THE EXERCISE OF TRVE Spiritual Devotion.

Consisting of diverse holy Meditations and Prayers; Serving for the inflaming
of men's benumbed affections; the quickening and increase of saving grace; and
the better ordering of the whole course of the life of a Christian, in a manner
acceptable to God, profitable unto others, and comfortable unto his own soul.

The first Part.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Thomas Man. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR EDWARD LEVVKENOR, Knight, grace and happiness.
SIR, I here offer unto you a small present; yet my first fruits in this
kind, and therefore such as I hope will find some acceptance with you. That
which moved me to the bringing of them to open light, was not any private or
sinister respect, but mature and advised deliberation. First, I observed the
great neglect of those two maine duties, of meditation, and prayer; how far
most were from the daily practice thereof, how much unacquainted therewith;
then which notwithstanding, nothing should be more ordinary with Christians. I
heard often complaints of the scantnes of writings of this nature, as much as of
superfluity in others: yea, even our adversaries have not spared to fasten
this as a reproach unto our profession and religion, though indeed they have
least cause to complain of us (what color soever they may seem to have)
seeing the greatest part of their labors herein, is far from that holy
exercise of true devotion, sauouring in many things too much of superstition,
and carnal affectation; and not that only, but also (as may easily appear to
those that are of sound judgment, and right discerning) exceeding defective in
the main points, and maimed in the principal parts, even in those which should
be the very life of devotion. I considered also how necessary it was for men
to have many helps and furtherances at hand, whereby they might be inured to
the due and frequent performance of this duty, so requisite for the taking
away of that drines of heart, and that deadnes of affection, which is oftentimes
in the best, and for the remedying of that spiritual distemper, which not
seldom does prevail too much with them, who otherwise are well disposed, and
desire to approve themselves unto the Lord in truth and sincerity; as also
for the quickening of the fainting soul, and languishing spirits, which
without the daily exercise of this and other holy duties are soon overtaken
with a kind of chillness, and want of spiritual life and motion. Besides
(that which more nearly concerned me) I remembered how God has placed all men
in the world for a time, not to be idle and unprofitable, but to be helpful and
serviceable unto others whiles they live by what means they can; yea how
straightly every one is bound to employ any talent that God has betrusted him
withal, during his life here upon earth, unto his glory, and to the benefit
of others, lest when the day of accounts shall come, he be found blame-worthie,
and so deprived of the joy of his master, even the glory of that celestial
Kingdom, the loss whereof can never be recompensed with the greatest
abundance of the fading pleasures, and fruitles vanities of this alluring and
deceitful world. I saw also how fast my days did slide away with a swift
foot, and how the harbingers of death had often summoned me to my last end, and
given me warning to prepare for his coming; yea how my candle was much spent
whiles I had given but little light unto others; Eccle. 9.10. Psalm. 115.17.18.
and thought upon that of the wiseman, that there is neither work, nor
invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither I was going, and
making have every hour; and therefore considering often and seriously with my
self the shortness and uncertainty of my fading life (the line whereof God of
his mercy and goodness has drawn out longer, then I either did or could
promise unto my self) I was desirous that this short course of mine, might not
be without profit, but that according unto that poor talent which the Lord
has given unto me, I might in any sort be beneficial unto the least of the
saints of God, and be a means of spiritual good unto any, though not in such
manner as those whom God has enabled for greater performances. This it was that
prevailed with me, and at length moved me (being also moved thereunto by some,
who having interest in me, made me more forward in this business) to publish
that for the benefit of others which I had first undertaken for mine own
private exercise; the exercise I mean of my mind in the duties of true
spiritual devotion. The reasons why I have made choice of you among others,
under whose name to communicate unto others these slender labors of mine, are
these especially. First, that knowing you have bin so well seasoned in your
younger years by means of the religious and godly care of your worthy
parents (who as while they lived, they were lights unto others, so now being
dead, and at rest with the Lord, their example may well be a pattern and
president unto those of that rank and order) I might hereby stir up your
pure mind, in this your riper age, unto the daily exercise of those duties,
which were so usual and ordinary with the^, as doubtless they have left few
behind them, who deserve the like praise herein. As the remembrance hereof may
be a joy and comfort unto you; so the imitation of the same will be comfortable
and exceeding profitable both unto your self and others. Again, I was drawn
hereunto in private respects; both in regard of that ancient frie^dship first
begun, whiles we lived in the same College, under the same government; as also
of that kindness which you have since showed me, and which being desirous to
make acknowledgement of, I thought good to take this occasion. Accept therefore,
I pray, this, as a testimony of the unfeigned love, and Christian affection,
which I deservedly bear toward you in many respects. And if it please you at
your vacant hours to bestow some time in the perusing of it, I hope you shall
find that which maybe some ways profitable, which is the only thing I desire
and aim at. The Lord increase his graces in you, and multiply his blessings
upon you, and upon that whole family, that it may be, as it has bin, a light
unto others in this dark and sinful age, wherein the examples of those that
should go before others, in the practice of piety and godliness, are so rare
and precious.

Your Worships in all christian duty and affection, I. ALLISTON.
Emman Coll. in Cambridge, August 30. 1610.
The Preface.
MEditation and prayer, these ought to be the daily exercise of every true
Christian. Ne there can I see how he should deserve the name of a Christian, who
does altogether neglect, either, or both of them. Both of them are necessary,
as severally in themselves, so especially jointly together; although indeed
the one neither may nor can be well severed or separated from the other, but
that there will be a want found of the benefit which should be received
thereby. Meditation is a preparatiue to prayer; Prayer the end of meditation.
If thou would pray effectually, thou must begin with meditation; if thou
would meditate profitably and fruitfully, thou must end with prayer. Use
both these duty as thou shall have occasion (as if thy heart be well ordered and
rightly affected as it ought, thou can seldom or never want it:) and
withal, pray unto God for a blessing upon them; and doubt not but that thou
shall find much sweetness and comfort in them, and reap no small benefit by
them.

MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS.
I will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways: Psalm. 119.15.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: Psalm.
143.10.

If I regard wickedness in mine heart, the Lord will not hear me: Psalm. 66.18.

The Lord is near unto all that call upon him, even to all that call upon him
in truth: Psalm. 145.18.


Enemies to devotion: first sinful lusts.
HE that has an aguish fit upon him, can taste nothing well, but all things,
even the most sweet and wholesome meats are unsavory to him; he can find no
relish in them: So it is with the man whose soul is diste^pered through sin.
He finds no sweetness, no savor in the things of God; yea his soul does loath
and abhor them though they be sweeter then Manna it self. O Lord keep me
from this spiritual distemperature, which of all others is most dangerous; and
grant that I may always delight in those things which are pleasing unto thee;
yea that I may find much sweetness in them, even in meditation, prayer, and all
other holy exercises, which thou have prescribed in thy word, that so my soul
may live for ever.

2 Worldly Cares.
THe cares of this world, and the desire of these earthly vanities, oh what
snares they are to the soul and to the spirit of a man! How many are taken in
them, and so brought into a kind of thraldom and bondage! What encumbrances
are they unto them in the performance of good actions! How do they cool, yea
quench the holy motions, the godly desires and purposes of the heart, and
hinder it from divine and heavenly meditations, which otherwise it would relish
far better, and find much more sweetness and delight therein, then now it
does! O my God, preserve thou me both now and always from the inordinate and
immoderate cares of this evil world, and from the excessive and unlawful
desire and affection of all vain and transitory things: Let me not be
ensnared, and entangled with them, as others are; Let them not be any let or
hindrance unto my soul, to withdraw it from the more serious meditation of
spiritual and heavenly things; or in any sort to cool my affection toward
them, or to cause me to take the less pleasure and delight in them, or to be
the more unfit to be conversant about them: Let them not so oppress my mind,
that I should find less liberty and freedom of spirit in good things, or
become more unapt for the performance of any duty of thy worship and service,
any holy or religious exercise which thou requirest of me; but grant I beseech
thee, that seeing how deceitful this world is, how vain all things here below
are, I may daily be more and more weaned from the love and desire of them; yea
may have thy love so shed into my heart, that all my delight may be in thee,
all my affections set upon thee, in such sort, that all carnal and earthly
things which would withdraw me from thee, and from the love of spiritual and
heavenly things, may be bitter and unpleasant unto me; and that I may serve
thee with more chearefulnes, and alacrity all my days, to thy glory, and to
the increase of my happiness in thy kingdom.

3 Satan's suggestions.
THat evil and envious spirit, the enemy of al mankind, never rests, but
seeks incessantly to cast ill motions, and suggestions into the hearts of
men, and to draw away their minds from every good thing which they enterprise
and take in hand: He uses all means to make them faint in the service of God,
to cool their zeal, to quench their spiritual devotion, to hinder them in
the performance of all good duties, and religious exercises, which might make
for the increase of grace in them; and to cause them (if it be possible) to
fall from that purpose of heart, and godly resolution which heretofore they
have had to continue in the Lord, and to walk in the ways which he has
commanded: yea no sooner shall the good spirit inspire into them any good
motions, any holy desires, but that wicked and envious one standing ready at
hand, will labor presently to strangle them, so that they shall never come to
any effect, but vanish away and leave the heart more heardened, and less
capable of goodness and of any spiritual and heavenly grace, then ever it was
before. Oh how closely, and how slily does he insinuate himself into the minds
of men, and deceive and delude them in this manner, when they think little he is
so near them, or so busy in working them so great a mischief, even that
which (if it be not carefully prevented in time) will be their utter ruin in the
end! O Lord, let me never give ear unto the deceitful enchantments, and to
the enticing and dangerous charms of that subtle and wily serpent, who is
always hissing about me; Let me not once listen unto him, nor yield unto any
of his suggestions, but always resist him in the first motions unto every
sin whereunto he shall tempt me. And whenever that good spirit of thine
shall speak inwardly and secretly unto my soul, and inspire any good
thought, any holy affection or desire into my heart, let me hearken thereunto,
as unto thy voice: Let me carefully use the means to foster and cherish such
beginnings of grace as it shall please thee in mercy and goodness to infuse
into me; that so I may not fall away from any good thing which thou have
wrought in me heretofore; nor find my self more unfit, or unto ward unto any
duty, or spiritual exercise, wherein heretofore thou have caused me to take
much joy and great delight; but grant that I may daily increase in grace, and
go forward cheerfully and constantly in the ways of piety and true holiness,
and with full purpose of heart cleave fast unto thee, to the end of my days,
never forsaking thee, nor being forsaken of thee, who art the God of my hope,
my strength, and my salvation.

WORKS OF CREAtion.
ALl the works of God are excellent and glorious, if we stand to consider
them, ^b. 40.10.
from Behemoth, (whom the scripture mentions and sets forth as one of the
chiefest of them) to the Ostrich; from the great Whale in the midst of the
seas, to the least fish that moves in the waters; from the Eagle to the fly:
from the Cedar of Libanus to the Hyssope that grows upon the wall; from the
stars of heaven, to the dust of the earth; and from the Angels of God, to the
worms that creep upon the ground.

Who is there that considers of them aright, or is so affected with them as
he ought? Lord let me always delight to be searching into them; and in them,
as in a glass, see clearly thy wisdom, and mighty power; and learn to know
thee, the Creator of all things both in heaven and in earth, and in all places:
and knowing thee, to worship and serve thee, in spirit and truth, lest I be
like unto the heathen, who when by the frame and workmanship of the world, and
the creatures therein, (wherein thy marvelous wisdom is engraven) they knew
thee to be God, and yet glorified thee not as God, became vile and abominable,
and altogether inxecusable, forsaking thee their Creator, who art blessed for
ever. Amen.

Work of Redemption.
OF all the works of God, that of the Redemption of mankind, is most
wonderful and glorious, whether we consider the person of the Redeemer, the
persons redeemed, or the means, and manner in and by which it was effected and
brought to pass. It passes all knowledge, all understanding. The Angels, ^et.
1.12.
those heavenly creatures, do admire at it, and desire continually to have a
more clear and perfect insight into it, as being so great and unsearchable a
mystery, that no creature is able fully to comprehend the breadth, the length,
and depth and height of it. Oh the marvelous blindness of men, for whom it was
wrought, that they can see and discern so little of it! their great
forgetfulness that they so seldom remember it! their extreme sottishnes, that
they scarce ever admire it in that holy manner that they ought; yea rather
little regard it, and esteem very lightly of it! O merciful God, far be it
from me to sin so great a sin against thy majesty, by prising so
inestimable a benefit, so much under the worth and value of it, and by being so
meanly affected with it as the most are: yea let me and al thy redeemed ones,
always clearly behold, and faithfully remember this great and gracious work
of thine toward us: let us highly esteem of it, rejoice continually and
glory in it, and vncessantlie praise and magnify thee for it for ever. What
can be rendered unto thee O Lord for so great love, for those exceeding riches
of thy grace toward us in Christ Jesus? what can be rendered unto thee worthy
of that infinite goodness of thine, sufficient for so unspeakable mercy and
bounty? All that we can return unto thee for it, is honor, glory and
thanksgiving. O let us never be found wanting in this, seeing we owe unto thee
much more, although there is nothing that thou more desire of us: (and yet
even this is thy gift also, yea thy especial grace) O do thou make me truly
and unfeignedly thankful.

Mercies of God.
WE can never be sufficiently thankful unto the Lord, for the least of those
blessings which he daily, and most freely vouchsafes unto us; health, peace,
liberty, maintenance and continual protection and preservation, etc. and yet
who is there almost that is heartily and unfeignedly thankful for those great
and wonderful mercies of his which concern our eternal happiness and
salvation in the heavens, even that glorious estate, which of his free grace
and bounty he has promised unto us, and will in due time give us full
possession of for ever. O the exceeding dullness of the hearts of men, that are
no more moved with the consideration of these things! yea that esteem more of
those ordinary kindnesses which are showed unto them by men, then of all those
infinite and unspeakable blessings and benefits which are vouchsafed unto them
by so gracious a God, so kind and loving a Father. O Lord, let me never be
unmindful of the least of thy mercies and favors, which thou have showed unto
me from the beginning of my life unto this present; give me a thankful heart
for them: especially lift up my heart and soul, unto a due and serious
meditation of those great and inestimable mercies of thine, wherein thou have
in a special manner showed thy self so exceeding good and gracious unto me, in
electing me unto life and salvation; in freeing and delivering me from that
wretched estate, and that woeful misery, whereinto I was so deeply plunged by
the sin of my first parents; in redeeming me therefrom, by so dear a price,
even the death of thine own Son, my blessed Savior; in adopting me into the
number of thy children by faith in him; and in providing that glorious mansion
for me in the heavens, there to live and reign with thee for ever. O give me a
lively sense and feeling, of thy goodness, thy love and unspeakable mercies,
so graciously vouchsafed unto me so vile and unworthy a creature: Inflame my
heart with an unfeigned and most entire love of thy majesty; and let my mouth
always praise thee; yea let me in heart, in soul, and with all the powers of
the same praise thee continually, and yield that glory which is due unto thee
both now, and evermore. Amen.

The folly of the wicked to be wondered at.
I Marvel much, when I read how the Israelits being in the way to Canaan (a
type of heaven for the goodness and pleasantness of it) desired so often, and
so earnestly to return again into Egypt (a figure of hell it self) where
they had been so hardly entreated, yea so cruelly and unmercifully handled: But
much more do I marvel, and can never sufficiently wonder at those, who when
the Lord offers to bring them out of the house of that spiritual bondage, and
not only to free them from the power of darkness, and the tyranny of sin
and Satan, but also by the light of his word and spirit, to lead and conduct
them safely into that heavenly Canaan, which flows with the milk and honey of
his rich and plentiful graces, even the inheritance of his chosen, the place
where his honor dwells; desire rather notwithstanding, still to be under the
hands of their cruel taske-masters, in the kilnes among the bricks, and in the
iron furnace, and to endure the most servile, and the most woeful and wretched
thraldom and slavery, that ever was or can be possibly, that so they may fill
themselves with the Onions and Garlike of Egypt. Lord, let the counsel of the
wicked be far from me: suffer not thy servant to delight in the ways of such
a foolish generation, who know not thee, nor regard yt which should be their
happiness. But let me ever praise thee with ioyfulnesse, that thou have
delivered my soul out of the hands of my cruel and deadly enemies, and
brought me from the house of bondage, the kingdom of darkness and death it
self, into ye ways which lead unto thy heavenly and glorious kingdom. And
although I am for a while, to wander in the wilderness of this world, and here
to endure much hardness, and to pass through many difficulties and troubles,
before I can enter into the land of promise, yet let me never faint or be
discouraged; much less be so evil disposed, as to repine, or murmr at any
time against thee, and desire to return to the sinful courses of the world,
or linger after these earthly vanities, but go forward according unto thy
direction, with faith, hope, and patience, looking continually for the
performance of thy gracious promise, that so at length I may enter into thy
rest, and live and reign with thee eternally.

The hurt and danger which sin brings.
WHat evil is there that sin brings not with it? It closes the Lords
hand; it dries up the fountain of his blessings and mercies; it keeps all
good things from us; it pulls down all kinds of plagues, miseries, and
judgments in this world; and in the end will not only bar the gates of
heaven against those that live and die in it, without true and unfeigned
repentance, but also sets hel-gates wide open for them, and draw them right
down into the depth of endless perdition and destruction, the house of
darkness, and the place of the damned. O what folly is it to delight in
sin, which is every way so hurtful and dangerous, not only depriving us of
that which is good, but also bringing upon us the greatest evils! O Lord keep
me from falling into any sin, let me ever abhor it and fly from it, as
from my greatest enemy: so shall I be free from thy fearful judgments the
wages and due desert of sin: yea so shall I be compassed with thy mercies,
and crowned with thy blessings for ever.

Death always to be expected and provided for.
LOrd, thou have graciously sent thy harbingers aforehand to forewarne me of
thy coming. Let my maine care be, to be always ready provided for thee, that
so that day which is justly feared of the most; yea the remembrance whereof is
bitter unto many, even those that take their pleasure in wickedness, may be most
welcome and joyful unto me; the end of all my miseries, and the entrance into
that glory and blessedness which thou have promised, and which I expect and
long for: I desire to be dissolved and to be with thee my Savior; for that is
best of all.

Another of the same.
AS the Lord will come in that last and general judgment when he is not
looked for of many; so by particular judgment, even by unexpected death, he
does now often suddenly surprise many when they think little he is so near.
It is not seldom, that we have such glasses set before our eyes wherein we may
clearly see ye truth hereof, although indeed few there be that delight to look
thereinto; the view notwithstanding, and daily consideration whereof, were
very profitable for them. Lord, let me ever be mindful of my frail and mortal
estate and condition in this world: let me always be ready at thy call, ever
prepared for thy coming in ye day of my dissolution, which as I am persuaded
is not far off, so it may be nearer then I think of. O let me live every day
as if it were my last day; every hour and moment, as if it were the last hour
and minute of this transitory and uncertain life of mine; that so whiles I
live I may die daily; and when I die once, I may live for ever.

Gods glory carefully to be sought for in all things.
ALl things were made for Gods glory. For this end the Lord gives being unto
all creatures: for this we live, move, and receive all those blessings which we
enjoy. And there is none of us, but shall be called unto an account, when the
day of reckoning comes, how we have referred all our actions unto this end;
whether we have in all things, and above all things sought the glory of God,
and the advancement thereof by all good means, even to the uttermost of our
p^^^er and ability. Every hour that has been spent otherwise, (...)
registered, and must be answered for in that day. Oh what a heavy account shall
the most have then to make, who now make this the least part of their care, yea
who altogether pervert the end for which they were created and sent into the
world, being so far from glorifying God in all their actions, that they do
nothing but dishonor him thoroughout the whole course of theit lives; giving
that unto Satan, which is the Lords due, and which he calls for continually
of them! where shall they appear when he shall require these things at their
hands? Certain, I cannot but wonder that such can sleep in rest one hour,
whose case is so fearful and miserable, especially since they know not, how
soon, how suddenly they shall be called to their reckoning, if not at that
general Audit, yet at their particular counts-day, the day of death. Lord, as
thou have made me for thy glory, so let my eye be always fixed upon the same;
let me be careful always by all means to seek the furtherance and
advancement of the same; yea do thou inflame my heart with a holy zeal
thereof. Let the coals thereof be fiery, and the flame vehement, that so
nothing may be able to quench it; not the deep waters, and raging streams of
the greatest troubles and afflictions which can betide me; no, not the loss of
life it self, and all things which I enjoy, or this world could afford me. Oh
that thou would kindle and increase this grace daily more and more in me, and
cause it to break forth in all the actions of my life, that so glorifying thee
here for a while, I may hereafter be glorified of thee for ever, even with that
fulness of glory which thou will give unto thy Saints.

No standing at a stay in Christianity.
HE that thinks that he has attained to perfection, and therefore stands
at a stay, and strives to go no further, may well suspect himself, and fear
that either he is undermined with a dangerous temptation; or else that indeed
be has heretofore deceived himself and his own soul, thinking himself to
be some thing, when he was nothing, and judging far otherwise of his estate,
then he ought to have done. Lord, let me every day more and more see mine own
weakness and unprofitableness, even how far I come short of that which
thou requirest of me; that so forgetting yt which is behind, I may endeavor my
self unto that which is before, and strive daily to make further proceedings,
and to attain to a greater measure of grace and godliness, till I come unto
that perfection which it has pleased thee (from whose divine dispensation
only it is) to allott unto me.

The benefit which is received by the mutual prayers of the faithful.
THe prayer of one righteous man is never without fruit, but avails much if
it be fervent, and proceed from a pure mind, and a believing heart: how much
more the earnest supplications of the assemblies of the Saints and servants of
God, even his faithful and beloved ones? no doubt they pierce the clouds,
open heauen-gates, and enter into the presence of God himself, and so prevail
with him, that they cause him, as to keep back his judgments, where they are
feared, so to power down his blessings in abundance where they are desired. O
Lord grant that I may be frequent, and earnest in prayer both public and
private, for my self and for others, even for thy Saints, especially thy
afflicted and distressed ones, either in body or in mind; and let it please
thee, as to make me careful daily to pray, and power out my suits and
supplications unto thee for others, so also in goodness to vouchsafe this
grace and favor unto me, that I may enjoy the fruit and benefit of the
prayers of thy servants, wheresoever or whenever they shall be assembled in
thy name, craving for thy blessing upon thy Church and chosen children: Hear O
Lord from heaven, and be merciful unto all and every one of thine that calls
upon thee in truth and faithfulness: let them taste of the sweetness of thy
mercies; yea let their empty souls be satisfied and filled with thy grace and
goodness, that so they may praise thee with ioyfulnesse, and both with heart
and mouth sing unto thy glory all their days.

Blessings of God are not the less to be regarded because they are common.
EVen that glorious creature the Sun, because it rises every day upon us,
is little thought of, or regarded of the most: The wondrous and admirable works
of God, because they are ordinary and daily set before our eyes, how meanly
are they accounted of? the greatest mercies and blessings of God because we
hear of them, and enjoy them continually, how slightly are they passed over by
many* of how few so highly prized and esteemed as they ought to be? Lord, let
not thy works, thy mercies and favors, wherein thou have showed thy self so
exceeding gracious unto me above all deserts of mine; let not them seem the
less in my eyes, because it pleases thee in great kindness to make them
ordinary and usual unto me: let me not be the less mindful of them, the
less thankful unto thee for them, because in the riches of thy love thou
vouchsafest to make them common by ye continual supply and increase of them:
yea rather let me (as it is meet I should) be moved and drawn to be so much
the more frequent in ye daily and conscionable performance of those ordinary
duties and services which thou requirest of me; and as thou enlargest thy hand
in the continuance and increase of thy mercies toward me, so enlarge my heart,
I humbly beseech thee, that I may daily more and more increase in true
thankfulness unto thee, unto whom I owe my self, and all things that I have:
for in thee I have all things; without thee I can neither enjoy nor hope for
any thing which is good, or to be desired.

The Angels watch over the godly.
O How strongly are Gods children continually guarded! Lo what multitudes of
those heavenly soldiers do attend upon them daily, hourly, every moment;
watch over them, yea compass them round about on every side, so that they can
have no hurt, but live and end their days in peace, safety and happiness. O
how blind are the eyes of men that they do not see and behold them; yea
rather how weak is their faith, that will not believe this, because they
cannot see them with the eyes of their bodies! Foolish and faithless people,
who will be perswaed of no more, then they can see with the eye of flesh, and
have an external view of, by their outward sense! why do they not as fondly
doubt whether they have souls within them? since they are spirits also which
they never saw, neither can see. Lord open mine eyes that I may see that
heavenly guard of thine, wherewith it has pleased thee to compass me, even
those celestial Angels and ministering spirits which are set continually to
attend upon me, that so I may be comforted in my greatest fears, and
encouraged with undaunted resolution to go forward with constancy in thy
ways, notwithstanding the opposition of the enemies of thy grace and truth,
knowing assuredly, that they that are with me, are more and mightier, then they
that are against me.

The danger of security.
WIll that man be secure and careless of himself, that knows certainly that
his enemy lies continually in wait for him, seeking his utter ruin, even
the spoiling of his estate, and the spilling of his blood? yea will he not (if
there be any wisdom or prudence in him) be very watchful, very circumspect,
and exceeding careful, to foresee and prevent all his dangerous attempts and
enterprises, whereby he might have the least advantage at any time against him?
Few there are, but are wise enough thus to procure the safety and security of
their bodily life, and outward estate, in this world, and to safe-gard it that
no enemy or adversary may impair or hurt the same at any time: And shall any
then be so foolish, so unwise, as not carefully by all means to provide for the
life and welfare of his soul, yea to procure the safety both of soul and
body, and not only his present but also his future estate in the heavens: and
yet lo, such is the folly of the most; yea even of many of those, who
otherwise are wise and prudent men, men of judgment and understanding. Satan
(that subtle, that wily, and most malicious enemy) lies continually in
wait for us; he omits no opportunity, no occasion whereby he may get any
advantage against us; he never leaves tempting, assaulting and assailing of us,
but seeks continually by all means possible to undermine our estate, and to
work our ruin and utter overthrow both of our souls and bodies for ever; and
yet most men, how careless, how secure are they, as though they had no heart,
no understanding? yea do they not even wilfully, and willingly give themselves
to sleep in greatest security. when they are in greatest and most apparent
and eminent danger, even then when the enemy is ready to make a spoil of
them, and eternal destruction and confusion to seize upon them without all
recovery, or hope of redemption? O merciful Lord, thou see, how busy
Satan is in tempting me; how many and how forcible means he uses to prevail
against me. O let me not be so careless and secure (as others are) but do
thou of thy especial grace give me wisdom from above, to foresee the dangers
which may befall me; carfulness and diligence with watchfulness and
aduisednesse to prevent them; and finally grace and strenghth not only to
encounter and resist, but also to vanquish and overcome that cruel and
malicious enemy and adversary, and in the end gloriously to triumph over
him, by the power and might of thy Christ, in whom and through whom I am able
to do all things.

The folly of worldlings, and wickedmen.
WE are ready to laugh at the folly of him that we see make more account of
toies and trifles, then of things of greater worth and moment; that will be
better pleased with a gay feather, then with a rich jewel, with a guarded and
party colored coat, then with a costly raiment and goodly attire. And yet
behold such is the folly and simplicity, even of those who seem to be the
wisest in the world, both in their own eyes and in the eyes of others, who
never knew the wisdom which is from above, but that only which is earthly
and sensual: with Heuah they prefer an Apple before Paradise: with Esau, a
mess of pottage before the inheritance of that celestial Canaan, the land of
promise which flows with milk and honey: with the prodigal son, the
husks of swine in a strange country, before the best fare in their fathers
house: in brief, the toies and trifles of this world, even the vain and
sinful pleasures and delights, and the transitory profits and commodities
thereof, before those hidden treasures, those inestimable riches of joy,
glory, and everlasting happiness and felicity, provided for the Saints in
the highest heavens, even the precious things of God, which can never be over
prized, or set at too high a rate. Can there be any greater folly then this?
Is not the simplicity of those that are thus strangely besotted, to be laughed
at, by those yt know what true wisdom is; yea rather to be pitied and even
bewailed with tears, although they in the mean while see not their
foolishness, but rejoice in it, accounting it wisdom, and themselves the
only wise and prudent men? whereas if their eyes were open, that they might
discern rightly of things (which now by reason of their blindness they
cannot) they could not but see plainly and acknowledge freely (as the truth is)
that of all men they are the most vain, the most unwise and extreme foolish.
Lord, give me not over to the folly of mine own heart, but indue me with true
spiritual wisdom and understanding, that so I may not with the men of this
world (whose minds are darkened, and deprived of the light of grace and
knowledge) choose death rather then life, shame rather then glory, hell rather
then heaven, vanity and misery, rather then endless and unspeakable
happiness, the service of sin and Satan, and the fruits and deceiuable
pleasures and profits of this world, rather then the service of thee the
everliving and most glorious God, and the blessed hope, of the enioyment and
full possession of that rich inheritance of thy chosen, even those inualuable
treasures of glory, bliss, and happiness; but that my judgment being
cleared, and my heart sanctified, I may now and always make greatest account
of those things which are most precious, and chiefly to be desired and sought
after, of all those that will be the sons of true wisdom.

The bondage and slavery of the wicked.
WE would wonder at him yt being laden with many irons, chained and fettered
hand and foot, so that he were not able to move from the place where he lay,
should notwithstanding persuade himself that he were a free man, and none more
at liberty then he. This is the estate of ye wicked: they are bound hand and
foot, yea all the parts and powers of their souls have many heavy chains
and irons lying upon them whereby they are even pressed down, and brought into
great misery and bondage; and yet they poor wretches (such is their
blindness) though plunged into the very depth of that woeful misery and
hellish thraldom, yet neither see nor perceive the same, but think themselves
as free as the best, and rejoice in their estate, when as they are the servants
of corruption, the slaves of Satan, subject to the power of darkness. Lord,
give me daily more and more to see that woeful misery, and fearful bondage
and slavery, which Satan by sin brings upon the souls of men, yea both
upon their souls and bodies. And grant, that seeing it, I may bewail it both
in my self and others, and labor to be restored unto perfect liberty and
freedom; being truly thankful unto thee, for this, that thou have in part
freed me already, making those bolts lighter, and those bonds looser: and
earnestly desiring and expecting the time when that which is in part, shall be
fully perfected, even the day of redemption; which I pray thee to hasten.

The fond and preposterous course of the wicked in preferring the health of
their bodies, before the salvation of their souls.
IF any be in danger, but to lose a finger, he will presently with all
diligence and carfulness seek unto the Physician, or Surgeon for to save
one joint of it (if it may be possible:) But to lose their souls how small
reckoning do most men make? what a preposterous course is this? Is the body
of more worth then the soul? is the life and safety of this corruptible
body, yea of one little member thereof to be more esteemed, more carefully
provided for, then the eternal life and salvation of the soul, yea of soul
and body? Is any so destitute of reason and understanding, as once to imagine
this? And yet behold, such are the lives and practices of most men, that either
they do, or at least would so persuade themselves; or else, how could they be
so careful for the maintenance and preservation of their bodily health, and
outward estate, and so careless, yea desperate, never regarding the present
and future estate of their souls, but passing away their days most securely
in the sinful pleasures and delights of this evil world, even bathing
themselves therein, whiles in the mean time, they willingly, if not
wilfully, deprive themselves of everlasting life and salvation, and hasten
forward unto that endless perdition and destruction, which is prepared for
them? Blessed be thy name O merciful Lord, that thou have not given me over to
the foolishness of the wicked, who shall perish for ever, but vouchsafest thy
grace unto me, whereby thou have made me more careful, to seek for the
assurance of the good estate of my soul in this life, and the eternal
salvation thereof in the heavens after this transitory life is ended, then for
the procuring of the life, and safety of this mortal and corruptible body of
mine, which shall be turned into dust and rottenness. Increase this grace in
me, and in all thine, that so we may have full assurance that we are thine, and
that when the earthly house of this our tabernacle is destroyed, we may live
with thee in glory for ever, even in that heavenly kingdom, that celestial
mansion, which thou have provided and prepared for us, and for all thy Saints.

The forwardnes of the wicked in the way to hell, ought to provoke the godly
to make the more speed in the way to heaven.
IS it not strange to see the wicked run faster to hell, then the godly do
to heaven? to make more speed and greater have, in the ways which lead unto
death and destruction, then the righteous in the ways which lead unto life
and salvation? As we are to pity their rashness and headiness (yea rather
their bold and desperate presumption) who whiles they walk in so slipperie a
way, rush forward, or rather are carried headlong with the violence of Satan,
and their own corrupt and unsanctified nature, not considering what is before
them, and whereunto they tend, until they fall into that deep gulf out of
which there is no recovery; so we ought to be provoked by them, and stirred up
by their example, to walk in the ways of godliness, and to run that race
of Christianity, with more swiftness, cheerfulness, and alacrity, then
hitherto we have done: yea to blush and to be ashamed of our former
backwardness and untowardness in going forward, so slowly, and so heavily in
the paths which will bring us to life and happiness, seeing the ungodly do
make such haste and walk on so fast in those broad and pleasant, yet most
dangerous and deceitful ways which lead directly to endless woe and misery,
even the place of the damned, as though they were afraid they should not come
thither soon enough. O Lord, if it be thy will, open their eyes, that whiles
they have time, they may be wisehearted to turn out of that broad way, seeing
that the issues thereof are death and confusion; and enlarge my heart, that I
may with more liberty and alacrity hereafer run in all the ways of thy
commandments; and in the end, having finished my course with ioyfulnesse,
receive that incorruptible crown of life, of glory, and happiness, which
thou have promised unto all those which continue faithful and constant in thy
service, unto the end of their days.

More care ought to be had of the soul then of the body.
Many are exceeding careful that their bodies may be clothed in costly, yea
in very curious manner, who are altogether careless what clothing or covering
they have for their souls; nay though they be clothed with the filthy rags
of sin and Satan, and quite stripped of all the graces of Gods spirit, those
precious ornaments, yet it never troubles their minds, it never grieves them,
or goes to the heart of them, but they are well content therewith, and desire
no better; yea they are not once ashamed, although their filthy nakedness lie
open continually, and appear to the eyes of all that see and behold them, but
rather rejoice and glory therein: we wonder at this, and not without cause;
but would we know the reason thereof? Alas they are stark blind, they see not
their own nakedness, their baseness, and extreme beggerie: they see not how
the glorious image of God (which stands in righteousness and true holiness)
is utterly defaced in them, and in stead thereof the image of Satan stamped
in them, in such sort that they are become vile and abominable, exceedingly
disfigured and deformed in all the powers and faculties of their souls, and
most loathsome in the eyes of God, and his Saints. O Lord, give me to see my
nakedness, my spiritual poverty, and beggerlinesse; and let me daily seek by
all means to cast off the old rotten rags, of sinful and corrupted nature,
and to be clothed thoroughout anew, with the graces of thy sanctifying spirit,
with righteousness and holiness, even according unto thine own image, wherein
thou did at the first create man; that so thou may take pleasure and
delight in me; and having vouchsafed unto me thy grace here, may receive me
unto glory hereafter.

The vnfruitfll hearing of the word of God very dangerous.
IF good seed be often cast into the ground, and it brings forth no fruit, but
briars, thorns and thistles, it is a sign that it is either a naughty, or a
barren soil, and therefore in vain to spend time, cost and labor in tilling
and manuring it: If the word of God (that immortal seed) be often sown by the
sincere preaching of the word, by the Lords own husbandmen, whom he imployeth
in that work; if it does not bring forth much fruit in those that are the
ordinary hearers thereof, but either no fruit, or else that cursed fruit of
a corrupt life, and ungodly actions, it is a certain sign that they have bad
hearts, and such as are barren of all grace; and they may justly fear that the
Lord will cause his ministers to labor no more among the^, but take both them,
and his word from them, and bring such a heavy judgment, and fearful curse
upon them, as shall cause them to mourn for their former unfruitfulness and
unprofitableness, under so many and so great means, as in former times have bin
so graciously offered unto them. O Lord, suffer me never to receive thy holy
word in vain, but let it take deep root in my heart, and bring forth much
fruit in my life and conversation, even the plentiful increase of grace and
godliness, to the glory of thy name, the good example of others, mine own
comfort, and eternal salvation in Christ Jesus.

Different degrees of grace in the godly.
THe Lord has not measured out the same portion of gifts and graces of his
spirit unto all alike; but has given this grace unto one, that unto another;
and the same grace in this manner unto one, in that unto ye other; to some more,
to some less; yea to diverse, different portio^s, both for the graces
themselves, as also the number, the kind, the qualities, measure and degrees
thereof: and yet all are his gifts and graces, proceeding from one and the same
spirit, which works in all and every one, as it pleases it. Lord, give me
to see and discern aright, what grace thou have vouchsaued unto me, and the
measure of it; and as to be truly thankful unto thee for the same, and to
glory in thee who art the author and giver of it, (as of every other good and
perfect gift) so likewise to be careful to employ it unto the setting forth of
thy glory, in the performance of those duties which thou requirest of me: that
so when thou shall call me to a reckoning for the use of that talent, which
thou have committed unto me, having bin faithful in the improuement of the
same, I may willingly appear before thee to give in my accounts, and be
plentifully rewarded of thee, by entering into that joy and glory which thou
have promised and prepared for all thy faithful servants.

Another of the same.
THou O Lord art very liberal in disposing of the heavenly graces of thy
spirit unto thy children, whom thou love, and in whom thou delightest. To
some thou give more, to some less, to all some: there is none of thine that
has not tasted of thy goodness herein, yea that has not received ye measure
of grace, for which he can never be sufficiently thankful unto thee. O
heavenly father, increase thy grace in me; and grant that I may always, make
precious account of the least measure, which it shall please thee in mercy to
vouchsafe unto me, and refer it wholly to thy honor and glory. And since
whatsoever I am, I am in thee; whatsoever grace I have, I have it from the
(whose gift only it is;) let me be content with that portion, which thou in
thy wisdom and goodness allottest unto me; and knowing that for the present
it is sufficient for me, neither envy those that have received more, lest I
repine against thee; nor despise those that have less, lest it displease thee,
and cause thee in justice to withdraw that grace from me, which in mercy thou
had freely given unto me, and to bestow it upon those, who would make better
use of it.

Death always to be desired of the godly.
IF any shall take away from me my torn and ragged-worne coat, and in stead
thereof put upon me a new and a better, shall I think that I have any injury
done unto me? have I any cause to complain as if I were wronged? If the Lord
unclothe me by depriving me of this temporal, this sinful and corruptible
life, and in stead of it cloth me with that which is eternal, incorruptible
and most glorious, does he hurt me? does he any wrong or injury unto me? shall
I complain? yea rather, Lord, let me desire always to remove out of this
body, and to dwell with thee for ever. Let me desire earnestly to put off
this corruption, to be dissolved and to be with Christ my Savior in the
heavens; for this is that only happiness and felicity which I expect and
hope for. Lord, even when it pleases thee, let me see thy salvation, which
thou have promised.

The imprisonment of the godly in this life.
THe godly whiles they remain in this world, live, as it were, in perpetual
imprisonment. They are laden with many chains and fetters, which lie heavy
upon them, and cause them to sigh in themselves, and to long earnestly for the
time of their deliverance and freedom. O blessed Lord, thou know what a
burden unto my soul, this corruptible and sinful body of mine is, which I
carry continually about with me; and how this earthly mansion keeps down
and oppresses my mind, and makes me heavy and untoward for the performance
of that good which thou command, and wherein my heart desires to approve it
self unto thee; I am so fast in prison, and so much encumbred with manifold
annoiances, which are, as it were, so many heavy irons pressing down my
mind, and hindering me from walking before thee, with that freedom of spirit,
and that cheerefulnes and alacrity wherein thou delightest, that my soul
mourns secretly within me, and longs to be freed from this misery and
bondage, wherein I am now detained. O Lord, when will thou set me at liberty?
Continually do I expect and wait for the redemption of this earthly and
sinful body.

The vanity of all earthly things.
OH the vanity of the things of this world, riches, pleasures, honor and
whatsoever else (to him that has a carnal and fleshly eye) may seem most
precious and glorious! how fruitles, how fading and transitory are they? was
there ever any that found any true peace, any sound joy or contentment in
any, or in all of them? What a vain thing then is it for any one to be
carried with such an insatiable desire after them; yea to place, if not his
only, yet his chief happiness and felicity in them, as many do? O Lord, draw
my heart daily more and more from the things of this world, whereunto the most
are so fast glewed: weane my soul both from the love, and desire of them; and
let my delight be in thee, let me rejoice in thee continually; yea let my
soul always long after thee, and in comparison of thee esteem of all these
earthly things but as dross and mere vanity.

A true discerning of the worlds vanity, makes men willing to leave it, and
desirous of a better estate out of it.
Many there be that complain of the vanity and deceitfulness of this world,
and yet are loath to leave it, and to depart out of it. Such either had never a
true sight of the vanity of all things here below, and of the wretchedness
and misery whereunto men, even the best are subject in this life; or else they
never indeed fully tasted of the blessedness and felicity of the life to
come, even those endless joys, and unspeakable glory, which are prepared and
reserved for the Saints, in the kingdom of God: or if they have in some sort
tasted of this heavenly gift, yet without any certainty or assurance that it
belonged unto them, and that their right and portion should be in it, and
therefore could not be so soundly affected with it, as thereby to be brought
into a true dislike and contempt of this present evil world, which
notwithstanding, at least, they wou^d seem to be out of love with. The man
that sees indeed, how vain, how deceitful and how miserable this world is;
and has withal received the first fruits of the spirit of God, and tasted of
the sweetness and blessedness of ye world to come; and also knows, that the
assurance of the promise thereof is made and sealed unto him, and that by the
truth it self, (even by him whose word shall stand, when heaven and earth
shall pass away;) that man as he shall find cause enough to complain of this
evil world wherein he lives; so it cannot be, but that he should desire
unfeignedly to be gone out of it, and to make change for a better; even that
which his soul longs after, and in the hope and expectation whereof he
rests continually, sighing in himself, and waiting earnestly for the
fruition and full possession thereof, when as being unclothed of the burden of
this flesh, and loosed out of the prison of this earth, he shall be clothed with
glory and immortality, and live for ever in that celestial mansion, not made
with hands, but eternal in the heavens. O Lord, when shall I be fully
delivered from the bondage of corruption, unto which I am now daily subject?
when shall I lay down this body of sin and death, which I now carry
continually about with me? when shall I remove out of this earthly tabernacle?
when shall I leave the wilderness of this wearisome world, and departing from
hence be translated into that glorious kingdom of thine, which thou have
promised unto me? My soul longs to dwell in thy courts, to see thy
salvation, to enjoy thy blessed presence, and to live and rest with thee
continually. For here, alas, I find no resting place; yea I see vanity,
wretchedness and misery on every side, in every place. One sorrow
succeeds another: The snares of many afflictions, and temptations have taken
hold of me; many deep waters have passed over me, and even almost overwhelmed
me. I am assailed continually with many and those very dangerous and perilous
enemies, who fight against my soul, and seek by all means the utter ruin
and subversion thereof: yea there is scarce one day, but that I pass through
many deaths (so many are the grieuances whereunto thy children are continually
subject, whiles they have their abode in this place, of vanity, of death, and
misery.) How therefore should not that day be pleasant, and not bitter unto
me? how should I not have a fervent desire to be dissolved, and so to remove
from earth to heaven; since that as long as I live here in this world, I cannot
be freed from all miseries, nor attain unto full and perfect blessedness,
which is only to be expected in the world to come, where I know that I shall
enjoy it, and have the fruition of it for ever in thy kingdom? All the days of
my appointed time, will I wait until my changing shall come, even the time of
refreshing, which I desire, and hope for; and which thou O Lord, (when it
pleases thee) wilt vouchsafe in mercy and goodness to grant unto me: Lord I
have longed for thy salvation.

Of whom death is most feared.
HE yt always fears death excessiuely, never made conscience to live well. He
that is careful to live well, will never be overmuch afraid to die, though
death in it self be of all things the most fearful and terrible; or if he
do fear it, when it first looks upon him with a ghastly countenance, yet when
the vizard, which it has put upon it, be plucked away with the due and serious
meditation of it, the fear and dread of it will vanish away presently. Lord,
let it be my care and earnest endeavor, so to live, and to pass the time of my
dwelling here, even these short and evil days which thou have measured out
unto me, that the remembrance of ensuing and approaching death, may never be
bitter or grievous, but joyful and pleasant unto me.

Satan's craft and guilefulnesse in deceiving men.
THe Devil goes always masked up and down in the world in a disguised
manner, and never, or seldom shows himself in his own likeness, because
then he knows well enough, every one (not without cause) would be afraid of
him, fly from him, and have nothing to do with him (for who would not shun
his deadly adversary, whom he saw nothing but plotting his own destruction
and overthrow) but usually he comes like a false friend, with the pretense of a
seeming good; he appears and offers himself unto men in the shape of
pleasure, profit, honor, even those things which are pleasing unto their
nature, and and whereby they may most easily be enticed, and drawn away after
him. How many thousands has he by these slights and policies of his deluded
and deceived? how does he hereby prevail against men, till he secretly work
their irrecouerable ruin, and that many times before they be aware of any such
matter, but feed securely and greedily upon those things which he profereth
unto them, not seeing the snare which is laid for them. O Lord let me always
suspect and fear the deceitfulness of Satan, in the things which are most
pleasing unto me, and which, with the show of pleasure, profit, and worldly
commodities and advantage, do most allure me, and draw my heart after them, or
cause me to set my affections inordinatly upon them; that so in what
counterfeit form soever, that deceiuer shall seek cunningly to insinuate
himself into me, I may discern his craft, and take heed by all means, that I
be not at any time beguiled and deluded by him.

Satan's several baits for sundry persons.
THe Devil has a bait for every age, for every place and person, and
according to the occasions and opportunities, he fitteth them all, to their
several natures, dispositions and inclinations. For the covetous, he has a
silver hook and a golden bait; the riches and commodities of this deceitful
world: for the voluptuous, sinful pleasures and sensual delights: for the
ambitious, honor and bewitching preferments: to such as are choleric, he
ministers those things that may kindle their wrath and inflame their fury: for
the melancholic, he lays ye bait either of unprofitable solitarines, or of
pining envy. And thus by one means or other he seeks continually to entice
them to swallow his bait which he so guilefully profereth unto them, that
being once taken with it they can hardly escape the danger which he labors
to bring them unto, except the Lord be the more merciful to pull the hook out
of their nostrils, and to set them at liberty again. Blessed Lord, give me to
see unto what sins I am, either by nature, or otherwise, most addicted; and
whereby Satan seeks chiefly to ensnare me, and to draw me unto perdition;
and having grace to see them, let me also have wisdom and strength to shun
and avoid them; that so I may not be deceived by Satan, nor perish with the
multitude whom he has taken in his snares, with those baits which he has
laid for them.

The occasions of sin carefully to be avoided.
HE that says, that he is loath to offend God, through the commission of any
sin, and does not carefully avoid the occasions whereby he may fall into the
same, is like to him that tells us, that he is loath to be burnt, and yet
dreads not the fire when he is near unto burning; yea rather will needs run
into the flame, wihch is ready to scorch him; or that he is loath to be
drowned, and yet goes so near the pits brinke that it is almost impossible for
him not to fall into it, and to perish in it. O Lord, let me not be so unwise
as to deceive my self as many do, by taking too much liberty unto my self
in those things, which though lawful in themselves, yet may be a means
through ye corruption of my nature, and the temptation of Satan, to draw me to
sin against thee. But give me wisdom in all things to foresee and prevent the
danger that may come upon me, for want of due providence and watchfulness; and
make me ever as careful to avoid the occasions of sin, as sin and death it
self: So shall it never have power or dominion over me; whereas otherwise it
cannot be but that I should fall often, and dangerously.

Respect of persons.
IT is a great fault, and yet ordinary, to respect men, more for the outward
trappings of the body, then for the inward graces, and virtues of the mind. If
one be of a goodly personage, or richly apparelled and attired, he shall be
regarded, and much set by, although his mind be never so deformed, destitute of
all grace and goodness, even those inward endowments, which are the greatest
excellencies. If another be more base or mean in these outward respects;
howsoever he be inwardly decked and adorned, yet there is no reckoning, or
very small account made of him. What is this but to prefer the body before
the soul, that which is terrene, earthly and coruptible, before that which is
spiritual, heavenly and immortal? Solomon the most glorious and renowned
Prince that ever was, in regard of his outward glory, wherewith he was invested
and arraied, yet he was not like the lilie of the field, or the withering and
fading grass; whereas all things that are most flourishing on earth, no not
those celestial creatures, the stars of heaven, nor the Sun and Moon
themselves, (those excellent and glorious lights) are comparable to one soul,
it being of a far more divine and excellent nature then they are. Good Lord
give me to discern of things aright; let me always esteem more of those that
are inwardly beautified with those virtues and graces of the mind, wherewith
thou have enriched them; and which are the things that are most precious in thy
sight, and which thou do much set by; then of such as wanting these, do most
flourish in the world, and are most eminent for their external dignities and
excellencies.

Gods special providence over his children.
HE that takes care for the watring of his garden, the growing of his herbs
and plants, and the feeding of his cattle, will he not much more be careful
for the feeding and preserving of his own children, whom he loves and
regards far more then all those? Seeing therefore God our heavenly father
watreth this great garden of the world; causes trees, herbs, and plants of
all kinds to grow and flourish therein; clothes the fields with so glorious
array, that great Princes with their shining train are not like unto them; and
seedeth and preserves continually by his special providence, the beasts of
the earth, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea; will he not do
much more, for his own children, who depend upon him, and whom he loves so
dearly, and most tenderly regards far above all these earthly things? Can
it be, that he should not feed them, preserve them, and provide all things for
the^, which may be for their good estate in this world? O the faithlesnesse,
and infidelity of man, who will not rest on Gods providence, nor credit and
believe those promises which he has made unto them (if they be his.) O Lord
God, most gracious, and heavenly father, grant that whiles I behold the birds
of the air, the flowers of the field, and all things which thou have created,
I may not only see and acknowledge thy power that made them, but also thy
providence in preserving, feeding, and apparelling them; and that I may use
them, as so many seals to confirm me in the truth of thy gracious promises,
and in the certainty of that special providence of thine over me continually;
even that thou will preserve me, cloth me, feed me, and help me in all my
necessities, supplying all those things unto me, which thou in thy wisdom
know to be most expedient and requisite for me. Herein I rest: this is that
only which can make me in all things truly contented, and in nothing too
careful; and without this my life would be irkesom and burdensome unto me,
through that carking care, and those manifold distractions, which I see in
others, even in those that are unfaithful, O Lord, and distrust thy providence.

Contentednes in all estates.
LOrd I know not what is good for me, or which I should desire rather;
prosperity or adversity, health or sickness, plenty or penury. Thou only
see, thou only know, what is every way best for me. Deal therefore
graciously with me, and do unto me that which is good in thine eyes, and which
thou (who iudgest and discernest of all things aright) see to be best for me.
And grant that I may rest contentedly and thankefully in those things, which
thou according to thy good pleasure, shall bring to pass, howsoever thou
disposest of me.

Coueteousnes a dangerous disease.
THe covetous man is like unto those that have the dropsy: for they that are
fallen into that disease, do desire to drink continually; and yet the more they
drink, the more dry, the more thirsty they are. So it is with the covetous,
who through the distemper of their minds, have drawn that spiritual dropsy
upon them, which is so much worse then the other, as the soul is better then
the body. They have a perpetual, and inordinate lust after riches, and the
profits and commodities of this world: and yet the more they have them, the
more they feel and complain of the want of them; the more they increase, and
the faster they come in, the more does their desire of the^ increase, and the
greater is their lust and longing after them. They are insatiable, and like the
two daughters of the horsleach, never think they have enough. This is an evil
sickness, and yet common and ordinary amongst men; yea many are so far
gone in it, that except they seek to prevent the danger of it in time, it will
prove incurable, and so in the end become mortal and deadly unto them. O
Lord, give me grace to covet after the better things, even those which are
spiritual and heavenly; and let me never be carried away with an immoderate
and inordinate desire of these things here below, which are earthly and
transitory: but let me always be content with that portion which thou shall
give unto me. If it be much; let me bless thee for it, and be ready to
distribute according to the necessities of others. If it be little; let me
bless and praise thee also, knowing that it is sufficient; and withal, that
thou have provided better things for me, even that rich inheritance, and that
enduring substance in the heavens, of which after this life, thou will give me
(having already made me a grant thereof) the full fruition and possession for
ever. And in the mean while, howsoever my estate is, or shall be hereafter in
this world, give me a quiet and contented mind, which may always rest in thee,
and wholly depend upon thee, who have promised, that thou will not fail nor
forsake me; nor deny any thing unto me, which thou (who know what is best
for every one) see to be good for me.

All must suffer afflictions in this life.
HE deceives himself, that looks for a continual calm, whiles he lives
in this world. There was never man that attained unto this, never shall, in
this life. Let him think that it is well with him, that is not always in a
storm; that has not always rough and heard weather, whereby that weak and
small bark of his, is much tossed and troubled; but some times, though
seldom, finds the benefit of a pleasant calm, whereby he may be refreshed,
and the better enabled with strength and patience, both to expect and to
undergo the future immine^t troubles, which shall betide him. O Lord, I look
not for my rest, whiles I sail in this troublesome sea; for thou have said it,
and I believe it, and all thy Saints and servants have seen the truth of it in
their own experience; even that thorough many troubles, by many afflictions we
must have passage, and entrance into thy kingdom, when it pleases thee O
blessed Lord, either send me a calm after those storms which have gone over
me; or else (which I rather desire) cause me speedily to arrive at that haven,
which I hope and long for; and where I shall enjoy perfect and perpetual rest
and peace, without any trouble or disquietnesse, yea without the scare of any
of those perils and dangers, unto which I am now continually subject.

The Ancre of the soul in afflictions.
A Ship that is on the sea in stormy and tempestuous weather, if it has not
an ancre, which being cast forth, may hold and stay it, is carried up and
down, and tossed to and fro, with much violence; and so at length either
driven upon the sands, or dashed against the rocks: In like manner it is with
all those, that in the troublesome sea of this dangerous world (where there are
so many storms and tempests continually arising) want the ancre of their
souls, even true faith in Christ, and an assured hope of the promises made by
him; they are tossed to and fro continually, having no rest, no comfort, no
confidence; they are carried away violently with the raging waters; and in the
end, either fall upon some quick sands, which swallow them up, and cause them
to sink into the bottom of that great deep; or else rush against some stony
and craggy rock, which beats them to pieces, and brings them to ruin. O
my God, thou see the great perils and dangers I am subject unto, and shall be
as long as I live in this world, which is a sea of miseries, and manifold
calamities. The winds blow, the deep wateres lift up their swelling waves,
and the stormy tempests threaten me with shipwreck, to the ruin and
destruction both of my soul and body: O therefore, let me never want that
assured hope, which being as the ancre of my soul, both sure and steadfast, may
enter into that which is within the veil, and clasp fast hold of those
gracious promises which thou have made unto me in thy Christ my blessed
Savior: so shall I not only be safe, and confident in the midst of those
dangers, which are round about me; but also in the end, having escaped out of
them all, arrive at that pleasant haven of true felicity, and endless bliss
and happiness; unto which the desire and prayer of my heart is, that thou
would shortly bring me, that so I may rest with thee, and sing praises unto
thee, in thy kingdom incessantly, even for ever.

Great danger in yielding to the least motion of any sin.
IN every sin that any one yields unto, he lays himself open unto ye
Devil, and gives him power of him: how careful therefore should men be to
avoid all sins; and not willingly to admit the least, since thereby they give
Satan, so great advantage against them. O Lord give me grace always to resist
Satan, in the entrance of his suggestions, and temptations, even in the first
motions unto evil, wherewith he shall at any time assail me, that so he may
never be able to prevail against me, or to get the dominion over me.

Grace to be increased daily by all means.
GRace if it be not continually nourished and increased by all good means,
which God has appointed, it will quickly waste and decay exceedingly. How many
have we seen that of strong have become weak and feeble? that having for a
time flourished with many excellent graces, and been as green Olives, or
fruitful plants in the house of God, have afterward appeared as sear trees,
and as withered branches, as though they had almost no juice or sap left in
the^, which might cause them to budde forth, and to become fruitful? O
merciful God, as it pleases thee to give me thy grace in any measure, so
grant that I maybe careful always, to use all means, whereby it may be
preserved, and daily strengthened, and increased in me; that thus the longer I
live in this world, the more fruitful I may be, abounding in every good work;
my last days maybe my best days, and the inward man of my soul maybe renewed,
the more that this outward man shall perish and decay: and having in my life
time, caused thy grace to shine forth unto others, I may after this life, shine
as a star, in the brightness of glory, in thy kingdom for evermore. Amen.

Satan's guilefull temptations.
WHo knows the power, the craft, and malice, of Satan, ye wily serpent, yt
roaring Lion? he walks about the earth continually, and compasses it to and
fro, on every side looking for his prey; yea he seeks by all means to
insinuate himself into us by many suggestions, and diverse kinds of
temptations, and thereby to sting us unto death: he waits his time, watches
the occasion fittest for his purpose, and whereby he may easiliest prevail;
and as he is wary in choosing his time, and taking his occasion and
opportunity, so is he as cunning in making choice of the means, observing the
inclinations, the natures and several dispositions of men, both in regard of
mind, and of body. Thus he deceived the perfectest that ever were on earth,
even our first parents in Paradise, and that in the time of their innocence
and integrity, before sin had made man so subject unto Satan, as now all are:
thus also since the fall, he has deceived and beguiled the wisest that ever
was among men, as he did Solomon; the strongest, as he did Sampson; the
holiest, as he did David, etc. There is no place so holy, no exercise so good,
which can quail his courage, or restrain the boldness of his attempts: yea
even the best things will he seek to make serve for his purpose; out of the
best duties and actions which we do, or can perform, he will take his
advantage against us, and cause us to sin against God, when we desire and
endeavor most to approve our selves unto him. O Lord since that evil one is
always te^pting, let me always, and in all things be vigilant and watchful:
let my eyes be open, and my heart waking continually, lest that envious and
malicious spirit, sow his tares, whiles I sleep in carelessness and security;
yea since that enemy of thy grace, and of the salvation of thy children, is so
mighty, so subtle, and malicious, grant that I may not be secure at any
time, but always keep a sure guarde over my heart, and all the affections of
the same: and because I am weak of my self, be thou faithful according unto
thy promise, to assist me in all those temptations, wherewith Satan shall at
any time assail me: so shall I praise the for ever, who art my strength and my
salvation, even the God through whom I am able to do all things, and by whom
all mine enemies are subdued unto me.

Christians are to estrange themselves from this world, and to aspire unto
heaven.
WE are all of us here pilgrims and strangers: heaven is our country; God our
father; Christ our elder brother; all the Saints and Angels our nearest
kinsfolk, and our best friends, and louingst companions, who expect and look
continually for our coming into that heavenly city, that celestial mansion,
the place where they and we are to rest and remain with our Savior in ye
presence of that glorious God for ever, to be partakers of that felicity and
blessedness which is unspeakable and glorious: Why then do we not weane our
selves from the world? why do we settle our selves here, where our rest is not?
yea why are we so loath to leave this dry and barren wilderness, where we live
among strangers that know us not, yea amongst many wild and savage creatures,
who seek to do us all the mischief they can? O Lord, raise up my thoughts,
and the affections of my heart unto those things which are above, unto those
things which concern my future estate in thy kingdom: let it be continually
the earnest desire of my heart, to be with thee my God in the heavens, there to
behold thy face in glory for ever, and to have the full fruition of that sweet
and comfortable fellowship and communion of my Savior, and of all the Saints
and Angels, wherein consists true happiness and blessedness.

Death always to be remembered.
MAny live as if they should never die; they remember not the evil days that
shall come upon them, and the years which shall approach, wherein they shall
say, We have no pleasure in them. They consider not how their eyes shall wax
dim, their ears deaf, their tongues speechles, yea how their spirits and
all their senses shall fail them, and all those worldly helps (wherein now
they rest and comfort themselves) utterly forsake them. O Lord, teach thou me
to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom: Let me always be
mindful of my end, and consider seriously of my frailetie and mortality, that
so when death comes (which continually waits upon me) it may not find me
unprepared, but that in the last hour, (the very remembrance whereof is
bitter unto many) I may find sound comfort, and be translated out of this vale
of tears, this place of mourning, where I am compassed about with sin and
misery, into the kingdom of thy dear Son, and my blessed Savior, and so
be made partaker of that glorious and immortal inheritance, which thou
reseruest for us, even for all thy Saints, in the highest heavens, the place
where thou dwell in glory and majesty, and where we shall live and reign
with thee eternally.

What manner of life it becomes Christians to lead.
THe heathen could say, that if men (as it is meet they should) would have this
always in their minds, that they were made of God himself, in regard of the
better part, which is the soul and spirit; that God was their father, he
doubted not but they would lead a life beseeming their estate and condition;
that they would do nothing, whereby they might show themselves to be base and
degenerate, such as in whom there were no resemblance, of that divine and
heavenly nature. Me thinks, many that are Christians (at least in name and
profession) should blush when they read, when they hear this. They call God
father, and think themselves much wronged, if any should tell them that they
were not his children, and that not only by creation (as the heathen are) but
also in a more special manner by grace and adoption through Christ: and yet
behold, many of them are not ashamed of that vileness and baseness in their
behavior, their actions, lives and practices, which the pagans and heathen
themselves were ashamed of, and have condemned as by their lives, so also by
their writings, thereby setting a brand of just reproach and eternal infamy
upon the foreheads of such fained and counterfeit Christians, who are the stain
of true religion and christianity; and such as though they think, that of right
they may claim this title to themselves, to be the chosen people of God, those
to whom he has given the name and privilege of his own sons, yet in very
deed are the children of the devil seuen-fold more then the heathen
themselves, who knew not God in Christ. O merciful Lord, grant I humbly
beseech thee, that as I call thee father, and believe and acknowledge my self
to be thine own adopted son through thy Christ, in whom thou have freely
loved and elected me from eternity; so also I may have grace from thee (for
thy gift only it is) not to fashion my self like unto the wicked and
ungodly, the men of this world; that I may not be like unto them in those vain
courses, wherein they walk and delight themselves; but that I may always do
those things which are beseeming my calling and profession; as acknowledging
thee to be my father, and glorying in this, that I am thy son, so living and
ordering my self as it becomes thy son; even shining forth in all
holiness of life, and godly conversation, to the glory of thy name, the peace
and comfort of mine own conscience, and to the good example of others, whom
thou have advanced unto the same profession, which is so glorious.

Gods patience in bearing with sinners.
IT is a wonder, that the Sun, which is a witness of so many, and so
enormous sins and wickednesses as are committed upon the earth, stands so
long in the heavens, and gives light unto the world; that the heavens are not
dissolved, and that the elements melt not; that the waters ouerflow not and
ouerwhelme us: yea that Christ, that just and righteous Judge of the whole
world, comes not in flaming fire, to burn up this earth with all the works
therein, which are polluted and defiled with our sins. It is thy mercy O Lord,
that we are not consumed. O be thou patient toward us, who cease not to
provoke thee daily. Let thy good spirit still strive with us, yea draw us unto
thee, with the consideration of thy lenity, and the riches of thy
bountifulness; that so thy long sufferance may be unto us salvation, even an
effectual means, to win us unto the love, and obedience of thy majesty,
and so in the end to bring us to eternal life and happiness in the heavens.

The soul how it is to be fitted and prepared, for the entertainment of so
glorious a guest, as the holy Ghost is.
IF thou were to entertain some honorable personage, how careful would
thou be to make such preparation and provision for him, that he might be
received in that manner that were fit for his place and estate? how much more
careful and sollicitous then ought thou to be, to prepare the secret
lodgings of thy heart and soul; to see that nothing be out of order in thy
whole man; that no uncleanness, nor any thing which is any way polluted
remain within thee, who art to receive and to entertain so honorable a
guest, even the holy spirit of the most high God, and to become a temple for so
great, and so glorious a presence, to dwell in for ever? O heavenly Father,
purify my heart, with the sprinkling of the blood of that immaculate lamb
Christ Jesus ye righteous; purge me daily more and more from all my
corruptions, even those which are most secret, and open to the view of none,
but of thy all-seeing majesty, whose eye pierces thorough all things, and
sees and discerns perfectly those things which are hid from the sight of
men, and which we our selves are ignorant of. Cleanse me both in soul, in
body, and in spirit, from the filthiness of all sin and iniquity, and from
the stain of all inbred corruption; and so sanctify me throughout with thy
grace, that I may be a fit temple and mansion for thy holy spirit to rest in;
yea that thou may delight to remain, to abide, and to dwell with me for
ever; which is the only happiness and felicity which my soul desires and
longs for, and which I know assuredly, thou who have promised it, wilt not
deny unto me.

Grieuing of the spirit of God.
THou art unwilling to give just occasion whereby thy kind friend might be
grieved, and so for thy unkind dealing with him, be moved to leave thee, and
depart from thee in displeasure, having no delight, no desire to return any
more unto thee, no scarcely though he be much sought unto, and entreated with
great importunity. Why then do thou daily and hourly deal so unkindly with
thy best friend? why do thou grieve the spirit of God, which is the only
comforter, and without whom, thou can never have any true peace, or
contentment, in any estate or condition of life? Why do thou continually
offer him so just cause to turn away from thee, yea to remove far off, and to
deny any more to visit thee, with yt gracious and comfortable presence of
his, though thou should hereafter never so often, and so earnestly seek and
sue unto him? O my God, forgive me my sins whereby I have heretofore grieved
that holy spirit of thine, by whom thou have sealed me, and assured me of those
gracious promises which thou have made unto me in thy Christ. Forgive me those
manifold sins and trangressions, whereby I have from time to time, most
grievously displeased and provoked thy majesty, who have continually showed
thy self every way so good, and so kind unto me. Hide thy face from them, and
let them never come into thy remembrance, to be a means to cause thee (as
justly thou may) to depart, and to take thy spirit from me, lest I die, and
perish. But notwithstanding my vndeseruednesse, for thy promise sake, do thou
still in mercy, vouchsafe freely to continue thy wonted and accustomed love and
kindness unto me. Give me not only the presence, but also the grace and
comfort of thy spirit; yea let it always rest and remain with me, that so my
spirit may live and praise thee. O Lord, this I know, that nothing but my
sins, can hinder this goodness and blessing of thine from me: forget
therefore, I pray thee, my sins past, cover my sins present, and keep me
from falling into sin hereafter, and then I am assured, that thy blessed and
gracious spirit shall dwell with me, and comfort me both now and ever,
according unto thy promise.

Spiritual desertions.
THe Sun may be eclipsed for a while, by the interposition of the thick and
duskie body of the Moon; but that being removed, it will quickly cause the
bright beams thereof to shine forth again unto ye world. The Lord may hide his
face from me for a time, by reason of my sins, which only can make a
separation and division between him and me, and cause him to withdraw the
light of his gracious countenance from me; but sure I am, that he will never
utterly forsake me: for his foundation is surely laid; his love and grace is
unchangeable: He has been once, nay often gracious unto me, and will continue
so for ever. O my God, keep me from sinning against thee; so shall the light
of thy countenance shine always upon me; so shall I feel the comfort of thy
presence remaining with me, in life, in death, after death, even for ever.

The truth and faithfulness of God, in performing his promises.
THe Lord is merciful in promising, and true in performing whatsoever he has
promised unto his children. We have no other title to the least of Gods
blessings, but even this, his mercy and truth, to claim them by; and having
that, we need no other. O Lord, although my sins are many and grievous, and
might justly cause thee to withdraw all thy mercies and favors from me, and
to deny any more to be gracious unto me: yet Lord, thy truth and faithfulness
endure for ever. O think upon thy covenant, and according to thy mercy, do
thou always remember me, and look upon me. Even for thy promise sake have
mercy upon me; and notwithstanding my sins call for judgment, yet do thou
continue still to be good and gracious unto me, in the supply of thy manifold
blessings and mercies.

The comfort of a good conscience, especially in death.
A Good conscience is a continual feast, as in and thoroughout the whole life
time, so especially in the hour, and in the very agony and pang of death.
With what sweet and pleasant food of divine consolation, does it then feed the
soul, and refresh the mind, when all other comforts fail, and become as
running streams dried up in the heat of summer? nothing then will afford the
like comfort unto this. Would thou see this, as it were in a glass, clearly
represented unto thy view? Suppose that even now, thou saw one lying at the
point of death, upon the bed of his sorrows, ready to take his last farewell
of the world, and to lay down his body in the dust, where he should have
corruption to be his father, and the crawling worm his mother, and his sister;
and the grave his house and dwelling place for a long season, whiles his soul
being separated from his body should depart into a far country. Suppose,
now at this instant, thou saw one in this estate, (as thus most certain it
shall be with thee, with me, with all of us) what, think thou, would be the
greatest comfort unto him? what is it, that would most refresh him and cheer
him up? Fine fare, or sweet iuncats? Alas, he takes no pleasure in them; he
cannot taste them though they be never so dainty; or if he could, yet should
he take no delight, nor find any sweetness in them: for it is his soul that
now hungers, and thirsts, and seeks for comfort, whiles his body is almost
senseless: He desires, he looks for spiritual food wherewith his fainting
soul, and languishing spirits may be fed and refreshed, and not for corporal;
yea that is loathsome unto him. Sweet music, and delightsome melody? Alas,
the daughters of singing are now abased; he is almost past hearing, and though
he could hear it never so well, yet it would not be any refreshing unto him,
he could not solace himself in it; yea rather it would seem harsh in his
ears, and unpleasant unto his mind: it is another kind of music and melody
which he longs to hear and hearken after, that therein he may find sound joy
and true comfort in that his extremity. His pleasures, profits, or great
revenues in this world? neither can these comfort him in that hour, they will
not afford him any true joy, pleasure or delight; no though he might even
swim and bathe himself in the abundance of them: yea rather they would be a
trouble unto him, they would disquiet and distract his mind, both because he
now sees that he is presently to leave the^ for ever, and to give a final
farewell unto them, never to have any use or benefit of the^ afterward; as
also, and that especially, because he knows that he is forthwith, to go to
answer, and to give an account, both for the getting, using and employing of
the^, and to receive accordingly. His credit, fame and reputation amongst men?
alas, although he were as famous, and renowned as Solomon was, when he was so
admired, that nations came far and near to see and to hear him; this then
would little avail him, it would yield him no pleasure, no delight; yea rather
it will grieve him to think how that happily has bin an occasion heretofore to
make him proud and vainglorious, and how that hereafter it will perish with
the remembrance of him, and vanish as the smoke, so that all his glory shall
lie buried in the dust, and his name be as if it had never been. Friends,
kins-folke and acquaintance? Neither can they afford him any true peace and
sound comfort. Indeed in the time of his health, they might be a joy and
refreshing unto him, even the very sight and presence of them peradventure
would affect him with an inward and secret delight and contentment: but now
they can bring little or no comfort unto him, no more then Jobs friends did
unto him in the depth of his misery, even sit by him and say nothing: yea
rather they will be a means to renew his sorrow and to increase his grief,
because he is so shortly to take his last farewell of them for so long a
season, as also for that he sees them who are most dear unto him, nothing but
mourning, weeping, sorrowing and lamenting for him on every side, which cannot
but disquiet and trouble him very much, especially having his mind so much
busied with the serious consideration of that long journey, which his soul,
immediately after the dissolution and separation thereof from his body, is now
presently to take into that unknown land. It is therefore neither the finest
fare, or daintiest iuncats, the sweetest music and most delightsome melody,
neither pleasures, profits, great revenues, honor, preferment, friends,
kinsfolks, acquaintance, nor any worldly thing else whatsoever, though never so
precious, never so glorious in the eyes of men, that can yield him any true
peace, or sound comfort, when this hour is once come, wherein he must breathe
out his soul (which has a long time been united unto his body in such a
firm league, and with so strait a bond of special love and amity, that it
is death now to depart or to be separated from it) and lay down his body in
the dust, and make his grave in the dark, where he shall neither see any, nor
be seen of any. What therefore (think thou) is it, wherein he shall find
comfort, when he shall stand in most need of it, having besides all the former
occasions of grief and sorrow, sin and Satan assaulting, yea laying harder
siege against him, then ever before; seeking by all means to daunt him, and to
rob and deprive him of al true peace and comfort, yea if it be possible to
bring him unto deep despair? What then would be most sweet and pleasant unto
him? What would most refresh him, and cheer up his languishing spirit? In
brief; if thou should ask him, what was his comfort in this extremity,
wherein he found most joy and delight: would he not answer thee, that his
rejoicing was the testimony of his own conscience, even in this, that he had
endeavored himself, with Paul, to have always a clear conscience toward God,
and men? in this that he had labored with Henoch to walk with God al his life
long: in this, that it was his chief care continually, to live uprightly, and
sincerely before God, and blamelesly and innocently before men. Would he not
tell thee, that this was the thing wherein he rejoiced, wherewith he was
comforted? Surely without doubt he would. And no marvel: For this, this (the
testimony I mean of a good conscience) would then be as a delightsome feast,
and a most heavenly banquet unto him. It would be sweet music, and a
pleasant melody within him. Never did he taste of such iuncats, as these would
be to his hungry soul, and to his fainting spirits. It would be as it were
Manna from heaven, and water of life, out of the Sanctuary of God, to refresh
and to revive him when he were almost dead. Never did he hear any music
that so much delighted him. Oh how would it cheer up his soul, and refresh
his mind, causing him to break forth into that speech of the holy Prophet:
Why art thou so cast down O my soul? why art thou so disquieted and so
troubled within me? O put thy trust in God, even thy God; rejoice, yea again
rejoice in him: for lo (as he has promised) he will send forth his light
and his truth, which shall lead thee and bring thee safely unto his holy
mountain, and unto his dwelling place. Lo he will plenteously reward thee,
receiving thee presently into his heavenly palace, and set thee upon a Throne,
and crown thee with glory and immortality. Or to say with that ancient and
religious Father: Go forth o my soul, what fear thou? why art thou danted
or any ways dismayed? Go forth, what need thou to fear? Commit thy self
unto him; who as he is a faithful Creator, so is he also a liberal rewarder
of all them that delight in well doing. Behold thou have fought a good fight,
thou have finished thy course, thou have endeavored to keep faith and a good
conscience, and to serve God in truth, vprightnes and sincerity all thy days.
So therefore those heavenly ministers, the Angels of God who have heretofore
attended upon thee, are now ready waiting for thee, eue^ to embrace thee wi^^
their arms, and to c^r^ie thee with joy and triumph into that heavenly city,
that celestial paradise, that new Jerusalem, where thou shall enjoy the
blessed presence of that glorious God, and the comfortable society and
compa^^^ o^ all the Saints and Angels, who desire and expect thy coming, and
with whom thou shall live, and conuer^e in heavenly manner, being ^^tisfied
with fulness of joy, bl^sse and happiness for evermore. This is the comfort
which a good conscience will give, as thoroughout the whole life, in the days
of trial and affliction, so especially in the last hour, when all worldly
comforts shall fly from us, and utterly forsake us: As Rahabs thread was
better unto her then all her goods and substance when the sword came, so will
this be better unto us the^ all ye world, when death comes and assailes us,
which we know not when, or how soon it will. O merciful God, I beseech thee,
make me wise to consider of these things, that so I may find comfort both now,
and hereafter, when I shall most want it, most desire it; and when as without
it I cannot but be exceeding wretched and miserable. Grant me thy grace, to
serve thee in righteousness and holiness all my days, yea to walk before
thee in truth and sincerity with a perfect heart, and to do always that
which is good in thy sight, and pleasing unto thy Majesty; that so (having my
conversation in this world in simplicity, and godly pureness) I may have the
testimony of my conscience to be my rejoicing, and, as it were, a continual
feast unto me al my life long, in all troubles* miseries and afflictions
whatsoever; yea and that when this short and transitory life shall draw to an
end, and al worldly comforts become vain, and no ways available unto me, I
may have the sweet comfort and solace hereof following and accompanying me
unto death, and resting and remaining with me in death: that so when at length
I shall send forth my last breath (calling to mind and recounting my
sincerity in thy service, and resting upon thy gracious promise for the
covering of my manifold defects and infirmities with thy sons righteousness) I
may then even lift up my head with confidence and boldness, and taking my
farewell of this wearisome world, depart hence with joy and rejoicing, knowing
assuredly yt I shall not die but live, being clothed with glory, and
immortality for evermore. This is my life, my hope. They that live not thus,
they die whiles they live, and when they once die, they die for ever. Oh
therefore that all would so live, that thus they might have peace and comfort
whiles they live, and in the end die the death of the righteous, and be made
partakers of their glory, which many wish for, few seek after, but fewest of
all attain unto.

Sin exceeding dangerous, though pleasant for a time.
Sin is sweet and pleasant for the present; at least it seems so to the
wicked, who never tasted of any sweeter delicates: But certain, howsoever they
relish it for the present, yet doubtless they shall find, to their grief and
sorrow, that in the end it will be as bitter as gall or wormwood, yea as
death it self. O Lord, let me never delight in those deceiuable pleasures of
sin which last but for a season, and the end whereof is bitterness and
destruction: let me never willingly take down, no nor so much as once taste
of, those poisoned morsels which the wicked and ungodly swallow with so much
greediness, as though they could never be satisfied or glutted with them: but
let me be always careful to avoid all sin, as I would do the rankest
poison, which being, though never so little, but once tasted of, present death
must needs follow, except there be a special recovery, by that sole and
sovereign medicine of Christ's righteousness, which is neither given, nor can be
applied to any of those, who wilfully and desperately drink down any of that
deadly poison, though they be often forewarned of the danger of it.

The usual event of Satan's practices against the Church of God.
IT has always been, and it is diligently to be observed, that by what plots
and practices soever, Satan has attempted the undermining of the Church of
God, and the final subversion and overthrow of the same, they have turned in
the end, if not to the ruin, yet to the weakening of his own kingdom, so that
he received the greatest foil, where he thought he should have most
prevailed. Especially we of this nation, have seen this more appara^tly in
later years; and as it was the Lords doing, and wonderful in our eyes, so
ought we never to forget it, but to be always mindful of it, yea to make
report of it unto those that are a far off, and to rehearse it hereafter to
those that are yet unborn, that so the goodness of the Lord, and the care which
he has over his Church, may be known and acknowledged, and due thanks,
praise and glory be returned unto him by many, for the same, in all ensuing
ages. O Lord remember thy wonted mercies, and continue still good and gracious
unto thy Church and chosen. O be thou favorable unto thy Sion, and build up
the walls of Jerusalem; make up the breaches, and repair the ruins and the
desolate and decayed places thereof: disappoint Satan in all his mischievous
counsel, and devilish policies and devices, whereby he seeks the overthrow
of it. Cast out all the cursed Iebusites which disturb the peace, and are
enemies unto the prosperity of it: keep it as thy little flock, which has
always been tender and dear unto thee: love it and delight in it, as in thine
own spouse, which thou have chosen unto thy self out of all the nations of
the earth: bless and sanctify it with thy grace, and defend it always with
thy mighty power. Compass it with a wall of fire round about, and fight thou
from heaven against the^ that fight against it. Thus O Lord be thou gracious
to thine own inheritance, thy chosen Sion. Let peace be within the walls,
and plenteousnesse within the palaces thereof, that so thy Gospel may flourish,
thy name be glorified, thy servants comforted, thy Saints repaired, the number
of thy children on earth accomplished, these sinful days finished, and
finally the glorious kingdom of thy Son fully established for ever in the
heavens. Amen.

Christians ought to keep continual watch in regard of Satan's assaults.
See thou not how careful those that are besieged and assaulted of their
enemies, are to have their Sentinels, and to make their defense sure, and to
fortify those places especially where the enemy gives the fiercest onset, or
where there is more danger that a breach should be made for his entrance.
Behold thou art continually environed with many spiritual enemies, the powers
of darkness, which have beset thee round about on every side: They have laid a
strong siege against thee, and assault thee every hour, every moment, seeking
by all means to make a breach into thy soul, and to bring both thy soul and
body to perpetual ruin and desolation: and will thou then be secure? will thou be careless? nay, will thou foolishly set open the gates, consenting
unto sin in the temptations thereof, that so Satan may enter in and make a
spoil of thee? O Lord, though many be so foolish and unwise, yet suffer not
me to be like unto them: but since so many, and so dangerous enemies, those
spiritual wickednesses, do bend their forces and entrench themselves about me
continually, grant that I may be wise to prevent the mischief which they
intend to bring upon me: make me always watchful and careful to stand for
my defense and safety against them: especially let me seek and endeavor by
all means to fortify my soul against those sins, whereby Satan does most
assail me, and to get strength against those weaknesses, whereby he may
soonest have advantage of me, and bring me into danger: yea O Lord do thou
watch over me, do thou strengthen me. Heal all my infirmities, repair the
ruins of my soul, make up the manifold breaches thereof. Compass me about
with thy grace and favor, that so none of those spiritual enemies may ever
have power over me, but that I may be defended from them in the time of this my
warfare here on earth, and hereafter triumph gloriously over them in the
heavens for evermore.

Greater care is to be had of things to come, then of things present.
O How careful are most for their bodies, how careless for their souls! For
the things of this world what pains, what labor do they willingly undergo!
for those of the world to come, how remiss, how exceeding negligent are they?
Lord grant that I may be always most careful of that which is most
necessary: that I may prefer heaven before earth, those things which are
spiritual, before those that are corporal; things which are permanent and
everlasting, before the lying and deceitful vanities of this world; endless
and unspeakable glory and happiness, before vain and supposed felicity.

Gods all-seeing presence.
THe eyes of the Lord are open upon all the ways of men, he sees and
observes them; even those things which they do in greatest secrecy are most
clear and manifest unto him: they are naked and discovered in his sight, and
he takes notice of all of them. O therefore how great is the boldness and
audaciousnes of such as dare presume willingly and wittinglie to commit so
grievous and so odious sins, whiles they are in so glorious a presence! who
is so profane and so graceless that should not be ashamed of this? yea that
should not be even astonished in himself, to consider that all his sins
(whereof some one of them, if it should be made known unto ye world, would
make him blush and hang down his head for shame) lie open and uncovered before
the face of almighty God, even the clear eyes of that infinite and glorious
Majesty, who is so pure that he cannot abide any uncleanness, yea that he
cannot once endure the sight of any thing, which is spotted and stained with
the filth of sin. O Lord, let me always see thee present with me, viewing,
marking, and observing the whole course and carriage of my life; not only how I
compose my self outwardly before men, but how even the thoughts of my heart
are framed within me; that thus I may not only be restrained from the
commission of outward actual wickednesses, (which even the shame of the world
causes many that are altogether void and destitute of thy sanctifying grace
to refrain themselves from) but also may fear to give entertainme^t to any
motion unto the least sin, and strive after holiness and purity, that so I
may be approved of thee, and find grace and favor in thy sight.

A motive to patience under the cross.
ALthough it be grievous unto us, yet it is good for us to be under the
cross. It is no small benefit which we receive by afflictions, if we look
unto the end and issue of them: for thereby we are humbled more then we were;
made more earnest and fervent in prayer; readier to seek unto the Lord; to
cleave faster unto him, and to depend solely and wholly upon him, making him
our hope, our stay, and only refuge; yea thereby our faith, hope, patience,
and all other graces of Gods spirit are exercised and increased, and that
inward man of ours daily more and more renewed, whiles we are outwardly
oppressed and afflicted. In brief, thereby we are weaned from the world, and
the vain and transitory things thereof, and made not only mindful, but also
desirous of the day of death, and of the time of our dissolution; whenas being
freed from all those miseries (wherewith we are and shall be compassed on every
side, as long as we live in this wretched world, and carry this body of sin
about with us) we shall enter into that resting place, where we shall want
nothing which may make for our blessedness and felicity. Let nothing then be
distastful unto me, which thou see to be good for me, O Lord: but let me
ever be content (if it so pleases thee) to drink down willingly the
bitterest cup of the most grievous affliction, which thou shall offer unto me,
seeing that in the end thereof I shall find much sweetness.

None ever free from the temptations of Satan.
THere is none that is not often assailed by the te^pter, even the most holy
and righteous men that live upon the earth: when one temptation is resisted and
passed over, they are to expect another, and to prepare themselves for it:
unlooked for blows are most dangerous. O Lord, I see how busy that enemy of
mine is; how many ways he labors to undermine me, and that especially when
I am least aware of him. O let me be always ready to meet him in the gate,
before he enter too far upon me: let me not be secure and careless, but
very watchful and vigilant; ever prepared to encounter with him, and to resist
him, especially in the beginning of his assaults, wherein if I withstand him
with faith, courage and resolution, I doubt not, but with thy grace, I shall in
the end easily get the victory of him, and see him fly before me.

Satan's temptations, sometimes more grievous and dangerous then at other times.
SOme have more grievous temptations presently after their first calling and
conversion unto God: some long after; some throughout their whole life have
that evil one incessantly casting many fiery darts at them, thereby (if it
were possible) to wound them even unto death, almost every moment, or at least
to make their lives wearisome and irksome unto them: These are not to faint,
or to despair, whiles they are thus tempted, but to be the more careful to
be always well appointed, and ready furnished, with the whole complete
armor of God, whereby they may be able to defend themselves, from the rage
and malice of that furious enemy and deadly adversary of theirs, who
thirsts after the blood of their souls, and desires nothing more then their
utter ruin and confusion. Since he is so fierce and eager upon them, they are
to be thus armed continually; and withal to pray unto the Lord, and that often
and more earnestly, that he would shield and safeguard them, and give unto the^
a joyful issue out of all their temptations; and then no doubt at length they
shall see the salvation of the Lord, in the overthrow of that malicious enemy,
by whom heretofore they have bin so greatly vexed, and so much endangered. O
Lord thou art the God of my strength; I fly unto thee alone for succor and
for aid in these great extremities, even in these grievous temptations and
assaults, whereby Satan, my maine adversary does seek daily to oppress my
soul: Do thou arm, and so strengthen me with thy grace, that through the
power of thy might, I may prevail against him, and put him to the greatest
foil, when he intends the greatest mischief, and thinks to have the
strongest hand over me, and the most advantage against me; so shall I sing
praises unto thy name, both now and ever; and teach others to resort unto thee
in their greatest dangers, and hardest conflicts, even then when the powers of
hell, shall set themselves most against them.

Satan more dangerous in lesser temptatious sometimes then in greater.
MAny are free from the danger of greater tentations, who are often overcome of
lesser, to the end that they might be truly humbled, and have no confidence
in themselves, or their own strength; seeing of themselves (as they find by
experience) they are so weak, that the least tentation is too strong for them,
and therefore could not possibly, but fainte presently under the greatest, and
yield without any resistance, if they were not sustained and supported by the
special assistance of that powerful God, against whom no emnitie is able to
resist; yea to whom the very gates of hell are subject, and able to do nothing
without his permission and sufferance, who is absolute Lord of all things. O
Lord, thou have manifested thy power unto me, in delivering me from the danger
of the most grievous assaults, wherewith Satan has sought my overthrow, and
whereby I feared that he would have soonest prevailed against me; and thou have
given me sufficient proof of mine own weakness, in suffering me to be foiled,
where there seemed to be least fear of any such danger. O let me always
acknowledge mine own weakness, and impotencie and extol thy grace and power;
that so I may not repose any trust or confidence in my self, or in mine own
strength for the resisting of the least emnitie, the least assault that at any
time is made against me; but may wholly at all times rest, and depend upon
thee, who alone art able to do all things.

Whom Satan tempts most.
Satan is always most busy where he has least to do: His assaults are
strongest where he is most encountered; where he has all things in possession
he is quiet. Lord I am not ignorant of his continual enterprises, his great
forces, his dangerous stratagems, his mischievous counsel, and devilish will.
To whom shall I fly, but to thee for help, for succor, and for aid? Of my
self I am weak, feeble, fainthearted, never able to meet, much less to
withstand and vanquish so strong an enemy, so great an adversary. I make
thee, O Lord, my only refuge: thou art my strength; through the help of thy
Christ, who has triumphed gloriously over Satan and al spiritual enmities, I
am able to do all things. Strengthen me, O my God, with thy might, through that
glorious power of thine, whereunto hell it self is subject: strengthen me in
the hour of tentation: Cover my head in the day of battle, put thy spirit
into my heart, and that two-edged sword of thine into my hands; and above all
things give me the shield of faith, and the helmet of salvation; yea put upon
me that whole complea^e armor of thine, that I may be able to resist in the
evil day when the rage and fury of the enemy shall be greatest; and to
overcome, yea even to tread down Satan under my feet, and so in the end,
having finished all things, and kept the faith, through hope and patience at
length receive that crown of righteousness, which thou have promised, and
which as I expect, so I know, thou the righteous God wilt give unto me, at that
glorious appearance of my blessed Savior; whose coming as I daily look for,
so I desire thee to hasten. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

The wonderful works of God in heaven and earth.
STand and consider: lift up thine eyes to heaven, and after that cast them
down to the earth, and behold the works of God: shall thou not have cause to
admire at the wisdom thou shall find in them, and to give glory to the
Lord, the Creator and preserver of them? Look up and consider the light of the
Sun, even that noble and swift giant, which is appointed of the Lord to run
his race every day, and to be his messenger, to show forth to the world, the
glory of his Maker: Consider the Moon, the number and order of the Stars;
that fair and excellent curtain which the Lord has drawn over us. Consider
also the power and changes of the wind; the storehouse and treasuries of the
rain, hail, snow, lightning, thunder; the multitude and huge heaps of the
waters in that vast depth; that great Leuiathan which takes his pastime
therein, with innumerable creatures else which live, and move there: Consider
likewise the earth thou treadest upon; the natures and kinds of beasts, the
fruits of the trees, the variety of flowers, the properties of stones, the
virtue of herbs, of plants, and roots: In brief, the whole earth, the sea, the
heavens, with all their rich and glorious furniture: Have they not written and
engraven upon them in great and text letters, Praise and glory to the Lord?
Yea do but look upon thy self, and into thy self, and shall thou not find in
thee, a little world, of strange and admirable works of God? Yea, O Lord, al
things are full of thy wisdom, and of the glory of thy mighty power. O let
me delight in the consideration of them, let my mind be raised up, by them,
to the meditation of the excellency and great renown of thee, the Creator and
maker of them; yea let my heart be drawn thereby, to a holy and reverent
fear of thy glorious Majesty, and to an earnest desire and entire affection
to sing praises continually unto thee. A shame it is for me to be dumb or
silent, since all thy creatures are so loud, never ceasing to speak of thy
praise, and to show forth thy glory in that excellent workmanship, which
thine own hand has framed in the heavens, the earth, the seas, and all places.

A caveat for rash censurers of the weaknesses and infirmities of others.
IT is a thing incident to the nature of men, to be very curious in prying
into the faults of others, and very careless in searching into their own
ways, or taking a view of those sins and corruptions which lie lurking in
their own bosoms. Experience every where gives too clear evidence of this.
It is a vice which every one, that has any care or conscience to order his
life according to the prescript and determinate rule of Gods word, must labor
diligently to reform himself of. And sure, it were wisdom for men rather to
be curious in things which concern themselves, then others; more ready to
epsy out their own faults, to censure their own actions, and to judge their
own selves, then others. For whiles they sift others so narrowly, and pass
sentence against them unadvisedly, they do often times not only much trouble
themselves in that, for which they shall have no thanks for their labor, nor
benefit themselves any ways; but also err, and sin most grievously against
God, and their neighbor, and most da^gerously against their own souls, which
they wound whiles they seek to wound others: whereas if they would be as
careful to spend the same time in examining their own ways, in looking and
prying into their own actions, and in censuring and judging themselves, without
all partiality and sinister affection, they should do that which would be
very pleasing unto God, and very fruitful and profitable unto themselves, and
which they shall never have cause to repent themselves of. Good Lord, let me
never delight, as many do, (even like the Spider, or such venomous creatures)
to feed upon poison only; to be always looking into the weaknesses and
infirmities of others; but let me ever be more clear eied, and quick sighted,
in espying out mine own sins, then the frailties of others, and more ready to
sit as judge upon my self, then upon others; yea let me always be very
charitably minded, in hoping, and interpreting the best of others, never
passing sentence against the^, no not in my secretest thoughts, til I see most
clear evidence, whereby they are so manifestly convicted, that there can be
no color for their sin, nor just plea for their defense; and very severe and
censorious in dealing with my self; both fearing and suspecting the worst even
in my best actions; and judging and condemning my self in those things,
wherein to others happily, I might seem rather to be justified and approved.

The infirmities of others are to be borne with.
IT is a rare virtue to bear with the weaknesses and infirmities of our
brethren; and yet such as must be duly and carefully practiced of us all, if
we be Christians, not in name only, but in deed, and in truth. We have both the
commandment and example of Christ, whereby we should be drawn unto this duty,
so well beseeming all that are his. It is the will of God that we should bear
one another burden; and therefore if we will not by our practice make open
profession, that we are such as are lawless, let us be careful to do it.
And if any be more auerse and backward hereunto (as indeed such is the nature
of us all, that we can hardly keep our selves strictly within the compass
of this law) let him look into the equity thereof, and see how just and meet
the thing is, which the Lord requires of him herein. Consider thy self well:
Thou would have others to tolerate those things which, it may be, are
intolerable in thee; and wilt not thou with patience, wisdom, and love, bear
with the frailties and weaknesses of others, which may more easily be endured;
especially if they be such as complain and groan under that burden, so that
thou need not lay more weight upon them, except thou mindest in the malice
of thy wicked heart, to press them down, and cause them to sink under their
load, whereas in meeknes of spirit, and in a tender affection, and brotherly
compassion, thou should seek to raise the^ up, and to strengthen them. Thou
art desirous that others should wink at thy faults which proceed f^o^ thy
weakness, and with a favorable eye so look upon thy defects, which thou can
not cover, as that they should either not observe the^, although they see them;
or else, if they both see and observe them, not esteem the worse of thee for
them, because that even in the best men, and those of greatest excellencies,
there are many infirmities, which although they may (as in wisdom they ought)
be hid from the view of others, yet cannot possibly be altogether healed as
long as they remain in the flesh, and carry this body of sin about with
them. Thou art desirous that others should deal thus lovingly and charitably
with thee; yea thou take it to be a great offense in them, and a great
injury unto thy self, if they do otherwise, and will thou not (as the law of
equity, according unto which all thy actions should be framed, does straightly
bind thee) mete out the same measure unto others, which thou thy self being
in their case, in the same, or the like condition with them, look to receive
from them; and if they deny it unto thee, complainest, as if they dealt hardly
with thee: Ought thou not to be so affected unto others, as thou think it
meet that they should be affected unto thee? If thou be not, who can excuse
thee? seeing that thine own conscience condemns thee, whiles thou do that
thy self, which thou dislikest, and condemnest in another; and neglectest that
duty which thou requirest of others, and perswadest thy self that all without
exception are bound unto. In brief, if thou can not be thy self, every way
as thou would be, yea and use all diligence, and careful endeavor that
thou might be; ought thou not in wisdom to bear with others, who do
not, yea possibly cannot in every thing frame themselves unto thy liking, nor
be in every respect, as thou would they should be? Who is there that will
not say, that this is a thing both just and equal? O Lord, I know that none
can attain unto absolute perfection in this world, but that all, even the best
and dearest of thy children, who have the greatest measure of thy graces, are
subject unto many infirmities, many weaknesses and imperfections even in the
best of their endeavors, wherein they do most strive after perfection: In my
self especially I do find many defects, many wants; I do not, neither can
do, as I would do, but fail in many things, wherein notwithstanding I do
desire, and endeavor to do that, which might be accepted of thee, and pleasing
unto thee: I see much weakness in me, and many infirmities, which I do daily
groan under, and desire thee in thy good time to heal me of, and to give me
grace to make this use of the^, even whiles I have mine eyes continually upon
them, to be thereby the more humbled in my self, and the more equally, and
charitablie affected toward others, covering their offenses, and bearing with
their weaknesses, and being ready with the spirit of love and compassion to
support them, where they seem to be most feeble; yea to have the same mind
and affection toward them, that being in their estate, I would desire that
they should have toward me, and to put my shoulders under their burden, and
so rather to ease them with my patience and sufferance, then to ouerload them
with my uncharitable dealing with them, even as I being oppressed in like
manner, would be desirous that they should bear part of my burden, and not
make it more grievous unto me, lest I fainted under it.

The lives of the Saints of old, and men now a days, how different they are.
O What difference is there between our lives, and the lives of the Saints,
and holy men of God recorded in scriptures, and other writings, wherein their
examples are commended unto us, as paterns, and presidents to follow in so many
rare, and excellent virtues, as they have gone before us, and left the memory
of them, behind them, as a light to shine unto us, who walk in the darkness of
this world, in the midst of such a perverse, and crooked generation, among
whom we should shine as they have done. Sure, when I lay our examples unto
theirs, and compare our lives with theirs, me thinks, that many, even of those
who are esteemed as the best Christians, deserve little more then the name of
half Christians, or at least but of weak ones and nouices in this holy
profession: so far do they come short of that which we see to have been in
them, and ought to be in our selves. Oh where is the holy and religious
conversation of Enoch? whose whole life was a continual walking in the
presence of the glorious God, and a daily conuersing, and familiar acquainting
himself with him, in the careful and conscionable discharge of all those
duties which he required of him. Where is the faith of Abraham, by which as he
well deserved to be accounted the father of us all, that are true believers; so
also he obtained this as a singular prerogative, and evidence of the
extraordinary grace and favor of God toward him, to be called, and reputed
in an especial manner the friend of God? Where is the meekness of Moses? where
is ye patience, and constancy of Job in the midst of so many, and that so
fiery trialls, for which the Lord did so ple^tifully reward him, when there
seemed almost to be no hope for him, and caused his example to be famous among
all them, that should hear of him? Where is the holy zeal of David, whose
eyes did not drop, but even gush forth, as it were, rivers of tears, and his
heart even consume within him, whiles he saw the wicked tra^sgresse the Laws
of God, whom he loved so dearly; and even with just Lot vexed his righteous
soul from day to day, whiles he beheld the unlawful deeds, and wicked
abominations whereby the Lord was provoked every day? Where is his vprightnes
and sincerity in the worship and service of God, for which the Lord graced him
with this title, that he was a man after Gods own heart? Where is the delight
that he took in the commandments of God; wherein he found such sweetness, that
all things else were nothing so pleasing unto him, nor so much desired of him:
Where is that holy devotion which proceeded from his pure mind, his sanctified
heart, and his heavenly affections, in such sort, that night and day,
continually upon al occasions, he breathed forth those sweet hymns, and most
pleasant songs and ditties of laud and praise unto the Lord, for all his
benefits, as to himself in particular, so to the whole Church, and all the
Saints in general; provoking them likewise and all creatures to do the same,
with the same affection? Where is the integrity and vprightnes of Josiah and
Ezekiah? who walked before the Lord in truth, and with a perfect heart, doing
that always which was good in his sight, without all guile and dissimulation?
Where is that conscionable practice of a godly and of a Christian life that was
in Paul, whose desire and endeavor was to have always a clear conscience
toward God, and toward men, and to have his conversation in the world, in
simplicity, and godly pureness? Or where is the heavenly mindednes of the same
Apostle? who whiles he lived in the world, yet carried himself as one that
was of another world, having his conversation in heaven, from thence expecting,
and looking for continually the glorious appearance of our blessed Savior, for
the accomplishment of his redemption. Or where is there that earnest desire of
the conversion, and salvation of others, which so manifestly showed forth it
self in him; in that it was not only the prayer of his heart, but that which
he aimed at in all his actions, and sought for by all means, and which that
he might attain unto, he thought no labor, no travel painful, or
grievous, no nor yet esteemed his life it self dear unto him; even that he
might win many unto Christ, bringing the^ unto the knowledge and obedience of
the truth, that so their souls might be saved in the day of judgment. Or
where is the piety, and devotion of that religious Gentill? who although he
wanted the means which we now have in more plentiful manner, yet has this
commendation given unto him, that he was a man fearing God, himself, and
careful to have his whole household, and all those that belonged unto him,
acquainted with true religion and godliness; and withal, that he caused his
prayers, and his alms to ascend continually into the presence of God, so that
the Lord took pleasure and delight in him, and revealed himself more clearly
and evidently unto him, by the ministry of his messenger which he sent unto
him for that purpose. Or where is the forwardnes of those noble Beroeans, in
receiving ye word with all readiness, and enquiring and searching into the
Scriptures from day to day, that they might know and embrace the truth
preached, and being well grounded and settled in it, continue steadfast and
immovable in the profession of it, notwithstanding the opposition of all false
Teachers, and seducing adversaries? Or where is there one like, the first
Martyr, S. Stephen, a man full of faith, and of the holy Ghost; and of that
unfeigned love and charity, as to continue praying for his deadly enemies, unto
the last breath? Or where be there any that have that entire and loving
affection, unto all the brethren, even to all the Saints, which yt beloved
Disciple of Christ, and fatherly Apostle, S. John, breathes forth, as it were,
thoroughout all his Epistles, and whereof no doubt he had received so great a
measure, that he desired nothing more then that as he did, so others also
might abound in the same grace, and thereby, upon good ground, be well assured,
that they were borne of God, and translated from death to life? In brief,
where are they, that with the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and other holy men,
and faithful servants of God in former times, address themselves with all
readiness, willingness, and cheerfulnes, to serve the Lord both day and night, in
watchings, in fasting and prayer, in divine and heavenly meditations, and in
the daily exercise of all the duties of a holy and religious course; being
content (if the will of God be so) to pass thorough that fiery trial, with
patience, and perseverance; to be reviled, disgraced, hated, persecuted, made
a gazing stock to the world, yea even as the filth of the world, and the
ofscouring of all things; and so to become even fools for Christ's sake,
praying for those that both speak and do evil unto the^, and blessing them
that persecute them: yea and not this only, but also even hating their own
lives, and giving up themselves unto death (the most bitter and cruel deaths
that can possibly be devised by the most bloody tyrants that ever were or can
be) rather then to be once drawn from the love, the faith, and obedience of
Christ, and from the profession of that truth which they have received? Alas,
how far do we come behind those Worthies that have gone before us, and
whose example the Lord has set up as a light amongst us, that we might see how
to tread in their steps, and to imitate the^ in those graces, for which their
memory shall be blessed for ever? how unlike are our lives unto theirs, if we
lay them both together, and look upon them with an equal view? How few are
those that shine in those excellent virtues, of zeal, devotion, faith,
sincerity, piety, charity, brotherly love, patience, constancy, and
perseverance? in all which they have been so eminent, that the very remembrance
of them may shame this age wherein we live, and cause many to blush, who think
that they have great wrong done to them, if they may not have the name for good
Christians, and be so reputed and esteemed amongst men, how little soever they
deserve it indeed. Nay, so degenerate are the most in these latter times, and
their lives and manners so much swaruing from the virtues, and religious
courses, and practices of our forefathers, those who^ God has made examples
for our imitation; that even he (according to the common rate) shall be
accounted honest and religious enough, and one that has made sufficient
proceedings in the school of Christianity; that is no open, notorious and
heinous offender; not tainted with any gross and capital crime, theft,
adultery, drunkenness, extortio^, oppression; no common railer or slanderer of
others; no malicious detracter, no troublesome contentious person, but one of a
free and ingenuous disposition, of a civil carriage, and commendable
behavior; one that lives quietly and friendly among his neighbors, and is
careful of outward obseruances, which either law, or some other sinister
respect draws him unto, and which a mere pagan and heathen might perform as
well as he: though he be far from the truth of religion, neither fearing
God, nor working righteousness, but altogether neglecting those maine and
especial duties both of the public, and private worship and service of God,
which he requires, and has expressly commanded; as prayer, due and diligent
reading, hearing, meditating and conferring of the word, and those things which
might tend to spiritual edification; sanctifying of the Sabbath; instructing
of his family; yea although in reregard of zeal, he be of a colder temper,
then the lukewarm Laodicea^s ever were, even almost ashamed of that forwardnes
and feruencie in the discharge of those duties, which the word of God does
prescribe unto him, and of that strictnes and precisenes which the Scripture
exacteth of him. This is the estate of our times; thus have most declined, and
gone backward, in this last and worst age of the world, wherein we see that
verified which the truth it self long ago foretold, and which now is most
apparent to all that have any discerning, viz. that the love and zeal of many
is grown cold; men generally are less fervent, and more defective in the
duties of piety and godliness, then they have been heretofore, although the
means were never more plentifully afforded unto any, then they are now, and
through the grace and mercy of God, have been a long time. It is woeful, to
see and consider, the great change and alteration, which now, if we have eyes,
we cannot but see almost in every place, amongst all sorts and degrees of men:
what a general defection, as it were, is there from the piety, devotion,
innocence, simplicity, and godly pureness, the holy conversation, and
religious practices, the zeal, integrity, sincerity, unfeigned love, and
charity, and al those excellent virtues, and graces of the holy men of God
that have bin before us? O blessed Lord, as thou have set the lives of many of
thy Saints and servants, as an ensample before mine eyes, that I should be a
follower of the^, and walk as they have walked, according to the rule of thy
word; so grant, I beseech thee, that I may be excited and provoked, whiles I
look on them, to imitate them in their virtues, and to labor to frame my life
according to that pattern, which thou in them have prescribed unto me; and
carefully to endeavor proceeding by one and the same rule, according unto which
they have walked, to attain unto that perfection of divine and spiritual
graces, which it pleased thee to vouchsafe unto them, even because they chose
the way of wisdom, and delited in the ways of thy commandments. Let the
example of their zeal for thy glory, make me more zealous, and earnest in
those things which are good, and whereby thou may be glorified: Let the
example of their true and godly devotion make me more devout and religious:
Their vprightnes, sincerity, and godly simplicity, let them stir me up unto
the same virtues: Their diligence, cheerefulnes and alacrity in the works of
thy worship and service, let them draw me unto the same duties: The example of
their patience in so many, and so great afflictions and trials, let it be an
especial motive and inducement, to make me the more patient; the example of
their meeknes, to make me the more meek; of their humility, to make me the
more humble; of their kindness, long sufferance, and brotherly love, and
affection, to make me the more tender hearted, loving and charitable unto all
men; of their contempt of the world, and the vanities thereof, to make me the
less to regard them; of their holy and heavenly conversation to make me the
more heavenly minded, the more heavenly affected, having my heart continually
lifted up far above all these earthly and transitory things, to the serious
consideration and meditation, of those most excellent and glorious things which
are above, even those unsearchable, and unspeakable riches, and treasures, of
that glory, and endless blessedness, and happiness which thou have prepared for
thy children in that celestial kingdom: that thus being careful to follow
the example of thy chosen servants, whom thou have set up as lights to shine
unto me, for my better direction in the way of godliness, which leads unto
life and salvation; I may hereafter enter into that joy, and be made partaker
of the same glory, of which they have now the fruition in that heavenly
mansion.

Heavenly mindednes.
THE eye of a Christian should be always in heaven: even when he is most
busied in these earthly affairs, he is to have his mind lifted up unto those
things which are above, and to be ever viewing, and beholding with the eye of
his soul, that unspeakable glory, and those endless riches and treasures of
everlasting felicity and blessedness, which to the eye of the body are
invisible, and cannot be seen of any, but of those only which are spiritual.
O blessed Lord, what is there on this earth, wherein my soul can find any
pleasure, or unto which I should give the affections of my heart? On every
side, I see nothing but misery, and vanity, continual occasion of grief and
mourning. My treasure, my joy and happiness is in heaven, even in the place
where thou dwell in glory and majesty, and where thou have prepared such
things for me, as the heart of man is not able to conceive, or comprehend: O
therefore let mine eye never be fixed upon any earthly object; but let me
always be looking up unto thee, and to that heavenly mansion, where such
glorious things are reserved for me.

Especial favors of God toward us, often and more especially to be
remembered of us.
IT is a good thing, to be often meditating upon the goodness and loving
kindness of the Lord toward us, in those special favors, and blessings,
whereby he has chiefly, and most evidently manifested his love unto us, and
his fatherly care over us: yea the least of his mercies ought daily to be
remembered of us, that so in all things we might stir up our selves unto true
thankfulness, which is a thing wherewith he is greatly delighted, and for which
he extends his loving favor in a more plentiful increase of his blessings,
and benefits. O merciful Lord, how great is thy goodness toward me! how
exceeding gracious have thou been always unto me! The mercies which thou have
freely vouchsafed unto me, are infinite, and innumerable, I am not able to
recount the^. O let me ever be thinking of them, and lifting up my heart
continually with unfeigned praise and thanks unto thy Majesty for them; that
so it may please thee, to cause the light of thy grace, and favor to shine
still upon me, even unto the end of my days.

How the conscience is disquieted and wounded.
HE is a happy man, that does always carefully avoid every thing,
whatsoever it be, that may be either a stain, or a burden unto his
conscience; he shall surely enjoy the benefit of a quiet, and of a peaceable
mind, with much freedom and liberty of spirit; whereas on the other side, he
that has little or no care of this duty, that regards not how he defiles
his conscience, or what load he lays upon it, by doing those things, which
are either altogether unlawful in themselves, or else unlawful unto him,
because either he has no warrant for the doing of them, or else fails in
the manner of the doing of them; he thereby brings a greater misery upon
himself, then for the present he can think of, and for which, hereafter he
shall meet with much untimely grief and sorrow, and taste of much bitterness
in his soul and spirit. O Lord, let me be careful always, to use all
means, whereby I may keep a clear and a pure conscience, doing that good
with all diligence which thou have commanded, and abstaining with all my
strength, from that evil which thou have forbidden, and from whatsoever I
cannot have resolution out of thy word, for the lawfulnes of it; that so I may
have comfort both in life and in death.

The dulnes and sottishnes of worldlings.
O The dulnes of the hearts of men, who mind only those things which are
present, never regarding those which are to come! How sottish is the nature of
man, that delights only to lie groueling on this earth, and to satisfy his
carnal and his sensual appetite in the enjoying of these things which are but
vain and corruptible; yea that neglects even heaven, and happiness it
self, so that he may have his fill of them! O Lord, let me always be far
otherwise affected then the men of this world are, who savor only of those
things, which are carnal, and earthly: (...) vain hope of a long life upon
earth, as many do; When it is morning, let me think, that I shall not live
unto the evening; and when the evening is come, let me not promise unto my
self assurance of life until the next morning, since there is no power thereof
in my hands: But let me live so continually, as if death were to seize upon me
presently; yea let me so live always, as if I were to die the same instant,
even when death might seem to be furthest off from me; that thus having
death always present before mine eyes, I may learn daily to die unto the
world, esteeming the things thereof as nothing, though never so highly prized
of the men of this world; and to aspire daily more and more, unto that
spiritual and heavenly life in thy Christ: that so when bodily death shall
close up these eyes of mine, I may not rest in darkness, and be as those that
are cut off from their hope, and lost their comfort; but depart in peace into
that light of glory, where I shall enjoy thy blessed presence, and behold thee
face to face for evermore, to my unspeakable happiness and felicity.

As is the life of a man, so is his death and final estate.
AS is the life of man, so is his death; and as it is with him in death, so
shall it be in the last and dreadful judgment. He that has a care to live
well, it cannot be, but that he should die well; and he that dies well, shall
assuredly find the judgment day to be a marvelous refreshing unto him: On
the other side, he that lives ill, how can he have any hope that he shall die
well? and if he be miserable in his death, how much more in the day of
judgment? Oh what a terror shall that day be unto him! who is able to conceive,
what a sea of misery, and horror shall then suddenly ouerwhelme him, in most
fearful manner? O my God, thou who art my strength, my hope, and my salvation,
give me both an earnest desire, and a careful endeavor to direct all my
ways, and to order the whole course of my life according unto the rule, and
prescript of thy holy word; let it be my care, to have a good conscience in
all things, and to live so, that my life being approved of thee, my death may
be blessed, and my appearance before thee in the day of thy coming, with joy
and comfort; when as the wicked shall not be able to stand in thy presence,
but call to the mountains and to the rocks to fall upon them, and to hide them
from the fiercenes of thy wrath, which shall be as a consuming fire to devour
all the ungodly of the earth.

Judgment day how terrible it will be to the wicked.
THe angry countenance of a severe Judge, how dreadful is it unto the
malefactor that stands endited at the bar before him? what a terror does it
strike into him? how does it astonish and amaze him, especially if he be not
only guilty of the fact, to himself; but perceiues that the Judge has
certain knowledge, and clear evidence of the same, and of all the particular
circumstances thereof: Oh the^, what a horrible fear shall possess the hearts
and minds of all sinful and ungodly wretches, when they shall stand before that
just Judge? when they shall be brought unto their answer, for all their
unrighteous and wicked deeds which they have committed in the whole course of
their lives? when that glorious God, that severe and mighty Judge (the Judge
of the whole world) having a perfect register of all their actions, words and
works, yea of the secretest thoughts and imaginations of their hearts; and
having all things which ever they have done, as clear as the Sun, or as
crystal before him, shall look upon the^ with a fiery eye, and with a
frowning and irefull countenance, and show such signs of his wrathful
indignation against them, as that the heaven shall shake, and the earth
tremble, yea both heaven and earth fly away from his face, and move out of
their places, for the greatness of his wrath, which shall be more dreadful, then
the heart of man is now able to conceive? O then what an astonishment shall
come upon them? how shall shame and confusion cover their faces? how shall
fear, grief, and anguish even rend their hearts, and souls? Never was
Belshazzar so perplexed, so amazed, and astonished at the sudden appearing of
the hand writing over the wall, (the forerunner of his speedy destruction) as
they shall then be: The changing of his countenance, the troublesome thoughts
of his mind, the loosing of his joints, and the smiting of his knees one
against the other, was but a shadow of that unspeakable dread, horror, and
fearful amazement, wherewith all ungodly persons shall be then stricken, and
utterly confounded in themselves. Seeing, O Lord, that appeara^ce of thine, in
that day wherein thou have appointed to judge ye world, shall be so terrible
unto all the wicked, that would not obey thee, nor hearken unto thy voice, to
walk in the ways of thy commandments: O let the remembrance thereof make me
always careful to refrain my foot from their paths, and to endeavor my
self unto righteousness, that so when their fear comes, I may have cause
to rejoice, and be glad in thee; yea even to look up unto thee, with
ioyfulnes, and to glory in thy salvation, who then wilt show thy self to be
marvelous and exceeding glorious in all thy Saints, even al those that have
believed in thy name, and waited for that blessed coming of thine, which as
thou have promised, so let it be thy pleasure to hasten.

The excellency of a true Christian.
O How great is the excellency of every true christian; even of every one that
is such a one, not only in name, in title, or outward profession, but in deed
and in truth! Surely, his honor is great, his estate is glorious; yea the
grace and dignity which he has received is such, as that the spirit of a man,
is not able fully to discern, or to comprehend the same. God, even of the most
high God, and so partaker of endless bliss, and happiness: He is borne
again by the spirit of God, through the incorruptible and immortal seed of
the word, and so made a new creature in Christ, more excellent and glorious
then those celestial creatures, the sun, the moon, and all the stars of
heaven. of the age of the fullness of Christ, his head. blessings in heavenly
things. him, depending wholly and only upon him, for the supply of all
spiritual graces, and strength; and to be more careful, and watchful over
all his ways, and more circumspect and heedefull, in avoiding all sin, and
the occasions thereof. gives clear and evident proof: These, even these
celestial creatures, are not only his familiars, and companions, continually
accompanying him, but also his atte^dants, sent forth of God to watch over him,
and to wait daily upon him. given him also his spirit, that blessed spirit of
grace and comfort, to refresh, and to cheer him up in all his griefs and
sorrows, and to lead him forth into green and pleasant pastures, so that he
is fulfilled with that spiritual delight, and heavenly joy and solace, which
is unspeakable, and glorious. He has set up the scepter of his kingdom in his
heart, so that all his enemies shall fall down before him; even Satan the
chiefest of his adversaries, who fights continually against him, and seeks
by all means to bring him into bondage and thraldom under him. What should I
say more? Being united unto Christ his redeemer, and made bone of his bone,
and flesh of his flesh, he is also joined, and nearly allied unto God the
Father, and so being ioynt-heire with the Son, has that crown of immortal
glory belonging unto him, and shall at length, even when this short life is
ended, live, and reign in that celestial kingdom, with God himself, and
with all his holy Saints, and elect Angels for evermore: And in the meanewhile,
even whiles he lives here crawling as it were upon the earth, and having the
place of his abode here below, where he is as one of no reputation in the
world which knows him not; he has his life, his conversation, and his chief
abode in heaven, being always looking up unto that place of his glory which is
above, where Christ Jesus his savior, sits at the right hand of his father;
his eyes are ever lifted up unto heaven, and set upon those things which are
within the veil, where his hope, yea his heart is; so that even whiles he
lives with his body on earth, in mind and in soul he is transported in a
manner, into heaven it self, and sees those things in spirit, which are
unutterable, and which flesh and blood, or the senses of a natural man can
never reach unto, never be able in any sort to comprehend. O Lord, who can
express the honor which thou have given unto thy Saints? who is able to
declare the special grace, which thou in thy infinite goodness and mercy, have
vouchsafed to every one, whom it has pleased thee, to give unto thy Christ,
and in him to elect and chose unto life, and salvation, according to the good
pleasure of thy will, before the world was? Oh with what glory and honor have
thou crowned them! how highly have thou advanced them! being moved thereunto
by nothing that was in them, but only of thy free love and mercy, that thereby
thou might cause thy infinite grace and glory to shine forth unto the
world, to the praise of thy name throughout all generations. O blessed God,
whose mercy and kindness unto mankind is so infinite, and inco^prehe^sible;
seeing it has pleased thee, in the exceeding greatness of thy love, and riches
of thy grace toward me in Christ, to choose me unto life and glory, and to
make me, even me so unworthy a creature, one of that small number, whom thou
have so highly honored in this world, and wilt for ever glorify, even with
that exceeding measure of glory in ye world to come: O let my heart and my
mouth never cease praising and magnifying thy great and glorious name; and
howsoever I may seem vile and contemptible in the eyes of the world, which
does neither know thee, nor thine, but has always hardly entreated those whom
thou have chiefly honored, esteeming them as the scumme and ofscouring of the
earth, the very abiects of men, yea men unworthy to live in the world; yet let
me never pass any thing at all, how the blind world does judge or esteem of
me, or how it is affected toward me; but let me always rejoice in thee and
glory in thy salvation, and rest continually in a comfortable hope and joyful
expectation, of all that goodness of thine which thou have treasured up in store
for me in thy kingdom, and whereof thou have given me the first fruits
already, as a pledge, and assurance of that, which I shall have the full
fruition of hereafter, for ever.

An humble heart most pleasant unto God: a proud* most vile and abominable.
AN humble and a lowly heart is a mansion wherein the Lord delights to dwell;
he fills and replenisheth it with the riches of the graces of his spirit: but
as for the proud and high minded, they are an abomination unto him: His soul
does loath them, and his spirit will never rest nor remain with them; they are
no fit mansion for him; yea they are meet only, to be an habitation for Satan,
that evil and unclean spirit, who being the father of the children of pride,
can take no pleasure, where he finds true humility, but seeks for lodging
in those especially, who are of a proud and hautie spirit: These are his
darlings, in these is his chief delight; in them he has a room always ready
trimmed and prepared for him; even in ye closets of their hearts, where he
dwells and reigns continually, and from whence he will never depart, as
long as he finds so fit a mansion for him. The only way to cast him out of
ye heart, and soul of man, is to empty it altogether of pride, and to have it
garnished with that excellent grace of humility and lowliness. O Lord, who
art the fountain of all grace, give unto me, I earnestly desire thee, a
contrite spirit, a meek, and an humble heart: Banish all pride and vanity of
mind far from me, and make me lowly, yea base and vile in mine own eyes, that
so that wicked spirit being utterly dispossessed, and finding no abiding place
within me, I may be fit to entertain that good spirit of thine; thou may
delight to dwell and remain with me, and to fill my empty soul, with those
precious riches, and treasures of thy heavenly graces, which are the things
which my heart desires and longs after: Oh do thou hear me, and satisfy
me, as my trust is in thee, who I know assuredly wilt never fail me, nor
withhold thy goodness from me, whiles I seek unto thee with a heart unfeigned.

Confidence in any creature, a most vain thing.
WHat a vain thing is it to put any trust or confidence in man, or in any
creature? what is this but to rest upon a broken reed? How greatly do such
deceive themselves? how often do they fail in their desires, and miss that
which they hoped for? O Lord God, who art glorious and wonderful in power and
strength, nothing is or can be hard unto thee; thou only art my hope; all my
trust and confidence is in thee. Whom have I in heaven, or in earth but thee?
upon thee, thee only I rest and depend continually. O do thou never forsake me.

Suspicion.
THE best man is always le^st suspicious: But he that is given ever to
mistrust and to suspect the worst of others, as it may be justly feared that
he has a very corrupt and unsound heart himself, so it may be undoubtedly
affirmed, that he is very offensive and displeasing unto God, very unquiet in
himself, and most uncharitable toward his neighbor, whom notwithstanding, he
hurts not so much thereby as himself. O Lord, increase the grace of true
charity daily more and more in me: Let me always be looking into mine own
heart, and considering ye paths of mine own feet; let me fear mine own
ways, and suspect the worst of my self in all my actions, being privy unto
those secret corruptions which lie lurking within me; and both think and hope
the best of others, because I know not what thy work is, or may be in them:
yea let me always be ready, to judge, accuse, and condemn my self; and even
in my thoughts to excuse, and acquit others, by making a favorable
interpretation of all their doings, until such time as thou do manifest,
and give clear evidence, that they are such, as are not to be approved: Thus
I shall please thee, and not sin against those, toward whom I ought always,
to be charitably affected, and free from all ill suspicion and wicked surmizes.

Why the Lord suffers often times the infirmities of his children to be known
to others.
IT is a means often times to make a man the more humble, to know that others
are privy unto his wants, his weaknesses and infirmities, which he was
desirous to keep secret; to perceive that the sores and blemishes of his soul
lie open unto the view of others, which he could wish rather were covered and
kept close. And for this end, the Lord many times in mercy and goodness, does
suffer ye shame and nakedness of his children, to be discovered before the face
of others, when as they would gladly have it hid from the eyes of all, and not
seen of any; yea he does suffer them to fall by many weaknesses and
infirmities, even such as are no ways pleasing, but grievous, and irksome unto
them; that so he may cause them to be the more humble and lowly, and not to
lift up their hearts at any time above their brethren, but so to demean
themselves, that it may appear that they esteem better of others, then of
themselves; which is an excellent and a singular grace, and whereunto, all that
are yet defective herein, should labor by all means to attain. O Lord, if it
seem good unto thee at any time, to make others to see the weakness of thy
servant; to cause my wants, imperfectio^s, and infirmities to be known and
discerned of others (as thou know how ready I am to fail, if thy grace
does not continually sustain me) let it not grieve me so much, that others
behold that in me, which may cause me to be ashamed, as make me every day more
careful to use al means to be healed, and cured of those diseases whereunto
my soul is subject, and inclinable through sin; and to increase as in all
other graces, so especially in true humility and meeknes of spirit, without
the which I can never please thee, nor have the light of thy countenance
shining upon me.

The heaven of the godly, and the hell of the wicked in this life.
IF there be a heaven in this world, it is the true Christian only that
enioyes it, in whose heart that blessed spirit does dwell, comforting and
refreshing him continually in an unspeakable manner. If there be any hell in
this life, it is in the soul and conscience of the wicked and ungodly man,
whom Satan that evil spirit has possessed, and bereaved of that which should
be the joy and comfort of his life; and not that only, but also even
oppressed with many fears, and sorrows, and with much anguish and horrible
amazement, arising from his hellish and guilty conscience. O blessed God, who
have given me, to see the great difference, which is between the estate of thy
children, and of the wicked and ungodly, even in this world; how that the one
is blessed and happy, the other wretched and miserable; grant that I may not
at any time desire to have the same lot with the wicked, though it seem
outwardly to fare well with them, but let me always rest in thee, and rejoice
in that portion which thou have given unto me, knowing that on earth there can
be no better inheritance, nor any estate more to be desired.

The cares of this world what hindrances they are to the sincere and entire
worship of God.
HE that is ensnared, and entangled with ye things of this world, or that is
not free from all inordinate affections whatsoever, cannot have a perfect and
an upright heart before God, nor freedom of spirit in his worship and service.
The soul only that is emptied of the troublesome cares, and sinful desires
wherewith most are surcharged; and the mind that is set at liberty from all
earthly vanities, is fit to come before God, with truth, vprightnes, and
sincerity, and to offer such sacrifices with which he is well pleased, and
wherein he most delights. O Lord, let not the excessive and inordinate desire
of any earthly thing cleave unto me; empty my heart of the cares of this
world; banish far from me the love of all those things, whereby I may any
ways be hindered from the performance of those duties, which thou requirest of
me; and grant that I may be careful to use all means, whereby my affections
may be so rightly ordered, that I may serve thee with a good heart, in
integrity and sincerity all my days.

True zeal.
THey that are truly zealous, are more zealous against themselves, then
others. As they do not (when just occasion, and opportunity is offered)
suffer the open sins of others to pass unreproved; so they are least
partial toward themselves, but are readiest to check themselves, even for
their inward, and most secret corruptions: As they have an eye unto the actions
of others, and are careful to discountenance sin, by fastening a seasonable
rebuke, and just censure upon it, wheresoever it does appare^tly show and
manifest it self; so especially they are always chiefly prying into their own
actions, and having espied a fault, are most severe, and censorious in judging
and rebuking themselves for it: They are grieved at the offenses of others, but
their own sins, they do most gall them; yea they ca^ never be quiet, whiles
they see the relikes and remainders of them abiding in them, but even groan
daily under the burden of them, and use all means to have their hearts purged
and freed from them. Good Lord, increase true zeal daily more and more in me:
let me not through childish fear, nor any other sinister respect, be too
slack and remiss in showing my dislike of the sins which others do commit
against thy Majesty, and yet let me not be so ready to censure others, as to
reprove, and reform my self.

A dangerous thing to affect the glory of the world.
HE that loves God, and seeks his glory, cannot be altogether carried away
with the vain glor e of this world, but will either despise it, or at least
set very light by it. He that loves the glory of this world, and does not only
affect it, but is also very eager in the pursuit of it, thirsting after the
praise, and applause of men; it is a sign that there is little or no love of
God, or of his glory in him. These are things that cannot stand together; the
one of the^ does exclude the other; the more the one of the^ does increase, the
more the other must needs decrease and be diminished. Is there any therefore,
that with a greedy, and ambitious mind does hunt after the praise of men, and
the glory of this world; sure it cannot be, but that he should exceed in
charity, who shall think him to be truly religious, or well affected toward
God, or unfeignedly desirous of his glory. O Lord, let not my heart be set
upon the glory which is from earth, and from men, but upon that which is from
heaven, even that which comes from thee alone: Let the glory of this world
(though never so glittering in the eyes of men) seem unto me (as indeed it is
in it self) but vain vanity, yea more vain then vanity it self; but let
the glory of thy name be dear and precious unto me, above al those things
which are most desired of the^ that know thee not: yea, O Lord, let it please
thee to inflame this chill and this cold heart of mine with a greater love and
zeal thereof daily more and more; and to increase in me an earnest desire and
endeavor to seek, and to set it forth, to the uttermost of my power, and by all means, and upon all occasions which thou shall offer unto me. In this only,
let me always be very ambitious.

A singular privilege belonging unto all the children of God.
THe Lord does cause all things to work together for the best unto his
children. It is good for every one of the godly, to labor to see and to find
this by experience in himself, and in his own estate. The diligent
observation hereof, cannot but make him both patient, cheerful, and
unfeignedly thankful in all miseries, and afflictions, either outward, or
inward; whether it be sickness of body or distress of mind, or whatsoever
else may befall him, throughout the whole course of his life, even to his last
hour. O gracious father, whose exceeding love, and unspeakable goodness all thy
children do daily taste of in so great, and abundant measure; give me, I humbly
pray thee, not only to see, and acknowledge the same with all thankfulness, but
also to have a lively sense and feeling thereof, at all times, in all things:
Let me assuredly persuade my self, that thou do love me, and have loved me
eternally in thy son, and in thy love toward me, do, and wilt cause every
thing, which betideth me in this world, to tend unto my great^st good; and let
the assurance, together with the continual experience hereof, cause me to rest
quietly, contentedly, and thankfully in all estates; howsoever it shall please
thee to deal with me.

Justification by faith only.
IS it not strange, that any should be so blind, so extremely deluded with a
vain and fond conceit, of their own goodness and inherent holiness, as to
think, or once to imagine that they may stand just before God thorough their
own righteousness? that they should persuade themselves, that by the merit and
worthiness of their own works they have right and interest unto life and
salvation? yea that they should challenge, and make claim thereunto, as unto
that which is due unto them as a just recompense and reward which they have
well deserved, and which God himself cannot without injustice detain, and
withhold from them; nay, that they should go so far as to affirm boldly,
that they may do works of supererogation, more then God has commanded, or
could require at their hands, such as whereby they may merit great things not
only for themselves, but for others also? Had they ever the spirit of Christ?
or did they ever receive the anointing of that holy one, who teach, maintain,
or believe this doctrine, so directly cross and contrary unto the Scriptures,
so exceeding derogatorie from the free grace and mercy of God, and from the
merit of the death and passion of Christ Jesus our only savior and redeemer,
by, and for whose satisfaction, obedience and righteousness alone, we receive
the promise of the Gospel, through faith, without any deserts of our own.
Alas, what is man, or what are the works of the best men, that they should
present them unto God, and plead with him for the obtaining of so great a
reward, for the righteousness and worthiness of their own deeds? Nay,
certain it is, that if God should make inquiry into the best actions of the
most holy and sanctified men that live upon the earth, or that ever were most
pure, most perfect, and most spotless and blameless in this world (as great
is the commendation wherewith God has honored many of his Saints) if he
should mark and observe them, and enter into judgment with them for the same;
there is none, no not one of them (as the best and holiest of them have freely
acknowledged) that should be justified, yea that should not be condemned, and
perish everlastingly, being never able to endure his presence; so pure and so
holy is his Majesty, so just and so righteous are his judgments, that no
flesh can abide the trial thereof. O Lord, most glorious and most righteous
God, when I look up unto the throne of thy justice, and set my self before thy
tribunal and judgment seat, I fear, and tremble, and am ready to fly from
thy presence, as not able to stand before thee, nor to answer for one of a
thousand of those things whereby I have most grievously offended thy most
glorious Majesty, and for which thou might justly condemn me for ever, if
thou should once call me unto a strait account of the same, yea even of ye
least of them, and deal with me therein, not according to thy great mercy,
but according unto mine own deseruings: When I look back unto my life past,
and take a view of the whole course thereof, how sinful, how unfruitful and
unprofitable it has been, I am confounded in my self, and dare not lift up
mine eyes to heaven for the multitude of my offenses and transgressions,
whereby I have continually displeased and provoked thee: When I consider my
present estate, how many weaknesses, and infirmities I am subject unto, how
sin cleaves fast unto me, and inuironeth and compasses me round about on
every side: yea how defective my best endeavors, how corrupt and sinful my
best actions, and services are, and have been: yea how much my whole life has
swarued from that perfect and exact rule of justice which thy law requires, I
am astonished, and stricke^ with a great fear, knowing that the time will
shortly come, when I must appear before the tribunal of thy justice, to
answer for all my actions, even for all those things which I have done in the
flesh, the works of my hands, ye words of my mouth, and the most secret
thoughts and imaginations of my heart, and to receive accordingly: What
therefore is my hope? unto whom shall I fly? wherein is my trust? Surely, my
hope, my trust, and my confidence is not in any merits or worthiness of mine
own, but only in thy mercy O Lord, and in the all-sufficient merits of thy
Christ, my Lord and blessed Savior, who has given himself to death for me,
and powered forth his precious blood upon the cross, to make full satisfaction
for me, and to reconcile me unto thy Majesty. Lo therefore, I do humbly
prostrate my self, O Lord, before the throne of thy grace and mercy in Christ
Jesus. I do renounce my self, and utterly disclaim mine own righteousness,
acknowledging it to be but as a stained and polluted cloth, and desire only to
appear before thee in that righteousness of thy Son, and to be found in
him, whom alone thou have made unto me wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. Were it not that I had comfort in this, I should
be of all creatures the most miserable; yea had I not trusted herein, I had
long since perished, and bin utterly confounded. Behold me therefore, O
gracious God, and loving Father, behold me with the eye of thy mercy. Look
upon me not as I am in my self, all stained and defiled with sin and
iniquity, but in thy Son, even that just and holy one, who only is my
righteousness, and my salvation; and in whom alone I do, and will trust both
in life, and in death. Accept therefore of me graciously in him. Clothe and
cover me with the pure and spotless garments of his righteousness, and
holiness, that so the filthiness of my pollution may never appear in thy
sight, who art of so pure eyes, that all sin is an abomination unto thee: let
the merit of his obedience, of his death and passion, whereby he offered
himself a sacrifice pleasing and acceptable, and of sweet smelling savor
unto thee, for all thy chosen, and redeemed ones, be a full satisfaction for
me, and for all my sins, though never so many and so grievous. Let me through
faith in him, be made partaker of his purity, of his innocence, of his
righteousness, of his holiness, and of his perfection; that so howsoever I am
in my self unclean, sinful, unrighteous, unholy, and full of manifold
infirmities and imperfections, yet in him, and through him, I may appear in
thine eyes pure as he is pure, innocent as he is innocent, righteous as he is
righteous, holy as he is holy, and perfect as he is perfect; and being
accepted into thy grace and favor through him in this life, may have comfort
and confidence in death, and in the day of judgment; and live with thee in
glory in the life to come, together with Christ my Savior and redeemer, and
with thy blessed Spirit, and with all thy Saints and elect Angels, in that
kingdom which thou have prepared, and of which I rest in continual hope and
expectation, desirous of the acco^plishment of thy promise, which is endless
blessedness, and felicity.

A comfort for afflicted consciences.
THere is none that receives a great measure of spiritual comfort, and divine
consolation, whereby his spirits are cheered, and his soul refreshed and
filled with inward joy and gladness; but he has usually some grievous
temptation, either going before, or following after it. Thus the Lord does
ordinarily deal with his children; there are none of his Saints, but have
experience of it in themselves. The Lord does not always cause the joyful
light of his cheerful countenance to shine clearly upon them; he does not
always fill their hearts with that peace which passes all understanding, or
ravish their souls with that inward and spiritual joy, and comfort, which is
unspeakable and glorious; neither does he always absent himself, or hide the
brightness of his face from them, but sometimes he does graciously visit them,
and causes them to taste abundantly of the sweetness of his kindness, his
mercy, and goodness, so that they are exceedingly refreshed, and feel such
divine and heavenly comfort, and inward solace, as that they are not able
outwardly to express it; and sometimes again as though he had forgotten them,
he seems to hide and to absent himself from them, and suffers them to be
assailed with some grievous temptation, so that their day is turned into night,
their light into darkness, their joy and gladness into sorrow and heaviness.
And this the Lord does, that he may cause them to acknowledge this to be his
gift, even that inward and spiritual comfort wherewith their spirits do
rejoice before him, and therefore to be thankful unto him, when they receive
it, or have a more especial sense and feeling of it; as also to make them to
depend wholly upon him, who is the life of their souls, and without whom there
can be no true solace, no found joy; and withal to exercise their faith,
their hope, and their love, the proof whereof is seen in those spiritual
desertions. O Lord God, if it be thy will, let thy spirit of peace and comfort
always rest upon me; let me taste continually of the sweetness of thy mercies,
wherewith thou art wont to refresh the souls of thy servants, after that they
have been wearied and oppressed with any grievous affliction or temptation: but
if it seem good unto thee, for the trial of my faith, and for the exercise of
the graces of thy spirit in me, to withhold at any time this blessing for a
while from me, and to deprive me of the lively sense and feeling of spiritual
and divine consolation, yet let me not faint, but rest in hope, and expect with
patience the time of thy gracious and heavenly visitation, with which according
unto thy promise thou will refresh and comfort me, giving unto me the oil of
joy for mourning, and the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness,
that so thy name may be glorified of me, in the thankful acknowledgement of
thy goodness toward me.

The Christians glorious conquest.
THere is none that can attain unto so great a conquest in this world, as a
true Christian: He through the grace, which he receives from Christ, who
daily assisteth him, and is always present with him, sustaining him with his
effectual power, is able to do more then all the greatest Monarchs, or
mightiest Potentates in the earth can possibly do of their own strength, yea
though they gather all their forces together. For he does not only conquer
himself, and subdue his own lusts which rebel against the spirit of his
mind, but also he overcomes this world, yea the prince thereof, even Satan
himself, with all those spiritual wickednesses which reign in others, and
have the^ continually in subjection under them. O Lord, without thee I am able
to do nothing; with thy help, there is nothing but shall be easy unto me:
Let it please thee continually to assist me with thy grace, and to strengthen
me with thy mighty power, that so I may daily see all mine enemies more and
more subdued unto me; and having gotten the victory and conquest of them in
this life, may hereafter receive that crown of life, which thou have promised
unto all the^ that overcome; living and reigning with thee, and with all that
heavenly and victorious host of thine, in glorious, and triumphant manner for
evermore. Amen.

The difficulty of conquering a man's self, and his own affections.
A Man must strive along while, and that with great earnestnes, and continual
exercise and endeavor, before he can overcome himself, and having mastered
his own will and waiward affections, give up himself wholly unto the
obedience of God in all things, with humble submission both of body and soul:
So great resistance and opposition shall he find within himself, by reason of
his corrupt nature, even that treacherous enemy, which lies lurking
continually in his own bosom, haling and drawing him from that which is good,
and hindering him in every godly purpose, and in every holy action and religious
enterprise, in such sort, that except he even offer violence, as it were, unto
himself, and to his sinful nature, and labor with a strong hand to subdue
corruption within him, he cannot prevail. O Lord my strength, without thee I
can do nothing, unto thee therefore do I stretch forth my hands. Thou know
how weak and how frail I am; how unable of my self to resist that secret
enemy which continually opposes himself against me in every thing which is
good: thou see how hard a matter it is for me to bring every thought of my
heart, every motion, desire and inclination of my will, and every action of my
life, unto that subjection and obedience which thou requirest; how difficult to
frame my self wholly unto thy will, and to submit my self unto thee in all
things, according unto that rule and commandment which thou have given unto
me. O therefore let it please thee to strengthen me with thy grace, which alone
is sufficient for me: let it please thee to help me in all my weaknesses, and
to give unto me a greater measure of Christian fortitude, and of spiritual
courage and resolution; and withal to give good success unto all my actions,
enterprises and endeauours in the way of godliness, and salvation: yea O Lord,
let it please thee to lead me forth in the constant and continual practice,
and exercise of piety and true religion; and in the resistance of all enmity
whatsoever, that so when the time of this spiritual warfare is ended, I may
receive that incorruptible crown of life and glory, which thou have promised
unto them that overcome.

The worlds esteem of Gods children.
IF one comes into the presence of a kings son, or some great or noble
personage, he no sooner sees him, but he is moved with reverence, and shows
that according to the worthiness of his person, he does regard and honor him.
But as for the sons of God, who have God to their father, Christ their elder
brother, all the Saints and Angels their companions, and fellow-bretheren; and
the kingdom of heaven it self their inheritance for ever, where they are to
live and reign as kings, in that glory which is unspeakable; how little are
they regarded in the world? how meanly accounted of? What small honor is
showed unto them, whom the king of heaven, does and will honor so greatly? Nay
are they not of all men, the most base and contemptible in the eyes of men? The
nearer they are unto God, the more they are loved and honored of him, are they
not the more hated and despised of the world? Even holy David a man after Gods
own heart, is but a worm, and not a man, in the account of men. Iehoshua and
his followers, monstrous persons. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, as the
filth and of scouring of all things, men unworthy to live upon the earth. In
brief, all the saints, who are dear and precious in the eyes of God, even
made signs and wonders amongst men. Cease to wonder at this: It is no new, no
strange thing: The world knows, and has always known his own, and makes
much of them; but those that are Gods, it neither knows, nor regards. And no
marvel, since it knows not God himself, but hates and despises him, even
whiles, in a false and counterfaite manner, it professes love unto him. Behold
we (even all the faithful) are now the sons of God: such love, such honor
has our heavenly Father vouchsafed unto us: but yet our glory and dignity does
not appear; but when Christ our hope, our life and glory, shall be revealed and
made manifest, then shall we be changed into the glory of his image, we shall be
like unto him, and then shall the blind and contemptuous world both see and
know him and us, to their own shame and confusion. Lord, let me never regard
the railings of the wicked Shemeis of this world, nor the mockes and scoffs of
those profane Ishmaelites, who could never abide thy chosen people, the sons
of the promise, for whom thou have provided the inheritance: yea let me pass
very little to be judged of man's judgment, even of those who are carried
whither their own blind and corrupt reason, or fancy leads them: But let
me always know and consider, that thou see not as man see, that thy
thoughts are not as their thoughts, but that I am dear and precious in thy
sight, and shall be glorious hereafter for ever, even with the same glory
wherewith thy Christ my savior is glorious: Let mine eyes always be fixed
upon that blessed estate, wherein I shall continue for ever in the heavens; and
let the hope thereof cause me to purge my self, that I may be pure, even as he
is pure, unto whom then I shall be made conformable in righteousness, glory
and happiness.

Another.
THe son and heir of a Noble man, or some great personage, whiles he lives
obscurely in a strange, and far country, being not known is not regarded,
but lies open to the contempt and abuse of the meanest and vilest persons, who
if they knew his estate, would more highly esteem of him. Lord, let me not
care, how vile or base soever I seem, whiles I live here in a strange place,
unknown, unregarded; since thou have assured me, that I shall be so glorious at
my return into mine own country, the habitation of thy saints, that heavenly
paradise, that celestial Jerusalem, the city of thee, the everliving God, the
glory whereof is unspeakable.

God and the world of a different judgment.
GOd sees not as man sees. They are many times of great esteem amongst men,
who are vile in Gods sight, such as he has rejected: And on the other side,
they are highly in Gods favor oftentimes, who are very meanly esteemed of
among men; yea despised, and accounted as the refuse of men, and the ofscouring
of the world. Those which seem the least and most contemptible in the eye of
men, are often, the greatest and most honorable in the sight of God; and those
which seem the very abiects of men (such as in whom nothing is to be desired)
appear as glorious before him. O Lord seeing thou do judge so differently
from that which the world judges, having so precious an esteem of those whom
that makes no account of, and accounting those as vile, yea abominable, and to
be abhorred of all, whom that does chiefly magnify, and most esteem of; let
me have this resolution always, to pass very little what corrupt men, or this
blind world deemeth and judges of me; and let it be my special care to
labor always by all means to be approved of thee, and to be assured that
howsoever others shall seek to cast shame, reproach, and dishonor upon me, yet
that I am good in thine eyes, and precious in thy sight; one whom thou do
justify, and wilt glorify.

The willing and joyful bearing of the cross, a sign of a well grown
Christian.
HE that does find sweetness in drinking of the bitter cup of afflictions,
which God daily offers unto him, it is a sign that he is a good proficient
in the exercise of Christianity, and true religion: For to bear the cross
patiently, willingly, and comfortably; to endure wrongs and injuries; to deny
himself, and to die daily unto the world, yea to be crucified unto it, and to
have it crucified unto him, is more then a carnal and natural man can
possibly do, or he that has not through a daily practice of humility, and
true obedience learned wholly to subject himself unto Gods will and pleasure.
Good Lord, seeing it pleases thee to cause me to taste of the bitterness of
many afflictions, grant that they may not seem grievous, but pleasant unto me;
knowing that it is thy will thereby to humble me, and to make me more fit for
the receiving of a greater measure of thy heavenly grace. Seeing thou have
appointed me daily to take up my cross and to follow my blessed Savior, who
in so many sufferings of his, has gone before me, and left his example as a
pattern and president behind him, unto which all that are his, should endeavor
to frame themselves, that so they may be conformable unto him; I humbly
beseech thee, that it would please thee, to give me patience, willingness and
cheerefulnes in undergoing whatsoever it shall seem good unto thee to lay upon
me, being fully assured, that hereby I shall have entrance unto glory, even
that glory into which thy Christ has already entered, and made a way for me;
and of which all these light and momentarie afflictions are not worthy, nor in
any sort comparable thereunto.

The exceeding folly and vanity of the wicked.
O The vain and preposterous courses of men! who does not wonder that
beholds, and considers them? and how should they not blush, and be
exceedingly ashamed of their folly and sottishnes when they think of them?
Let the flattering and deceitful world call them and allure them with the
enticing promises of earthly and temporal things, pleasures, profits, honors,
even those things which are fading and transitory; and they are ready to
follow it presently, and to show themselves serviceable unto it with all
willingness and readiness that may be; yea to undergo much labor and toil,
and to endure great hardship, and to pass thorough many difficulties, in the
earnestnes of their desire to attain unto that, whereof notwithstanding they
fail often times, and come short of their hope, and expectation: Let God (whose
word is truth, and who never fails any in yt which he promises unto them,
nor deceives the^ that rest upon him, and give credit unto his word, but
satisfies the^ most abundantly, and returns more unto them then they did
either expect, or could desire) let God, even that gracious and bountiful God
(with whom is the treasury of all good things) call them, and promise unto
them the unspeakable riches of celestial and heavenly things, such as are most
excellent and glorious, far passing the most desirable things of this world,
and such as shall never fade, nor be any ways diminished, or once subject
unto any change or alteration; yet they have no heart to come unto him, or to
follow him, but are exceeding heavy and drowsy, yea very unapt and untoward
unto yt which were so greatly for their good; and in which alone consists
true blessedness, and eternal felicity, and happiness. O Lord, let me never
be so foolish as the men of this world are, in whom there is no understanding:
let me be more careful to serve thee, then they are to serve the world, even
that cursed Mammo^ which they make their god. Let me labor more for spiritual
and heavenly things, such as shall remain and abide for ever, then for those
things which are carnal and earthly, and such as are of no continuance, but
shall quickly perish, and pass away as a shadow, and be quite forgotten, even
as if they had never been. Yea let me always prefer that inestimable price
of glory, that chief, that unchangeable, and everlasting good which thou have
promised and prepared for thy Saints in that celestial kingdom which I daily
expect and hope for, before all the alluring and deceitful vanities, the
seeming and supposed good, yea all the most precious and glorious things of
this world whatsoever, wherewith those that are earthly-minded are so greatly
enamoured, and wherein they place the height of their false and imaginary
felicity and happiness.

The spirit of God is the life of the soul.
AS is the body without the soul, so is the soul without the spirit of God,
which is the life thereof. If there be a separation of the soul of man, what
is his body, but a dead, and a liueles corpse or carcass, having no sense, or
motion? It cannot once breathe or stir it self, nor put forth any power for
the performance of the least action: So is it with the soul of every one, in
whom the spirit of God is wanting, or from whom it is departed: There is no
life, no vigor, no power, or ability to do any thing which is good: yea
sooner may a dead body move it self, and exercise the actions, and operations
of a natural life, then the soul which is without the spirit of God, and so
destitute of the life of grace, can show forth any certain signs and effects
of a spiritual life. O Lord, I have found by experience what a deadnes there is
upon me, if thou at any time withdrawest thy spirit, and do not cause it to
work effectually upon my soul; without the continual presence, and
assistance thereof, I am not able to do, no not to will, or desire in any sort
that which is good, but am even as a breathless and liuelesse creature, one in
who^ there is no life. O therefore let it please thee to power out thy spirit
plentifully upon me; let me always find it not only present, but also
powerfully working within me, and quickening me unto the willing and cheerful
performance of all those things which thou requirest of me: yea let it please
thee, (in who^ only I live, and move, and without whom I am as one whose spirit
is departed from him,) let it please thee, O Lord, to breathe the life of grace
daily more and more into me, and to inspire me continually with good motions,
with holy and heavenly desires, that so I may delight in those things which are
pleasing unto thee, and bring forth the fruits of the spirit abundantly,
throughout the whole course of my life, to the praise of the glory of thy
grace (from whence alone is all my sufficiency and ability) to the benefit of
those among whom I either now do, or hereafter shall live; and to the endless
comfort and salvation of mine own soul, through Christ my Lord and Savior,
who with thee, O father, and with thy holy spirit, be blessed and praised
both now and evermore. Amen.

The love of the world and worldly desires, banish all true love of God from
the soul.
HE that suffers any wordlie desires, or the inordinate affection of any
earthly thing whatsoever to take place in his heart, cannot love God sincerely,
entirely, and unfeignedly; yea the more the desire of his heart is enlarged unto
ye affecting of those things, the more is the love of God abated and diminished
in him; as much as the one increases, so much the other of necessity must
decrease. O Lord, who have manifested thy love so richly toward me, fill my
heart daily more and more with the love of thy majesty; let the same wholly
possess me: For this end, suffer me not to be entangled at any time with the
inordinate desire of any of these fading and fruitless vanities; but free me,
I beseech thee, from the sinful and immoderate affecting thereof; yea purge my
heart, and banish far from me the love of al those things, which might be a
means in any sort to alienate my mind from thee, and grant that my soul may
delight in thee, and that I may love thee with my whole heart, yea that the
affection of my love may be set and fixed upon thee alone, who only art
worthy to be loved above all things; and that if I love or affect any thing
else, it may not be otherwise then in thee, and for thee, unto whom I am
desirous to give my heart with all the affections thereof.

The sinfulnes of man's nature corrupted.
O Lord, what a fountain of corruption do I see continually, springing up
within me? and how much more does there abound in me, which being hid from
mine eyes is seen only of thee, who alone know the heart, and beholdest
the inward and most hidden secrets thereof, which the eye of man cannot pierce
into. Do thou vouchsafe to cleanse it daily more and more: Power down
plentifully that clean water of thy sanctifying grace, which may wash away
that filthiness, even those stains and pollutions wherewith I am defiled, and
which being lothesome in mine own eyes, cannot but be as an abomination
before thee, who art so pure, that thou can not see evil, nor behold
wickedness. O let thy spirit purge and purify my soul from that inbred
corruption and contagio^ thereof, which cleaves so fast unto it; yea let it be
as fire to dry up those polluted streams, which flow continually from that
unclean fountain; that so I may be found of thee without spot, and
blameless, in the day of that glorious appearance of thy son my blessed
savior and redeemer; in whom though I see him not, yet do I believe, and
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.

Blindness of mind, a great misery.
IF any want the eyes of their bodies, they account it a great misery, and
would use any means, be at any cost, to enjoy the comfort and benefit of
their sight. And yet most want the eyes of their souls, and think it to be no
misery; neither regard, nor seek once for that wherein the comfort of their
lives consists, and whereby they should come to see the light of glory in the
kingdom of heaven. O Lord, though others be wilfully blind, and so most
miserable, whiles they see it not, yet open thou mine eyes ever more and more:
Suffer not sin with the deceitfulnes thereof to draw any filme over them;
but give me daily a clearer sight of mine own misery, and of thy unspeakable
mercies toward me, who am unworthy of the least of them.

Hardness of heart a fearful plague.
THere can no worse plague happen unto any one, then a hard and obdurate
heart; and yet alas, how few be there that complain of it, although they be
far gone with it! How few, that seek to be thoroughly recovered of it,
although they have present means continually offered unto them, for the cure
of it! Oh they know not the danger of it; or if they do, and seek not
carefully for the remedy, surely they are exceeding desperate of their
estate. Good Lord, break thou this stony heart of mine, I humbly pray thee:
Give me to see, and to grieve daily more and more for the hardness of it, and
never to sleep in rest, till I feel it softened and mollified, yea till I be
cured and altogether recovered of it. Howsoever it shall please thee outwardly
to afflict me for my good, yet Lord keep me always, I beseech thee, from that
inward, spiritual and most fearful judgment, which thou use to send upon
the reprobate, who being past all feeling, seal up unto themselves thereby
the assurance of eternal perdition.

Fear of God.
I Have often wondered to see, in what awe most stand of mortal men, who have
power of their goods, life, or outward estate; how careful they are to please
them, how afraid to offend them: and yet in the mean while, how regardlesse
they are, and show themselves to be, of that great, that powerful and
immortal God, whose name is terrible; yea, who is able presently to cast them
both soul and body, into hell for ever, there to have their portion among the
damned. Either men are Atheists, and think there is no God (for they that
believe that there is a God, can not but know, that his power is infinite, and
therefore must needs fear him more then any man, whose power is but finite,
when it is greatest:) Or else they are marvelous desperate, who though they
know and will acknowledge the power, and the fiercenes of his wrath, yet fear
not the punishment, and the horrible torments which he has threatened against
them. O Lord, let me not be either so blinded, or so hard-hearted, as the
wicked and ungodly are. Let me always fear before thee, and tremble at thy
presence, standing continually in awe of so great, and glorious a majesty,
which the Angels adore, and reverence. And let this fear of thee and thy
righteous judgments, banish and drive out of my heart, the love of all sin,
so that I may not once dare willingly to commit the same, though I might
thereby gain the whole world. Yea Lord, do thou plant thy fear in my heart;
let it possess my soul, and then it can not be, but that I should seek in
all things to please thee more then men, and fear to offend thee in any thing,
not fearing the fear of those that be thine enemies, and hate thee.

Fear of God speaking in his word.
MEn we see often times are stricken and amazed at the sudden noise of a great
thunderclap; they tremble and quake: yea this causes many, with the
Heathenish Emperor to seek for covert, and to hide and shroud themselves for
fear. And yet behold, such is the corruption of man's nature; such is their
stupiditie, that although they hear daily a greater, and more dreadful noise,
even the mighty and terrible voice of God which sounds in his word, and
whereby he threatens them in most fearful manner, not only with temporal
judgment, but also with eternal perdition and destruction, yet they are
scarce once moved; they fear not; they do not quake and tremble, but sooth up
themselves in the wickedness of their hearts, and bless themselves in their
sinful and ungodly ways, thinking that al is well, and dreaming of nothing
but of peace and safety, when their confusion is nearest, and sudden
destruction and desolation ready presently to seize upon them. O let it be
otherwise with me, and with all them that fear thy name O Lord; let me be
touched, and rightly affected with the consideration of thy great and glorious
majesty, when I behold thy wondrous and marvelous works, how thou casts
forth thy lightnings unto the ends of the world, and thundrest from heaven with
a mighty voice; at the noise whereof, even the bruit beasts, and dumb
creatures, do quake and tremble for fear. Let these things cause me, to
acknowledge the greatness of thy power, to stand in a holy and awful reverence
of thy presence, and to give glory unto thy name, who art the mighty and
glorious God of heaven and earth: but let me be much more moved, and inwardly
affected, when I hear the voice of that mighty and powerful Word of thine,
which goes out of thy mouth, and which thou causest to sound in mine ears, by
the ministry of men whom thou have ordained; and in and by whom thou speak
both to the ears, and to the hearts of men. O let this word of thine, which in
it self is mighty in operation, and whereby, through the working of thy
spirit, thou do marvelous things; let it strike and break in sunder this
hard and stony heart of mine: let ^r cause me to tremble at the hearing of it,
yea even to fall down before thee, and to adore thy majesty, to be afraid of
thy displeasure, and to serve thee with an humble, and with a contrite heart
all my days: Then according unto thy promise, thou will look mercifully upon
me, thou will deal exceedingly graciously with me; yea though heaven be thy
throne, and the earth thy footstool, yet thou will vouchsafe to dwell with me,
by the comfortable presence of thy grace, and blessed spirit for evermore.

Knowledge and conscience must go togther.
MAny labor for knowledge, few for conscience to practice those things which
they know. Such knowledge is vain, and brings no profit to him that has it.
^^e what if thou could repeat all the most pithie sentences of the wisest
and grauest Philosophers, and the greatest Sages that ever were? it were
nothing. Yea what if thou could say over the whole Bible without book, and
with the superstitious Jew, tell exactly how often every letter were found in the
same; and withal, were able to expound the hardest and most difficult places
therein yt could be put unto thee, so that al yt heard of thee did admire thee,
as one very rare and eminent in thy kind? All this were nothing, it were in
vain, and no ways available unto thee, if thou were not as careful to have
thy heart touched, thy mind sanctified, and thy life reformed, as thy head
stuffed and filled with variety and abundance of knowledge and learning; if
thou did not labor as much, if not more, for the practice of those things
which thou know, then for the bare and naked speculation it self, without
fruther profit. Give me grace, O Lord, as to use all good means to attain
unto all kind of learning which is necessary and profitable for me,
especially the knowledge of thy word, and those secret and hidden mysteries,
which thou have therein revealed; so much more, with all diligence, carefully,
and conscionably to practice those things which I have learned; joining to my
knowledge, virtue, faith, temperance, patience, godliness, and unfeigned love
and charity unto all men, even mine enemies, and those that are most bitter
toward me, yea most wickedly and maliciously set against me: that thus the
knowledge, which by thy blessing I shall attain unto, may not be idle or
unprofitable, but I may abound and increase in the fruits thereof, to the
praise of thy name, the benefit of others among who^ I shall live, mine own
comfort in this life, and the furtherance of my salvation, in thy kingdom
after this life, for ever.

Another.
IT is not without cause, that the Scriptures make the heart the seat of
truth, sincerity and vprightnes, and not the head, seeing the heart is the
seat and subject of the affections; the brain of knowledge, understanding and
judgment. A man may know and understand much, and yet be very ill affected; he
may be of a large capacity, and of a very deep apprehension, even of the
greatest mysteries of Christian religion, and yet be of an exceeding corrupt
mind, and of a most unsound life. Knowledge is good, and to be desired, and
sought for, and that with diligence; but yet good affection must be joined with
it, and increased by it; or else it will not be profitable, but hurtful and
dangerous, making the owner of it rather worse then better. It is a good thing
to know much; but it is better, and more acceptable to God, to affect the good
things we know, that we might practice them, and to dislike the evil we
know, that we might shun and avoid them. God ever loved and delighted more
in the truth and sincerity of the heart, then in the bare speculation, and
fruitless apprehensions of the mind and understanding part. Let it be my
desire, O Lord, my care and my earnest endeavor, rather to live well then to
know much: let me labor for both, since both are necessary; yet always
prefer this before the other, seeing that without this, is least profitable,
and more dangerous (not of it self, but through the fault of him that uses it
amiss) making the life more corrupt, and bringing with it the greater
condemnation in the end.

The worldly man's Idol.
THat which every one most sets his heart upon, that does he make his God,
yea rather his Idol. Thus the God of the covetous is riches, even that cursed
Mammon: The God of the voluptuous, pleasure: of the ambitious, honor. O then
how many vile and wicked Idolaters be there in the world? Surely, as many as
do give themselves over to covetousness, ambition, and voluptuousnes, even
the excessive and inordinate desire of the vain and transitory things of this
world. O Lord God, thou only art my God; whom have I in heaven but thee? or
what is there that I should desire on earth, in comparison of thee? O let my
heart be always fixed upon thee; let my soul love thee, delight in thee, and
seek and long after thee, above all things; which is that inward and spiritual
worship and service, which thou requirest of all those upon who^ thy name is
called, of all those that acknowledge thee, the Lord, to be their God.

The miserable estate of a worldling.
HE that does once embrace this world, can hardly be loosed from it, and
brought to follow Christ and to cleave unto true religion, in the truth and
sincerity of the profession thereof; yea such is the bewitching nature of it,
that it will daily more and more fasten upon him, and claspe round about him,
so that he shall have no power to free himself again, except an
extraordinary grace be ministered unto him of God. Of all men (of whom there
may be any hope) a covetous worldling is in this regard most miserable, and his
estate most dangerous; since that it is harder for him to be reclaimed, then
for any other; for of all sins, (out of which there may be any recovery) that
sin of avarice and covetousness is most irrecouerable. O blessed Lord, let not
my heart be glewed at any time unto the things of this world; Let not the
immoderate care and desire thereof, take hold of me, let it not be rooted in
me; but let me always enjoy such freedom by thy grace that I may willingly,
readily and cheerfully perform those duties which thou requirest of me; yea
that I may cleave fast unto thee, and run with liberty, the ways of thy
commandments.

The unpleasant and distracted life of a carnal and wicked man.
WHat pleasure is there in the life of a carnal and wicked man, who is carried
away with the vain and inordinate desires of his own heart? Before he has
obtained that which he lusts after, he is restles and unquiet; All that he had
before does him no good, because he wants that: when he enioyes it, he is
grieved and displeased, yea vexed, because it does not satiffie him, nor yield
him that contentment, which he looked for in it. Afterward, he is perplexed
and troubled in mind, by reason of the guilt which he has brought upon his
conscience, through his sin; the sweetest fruit whereof in the end, is
nothing but shame and sorrow, yea much bitterness. Thus he is continually
disquieted, discontented, and distracted, whiles he follows his unlawful
desires, and yields to his disordered and distempred affections; he has no
peace, no ease, no rest. Witness the proud person, the covetous, the voluptuous,
the ambitious, the envious and malicious, and whosoever else he be, that
lets loose the raines to any unbridled passion, any inordinate affection. It
is a mere slavery, to be a servant unto any such lusts; and the only means
to obtain true liberty, hearts ease, peace and sound contentement, to resist
them, and to get the mastrie over them, and to be no ways bound to them. O
merciful Lord, let me not be addicted to these things, which are base, earthly
and sensual: let me never willingly yield unto any sinful desire of my
corrupt nature; but give me grace always to bridle, yea to subdue, and to
mortify those wicked affections, which otherwise would prevail against me;
that so being ouermastered, and even brought into subjection under me, through
the working of thy gracious spirit in me, I may pass the whole time of my life
hereafter, in rest, quietness and true peace and contentednes, and serve thee,
with perfect liberty and freedom all my days.

The life of the righteous as well to be sought after, as their death wished.
I Marvel not that all men (even the most wicked and profane of ye world)
do, with cursed Balaam, desire and wish for the death of the righteous, seeing
the end of it, is true and perfect blessedness, and the want of it, extreme woe
and misery. But this seems very strange unto me, that they should not as well
desire the life of the righteous: not only, because this is the means to come
unto the other, that necessarily depending hereupon; but also since herein is
true happiness to be found, and that which is to be desired of all men, and
without which, man cannot but be miserable, and even a burden unto himself.
For the righteous, the sincere and upright in life and conversation, they only
lead a peaceable, a comfortable, and a joyful life. They rejoice not so much
in the face, as in heart; not so much to the teeth outwardly, as in soul, and
spirit inwardly: whereas the hypocrite, the false hearted, and all that love
unrighteousness, never have any true mirth, any sound joy, but only a false and
counterfeit image thereof, which when it is at the best, is but hollow, rotten,
and unsound; yea when they sport themselves in their carnal and worldly
delights most immoderatly, and break forth into excessive laughter, yet then
their joy is but the fit, as it were, of a frantic or mad man, they know not
what they do; and at length, their sorrowful dumpes, their troubled thoughts,
and distracting cares, return again unto them unsent for, they break off
their laughter with a sigh, and end their mirth with heaviness, anguish and
great perplexednes: yea the Lord fills their souls with much bitterness; so
that many times to be eased of it, they could willingly be rid of their lives,
in which they find so small comfort. Lord, let me be as careful to lead a
good life, as to make a godly end: let me hate all unrighteousness, and
forsake all the ways of the ungodly; and let me seek by all means to attain
unto true holiness, and strive after sincerity and vprightnes; that so the
spirit of joy and gladness may rest continually upon me, and cause me always
to rejoice unfeignedly in thee, with that inward spiritual joy and comfort, the
sweetness whereof none knows but thine only, even those whom thou have given
to taste of it; and which being once given of thee (from whom alone it
proceeds) none is able to take it away again.

The folly and danger of deferring Repentance.
IT is exceeding folly in men to live carelessly and securely, all their life
long, and to put off all, unto their dying hour, vainly supposing, that it
will be enough for them, then to commend themselves unto God, and to desire him
to take them to his mercy. Alas, such know not what they do; they know not
the price of their souls: for surely if they did, they would never put them in
adventure to the last hour: They consider not the danger of losing them for
ever; for then certainly they would quickly be of an other mind; they would
look about them; they would not set all upon such a ticklish point, nor put
themselves unto that hazard, no not for the gain of the whole world; but they
would presently cut off all delays (which in good things are always exceeding
dangerous) and seek diligently by all means to lead their lives in that
manner, and so to secure their estate, that in death they might have assurance
that they should not die, but live, having their souls translated and carried
(though not by fiery chariots, as Elias was, yet by the hands of those
heavenly Angels, which continually wait and attend upon them) from earth to
heaven, from this vale of misery, to that place of endless glory and
happiness. O Lord keep me from that extreme folly and simplicity of the
wicked, whom Satan has so deceived and deluded, that they should be careless
of that which most nearly concerns them, even their future and eternal estate
after this life, which depends upon the course of their life lead in this
world, which is short and momentarie. Let it be my care and endeavor every day
to seek by a holy conversation, to be assured of the certainty of my
election, and of my blessed and happy estate after this life, even my future
glorification in thy kingdom; that so I may be always prepared, and rest
continually in a joyful hope and expectation of the accomplishment and
fulfilling of thy gracious promise.

Freewill.
IT is a vain thing to think that a man has freewill unto that which is
good: As well may thou persuade me, that a stone can move it self, or that a
dead body can raise it self out of the grave. Except the Lord put to his
hand, we can never move our selves, no not to one good motion, one good
thought or desire, much less give our selves to the constant practice of that
which is good. Except the Lord put new life into us, except he quicken us with
his spirit, we are al but dead men, and shall lie in our graves until we be
awaked unto judgment. O Lord (the fountain of grace and life) do thou
quicken me, so shall I live; do thou lift me up, so shall I rise out of the
grave of sin and death: Do thou draw me, so shall I come unto thee, yea so
shall I even run with liberty in all the ways of thy commandments. Hear
me, O Lord, and help me, for in thee do I trust, in whom only I live, move,
and have my being, and without whom all my life is but death. Without thee I
can do nothing: In thee, and by thee all things.

What worship God especially requires.
MAny perform outward worship and service unto God; few that which is in^ard.
Both are required, but the latter is chiefly necessary, without which, the
former though commanded, is neither pleasing nor acceptable, yea vile and
abominable unto him, that has always loathed such dead carcases, such
liuelesse sacrifices. Lord, give me grace always to offer unto thee a whole
burnt offering, to serve thee as in body, which thou have made for that end,
so especially in spirit and in truth; so shall I not be reproved, yea then
thou will accept both of me, and of all my sacrifices, and be exceeding
gracious and merciful unto me, above that I can expect or desire.

Christians are willingly to resign themselves, and all that they enjoy, to
Gods will.
ALL those things which we enjoy in this world, are not our own, but Gods: he
gave them to us to use, and at his pleasure he may call for them, and cause us
to restore them to him again, since he alone has absolute right and interest
in them. Whiles we have them, we are to have a care to use them well, and not
to neglect them, or to be regardlesse of them. We ought to use them, and yet
not so to use them, as if they were our own, but lent unto us by another, of
whom we have received them. When he takes them from us, we are willingly to
restore them, and readily without any murmuring or repining to part with them,
since they were but lent unto us for a time, for our convenient or necessary
use, and are now called for again by the right owner of them; so that to be
unwilling to return them at his command, is not, neither ought to be
otherwise esteemed of us, then as the usurping or violent detaining of another
man's goods against his will and pleasure; even theft and robbery against the
highest. What means it the^, that many are so loath to restore the things,
which God has given them the use of for a while, and now requires of them
again? What means it, that many are so grieved to part with those things
which the Lord has lent them, until such time as he should call for them? Yea,
why is it that many complain so grievously, as if they were greatly injured,
or had very hard measure offered unto them, when the Lord takes from them,
their wives, their children, their friends, their goods, their lands, livings,
or their life it self? Are they their own, and not Gods? Why then should they
sin against him, by repining that they cannot keep them against his will?
Has he given unto them the use of them thus long, and does he now call for
them, and require them again of them? Why then should they not with all
willingness, and thankfulness restore them, acknowledging themselves much
indebted unto him for the fruition of them, and the benefit they have received
by them hitherto. O Lord, thou have freely and most graciously vouchsafed many
blessings, and benefits unto me, even in the things of this world, the least
whereof I am altogether unworthy of; thou have given me life and health,
friends, and a competencie of these earthly things, which in wisdom thou
saw to be convenient for me; thou art the author and giver of them, as of
all other things which are good. Whiles it pleases thee to continue them unto
me for my use, give me grace to use them soberly in a sanctified manner, so as
may be most for thy glory, and my comfort, both here and hereafter; when it
shall please thee to take the^ away from me, and to deprive me either of any,
or of all of them, grant that I may with a willing mind, and with a thankful
heart, return them again unto thee, saying with that faithful and constant
servant of thine, whom thou have made a pattern and president unto me: Naked
came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither (even into
the belly of the earth, which is ye mother of us all): the Lord has given,
and the Lord has taken it: blessed be the name of the Lord.

Forgiving of others, how necessary for all men.
HE can never truly, and freely forgive those that offend and injury him, yt
has not first tasted of the infinite love and favor of God in Christ toward
him, in the forgiveness of those manifold sins, and innumerable and most
grievous offenses whereby he has displeased and provoked him. But he that has
a true apprehension, and a lively sense and feeling hereof in his own soul,
he cannot but freely, even from his heart, forgive others, as God for Christ's
sake forgave him. Either therefore manifest thy love unto thy brethren, in
freely forgiving and forgetting the wrongs and injuries which they have done
unto thee, or else freely acknowledge and confess (as indeed ye truth is) that
thou never as yet tastedst effectually of the love of God in Christ; that it
was never shed into thy heart, and that thy sins are still unpardoned, that
thou have no assurance of the forgiveness of them; which if thou have not, thou
art a miserable and a wretched creature, one that can have small joy or
comfort of thy life. Choose therefore which of these seems best unto thee?
either to continue in this misery, and to be branded, as it were, in the
forehead, for an impenitent sinner, one upon whom God has showed no mercy,
but is still under the curse, even the most fearful curse that can be, in a
most comfortles estate: Or else (which thou ought rather to desire, and to
be careful of above all things) that thou have obtained mercy, that thou art
in the love and favor of God, and that all thy sins are freely and fully
forgiven thee, because thou art loving and merciful in forgiving others, that
have sinned against thee. O merciful God, cause me daily more and more daily to
see the exceeding riches of thy grace, and to taste of that infinite and
unspeakable love, and kindness of thine in Christ Jesus so freely and so
graciously pardoning and forgiving unto me all my sins, even that great debt
which no creature was able to make satisfaction unto thy majesty for me, and
those heinous offenses for which thou might have justly condemned me. And let
the lively sense and feeling of that incomprehe^sible love and mercy, which
thou of thy infinite goodness have freely vouchsafed unto me, cause me,
following thy example, to put on the bowels of mercy, even those tender
affections of love and compassion, that I may willingly and freely forgive all
those that shall any ways offend me, even as thou for Christ's sake forgauest
me. Hereby I shall have a sure evidence of thy love toward me, and an
infallible sign and seal, to certify and assure me of the absolute remission
and forgiveness of all my sins, which is blessedness it self, even the very
gate which leads into heaven, unto that glory and salvation, which thy
Saints hope for, and whereof having given them the first fruits here, thou will
give them the full possession hereafter in thy kingdom for ever.

A comfort for such, as are unjustly slaundered of the wicked.
A Good man that is unjustly slandered and reviled, or any ways wronged of the
wicked, has many things to stay his mind, to comfort him, and to cause him
not to be moved, or disquieted, but rather to be glad and joyful. First, he
is thereby made conformable unto Christ, upon whom the rebukes of many were
laid, and who was more unjustly wronged and disgraced, and more shamefully
used, then he either is or can be. Again, he suffers it of evil and wicked
men, who always hate them most, who God loves best; and hereby has an
argument of Gods special love and favor to him. And he does not only suffer
it of those which are evil, but also for that which is good, even for his
goodness and for righteousness sake, yea for Christ's sake, for Gods sake, whom
thereby they chiefly dishonor, and who will surely therefore take vengeance of
them, but recompense him with a greater measure of glory. O Lord, though the
wicked of this world study how they may vex and molest me, whiles they
imagine lies, and speak al manner of evil in most malicious, disdainful, and
despightfull manner against me; yea hate and persecute me without a cause, as
they have done thy servants heretofore, nay thine own son, whom thou in love
to mankind did send out of thy bosom; yet let not me be discouraged at any
time therewith, but rather looking unto the author and finisher of my faith,
even Christ Jesus, who endured such speaking against of sinners, let me suffer
with patience the evil which they speak of me falsely, and having not only
mine own conscience, but thee also (who art privy to all my actions, yea
know all things, and wilt judge uprightly) a witness of my cleerenes and
innocence in those things which they would cause to cleave unto me, let me
despise their shame, and be most joyful when they seek most to oppress me,
and to cast me down with overmuch sorrow, anguish and heaviness, knowing
assuredly that the shame which they would cast upon me, shall turn to my
greater glory.

Compassion toward others in their griefs.
WE should be affected with the miseries of others, as with our own; and have
a sense and a feeling of those things which are grievous unto them, as much as
if the same were our grief, as it is theirs; or the same burden lay upon us,
that does upon them. This is that which God has commanded, and which all of us
must frame our selves unto, if we will not be guilty of sin, both against
God, and our neighbor. But, alas, such is the weakness and feeblenes of man's
nature, that few or none are thus indifferently affected toward themselves,
and others; yea, most do little regard the evil which presses others, and
lies heavy upon them; whereas if the same, or a lesser be laid upon
themselves, they are sore vexed and grieved; they complain much, and think
that none can be compassionate enough toward them. Good Lord, I beseech thee,
to heal me of this infirmity, and to free me from this corruption. Grant that
I may have a sympathy and fellow-feeling of the sorrows and miseries of
others, as if they were mine own; let me always have a tender compassion over
them, and be affected unto them, in that manner, as I would desire, if I were in
their estate, that they should be unto me. This is that which thy holy and
righteous law binds me unto, and which therefore I desire to perform, that
so I may please thee, and do good unto my neighbor, by helping him to bear
the burden which oppresses him.

A comfortable life, how to be obtained.
ALL men are desirous so to live, that they may have joy and comfort of their
lives: but few attain hereunto. For either they know not the right way which
leads unto it; or if they know it, yet they ^^haled and drawn aside, either
with t^^ violence of the temptat^ons of Satan, or the strength of their own
corrupt and distempered affections, to the seeking of it elsewhere. They are in
an error, and far out of the way, that think that either riches, health,
pleasures, honor, or any earthly or worldly thing whatsoever will bring them
true, constant joy. Nay, a man having all these, as much as his heart can wish
or desire, may be in a miserable, and comfortless estate and condition, full
of grief and anguish, yea even racked as it were continually with manifold
vexations and distractions. The only way to live peaceably, and joyfully, is to
lead a holy, and a religious life in all sincerity and vprightnes This
brings with it that sweet peace, and that inward solace and joy, which the
world cannot give. O blessed Lord, the days of this my pilgrimage are few and
evil; make them comfortable unto me, I humbly pray thee, by leading me forward
in the ways of righteousness and true holiness: grant that I may always
endeavor my self to have faith and a good conscience before thee, and before
all men, and to walk continually in simplicity and godly pureness, without al
guile and hypocrisy, that so my heart may rejoice in thee unfeignedly, yea even
be filled with that joy, which is unspeakable, and glorious.

How they are to live that are redeemed by Christ.
IT is a shame for the Lords free man, to make himself a servant, a drudge,
and a slave to the world, to sin and Satan. He that Christ has redeemed,
must live like one set at liberty, being always very careful and wary that
he be not entangled nor overcome with any lust, with any corrupt and unlawful
affection, lest thereby he bring himself into that bondage and servitude, then
which there can be nothing more wretched and miserable. O Lord, since it has
pleased thee of thy infinite goodness and mercy to redeem me with so great a
price, even with the precious blood of thy dear Son that immaculate Lamb,
grant that being freed from that estate of corruption, unto which before I was
in bondage, and having escaped from the filthiness of the world, wherewith I
was formerlie stained and polluted, I may be careful to renounce all those
ungodly courses, even that vain conversation wherein I walked and delighted,
before I knew thee and that saving grace of thine, which thou in the riches of
thy mercies have reueiled, and manifested unto me; and that I may daily more
and more labor and strive after spiritual liberty and freedom, living as
thy servant, as thy redeemed one, and showing forth the virtues of thee my God
and Savior, who have called me out of darkness, into that marvelous light of
thine.

Gods love and favor to be sought for above all things, and his wrath feared.
IF we be out of favor with men, of no esteem, no reckoning amongst them;
If despised, and disgraced of the world, and made as such as are vile, and of
no reputation: If we be but in danger to lose our goods, our riches, our
lands, and living; or to have our outward estate by any means impaired and
decayed, or in any sort diminished: If any of our dearest friends, and nearest
kinsfolk, die and depart from us for a while; or if we our selves be in any
peril of death, lo, then we are very sad and heavy; we are exceeding
pensive, and grieved out of measure, as though no greater evil could befall
us. But if we be clean out of the love and favor of God (then which there can
be no greater misery); if we be not regarded of him, but are vile in his
sight, such as by reason of our sins he does loathe and abhor, more then
we do the vgliest and the loathsomest creature in the world, and does many
ways testify the signs of his hatred, and the deep displeasure which he
has taken against us: If we be in continual danger to hazard ye most
desirable goods (which are better then all things, which this whole world can
afford) even those precious things of God, wherein only true happiness and
felicity consists. If we be in never so great and apparent danger and
ieopardie, to lose the unspeakable riches of that glorious, and immortal
inheritance, reserved for the Saints in that heavenly kingdom, that celestial
Canaan, the Paradise of God; where there are such joys, such pleasure, such
blessedness, as the heart of man is not able to conceive, or to comprehend. If
our nearest and inmost friend, which rests continually in our bosom, and in
the secretest lodgings of our hearts, unto whom we profess the greatest love
and friendship that may be; in brief, to whom we are joined and united, with
so near and strait bands, that it is death for us at any time, to be severed,
and separated for the least while, for one moment; even our own soul, if that
be dead in us, whiles it seems to live; dead in trespasses and sins,
whiles it lives according to the flesh, delighting in those things which are
unlawful; dead in regard of the life of grace, whiles it lives the life of
nature; yea continually in extreme danger to die eternally, even that second
death, which of all evils is the most fearful, and most woeful, above that any
man does think, or can imagine, though he have ^resented unto his mind, the
most dreadful things, and fullest of horror, that can possibly enter into the
heart of man: yet behold (such is the sottishnes of man's nature) though we
know these things, yet we are not inwardly touched, nor moved with them, as
we ought to be; though we read of them our selves, though we hear of the^
often by others; yea though the Lord from day to day, and from time to time,
causes them to sound in our ears, by the ministry and preaching of his
word, in the mouths of his faithful servants, whom he sends, and by the
inward and secret voice of his spirit, which suggesteth these things unto us,
yet our hearts are not affected with the consideration of them; we have almost
no sense, or feeling of these evils and miseries, we make no account of them,
we are little, seldom, or never troubled with the meditation and remembrance
of them. The fear and danger of them does not strike our souls with grief
and sorrow, nor make us so pensive and heavy, as the fear and dread of far
lesser evils do. We grieve more at the loss of the favor and countenance of
men, yea of carnal and worldly men, then of that glorious and immortal God,
whose loving favor is better then life, and the want of it worse then death:
we grieve more at the loss of ye things of this world, which are vain,
earthly, and transitory (and such as can never make the owner of them truly
blessed and happy, though he had them in greater abundance, then his heart,
albeit never so insatiable, could desire) the^ of the things of the world to
come, which are most excellent, heavenly, and enduring for ever, in the hope
and expectation whereof there is joy, and comfort unspeakable and glorious,
even whiles they are not seen, but believed; and in the full fruition and
possession whereof, there is entire and absolute felicity and blessedness. We
are grieved more at the death and departure of our friend, then at the death
and destruction of our own soul; more troubled with the fear of the loss of
this temporal life, which is always fading, and whereof we can have no
certainty or assurance, one hour, no not one minute; then of that which is
eternal, and shall never have an end, but continue for ever, in such glory,
the enjoying whereof one moment, is better then all the glory, pleasures, and
delights of this life, whereof any man is or can be made partaker in this
world; yea though he live long, and see many days, and wants nothing of those
things here below, which seem most precious and glorious in the eyes of men.
What should I say more? We are more troubled with the fear and dread of our
natural death, the death of our bodies (which if our lives were such as they
ought to be, would be more desired then feared of us, being the entrance into
that promised rest and happiness) then of the death of our spirits, yea of our
souls and bodies, even that fearful and most dreadful death, which is the
second death, when as the soul presently after the dissolution and separation
of it from the body, in the end of this life; and both soul and body, even
the whole man immediately after the day of judgment, having received their
final doom, shall be delivered up unto eternal death and condemnation in
hell, where they shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Surely many such there be in all
places, who have so small sense and feeling of the greatest evils both present
and imminent; that are more grieved and troubled for the approaching of some
lesser evil, then of the greatest misery that can possibly befall a man; the
very remembrance and consideration whereof, were enough to breed a horror and
astonishment in the mind of the hardiest, the most obstinate, and impenitent
sinner, if he should have a right apprehension of it. Oh the folly of such
men! who sees not how Satan has blinded and besotted them, that they should
be as those, who have no understanding, no discerning of things that differ so
exceedingly? O blessed Lord, open their eyes, that they may have a sight of
their greatest miseries; touch their hearts, that they may have a feeling of
that which should be their greatest grief, and wherewith they should be most
affected: And keep thy servants from falling at any time into that vain and
foolish opinion, and imagination of theirs. Let us always fear thy
displeasure, more then the angry countenance of any mortal man whatsoever;
let us be more afraid to be despised and rejected of thee; or to be such as
thou take no pleasure, no delight in, then to be disgraced and contemned of
the whole world, esteemed the filth and ofscouring of all things, men unworthy
to live upon the earth; let us choose rather to incur the danger of the loss
of our goods, lands, substance, and to be content to have our outward estate
in this world much impaired, yea altogether wasted, and brought even to
nothing, rather then once willingly to hazard our everlasting estate in the
world to come, by bringing our selves into danger of the loss of those
unsearchable riches, and treasures of life, glory, and endless felicity;
even those far more excellent and glorious things, which thou have promised
and prepared for all thy Saints in that heavenly kingdom. Let us not fear
the death of these mortal bodies of ours, which are but dust, and shall
return to the earth of which they are framed; let not the remembrance thereof
trouble us, or be any ways grievous and bitter unto us, nay rather let us
rejoice in it, and long for it, and that with an earnest desire, seeing it
shall be a passage unto us, from this life unto a better: but let us fear and
avoid those things which might cause the death of our souls; yea let us so
fear hell, death, and destruction, that we may be full assured we shall escape
them, and when this life of ours is ended, be translated into that place, where
thou dwell in fulness of glory and majesty, and live and reign with thee
in the heavens for evermore. Amen.

The Lords service the greatest freedom.
TO be in the Lords service is the greatest freedom, yea the greatest
privilege, and most excellent prerogative that men can attain unto in this
world. It is a very honorable, and glorious calling; no earthly dignity,
office, or prehemencie whatsoever, to be compared unto it. The Angels of
heaven those celestial creatures account it (as it is indeed) their crown,
and their greatest glory; that wherein they find cause of continual joy and
rejoicing: Why then should any man (a worm of the earth) esteem so meanly of
it, (as many do) yea think it to be a burden which he is loath to take upon
him; a bondage which it is grievous to him to undergo, yea a disgrace, and
reproach which he is unwilling to sustain? Oh that vain man should be so
degenerate and base minded, as to have so mean a^ conceit of that which he
ought so highly to prize; that he should suppose the service of the great king,
and monarch of the whole world the most high God, (wherein the most excellent
creatures do glory) to be base and contemptible; that he should think it a
dishonor, and disparagment unto him, to profess himself to be a dutiful and
obedient servant unto the Lord of heaven, the mighty possessour of all things,
(to whom all knees are to bow, and whom all creatures must adore) when as he
accounts it an honor, and a grace unto him to be reputed an inferior servant
unto his minister, and vicegerent upon earth; and no small privilege to be in
any office under him: yea that he should be such a miscreant, as to despise
that, which if he were not strangely blinded, and extremely besotted, he would
think himself happy that he might have it once vouchsafed and granted unto
him! O blessed Lord, how great is thy goodness and thy mercy toward me, in
that it has pleased thee to take me into thy service? how much am I bound unto
thee for this favor which thou have showed unto me, who by reason of my sins
whereby I have from time to time dishonored thee, am altogether unworthy to
be called thy servant, or once to be reckoned amongst the least, and meanest of
those unto whom thou have vouchsafed this so great a privilege, so glorious a
dignity, and prerogative. Oh that I were able to perform that service which
is due unto thee, and which thou requirest of me; Thou art my Lord and my God,
unto whom I owe all duty all homage, and loyalty; thou only art worthy to
be served, worshipped, and glorified of all creatures, both in heaven and in
earth. I acknowledge, that all that I can possible do, is less then that
which my duty, and thy love and goodness binds me unto, and which thou
may well expect of me; It is the desire of my heart to be found every way
obedient, and faithful unto thee, yea to serve thee with all my strength, with
all my might, and that unto the end of my days: O Let it please thee (who art
able to do all things) to make a gracious supply of that which thou see to
be wanting in me; and wherein through weakness, and infirmity, I am subject
to fail most, to help and to assist me through the powerful working of thy
blessed spirit, without which I am able to do nothing.

The extreme folly of men in hazarding the eternal estate of their souls,
for the enjoying of the vain pleasures of this world.
O How vain, how momentarie, and deceitful are all earthly pleasures and
delights, even then when any enjoys all that his heart can wish, or desire,
or whereunto his mind stands most affected! They are all as smoke, or as a
shadow; they vanish suddenly and come to nothing: and when they are gone,
they are as if they had never been; even the remembrance of them does perish,
and pass away. And whiles that a man has the use of them, yet does he not
find any true delight or contentment in them; yea it may well be doubted,
whether he tastes of more sour or sweet, more honey or gall, more pleasure
and delight or grief and vexation, whiles he drinks the^ down with a
greedy appetite, and in an insatiable manner. For thus the Lord vs^ally puts
much bitterness into their sweetest cup, and mingleth trouble, anguish and
vexation with their chiefest delights, which they most inordinatly desire, and
seek after. And yet lo, such is the folly and sottishnes of many (unto whom
the Lord otherwise has given understanding whereby to judge, and discern of
things that differ) that like unreasonable men, nay like brutish creatures,
that are destitute of all wisdom and knowledge, for the gaining of these
fruitless and fading vanities, they stick not to lose their own souls, then
which nothing should be more dear or precious unto them. O Lord, let me not be
taken in the snare of the wicked at any time; let me not have a longing and
inordinate desire after those things which please them, and with the love
whereof they are drawn away from that wherein their happiness consists (if
they had eyes to see it;) but grant, that seeing and considering daily more and
more, the vanity, the uncertainty, and deceitfulnes of these earthly
pleasures, and worldly delights, wherein most are drowned, I may have a true
contempt, and holy disdain of them, in comparison of those things which
concern thy kingdom; and that being weaned from the immoderate love and
sinful desire of them, I may delight my self in thee continually, yea solace my
self in thee alone; that so I may be filled with true inward and spiritual
joy, rejoicing always in thee, who only art the fountain of all heavenly
comfort and contentment, and of all divine consolation.

Denial of a man's self, how necessary.
MAn is always to rest in the will of God, and to yield himself in all things
to be ruled, and directed thereby: Thereunto must he frame his will, his
desires, yea all the affections of his heart, and actions of his life; he must
in every thing be swaied wholly, and only by that, or else he shall never
perform acceptable obedience unto God, that wherein he is most delighted and
best pleased. O Lord, give me grace always to deny my self, and mine own
will, and to resign my self unto thy holy and heavenly will in all things.
Let me will those things only which thou willest, and affect, desire, and
enterprise nothing but that, which thou have either commanded, or warranted the
lawfulnes of it, that so I may do it of faith and without sin. Behold Lord I
am thy servant, desirous to approve my self unto thy majesty, and to please
and obey thee in all things. Teach me daily both to know and to do thy will
better then I have done heretofore; even with all readiness, willingness, and
cheerefulnes, as those celestial creatures do, which always attend upon thy
presence, as ministering spirits, ready with all diligence and alacrity to
execute whatsoever thou command. Frame my heart more and more unto the
obedience of thy laws, and let me with all reverence, and humble submission
both of soul and body, subject my self unto thee, following thee
whithersoeuer thou shall lead me, and being content to be ruled, directed, and
governed according unto thy will and good pleasure in all things: yea O Lord,
deal with me as thou please, and as thou know may be most for thy honor
and glory, and for my greatest good in this life, and the furtherance of my
happiness and salvation in the life to come, through Christ my only Lord, and
blessed Savior. Amen.

The Lord is the light and the guide of his.
EXcept the Lord do inlighten the minds of me^, they are as those that walk in
darkness; yea even the best are ready continually to err, and to go astray, if
he be not their guide, if he be not present to direct them, and to lead them
forward, as it were, with his hand in the right way. Daily experience and
observation makes this so clear and evident, that none can either deny it,
or doubt of it. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, neither
is it in man to walk, and to direct his steps, but if thou leave him, he
starteth aside, and wandreth like a straying sheep: O therefore be thou
merciful unto me; let thy grace and thy truth always shine forth clearly
unto me. Be thou my guide in all things, going before me, and directing me
aright, so that I may never be plucked away with the error of those that fall
from thee, and from thy truth. Give me knowledge, give me understanding,
teach me to do thy will, and to walk in all the paths of thy precepts with a
right foot, and with all sincerity of heart and affection; yea let thy good
spirit be always present to assist me, and to lead me in the way wherein I
should go; that so I may continue steadfastly and constantly in the knowledge
and obedience of thy truth, and do those things which may be pleasing and
acceptable in thy sight, and bring comfort unto my soul and conscience, both
in life and in death.

The Lord never forsakes his in the day of affliction or temptation.
IF the Lord at any time does expose his children unto any kind of misery or
affliction; if he suffer them to fall into diverse and grievous temptations, he
means them no hurt therein, neither is he therefore to be thought an enemy,
or to have lessened his care and loving affection toward them; but rather he
does all this for their good, yea for their great benefit, though they for the
present cannot easily discern it, (not being so well acquainted with the
Lords dealings, and proceedings, with whom it is an ordinary, and no unusual
thing, to prove, and exercise his, even his most beloved ones, sundry ways,
and in diverse manners:) His love is as great toward the^, when he seems to be
their enemy, as when he carries himself most friendly, and causes his face
to shine most comfortably upon them: in their grearest distress and
affliction, as when they have plenty and abundance of peace and prosperity;
yea rather (if there be any change in the immutable and unchangeable God)
even then when for a while he seems to withdraw himself from them, and to
leave them comfortless in the midst of their miseries, and greatest
extreamities, he is most tenderly affected, and has a most gracious respect
unto them, although it does not so appear until he manifest it. O my soul,
why then art thou so cast down? why art thou so disquieted within me? why
do thou not wait upon God? why do thou not rest wholly on his good will
and pleasure? Why do thou not put thy whole trust and confidence in him, yea
return continual thanks and praise unto him, whose mercy and goodness is
exceeding great toward thee; who in every thing seeks thy profit, and the
furtherance of thy salvation and happiness; yea who is every way infinitlie
gracious unto thee, far above that which thou art able to think, or to
conceive? O blessed Lord, let mine eyes and my heart be always lifted up unto
thee, my God and loving Father, the Father of all mercies, and heavenly
comforts; and suffer me not at any time to be so forgetful of thee, so
distrustful of thy love and gracious favor toward me, as that I should faint
in the day of affliction or temptation, when it shall seem good unto thee, to
try and exercise me in that manner that it pleases thee; but grant that I may
have as sure hope and confidence in thee, and be as thankful unto thee when
sorrow and grief shall lodge with me, yea when a multitude of sorrows shall
compass me about on every side, as when I shall be most filled and replenished
with spiritual and divine comforts and consolations; knowing that thou art ever
the same, always faithful in that thou have promised, and infinite in thy
grace and goodness toward thy children, most caring for them, when they seem
to be least respected, and in a manner forsaken of thee.

The love of the world and worldly things, is the cause of distraction, and
much disquietnes.
THE inordinate love of any worldly thing, is the cause of much disquiet of
heart, and great distraction and vexation of mind. How many do hereby pierce
themselves thorough with many sorrows; how do they trouble their own souls,
when otherwise they might be at rest? into what bondage do they bring
themselves? yea even consume themselves in vain, with unprofitable cares and
pensiveness? It is the wisdom of a Christian therefore, never to affect, or to
covet after those things which are unlawful for him; never to desire or to
long after any thing, which may hinder him in any sort, from inward peace and
freedom of mind, or be a cause of anguish, grief and distraction unto him:
but to weane his soul from the excessive, and disordered love and desire of
them; considering that they are such things, as when he has the full fruition
and enioyment of them, he shall find that they will not satisfy his desire
and expectation; and that they will quickly vanish away, and perish with the
use of them. O Lord withdraw my heart, I beseech thee, daily more and more from
the love of the world, and the things thereof, seeing they are vain,
transitory, and full of grief and vexation, not yielding that delight and
contentment which they promise and make show of, but rather much anguish and
unquietness of mind: Seeing they are a cause of such unlooked for bitterness,
let me not so affect them as I have done; let them not seem so sweet and
pleasant unto me, as they do unto others, who have not tasted of better
things, and therefore find such relish in these; but grant that all the
affections of my heart may be set upon thee alone, and that I may delight and
rejoice continually in thee, who art the only fountain of al true joy, peace,
and happiness; assuredly persuading my self, that having thee to be my God, I
shall have the desires of my heart, yea more then ever I did or could expect or
desire, freely granted unto me according unto thy promise, wherein I trust, and
in which stands my comfort.

How Christians are to judge of their estate.
A Christian is not to judge of his estate according unto his present sense and
feeling. For the Lord many times is nearest unto them, when he seems to be
furthest off from them; when they seem to be even lost in themselves, then is
he readiest to be found of them, and to show them his salvation. O heavenly
Father, give me with faith and patience continually to wait upon thee, and to
hold fast that confidence, and the rejoicing of that steadfast and assured hope,
wherewith thou have heretofore vpholden me. Let me never think my self to be
altogether forsaken of thee, because thou sendest some grief and affliction
upon me, or suffer Satan to assault me with diverse and sundry temptations;
or else for a time withdrawest from me the joy of thy spirit, and the comfort
of thy salvation; yea though thou seem to abs^nt thy self from me, and to
deny that gracious presence of thine unto me, wherewith thou have heretofore
comforted and refreshed me exceedingly: but grant that I may cleave fast unto
thee, even when I have least feeling of thy love and favor, and of the work
of thy grace in me, and yt I may always have sure trust in thy mercy, knowing
that thou a^t wont to be near at hand unto thy children, when thou make as
though thou were a far off, and would not be found of them.

The presence of God how blessed and comfortable a thing it is.
OH how blessed a thing it is, always to enjoy the gracious and comfortable
presence of God! For when he is present, all things are pleasant and
delightful, the heart rejoices, and the spirit of man is refreshed
exceedingly; and when he does absent himself or hide his face (though but for
a season) then every thing becomes irksome, and full of wearines and
lothsomnes; the soul can take no true pleasure nor delight in any thing, no
more then the stomach being distempered, in meats, in which there is no
sweetness, no relish. O my God, the God of my joy, the fountain of my peace
and happiness, do not thou hide thy gracious countenance, nor depart far
from me at any time, but let thy spirit always dwell within me, and comfort
me. Let my soul taste of those sweet delicates of thine, even that hidden and
that heavenly Manna, which how precious and delightsome it is, none knows but
those only unto whom thou have freely vouchsafed to give it: let thy face ever
shine upon me, and manifest thy presence always, by causing me to feel the
comfortable fruits and effects thereof within me. Oh when shall that blessed
and wished for time come, when as I shall be satisfied with the fullness of
thy presence, and drink abundantly out of the rivers of thy pleasures for
evermore?

The old man never dies in this life.
EVery Christian as long as he lives in this world, has the old man living
in him; he is in part, but not wholly crucified and slain; he has received
his deadly wound, and lies a dying every day, but will not be quite dead,
till the soul be separated by death, from this earthly, this sinful and this
corruptible body. O Lord, subdue and mortify daily more and more, I humbly
pray thee, the corruption of my nature; let me feel the power and strength
thereof weakened, and decaying in me; put thy spirit into my heart, which may
strive continually against it, and suppress the force of it, so that although
in some sort it live in me, yet it may not reign at any time, nor have
dominion over me. And when it pleases thee, make an end of these wretched and
miserable days, and deliver me from this body of sin, and of death which I
carry continually about with me; that so being wholly freed from the bondage
unto which I am now subject, and restored unto perfect liberty, I may serve
thee with all cheerefulnes and alacrity, as thy holy Angels and Saints in
glory now do, and shall for evermore.

A free mind how to be obtained.
THere cannot be a free mind where the heart does not continually rest upon
God, and stay it self upon him only. He that does this shall quickly find
all sinful and immoderate fear, and the excessive and inordinate love of all
earthly things much diminished and abated in him, yea flying quite away, and
vanishing in such sort as if he had never bin annoied or encumbred with them.
He that does it not, it cannot be, but that he should live and spend his days
in continual disquietnes, yea in great misery, and vexation of mind and
spirit, by reason of many distracting thoughts, superfluous cares, and vain
desires, which will even pierce his soul with many sorrows, and oppress his
mind with much grief, anguish, and perplexity. Ah Lord, thou know the
secret thoughts and desires of my heart; thou see what it is that my soul
longs after; how feign I would serve thee with that cheerfulness of mind,
and that freedom of spirit, which is the sacrifice wherein thou art so much
delighted; Have regard unto me, I humbly entreat thee: consider my request,
which I power out unto thee from a heart unfeigned. Give me daily a greater
measure of thy grace, whereby I may break through those snares which are laid
for me, and wherewith I am ready continually to be entangled; and grant that
I may resign my self wholly unto thee, and rest, yea set and fix my heart,
and even roll my self upon thee; that so I may pass the rest of my
pilgrimage hee^e on earth, peaceably, cheerefullie and comfortably, as one
that is set at liberty from all sinful and inordinate affections, and from
the vain desires, and the needless and troublesome cares of this evil and
wicked world. Amen.

An effectual motive to true humility and lowlines of mind.
OH how meanly ought every one to esteem of himself? How little ought he to
be in his own eyes? seeing that in himself he is nothing; notable of
himself, no not so much as once to think that which is good: If he were as
wise as Solomon (so famous for his wisdom and understanding) yet if the Lord
did not continually guide his heart, and direct his st^ppes, there would be
much folly and vanity sound with him. If he were a^ r^ghteous as David (^ man
after Gods own heart) yet if the Lord did not always preserve him, and
strengthen him through the assistance of his gracious spirit, he would fall
most dangerously: yea, if he were as pure, and as holy as the Angels
themselves, those heavenly spirits, yet if the Lord should not sustain him
with his especial grace, and continue him in that estate, but withdraw his
hand from him, he would quickly fall, as it were a star from heaven, and
(all his glory being lost, and his light dimmed, yea quite extinguished)
become like unto Satan, the prince of darkness; nothing but sinfulnes and
impuritie. There is no wisdom, no righteousness, no holiness, no stedfastnes but
only in God, and of God, who is the fountain of all grace and goodness, and
from whom the streams thereof are to be derived into the hearts of men, or
else there will be nothing but barrennes and emptines in them. God is all in
all; the best without him are as nothing, having no power, no ability to do any
thing which is good. What is it then that men should glory of in themselves?
Or how should they not always have a very mean conceit and esteem of
themselves, yea even annihilate themselves, and give the glory of all unto
God, unto whom alone it is due? O blessed God, give me that meekenes of spirit,
and that true humblenes of mind, which as it is a thing rare and precious in
it self, so of thee very much set by. Teach me, considering mine own weakness,
of which I have daily experience, and my insufficiency of my self, and of my
own strength to do, to will, or to think any thing which is good, to be
lowly, vile, and abject in mine own eyes, yea to esteem my self as nothing
without thee; and always acknowledging mine own feeblenes, and manifold
fraileties and infirmities, to depend wholly and only upon thee; yea to cleave
fast unto thee, and to ascribe the praise and glory of whatsoever good is
wrought in me, or by me, unto thee alone, who art the God of my strength, the
author and given both of grace and glory, and the beginner, and finisher of
every good thing, which is wrought in any of thy children.

Another.
THE more that any one does empty himself of his own worth, and goodness, the
more will the Lord fill and replenish him with the abundant riches of his
divine and heavenly grace. The lower that he does abase and cast down
himself, the higher will the Lord advance him, and lift him up, even far
above that which he did either desire or expect. Thus his gain will be
exceeding great, in that wherein to others he may seem to suffer some loss,
and much to prejudice himself. O Lord, grant, I beseech thee, that I may every
day be more humbled with the sight of mine own unworthiness, of my spiritual
poverty and beggarlines, that so it may please thee, to enrich me with the
greater measure of thy grace; let me yet be more vile in mine own eyes, that so
I may at length be exalted of thee, above that which I deserve, and be crowned
with honor and glory in thy kingdom for evermore.

Vainglorie what a vanity and folly it is.
VAinglorie, as it is a common disease in ye world, so the greatest vanity
that can be; yea mere folly and madness itself. It argues evidently, that he
that is carried away with it, is not only much distempered in his soul, but
even out of his right mind, and destitute of true wisdom and understanding,
seeing that it bereaues a man of true glory, unto which that is no ways
comparable; and depriues him of divine and heavenly grace, the most precious
jewel in this world, and most to be desired and sought for, far above all
fading and earthly vanities: For whiles that any seeks to please himself
overmuch, in receiving honor of men, he cannot but displease God very highly,
and want that honor, which is from above; whiles he couets and hunts after the
praise and applause of this world, and desires to lift up himself in the pride
and vanity of his heart above others, the Lord resists him and denies his
grace unto him, so that of all others he is herein (through the just judgment
of God) most barren and fruitless, having perhaps the shadow and outward
appearance of some moral virtues, but wanting that which is the life and soul
of them. O Lord, how little cause have I to glory of any thing that is in me,
except it be of my infirmities, my weaknesses, and manifold imperfections, unto
which I feel my self continually subject? What is it for which I should
esteem my self to be any thing, or to be once worthy to be accounted
amongst the meanest of thy servants? For behold, I am but a frail and a
sinful man, full of wretchedness and misery; nothing without thee; not able to
do the least good but as I am strengthened and assisted by thee; ready to
fail, and to sink right down, if I be not continually sustained and
supported by thee. What shall I say? If I have any thing, it is only thy gift,
and thy gracious blessing, for the which I can never be sufficiently thankful.
Far be it from me therefore, to be so misled with the vain conceit of
wicked and ungodly men, that I should lift up my self above that which is
meet, or glory in any thing of this world, lest it displease thee, and cause
thee in justice to bring shame and dishonor upon me; but grant that I may
rejoice and glory always, and only in thee; yea that I may extol and
magnify thy name continually, who art worthy of all praise and glory, both
now and evermore.

The Christians Paradise in this life.
THe children of God live continually in a paradise, even whiles they remain
in this world, and seem to others to be wretched and miserable, subject unto
manifold afflictions, and diverse kinds of calamities: They taste daily of the
fruit of the tree of life, and are refreshed with those inward spiritual
joys, and heavenly delights, which are above all other joys, and in
comparison whereof, all the pleasures and delights, which this deceitful and
enticing world can afford them, are but mere vanity. They are certified of
their salvation; they know themselves to be elected and redeemed by Christ
their Savior, and that none can take the^ out of his hands, who is so mighty
and powerful in himself, and so gracious and loving unto them: yea by faith
and hope they are ascended into heaven, and in spirit behold that mansion place
provided for them, and that glory which he (who never deceived any that
trusted in him) has promised unto them; the remembrance and joyful
expectation whereof, does even ravish their souls, and cause them to glory in
the Lord, and in the riches of his goodness and mercy so graciously and
bountifully vouchsafed unto them, when they were most unworthy of it. O
blessed Lord, open mine eyes, that I may see the excellency of that estate
whereunto thou have called me of thy free grace; take away that veil which
Satan seeks to spread before me, that so I might not see into that glory,
which thou of thy endless love and unspeakable goodness have made me partaker
of, even in the midst of those weaknesses, those infirmities and afflictions
wherewith I am compassed about on every side. Thou have given me thy spirit to
be my comforter in all my sorrows, yea my faithful guide to lead me along
safely by the waters of divine and heavenly consolations, and to conduct me
with much peace and joy through this vale of misery, unto that promised rest,
that heavenly Canaan. Every day thou causest me to taste of thy goodness, yea
fillest me with thy hid treasures, such as the world is not acquainted with:
Even in the depth of misery, thou make me to see, and to enjoy the
blessedness and glory of thy Saints and chosen ones: And after that I have
been for a while tossed in this sea, wilt cause me speedily to arrive at that
haven where I would be; yea thou will stretch forth thy hand, and receive me
into thine own presence, and cause me to behold thy face in that brightness of
glory for evermore.

How the life to come ought to be desired of every true Christian, in regard of
the excellency and glory of it.
THat heathenish pagan (as is reported of him) reading Platoes discourse of the
souls immortality and estate after this life, was so ravished therewith, that
with the desire thereof, he cast himself into the sea, and ended his life. His
act was sinful, and no ways to be imitated by any (for no man is to cut off
the threede of his life, until the Lords appointed time) but yet his vehement
desire and earnest affecting of that glory which he apprehended, and conceited
in his mind, may teach even us that are Christians, to blush in our selves,
when we find our hearts so dull, and senseles, that the remembrance of that
promised glory and happine, swill no more affect us, then ordinarily it does
the most. Oh it should wholly possess our souls, and ravish our minds, and
cause us to labor by all means to get assurance upon good evidence, that we
shall at length have our part and portion in it, being gathered togeher with
all the Saints into that glorious kingdom, those heavenly mansions. O
merciful God, how great is thy goodness? how unsearchable are the riches of thy
grace, and favor toward thy Saints and chose^ ones, those whom in Christ
Jesus thou imbracedst before all worlds? Oh how blessed and glorious is that
estate which thou reseruest for them in the heavens, and which thou will give
the^ possession of, as soon as these frail and sinful days of theirs are
ended! Thou will cause them to shine as the stars, yea as the sun it self
when it is in the greatest brightness. All kind of impuritie and uncleanness
being done away, thou will clothe the^ with the glorious robes of innocence,
righteousness, and holiness; thou will adorn them with those precious jewels of
all divine and heavenly graces, and cause thy name to be written in their
foreheads; yea thou will set them upon thrones with thy Christ, with scepters
in their hands, and crowns on their heads, and give unto them for an
everlasting inheritance, that celestial kingdom of endless bliss and
happiness. Thou will every way show thy self marvelous toward them, above
that we are able to think, or conceive in this frailetie of ours, which is not
able to comprehend the brightness of that heavenly light, which thou will cause
to shine forth unto them in a wonderful and glorious manner, no more then our
bodily eyes are able to behold the glittering beams of the Sun when it is in
the full strength thereof. O blessed Lord, affect my heart with the due
consideration of that marvelous glory of thine, even that happy and glorious
condition, which in thy unspeakable mercy and kindness thou will raise me unto
as soon as these wretched days of sin and misery are ended. And let the
remembrance thereof, cause me continually to sigh and to long after it, and to
rest ever in a joyful expectation of it, desiring either to be dissolved by
death; or (which I rather desire) to see my Savior coming in the clouds with
glory and majesty, attended with thousands of Saints and Angels; that so I may
have entrance into that heavenly paradise, and take full possession of that
rich, undefiled, and never fading inheritance, enjoying the sweet fellowship
and communion of all thy chosen and beloved ones; yea living continually in thy
most blessed presence, and beholding that marvelous light wherein thou
dwell who inhabitest eternity.

Who shall be citizens of that heavenly kingdom.
THey that will be citizens of the kingdom of heaven, must first live as
pilgrims and strangers here upon earth. They must pass by all these
transitory and earthly things, using them (when they have occasion) as if they
used them not. They must not set their hearts upon any thing which is here
below, but aspire always unto those things which are above, desiring and
longing with an earnest affection, to be at home, even at that heavenly
mansion where the place of their perpetual rest and abode is, and where they
shall continue for ever with that blessed company and society of those
glorious and celestial creatures, which now continually desire and expect
their coming, that so they may rejoice together in the fruition and
accomplishment of the same felicity and happiness. O Lord, let my heart, I
beseech thee, be more and more daily alienated and estranged from this world,
and the things thereof, which are but mere vanity; and let me carry my self
continually as a pilgrim and soiourner here on earth (as all thy Saints have
been) not suffering my affections at any time to be fastened unto any of these
fading and transitory things, but weaning them altogether from the same,
resting always in a desire and joyful expectation of my return unto that
blessed home of mine; that so when this wearisome and sinful course is ended,
I may be received into thy celestial mansion, and live with thee in glory for
ever.

Soli Deo gloria.
AN ALPHABETICAL Table of the chief points contai^ed in the several
Meditations.
A
ACcount of all our actions to be given to God. page 27 Affections ouermastered
with much difficulty. page 263 Afflictions, the necessity of the^ 94 the
benefit thereof. 153. the Ancre of the soul in afflictions. 96. A comfort for
the afflicted. page 370 Ambitious man's Idol. page 309 Angels watch over the
godly. page 36
B
BLessings of God, not the less to be regarded because they are common. 34.
especial blessings and favors especially to be remembered. page 201 Blindness
of mind a great misery. page 293
C
CAre ought rather to be had for the soul then for the body. 49. for things
to come, then for things present. page 149 Censurers, the danger of their
sin. page 168 Christians must never stand at a stay. 30. what manner of life
it becomes them to lead. 110. 342. their imprisonment in this world. 66. their
life a pilgrimage on earth. 106. God, their ^^ght and guide. 368. their
glorious conquest. 261. 263. Their excellency. 216. their paradise in this
life. 395. How they are esteemed of in the world. 267. 275. what reckoning they
are in with God. 277. A singular privilege of theirs. 244. how they are to
judge of their estate. page 377 Comfort for afflicted consciences. page 257.
370 Compassion toward others in their griefs. page 337 Confidence in any
creature a vain thing. page 230 Conscience, the comfort of a good conscience
especially in death. 125. how the conscience is disquieted. page 203
Contentednes in all estates. page 90 Covetousness a dangerous disease. 91.
Idolatry. page 309 Cross, se^ ^fflictions.
D
DEath always to be expected and provided for. 24. 25. 108. to be desired. 65
of whom it is most feared. page 76 Denial of a man's self how necessary. page
365 Desertions of the godly. page 122 Devotion hindered, first by sinful lusts,
1. secondly, by worldly cares, 3. thirdly, by Satan's suggestions. page 6
E
EState of a Christian how to be judged of. page 377
F
FAith. page 246 Fear of God. page 296. 299 Forgiving of others how
necessary. page 329 Freedom of mind how to be obtained. page 384 Freewill.
page 322
G
GOds glory carefully to be sought after in all things. 26. His truth and
faithfulness. 123. His love and favor to be sought for above all things, and
his wrath feared. 344. his especial providence over his children. 86. his
all-seeing presence how it ought to affect us. 150. his presence how blessed
and comfortable a thing it is. page 380 Grace, different degrees thereof in the
godly. 61. 63. the decay of it dangerous. page 100
H
Hardness of heart, what a fearful plague it is. page 295 Haste of the wicked
to hell, prouokes the godly to make the more speed to heaven. page 53 Heaven,
who citizens thereof. page 404 Heauenly-mindednes. page 199 Holy Ghost, how the
soul is to be fitted and prepared for the entertainment of so glorious a
guest. 116. grieuing thereof. page 118 Humility, motives thereunto. page 227.
386. 390
I
INfirmities of others must be borne with. 172. Why the Lord suffers often
times the infirmities of his children to be known to others. page 233
Judgment day how dreadful it will be to the wicked. page 211 Justification by
faith only. page 246
K
KNowledge, conscience and practice must go together. page 303. 306
L
LIfe, the shortness and uncertainty of it. 206. As is the life of man, so is
his death and final estate. 209. the life of the righteous as well to be
sought after, as their death wished. page 315 Life to come how it is to be
desired, in regard of the excellency and glory of it. page 399 A comfortable
life how to be obtained. page 339 Lives of the Saints of old, and men in these
days how different. page 179 Love of God by what means it decaieth in men.
page 289 Love of the world a cause of distraction and much disquietnes. page
374
M
MEditation, of things holy and divine, by what means especially it is
hindered and interrupted. page 1. 3. 6 Mercies of God. page 15
O
OLd man never dies in this life. page 382
P
PAtience of God. page 114 Patience in affliction. page 153 A sign of a well
grown Christian. page 279
Prayers of the faithful what benefit they bring to others. page 31
Providence. page 86
R
REdemption. page 12 Repentance, the folly and danger of deferring it. page
319 Reproaches, comfort therein. page 334 Resigning of a man's self, and all that
he enioyes, to Gods will. page 325 Respect of persons for outward ornaments,
and indowments, more then for the inward virtues and graces of the mind, how
unbeseeming a thing it is. page 84
S
Satan's guilefull temptations. 76. 79. 102. his policy and practices against
the Church of God, what event they usually have. 143. None free from his
temptations. 155. Whom he tempts most. page 162 Security, the danger of it.
page 38 Service of God, the greatest freedom. page 356 Sin, how hurtful and
dangerous it is. 22. 99. the occasions of it carefully to be avoided. page 82
Sinfulnes of man's nature corrupted. page 281 Spirit of God the life of the
soul. 286. See Holy Ghost. Suspicion. page 231
T
TEmptations. Diverse kinds of them in the godly. 157 more danger in lesser
temptations sometimes then in greater. 165. See Satan.
V
VAinglorie. 242. the folly and vanity thereof. page 392 Vanity of all
earthly things. page 63.
W
WAtchfulnes. page 146 Wicked, their folly. 18 42. 49. 281. 361. their bondage
and slavery. 47. what an unpleasant and distracted life they lead. 312. What
difference there is between their estate, and the estate of the godly eue^ in
this life. page 236 Word of God: the unfruitful hearing of it dangerous. 59.
it ought to be heard with fear and trembling. page 299 Worldlings their
folly. 42. their dulnes and sottishnes. 205. 281. their miserable estate. page
310. 574. Worldly man's Idol. page 309 Worship, what it is that God especially
requires. 323. hindrances thereunto. page 238
Z
Zeal. page 240
FINIS.

