A TREATISE OF MELANCHOLY.

CONTAINING THE CAUSES thereof, and reasons of the strange effects it works
in our minds and bodies: with the physic cure, and spiritual consolation for
such as have thereto adjoined an afflicted conscience.

The difference betwixt it, and melancholy with diverse philosophical
discourses touching actions, and affections of soul, spirit, and body: the
particulars whereof are to be seen before the book.

By T. Bright Doctor of Physic.

ANCHORA SPEI printer's device of Thomas Vautrollier

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier, dwelling in the Blackfriars. 1586.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL M. PETER OSBOVRNE, etc.
OF all other practice of physic, that part most commends the excellency of
the noble faculty, which not only releeueth the bodily infirmity, but after a
sort even also corrects the infirmities of the mind. For the instrument of
reason, the brain, being either not of well tempered substance: or disordered
in his parts: all exercise of wisdom is hindered: and where once understanding
lodged, wit, memory, and quick conceit, kept residence, and the excellency of
man appears above all other creatures: there inconsiderate judgment,
simplicity, and foolishnes make their seat, and as it were dispossessing
reason, of her watch tower, subiecteth the nature of man unto the annoyance of
infinite calamities, that force upon us in the course of this frail life, and
baseth it far under the condition of brute beasts. The heart the seat of
affection (and neither immoderate in temper, nor in figure or quantity
otherwise disposed then is expedient for good action) the seat of temperancie,
of justice, of fortitude and liberality, daily practice of physic shows
how much it is disposed and framed to mediocritie of affection wherein virtue
consists, by such means as nature ministers, and the physician her great
steward according to her will, dispenses where need requires: in so much that
what reason brings to pass by persuasion and counsel, that medicine and
other helps of that kind seem to work by instinct of nature. The daily
experience of phrensies, madness, lunasies, and melancholy cured by this
heavenly gift of God, make manifest demonstration hereof. The notable fruit and
success of which art in that kind, has caused some to judge more basely of
the soul, then agrees with piety or nature, and have accounted all manner
affection thereof, to be subject to the phisicians hand, not considering herein
any thing divine, and above the ordinary events, and natural course of
things: but have esteemed the virtues the^ selves, yea religion, no other
thing but as the body has been tempered, and on the other side, vice,
profaneness, and neglect of religion and honesty, to have been naught else
but a fault of humor. For correcting the judgment of such as so greatly
mistake the matter, and partly for the use of many that may need instruction
and counsel, in the state of melancholy, and affection of brain and heart, and
would have both to satisfy their own doubts, and to answer the profane
objections of others, I have taken this pains to confute the absurd error of
the one, and to satisfy the reasonable and modest inquiry of the other that
seek to be informed. I have laid open how the body, and corporal things
affect the soul, and how the body is affected of it again: what the
difference is betwixt natural melancholy, and that heavy hand of God upon the
afflicted conscience, tormented with remorse of sin, and fear of his
judgment: with a Christian resolution according to my skill for such as faint
under that heavy burden. And that I might to the uttermost of my endeavor (as
other business would permit me) comfort the^ in that estate most comfortles, I
have added mine advise of physic help: what diet, what medicine, and what
other remedy is meet for persons, oppressed with melancholy fear, and that
kind of heaviness of heart. I have enterlaced my treatise besides with disputes
of Philosophy that the learned sort of them, and such as are of quick
conceit, and delited in discourse of reason in natural things, may find to
pass their time with, and know the grounds and reasons of their passions,
without which they might receive more discomfort, and greater cause of error.
This I have delivered in a simple phrase without any cost, or port of words to
a supposed friend M. not ignorant of good letters, that the discourse might be
more familiar then if it had carried other direction it otherwise would be.
Change the letter, and it is indifferent to whom soever stands in need, or
shall make use thereof. I write it in our mother tongue that the benefit (how
small soever it be) might be more common, and as the practice of all ancient
philosophers has been to write in their own language their precepts, whether
concerning nature, or touching manners of life, to the end their country men
might reap the benefit with more ease, and seek rather for sound judgment
of understanding, then for vain ostentation of strange tongs: which is also
after a sort followed in translations: so I took it meetest to impart these
few points of philosophy, and physic in English to the end our people, as
other nations do, might acquaint them selves with some part of this kind,
rather then with other frivolous discourses, neither profitable to use, nor
delectable to the virtuous, and well disposed mind. This my slender endeavor I
dedicate to your name right worshipful M. Osbourne, to whom besides I am
particularly beholdinge, your good favoring of virtue and learning in certain
of my acquaintance of the best mark has moved me to give this signification
how ready learning is to honor her favorers. she has many daughters, and
they be all knit in love: betwixt the^ there is neither envy, nor jealousy:
where one is honored and receives entertainment, there all congratulate
without detraction: and even as in a dark night one star breaking out of a
thick cloud, though it be but small, delivers a far more cheerful and
comfortable light, then if it shone with many in a clear evening: so this
virtue has the more grace, and beauty in you, insomuch as almost all such
planets have a long time either been wholly eclipsed, or quite fallen out of
their spheres, to the great disco^forte of such as travail in this kind of
night works, and busy the^ selves at the lamps and are careful to uphold
with perplexed study the society of mankind by learning and instruction.
There be a few that shine with you, their honor grounded upon virtue, shall
stand for ever: the Muses and the Charites have their names in perpetual
record: and I a servant of theirs in their names perform this duty unto you
in this sort as I have declared. Fare you well: from little S. Bartlemewes by
Smithfield the 23 of May. 1586.

A lover of your virtue, T. Bright.

TO HIS MELANcholicke friend: M.
ALTHOUGH dear M. your letter full of heaviness, and uncomfortable plaintes,
has in such sort affected me, that (as it faireth with a true hearted friend)
your affliction draws me into the fellowship of your mournful estate.
VVherby I am feign to call for such supporte, as reason ministers to wise men:
and am compelled as it were to put bit into the mouth of my over vehement
affection: and give check as much as my strength serves unto my passion
somevvhat in this behalf unruly. Yet albeit our cases are not equal, in so
much as the grief is not so sensible to me as to your self, whom it has (I
perceive) entered to the quick, not only of bodily sense: but has passed
deeper, and fretted the tender sinevves of the soul and spirit: yet I say,
for as much as such is the gracious providence of our God, and the manifold
graces of his bountiful hand unto men, that scarce appears any calamity, but
if time be taken and opportunity laid hold on, help and release does as
readely present it self, to the comfort of such as travail under the
burden, as affliction is ready to charge them: and considering on whom this
kind of cross is fallen: upon a man exercised in the study of piety, and a
practiser of the same, and one not ignorant of the precepts of philosophy,
vvherby worldly men, and such as are destitute of the knowledge of God, stay
themselves in such cases, which as it serves them but slenderly and is but a
readen staff, to bear up so heavy a burden, being otherwise void, and
unfurnished of the heavenly grace, so may such philosophical and human
precepts, and consideration of natural causes, and euentes, stand him in
stead, who rests not wholy there on, but leans upon the maine pillar of
Gods promises, of mercy and grace, and vvaighteth with patience the appointed
time of his release. These considerations to be seen in you, give me
consolation and the rather enable me to comfort you my dear friend, whose
soul I perceive pa^teth with heat of that flame, which most nigh you say in
your feeling approaches unto those torments described vvher the worm dies
not and the fire goes not out: whereof although you seem presently to feel
the anguish for a time; yet have comfort and attend the happy issue, which
doubtless is your raising up again and more high advancement into the
assurance of Gods love and favor. For as of all mettalls gold is tried with
most vehement heat, and abides the oftenest hamering of workmen for the
refyning, which being once fined serves for the seat of the Diamond, and for
matter of precious vessels to the royal furniture of the tables of potentates
and princes: so now even that heavenly refiner, holds you in this hot flame
for a time, till being purified and cleared from that dross of sin which
cleaves so fast, to our degenerat nature, you may make hereafter a more
glorious vessel, for his service and honor of his heavenly majesty. Your
request is not only that I should minister unto you, what my slender skill
either in divinity or physic may afford, but that I would at large declare
unto you the nature of melancholy, what causes it, what effects it
works, how cured, and farther to lay open, whatsoever may serve for the
knowledge thereof, with such companions of fear, sadness, desperation,
tears, weeping, sobbing, sighing, as follovv that mournful train, yea often
times, unbridled laughter, rising not from any comfort of the heart, or
gladness of spirit, but from a disposition in such sort altered, as by error
of conceit, that gesture is in a counterfeit manner bestovved upon that
disagreeing passion, whose nature is rather to extinguish it self with
tears, then assvvaged by the svveete breath of chearefulnes, otherwise to
receive refreshing: This your request charge me with that, vvhereto if my
skill reaches not, yet my good will and prompt mind, both in respect of your
estate, whose grief I pity and desire to mitigate, and the complaints of
diverse others also in like case oppressed, dravve me, that both they and you
knovving the grounds of these passions: what part nature has in the
tragedy, and what conscience of sin drives unto: what difference betwixt
them, how one nourishes another, how each rises, and the several means,
both of preventing and cure of each, the desperate discouragementes, which rise
unto body and mind thus afflicted may be at the least mitigated, and some
light given to the soul, stumbling in the dark midnight of ignorance, and
refreshing to the comforteles heart, distracted with a thousand doubts and
pensive thoughts of despair: vvherin according to your request, I have
copiously entreated of these points, that both you might be the more comforted
and satisfied by plenty of discourse, and being a matter fitting your humor
and pertinent to your present estate, you might have vvherevvith to pass the
tedious time with more contentme^t. Therefore as your grief will give leave
and respitt thereto, you may here know and learn that, which you desire to
know in this case, whereof if by Gods blessing you may make use to your
comfort, I shall joy in my pains and you against other times of trial, by
this experience, may have cause of more hope of release, and comfort in
heaviness, then through the terror of this strange affliction you presently
feel.

THE CONTENTS OF the book according to the Chapters.
HOw diversely the word melancholy is taken. Cap. 1. page 1. The causes of
natural melancholy, and of the excess thereof. Cap. 2. page 4. Whether good
nourishmente breed melancholy by fault of the body turning it into
melancholy, and whether such humor is found in nourishmentes, or rather is
made of them. Cap. 3. page 7. The answer to objections made against the
breeding of melancholicke humor out of nourishment. Cap. 4. page 10. A more
particular and farther answer to the former objections. Cap. 5. page 22. The
causes of the increase and excess of the melancholicke humor. Cap. 6. page
25. Of the melancholicke excrement Cap. 7. page 31. What burnt choler is, and
the causes thereof. Cap. 8. page 32. How melancholy works fearful passions
in the mind. Cap. 9. page 33. How the body affects the soul Cap. 10. page
39. Objections against the manner how the body affects the soul, with
answer thereunto. Cap. 11. page 49. A farther answer to the former objections,
and of the simple faculty of the soul, and only organicall of spirit and
body. Cap. 12. page 55. How the soul by one simple faculty perfourmeth so
many and diverse actions. Cap. 13. page 67. The particular answers to the
objections made in the 11. Chap. Cap. 14. page 72. Whether perturbations rise
of humor, or not with a division of the perturbations. Cap. 15. page 80.
Whether perturbations which are not moved by outward occasions rise of humor,
or not: and how. Cap 16. page 90. How mela^choly procures fear, sadness,
despair, and such other passions. Cap. 17. page 101 Of the unnatural
mela^choly rising by adustion: how it affects us with diverse passions. Cap.
18. page 110. How sickness, and years seem to alter the mind, and the cause,
and how the soul has practice of senses separated from the body. Cap. 19.
page 116. The accidents which befall melancholy persons. Cap. 20. page 123.
How mela^choly alters the qualities of the body. Cap. 21. page 125. How
melancholy alters those actions which rise out of the brain. Cap. 22. page
129. How affections be altered. Cap. 23. page 132. The causes of tears, and
their saltnes. Cap. 24. page 135. Why tears endure not all the time of the
cause: and why in weeping commonly the finger is put in the eye. Cap. 25. page
148. Of the parts of weeping: why the countenance is cast down, the forehead
lowreth: the nose droppeth, the lip trembles, etc. Cap. 26. page 123 The
causes of sobbing, and sighing: and how weeping eases the heart. Cap. 27.
page 157. How melancholye causes both weeping, and laughing with the reasons
how. Cap. 28. page 161. The causes of blushing, and bashfulnes, and why
melancholy persons are given thereunto. Cap. 29. page 166. Of the natural
actions altered by melancholy. Cap. 30. page 173. How melancholy alters the
natural works of the body: juice, and excrement. Cap. 31. page 178. Of the
affliction of conscience for sin. Cap. 32. page 184. Whether the afflicted
conscience be of melancholy. Cap. 33. page 187. The particular difference
betwixt melancholy, and the afflicted conscience in the same person. Cap. 34.
page 193. The affliction of mind, to what persons it befalls, and by what
means. Cap. 35. page 198. A consolation to the afflicted conscience. Cap. 36.
page 207. The cure of melancholy, and how melancholicke persons are to order
them selves in actions of mind, sense, and motion. Cap. 37. page 242. How
melancholicke persons are to order the^ selves in their affections. Cap. 38.
page 249. How melancholicke persons are to order them selves in the rest of
their diet, and what choice they are to make of air, meat, and drink, house,
and apparel. Cap. 39. pa. 257. The cure by medicine meet for melancholicke
persons. Cap. 40. page 265. The manner of strengthening melancholicke persons
after purging: with correction of some of their accidents. Cap. 41. page 277.
A TREATISE OF MELANCHOLY.
CHAP. 1. How diversely the word Melancholy is taken.
BEFORE I enter to define the nature of melancholy, and what it is, for the
clear understanding of that wherein my purpose is to instruct you, it shall be
necessary to lay forth diverse manners of taking the name of melancholy, and
whereto the name being one, is applied diversely. It signifies in all, either
a certain fearful disposition of the mind altered from reason, or else an
humor of the body, commonly taken to be the only cause of reason by fear in
such sort depraved. This humor is of two sorts: natural, or unnatural:
natural is either the grosser part of the blood ordained for nourishment,
which either by abundance or immoderate hotenesse, passing measure, surchargeth
the body, and yields up to the brain certain vapors, whereby the
understanding is obscured; or else is an excrement ordained to be avoided out
of the body, through so many alterations of natural heat, and variety of
concoction, having not a drop of nourishing juice remaining, whereby the body,
either in power or substance may be relieved. This excrement, if it keeps the
bounds of his own nature, breeds less perturbance either to body or mind:
if it corrupt and degenerate farther from it self and the quality of the
body; then are all passions more vehement, and so outragiously oppress and
trouble the quiet seat of the mind, that all organicall actions thereof are
mixed with melancholy madness; and reason turned to a vain fear, or plain
desperation, the brain being altered in his complexion, and as it were
transported into an instrument of an other make then it was first ordained:
these two according to the diversity of settling, do engender diversity of
passions, and according thereunto do diversely affect the understanding, and do
alter the affection, especially if by corruption of nature or evil custom of
manners the party be over passionate. The unnatural is an humor rising of
melancholy before mentioned, or else from blood or choler, wholly changed
into an other nature by an unkindly he ate, which turns these humors, which
before were raunged under natures government, and kept in order, into a
quality wholly repugnant, whose substance and vapor gives such annoyance to
all the parts, that as it passes or is seated makes strange alterations in
our actions, whether they be animal or voluntary, or natural not depending
upon our will, and these are all which the name of melancholy does signify:
now the definition and what it is. As the things be diverse, so it also
follows the suite, and is likewise diverse either of the humor or of the
passion, and the humor being either a nutritive juice or an excrement
unprofitable thereunto, I define the humor no otherwise then that part of that
blood which naturally of the rest is most gross; and the excrement the
superfluity of the same; which if it putrifieth, bestows still the name of a
far diverse thing both in temper and nature, called black choler. The
melancholy passion is a doting of reason through vain fear procured by fault
of the melancholy humor. Thus briefly and clearly do you understand what the
nature of melancholy is, and whereto the name is usually applied: of which
when I shall have at the full to your contentment entreated, then will I
satisfy the other part of your demand, and lay open the consent and
difference betwixt the conscience oppressed with sense of sin and this
natural kind before mentioned, and minister unto you such heavenly comfort
and counsel as my slender skill will afford, and such physic help as your
present need requires.

CHAP. II. The causes of natural melancholy and of the excess thereof.
AS all natural humors rise of nourishment, so melancholy being a part of
blood, from thence it springs also. Whatsoever we receive into the body for
sustentation of this frail life, consists of diversity of parts, being it
self compounded, although to the outward view it seems to appear uniform:
as bread, flesh, fish, milk, wine, bear etc. which show of uniformity being
taken away by the natural furnace, which preserves the lively heat of every
living thing, that outward resemblance vanishes, and the diversity
manifests it self: as we see gold or silver, before it be proved with fire
appears no other then all alike: but afterward is discovered by the burning
crucible to be much otherwise; so fares it with nourishments, whose diverse
parts are laid open by so manifold concoctions, and cleansings, and
straininges, as are continually without intermission practiced of nature in
every man's body: no gold finer, more busy at the mine, or artificial
Chemist half so industrious in his laboratorie, as this natural Chemist is in
such preparations of all nourishment: be it meat, or drink, of what sort
soever. By this means the blood which seems in all parts like it self, no
egg liker one to another, is preserved distinct in all parts. The purest part
which we call in comparison and in respect of the rest blood, is temperate in
quality, and moderate in substance, exceeding all the other parts in
quantity, if the body be of equal temper, made for nourishment of the most
temperate parts, and ingendring of spirits. The second is fleume, next to blood
in quantity, of a waterie nature, cold and moist, apt to be converted into the
substance of purebloud if nature fail not in her workinge ordained for
nourishment of moyster parts. The third is melancholy, of substance gross
and earthie, cold and dry in regard of the other, in quantity inferior to
fleume, fit nourishment for such parts as are of like temper. The fourth,
choler, fiery, hot, and driest of quality, thin in substance; least in
quantity, and ordained for such parts as require subtiller nourishment, and
are tempered with greater portion of the fiery element. These differences
nature has so distinguished, that although in vein and place, they remain
linked together, yet in faculty, and virtue they are diverse the one from the
other: which as they fit the variety of parts, blood the temperate, and the
rest such parts as have like declining from temperate: so by the marvelous
working of nature, these varieties of humors are entertained by nourishmentes
inclining to like disposition: although no nourishment can be utterly void of
all these parts, no not those that are counted most to incline to any one
humor, as beef, and veneson to melancholy: honey, and butter, to choler: and
fish to fleume. Hereof rises then this humor melancholy, even from
nourishments, as all the humors do; and although not of such excellent use;
yet as necessary for the maintenance of life and substance of the body as
any other; neither do these humors fall into man's nature only: but what
soever living creature has blood can not be destitute of them as parts
thereof, more or less according to their diverse complexion. Thus then as man
consists of parts requiring this diversity of food, necessary it was, and
so ordained by God, such humors might answer in like variety: and as humors
are diverse; so likewise the matter whereof they should be wrought could not be
of one sort, and therefore all kind of nature ordained for nourishment,
afford this choice, some in greater scarsitie, this or that, to the end no
state of body should complain. Here you may move a question not impertinent to
the matter in hand; whether some bodies do not turn good nourishment, and of
the purest sort into greater quantity of melancholy, then other some, and
whether that of nourishment which of it self would yeeldstore of the best
juice, by melancholicke or rather cold and dry disposition of the body, can
so be altered as to fail of that store, wherewith by nature it is replenished,
and in steed thereof yield this gross, thick, cold, and earthie humor,
whereof I now discourse. Again whether these humors are in such natures, as
yield nourishment, and so by separation only after any Anaxagorian manner
appear, or rather are made as a stool out of timber, bread of corn, wine of
grape, etc.

CHAP. III. Whether good nourishment breeds not store of melancholy by
fault of the body: whether it turns not into melancholy: and whether these
humors are found in nourishments, or rather are made out of them.
THESE questions are not void of probability on both sides, which to the end
the truth may lie the more apparent, I will not stick to declare unto you. It
should seem (as the objection imports) that which before has been
attributed to the kind of nourishment should rather rise of the body
nourished, considering how it alters, which it embraces for nourishment, as
consider the earth it self, the mother and very nurse of all corruptible
things, how out of the same soil, not half a foot betwixt the wholesome
fruit and sovereign medicine, both spring up together with deadly poison: yea
how in the self same creature what strange diversity of nature arises of the
self same nourishment: as in the pastinacamarina, whose substance and flesh is
wholesome to eat, and yet the tail carries a most deadly weapon, wherewith
whatsoever is wounded, perishes without recovery, not by any foraine
tincture, but by the nourishment altered in that part into such a pernicious
disposition. The same is also found in the flies Cantharides, whose body
exulcerateth all parts, but especially the bladder, and is not inferior to
the chief poisons, contrarily the wings help wherein the body hurted; which
may be no small reasons of of doubt; whether the humors be found in
nourishments, or rather are made by a certain disposition of the body: as who
would imagine, blood could ever be made of iron; which notwithstanding, the
Ostridges alter in such sort, as by no heat of fire, it can be sooner molten
then it is digested in the stomach of that fethered foul? now nature
digesteth nothing but to make use of nourishment thereof: else whatsoever
enters into the body, passes as it comes, and has no welcomming; but is
refused as impertinent; nature bestowing no handling thereof: more then a
skillful painter to counterfeit the fashion of some excellent beauty, would
dip his pensill in the mire, in steed of perfect color. To these probabilities
may be added, how some natures change into a far diverse quality that which
they have received, then it stood by nature, as the family of Marsie in Italy,
and Psillie in Lybia: which was so te^pered, that they did without hurt suck
the poison of vipers, and without peril did usually hunt them: and so by
necessary consequence to be gathered, that they did receive nourishment by
them. What soever enters into the stomach, either is altered into familiarity
of nature: or else having an actual power not hindered, alters with
repugnancie the nature which has received it. If it alters it wholly, then
destroys it; if in part; then carries it on the one part nourishing and
alimentarie virtue, and on the other, a medicinable power; so it should seem
these Psillie, even by virtue of nature made nourishment of that, which to
other is deadly poison. Whereupon it may be gathered, that nourishments in some
bodies have not such power, as I have said before; seeing they be made in
certain of poison. The same may be declared in duckes and hens, which feed
upon toads, notwithstanding their flesh we feed of with health, and strength,
to our bodies; Quails likewise feed of neesing powder seeds, and feldfares of
hemlocke, the one much approaching nigh unto, and the other famous by the
Athenian executions, for most infamous poison* all which notwithstanding, their
flesh is not refused at the tables of the most delicate and daintiest: hereby
in appearance it seems that it skilleth not much, what meat is received in
respect of sustaining this or that complexion; seeing that poisons may be made
by virtue of concoction familiar nourishment: yea which is more auailable to
uphold this matter, and strange to consider of; it has been known and is
recorded in credible history, that some have been brought up from their youth
and always have been sustained and fed with poison; which being so, the
nourishments of the body not only receive preparation by natural concoction,
by which they become that in deed and effect, which before they were in power
and possibility: but seem to be made out of whatsoever is received; where it
finds a nature of sufficient strength to frame it: and not (as it was wont to
be said) Mercury is not made of every tree, so nature makes every thing of
any thing: not by Anaxagoras art, for then should bread contain really,
corporally, and substantially flesh, blood and bone, but by a power and virtue
whereof the matter has no part, more then the gold for the framing of a jewel
partaketh of the gold smithes cunning.

CHAP. IIII. The answer to the former objections.
THESE shows and semblances of truths may seem to overthrow that which has
been set down as the ground and matter of humors, and lay it rather in the
nature of the thing nourished, to transform and assimulate whatsoever it has
received, though it be of never so strange a quality: but as I have set down
these objections, to the end that truth being compared with untruth may the
better appear by reason of comparison, so mark for your fuller satisfying in
this point, how yet nothing is hereby lost, but sufficiently it maintains it
self: and by strength of reason, the only pillar of humane truths it is
vpholden. It was declared before how nourishments as of all other humors, so
of melancholy, they afford the matter, to the which nature applying her
proper temper as an instrument, and practizing that skill which she has
learned of God, works out both humors and substance for preservation and
nourishment of our bodies; now that the earth within small distance affoordeth
nourishment both to henbane and lettis, to hemlocke and the mallow, to poison
and wholesome herbs; that the same flower nourishes the spider, and yeldeth
honey to the be, that the pastinacamarina carries the instrument of death in
her tail, and wholesome food in her substance, and all what has been before
objected from Cantharides; the Ostridges, Psilli and Marsi, neesing powder,
hemlocke and toades, whereof wholesome birds do adventure for nourishment, and
from that virgin fed and sustained with poison sent unto Alexander to infect
him with her company: all I say that may out of these particulars encounter
the former truths, being considered and wayed, add this thereunto (taking
away nothing) that to the disposition of the matter, it is also necessary, an
outward skill and science in the worker concur, whereby that matter may
receive convenient form agreeable to the workers intention. For as it is
impossible to make a rope of sand, so likewise hemp makes it not without the
art of the crafts man, who joining his work with convenient stuff finds
the end of his labor: and as some workmen exceed other in skill and
diligence and of the same matter, the work either excels or wants
according thereunto; in like manner the nourishment being all one, as it
falls to a nature of good or bad temper, weak or strong, brings forth
nourishment, and excrement accordingly. Touching the earth it contains in it
invisible seeds of all things in a manner, to which it storeth up and imports
also food meet and convenient: these seeds lie not distinct in place but in
nature, no more then the parts of blood which before I mentioned, so that
although it were possible for hemlocke and the vine to grow in one body, and
occupy one place, yet could not the proper nourishment to either be avoided:
such harmony and agreement is there betwixt them in nature, and with such
earnest desire does the one affect the other. This then is the cause why life
and death dwell so nigh together, and yet (as they are of the vehementest sort
of adversaries) without entercommunication. Even so the body contains parts
linked notwithstanding in one community, of diverse natures, which draw out
of the mass of nourishment that which is meet each one for it self: which
though it in appearance, and show, seems uniform, yet contains it diversity,
as the sundry parts require: which diversity being distinct in nature, and
confused as it appears in one by the cloak and garment of an universal
form; by natures Mechanical operation (the very pattern of all arts, both
liberal and servile) is discovered and brought into an actual substance
consisting of his single and proper nature, which before had only a potentiall
subsistence as members and parts have in the whole. Which producing I
understand not a discovery only, as by withdrawing a veil, to show that which
lay behind it, but a generation and coupling of matter with the form; which
form it brings not with it, but receaueth it as it were an impression from
the part. So then, as every thing is not made of any thing in art; neither is
food ministered for all things in every thing in nature: but requires apt
preparation of matter, by natural virtue to be appropriate to every part.
Now if it be replied: this answer, as it may suffice against that which is
objected out of the earth, yet leaves it doubtin the pastinaca; Cantharides
and Psilli: by reason the matter of these things through natures working
grows more particular, and is not stored with such variety (as I may so call
them) of potentiall natures; whereby it might seem the very individual
substance indifferently to subject it self either for nourishment or poison:
let the consideration of the earth carry us yet farther to the dissoluing of
this knot also. True it is, that the particular nourishment contains not so
many suits, as the earth the nourisher of all things does: yet it answers in
proportion to the part which it has to sustain. So that the mass of blood
being the universal soil, wa^teth not for the relief and entertainment of all the members of the body, choice of substance according to their variety.
Hereof is the bone nourished, as hard as metal: and the brain as tender as a
posset curd: the kidneyes gross and thick: and the lights loose and subtle:
the eye as clear as cristall: and the spleen as black and dark as ink. Now
let us apply this more particularly to Pastinaca, Cantharis, and the rest of
that sort, The Pastinaca, substance, and fish, is nourished with that which in
it self is wholesome, the fish being of the same substance or disposition; but
so, that, that nourishment has in it an execremental substance, which being
considered alone though it be not yet poison, has in it a power, meeting with
a former, to become of like hurtful quality: which we see in execrements
being permitted to putrify and to degenerate of them selves, how by
corruption they become most dangerous; much more finding an active and lively
nature furnished with power as it were to animate and waken that which before
lay dead in such matter: so Pastinaca has a weapon given by nature soked with
most deadly venom separated yet from the fish, and sticking on the one side of
the midst of the tail, which is maintained with such a kind of excrement,
as being rejected in all the parts, finds there impression and entertainment:
not either that the fish feed of that poison (for nothing feeds of
excrement, appropriate to one part, or that wherewith that part, while it is
excrement is nourished) as venomous, for then should such as feed of that fish
be in peril, but being unmeet to nourish or to have place in the fish, is of
temper, (by the altering of that part) apt to be converted into so venomous a
nature, which is planted in the fishes tail, not much unlike to the growing of
Misleto in a crab tree, whose natures do apparently differ, seeing the same
Misleto grows also in the oak and on the hauthorne: neither can any with
reason affirm, the Misleto is nourished with that which belongs to the crab:
for then would it not prosper in the oak destitute of his proper juice, but
both the oak, the crab tree and the hauthorne, certain of them, and in
certain places, having a superfluity meet for that use, the seed of that
misle being there and embracing that humor, rises up into such a diverse
plant as we see; which yet according to the diversity of place, varieth in
virtue, for that only of the oak we use and account available against the
falling sickness and esteem the other of small value. Now if it be
demanded, why then grows not the misle on the earth, which has more plenty
of such juice, and greater choice? it may be thus answered: although the earth
affoordeth entertainment for all things, yet it does it diversely, to some
immediately, to other some by means, as the earth ministers juice to the
grass and herb of the common field, it nourishes mutton, and we feed
thereof; who if we should attempt to be relieved by the herb, it would yield
us but thin fare. This juice of the earth is altered into an other nature in
the herb, that herb into flesh, and flesh of that kind changed into the
substance of our bodies, which first as it sprung up from the earth, so by it
is it relieved. So the misle draws from the earth, by means of the tree
wherewith it prospers, endued now with other form, and made more familiar
unto it, by the preparation of the tree. And this I take to be the cause why
certain things will not grow on the earth, but in other natures: and why
graffes yield more pleasant fruit then carnels, by reason the stock gives the
crude and raw nourishment of the earth a farther ripening, and even as it were
chewing it unto the sion graffed: so to conclude this answer; the Pastinacas
venom is ministered by an excrement, which carries an aptnes to be converted
into poison: and such poison as that part is able: thereof to engender, neither
being such before in the Pastinaces nourishment, nor in the substance of the
fish, nor as excrement; but after it is converted thereinto by that barbed
weapon; which the fish reue^geth within her tail. Whereby it is evident, that
not only of poison, but of any humor beside, the aptnes of the matter (whereof
some be grosser, and some pass more alterations) it is necessary also there
should concur in the place nourished, an altering virtue; and as such
assimilation is necessary, in like manner an apt matter may not be to secke,
sit for such generation. Wherefore Melancholy is not made of every part of
good nourishment, but of such part, as has a token of fellowship with the
same Melancholy: and more or less as the body is more or less apt,
together with aptnes of the matter to make that conversion. Touching the
Ostridge which may seem to turn iron into blood and so into flesh: we are
rather thus to esteem, that although the Ostridges nature does intend
nourishment by the iron; yet does it no more nourish, then stones does
chickins, and hens which are dissolved in their mawes. How the^ (say you) and
why does it dissolve iron? by a contrary virtue which respects all things
alike, that are received: whereby the stomach becomes the most Catholic
part in all the body, carrying a more indifferent affection to whatsoever is
received then any part beside, which in the first concoctio^ regards not so
much it self as other parts, for whose sake it is ordained, as it were, the
Cook not respecting this or that sort of nourishment or food, but applying
it self alike generally to all that has not a resistance in nature and a
counterpower of poison, which always alters and is not altered. Else could
it not so easily embrace both hot and cold, sower and sweet, fat and lean,
moist and dry, of all bougetts (as a certain Poet says) in that respect the
straungest; by this virtue the Ostridges having a very thick and fleshie mawe,
whereby it is furnished with store of a natural heat dissolueth by a kind of
putrefaction, the iron; which if it yield any nourishment, the stomach finds
benefit thereof in the blood, wherewith it is nourished, if none, it passes
all into excrement and so is voyded as unprofitable, except it may be thought
more likely in reason, that the Ostridges enjoys some part of nourishment,
thereby passing it into blood, or at the least that the stomach receives a
kind of comfort and contentment, which commonly it is taken to do by the
nourishment it contains as the Cooks appetite may be satisfied for a time by
smelling of the roast, which if it fair so with the stomach there is then
reason sufficient of such digestion which the foul works not by the excess
of heat, but by a certain temper at for the work, for no heat of fire in
long time is able to do that which the Ostridge mawe does speedily by a
certain corruption of that which it digesteth. Carrying as it were a kind of
Aqua fortis in the mawe, rather then any heat of Etna, if we take it that the
foul has some part in the body, whose turn the common officer, the stomach
serves, agreeing to the nature of some substance contained in the iron, and
that conveyed into the blood, and from thence drawn to that part, whereof it is
affected: or it has an Alementarie virtue common to diverse parts. Be it so,
yet therefore no consequence of reason can infer, that nature respects not
any aptnes of matter: for in a manner al things of the earth has some thing
Alimentarie and pasturable for all living creatures, which may evidently
appear by co^paring of nature. The earth which we plow and till and labor
with hard and weary hand is altogether mynerall, which is the generallest
nourishment of all: now if one nature among so many millions be found in iron
to suck forth that virtue, no marvel seeing all creatures which require
relief of food, by certain degrees and former apparations, partake of the
same: then seeing the Mineralls feed the Vegetalls, and the Vegetalls the
Animalls; let the experience of the Ostridge satisfy us in this which reason
misliketh not, that even a nutritive juice for some sort of Animal may be
found in iron, and yet so, that (notwithstanding) not all things are of like
aptnes for such use, neither in general as blood, nor in particular, as the
more special food belonging to each part derived from the blood. And thus my
friend M. to pass the tedious time with you, you have my opinion to this
objection. As for the strange nature of that kind of people or famelie called
Marsi and Psilli, we may thus reasonably conjecture, that either they had a
nature of stronger temper, then the ordinary sort, by which it was able to
master that poison and all other; or else by the custom of usual feeding on
the flesh of aspes and vipers, which they did use, they grew into such
familiarity with the poison, as the serpents themselves, which nature had with
such poison so armed, and this rather then that infamous refuge of propriety of
substance, which is as much to say, as we know not. This custom was also the
only cause why the young maid nourished with poison faired with it as with other
victual: for of purpose she was nourished from her infancy therewith, that she
might by freque^ting the Kings company destroy him with infection, which
poison being but an accidentary thing, by custom is vanquished of a natural
and essential virtue. That poison is but accidental and not essential, it
appears by that in diverse kinds, it is not in all of the same sort, nor
alike in all parts of such natures, as we count venomous, as the wings of
Cantharides and the bodies so contend in nature, that the one helps where the
other harmeth: the weapon of Pastinaca and the fish, the Scorpion and his
stinge, the vipers bitte and vipers flesh, the base and foundation of Triacle,
the shrewmouse and her self dissected and applied to the wound: which all
argue the poison not to be equally mixed, and therefore not essential: again
in some places Scorpions are not hurtefull, in some spiders, in other some
aspides, the which if their nature did consist of poison, then could they not
be otherwise, neither receive alteration by soil, neither is this in animalls
only, but also in vegetalls, as in Persea, in Hemlockes, in Napellus in the
Vgh tree which in other some places carry with them certain and assured
peril, and in other some are utterly harmeles. This custom being begun in
infancy, made a greater familiarity betwixt the damsells nature, and the
poison, which as in civil manners it is more flexible in youth the^ in
process of years, so the disposition of nature fares in like sort, which
most heartily embraces that wherewith it is first acquainted, but you will say;
how could it have first access and be entertained of nature, to whom it is so
repugnant. Thus we are to judge in the case, that they which first practiced
this strange kind of nourishing, by little and little assayed nature, and now
and then gave heart thereunto by counterpoyson preservatives, and so at the
last, being encouraged, and farther strengthened, it was able to overcome that
part of the poison; which of it self was deadly and turn the other into
familiar nourishment, which by reason of acquaintance through custom, her
nature brake which if it had been all poison, then as it had bin wholly and
unfit matter of nourishment, so could she not without danger have borne it
one hour: whereby it is manifest, that with natures art an apt matter of
producing of nourishment must needs meet for her maintenance. That which
Cantharides offers of doubt, may be sufficiently resolved by that which has
bin said of Pastinaca. The quails feeding of He^lock, and the other of neesing
powder, move more difficult questions, seeing they make the poison wholesome
nourishment to themselves and yield their bodies, dainty dishes to our tables,
notwithstanding their poisoned food: Whereby it should seem, that poison it
self, where a nature fitteth, therewith may be matter of wholesome nourishment,
for the satisfying of which objection, we are to consider every part of that
we take for nourishment, is not alimentall but part excrement, and that the
greatest part, as it appears by so many alterations, and purginges, which
the food suffers, before it be received of the parts of the body for
proper nourishment* so therefore; these birds are not sustained with that which
is poysonfull in their food, but alter it first, and then pass it into
superfluous excrement; their substance being utterly void of the same, and so
becomes unto us wholesome: very well: but how is their nature able to vanquish
that which is poison: seeing it is not received of us without present danger?
Diverse reasons thereof may be alleged, first, it is not poison unto them, as
we see some kinds of Aconites to kill dogs, some Leopardes, and some wolves,
and not offensive to our creatures: then, that it may be by excessive heat of
the mawes of such birds, then cold poison of Hemlock receives sufficient
alteration to keep of the perrill of poison. Whereto may also be added, the
reason of Galen, that because the veins and passages of those birds are
straighte, the poison before it assaileth the heart in the way receives
sufficient alteration; especially Hemlock being so cold poison, and therefore
slow of passage in respect of it self, and shutting up, and straightening of
poores, by which it passes: so to conclude this problem, we see the sentence
stands yet sure, that nourishments are the matter of all humors, and by
consequence of Mela^cholie, and although natures wonderful art appears in
making (as it may seem in appearance) one contrary to another, yet does it not
so in deed, but always desires convenient matter to practice her natural
act upon: and thus much to the objections, now to the questions themselves.

CHAP. V. Touching the questions propounded in the end of the second Chapter.
THvs much has been said to the obiectio^s, now let us declare at large to
your fuller satisfying, what I judge most agreeable to the truth in the
questions: and first, whether some bodies do not turn good nourishment, and of
the purest sort into greater quantity of melancholy, then other some? which
question if we consider parted, it may more clearly be decided, that is, first
whether the same nourishment be not turned into more or less plenty of
melancholy in other bodies? then, whether by any quality of temper, good and
pure nourishment may yield an humor melancholicke? To these questions first I
answer affirmatively, yet not impairing of the former truth set down. For all
kind of nourishment as it in part alters the bodies, so is it again of them
more altered then it alters, whereby melancholicke persons of the self same
nourishment frame unto them selves that which to them selves is agreeable: else
could there be no nourishment without this altering virtue. Why then (say you)
it rises not of the nourishment, which was not melancholicke, but of the
nature nourished. Not so, for no nourishment is so pure, that altogether it is
void of melancholicke matter, for then could it not be nourishment: but
notwithstanding it has greater plenty of good nourishment then of gross and
melancholicke, the similitude of nature refuses the one, and embraces the
other: whereupon rises this difference in nourishment, the vital being alone.
The second part of the former question, receaueth the same answer with the
first, because no nourishment is so pure but it partaketh little or much, with
some part of melancholy. For I do not take it, that the part makes the
nourishment melancholicke, which carries no disposition thereunto: but lusts
after that in the mass of victualles, wherewith it has greater familiarity,
which to a melancholicke body is of an impurer disposition, refusing that
would serve more fitly for a better tempered complexion; even as we see often by
experience that the good complexion may be replenished with melancholicke
blood: which appears by opening a vain, and yet the parties body nourished,
(as the beauty of color does declare) with that which is pure, which
melancholicke blood rose of evil choice of diet, rather then through fault of
complexion: now that part of nourishment, that is pure cannot be altered in
substance into another, whereto it carries no proportion: by mixture it may be
defiled, and become impure, but neither can it be altered into that, wherewith
it has no community, more then gross, melancholicke, and earthy nourishment
can by any art of nature become aerie, moderate and pure: I mean the self same
part of nourishment: for so might all things in deed rise of every thing,
which would turn the excellent variety of natural things into unity. As for
Anaxagoras imagination of breeding things by separation only, this kind of
diverse matter, which we require in nourishment overthrows it, neither are we
to think generation of nourishment to be no other but as art works upon her
subject, for there, is there no nature produced, distinct in substance and
essence, but by an accidental quality only produced by art. And thus lest I
be over tedious in this point, you have my answer to the questions and
objections before made concerning the nature of nourishing and preparation of
humors, and hitherto that has been said, respects only melancholy, as it is
an humor in the body apt for nourishment of certain parts, more disposed to
that, then to any other portion of the blood besides, now touching the cause
of increase and excess of this humor.

CHAP. VI. Of the causes of the increase and excess of melancholicke humor.
IT was declared that the quantity of melancholy should be least in the just
te^per of blood of all the other parts, saving choler, which natural
proportion and rate when it exceeds, then is the body turned into a
disposition melancholicke by humor: although the complexion for a time hold
entire, which long can not endure, more then the nature of that damsel which
was nourished with poison, kept her ingenerated complexion: but nature
acquainting it self by moments and degrees with such kind of humor, and
having no choice of better, is feign at length to embrace that, which otherwise
more gladly it would reject. The causes of excess of this humor are diverse,
and all (except it be received from the parent) spring from fault of diet: and
although chiefly meats and drinks do yield matter to this humor, yet
besides the complexion inclining to such temper, this matter is increased by
perturbatio^ of mind, by temper of air, and kind of habitation, and that
humor which otherwise would yield a nutritive juice, of the best sort, by this
occasion is turned into these dregs of melancholy. Here first I will declare
unto you, such nourishments as are apt to engender those humors, that in this
present state you now stand in, oppressed therewith, knowing which they are
that minister matter to this gross juice, you for your more speedy recovery
avoid them, and with choice of better, alter that which is amiss into a more
cheerful quality. Now all nourishmentes that offend us, either do it by
their own nature, or by some accidentarie cause befalling unto them, and
likewise whatsoever becomes unto us melancholicke. But that you may more
easily understand from whence all sorts of nourishments are taken, I will set
down unto you in a short view, the kinds of them all, and in every kind note
unto you, that which of the own nature is melancholicke. You know all
nourishmentes are either meat or drink: meats are taken either from
vegetables or animalls: the vegetables either minister unto us nourishment them
selves, or their fruit only, and they are either of trees or herbs: of trees,
the tender buds are eaten, which because we do little use to feed of, I pass
over farther mention. Of herbs we either feed of the root, or such parts as
rise therefrom, and those roots are either round or long, of neither sort do I
remember any greatly to be eschewed as melancholicke, except rape roots and
nauewes. Such parts as rise from the root, are used while they be tender and
young, or else sprung up at the full, of these kinds, cole worts, beete, and
cabages only engender a melancholicke juice. The fruits of vegetables are
either of trees or herbs: of fruits of trees, quinces raw, medlers, services,
dates, olives, chestnuts and acornes are all melancholicke: fruits of herbs,
are either grain or of other sort, and those are either corn or pulse: of
corn, sodden wheat is of a gross and melancholicke nourishment, and bread
especially of the fine flower unleavened: of this sort, are bag puddings, or
pan puddings made with flour, fritters, pancakes, such as we call Banberie
cakes, and those great ones confected with butter, eggs etc. used at weddings,
and howsoever it be prepared, rye and bread made thereof, carries with it
plenty of melancholy. The pulses are wholly to be eschewed, of such as are
disposed to melancholy: except white pease: fruits of herbs of other sort
then grain are purest from melancholicke excess. And thus of vegetables you
understand, which you have in this melancholicke respect to be avoided. The
food which we take from the animals, is either from them selves, and from
certain of their wholesome excrements. Such as yield them selves are either of
the earth, or of the water: those of the earth have great diversity of
nourishment in their several parts, which are either spermaticall, and those
of white color: or sanguine, of color read and bloody. The spermaticall
parts may well be discharged of melancholicke juice, as rather enclining to
fleume. Of the sanguine parts, some are the brawnie parts, which compass the
bones, and are ordained for voluntary motion, called muscles: or else are of
the inward parts, and are of them selves destitute of motion. The muscles
which are subject to most motion, as of the legs, yield more melancholy, then
parts which have more rest. Of the inwardes, the milt is altogether
melancholicke, and so the kidneyes, the liver, the heart, and with them, all
the carnels. Blood is melancholicke, and whatsoever dish thereof is made. Now
all nourishments taken from the earth, are either beasts, or foul. Of beasts;
these are of melancholic persons to be eschewed: porke, except it be young, and
a little corned with salt, beef, ram mutton, goat, bores flesh, and veneson:
neither is mutton of any sort greatly commended of Galen. Of foul, some be
water foul, and some land. The water foul are not of melancholicke persons to
be tasted, except the goosewings. The land foul which are melancholicke are
these: feldfares, thrushes, sparowes, martins, turtles, ringdoues, quails,
plouers, peacockes etc. and these have you to eschew of nourishments of the
earth. Those of the water are fish: and either of the salt water and sea; or of
the fresh water. Such as are of the sea, are either of the monsters of the sea;
or such as more properly are to be called fish. The mo^sters are ceals
purposes, and such like: which all breed unwholesome and melancholicke
nourishment. The fish of the sea are either shell fish, or destitute of such
defense. Of shell fish, some are of harder shells, as oysters, periwincks,
muscles, cockles, and such like: of which rank, the oyster carries with it
least suspicion of melancholy. The softer shell or crustie are cray fish, the
crab, the lobster, the pu^ger, and such of the rivers like to these etc. which
all need not to be excepted unto you in order of your diet. Such sea fish as
carry no armor of shells, are either those, that haunt the rocks: or other parts
of the sea. The rock fishes are most apt of all manner sea fish, for
melancholicke persons: as the gilthead, the whiting, the sea perch etc. Such as
haunt other places, are either keepers of the depth; or aprochers nigh the sand
and shore. Of such as keep the depth, either they have the pooles: or other
places of the depth. Of the poole fishes, I remember not any greatly to be
avoided in choice of your diet. Of such as frequent other places of the depth,
these are melancholicke: the dragon of the sea, in form like an eyle: the
cuckoe, ling, any salt fish, thornbacke, and skate. Of such as approach the
shore, I know none greatly to be avoided. Fresh water fish, and of the river:
the lampray, and the tench, have most plenty of melancholy. And these are
nourishments taken from the parts of the animals: now their works are either
excrements, and superfluities of their humors, or other kinds of works. Of the
first sort, are milk from the beast, and eggs from the foul: which the
spawne of fish in a manner resembles: milk, and what soever is made thereof,
is to be eschewed of melaneholie persons: as cheese, curdes, etc. the spaunes,
as roes of hearinges, are to be eschued of you, as nourishment of melancholy:
else I take none of that sort greatly to be feared in that respect. Of other
works of animals then excrements, we feed only of honey, which has no
melancholy disposition at al. Of drinks, eschew red wine, and what soever
liquor, bear, ale, or cider, is not clear, and well fined: as also if it be
tart, and sower. Hitherto have you heard of nourishmentes, which of their own
nature are to be eschued; now of those that by some accident, and not of them
selves are melancholicke, as if they be too old, and very lean: or be long
kept: or over much salted: whereby they become the drier and harder, you are to
refuse them. Likewise if in the dressing of the nourishment, it be overmuch
baked, or roasted, it is to be eschued. To these belong salt fish, beef, and
bacon, and read hearringes, hard cheese, and old. Of drinks, new wine, bear
or ale: and on the contrary part, over stale, and sower, are to be eschued:
and of sauces, those that be sharp, as veriuyce, aliger, or beareger, vinegar,
are chiefly to be avoided of melancholicke persons. Thus do you understand
how to use your choice in meats, and drinks: and what to shun, as breeders
of this thick, black, and melancholicke humor. Besides these, the air
thick and gross is sit to entertain this humor: so that fumie, marrish,
mislie, and low habitations, are hurtful to persons disposed to melancholy:
likewise if it be dim and dark. Wherefore the houses, and habitations of that
sort, are most unmeet for such persons. These hitherto are all such outward
things melancholic: whatsoever else breeds mela^cholie, is a disorderly
behavior of our own parts, in such actions as belong to the government of
our health. This behavior, is either in actions of motion: or in order and
manner of rest. Our motion, is either of mind, or body. Of actions of the
mind, over vehement studies, and sad passions, do alter good nourishmentes
into a melancholicke quality; by wasting the pure Spirits, and the subtillest
part of the blood: and thereby leaving the rest gross and thick. In like
sort do exercises either wholly intermitted; or turned into an excessive
labor, and wearying of the body: the one causing the blood to be thick
through settling: and the other, by spending the body overmuch, and drying it
excessiuely. Such also as give themselves to inordinate sleep, thereby further
the increase of melancholicke humors. And these are all the causes, whereby
the matter of that humor is supplied; and the blood being of it self good, is
altered into that juice, whereof you complain of abundance. Now if to these,
you add a nature of it self disposed thereto, and a spleen not able, either
for feeblenes, or obstruction, to purge the blood of superfluity of that
juice, then have you all that may be said of the causes of this humor, keeping
within the compass of nourishment.

CHAP. VII. Of melancholicke excrementes.
THE melancholicke excrement is bredde of melancholy juice, drawn of the
milte out of the liver, by a branch of the port vain, wherewith being
nourished, it rejects the rest as mere excrementall; and voydeth part, into
the mouth of the stomach, to provoke appetite, and hunger; and passes the
other part in some persons, by hemerode veins into the siege: It abounds
there when it is hindered of such passage as nature requires; or else by
feeblenes of the part, it is not able, either to suck the melancholy from the
blood, or discharge it self into those passages, which nature has thereto
ordained. This member, of the whole body is the grossest, and evil fauouredst
to be held, black of color, and evil sauorie of taste: and gives a manifest
experience of natures desire, always to covet that, whereto it is most like;
and so faireth the spleen better with those muddy dreggs, then it would with
purer and finer blood; which if it should be offered to other parts, they would
abstain: except great want forced them to take any part thereof. These are
the causes of natural melancholy, both juice, and excrement: It remains
next, to show, what that humor is, which rises of this, or any else,
corrupted, called also by the name of melancholy.

CHAP. VIII. What burnt Choler is, and the causes thereof.
THAT kind of melancholy, which is called Atra bilis, rises by excessive
heat of such parts, where it is engendered or received, whereby the humor is
so adust, as it becomes of such an exulcerating, and fretting quality, that
it wastes those parts, where it lights; this most commonly rises of the
melancholy excrement before said, and diverse times of the other thick part
of blood; as also of Choler, and salt fleame: which take such heat, partly by
distemper of the body, and partly by putrefaction that thereby a humor rises,
breeding most terrible accidents to the mind, and painful to the body:
which the melancholicke and gross blood, does more forcibly procure: in that
that any heat, the grosser the substance is, wherein it is received, the more
fiercely it consumes: whereupon the seacole gives more vehement heat, then
charcole: and the cole then the flame: and a cauterie of hot iron, then a
burning firebrand Otherwise choler being by nature of the hotest temper,
carries with it, more quality of heat then the other: but by reason the
substance of the humor is more subtle and rare, the less it appears: and, as
the heat of a flame in comparison of the other, more speedily passes. Hitherto
have I declared unto you all the kinds of melancholy, and causes of each of
them: hereafter you shall understand, how they work these fearful effects
in the mind, whereby the heart is made heavy, the spirits dulled, the cheerful
countenance altered into mourning, and life it self, which the nature of all
things most desires, made tedious unto persons thus afflicted.

CHAP. IX. How melancholy works fearful passions in the mind.
BEFORE I declare unto you how this humor afflicts the mind: first it shall
be necessary for you to understand, what the familiarity is betwixt mind and
body: how it affects it, and how it is affected of it again. You know,
God first created all things subject to the course of times, and corruption of
the earth, after that he had distinguished the confused mass of things, into
the heavens, and the four elements. This earth he had endued with a fecunditie
of infinite seeds of all things: which he commanded it, as a mother, to bring
forth, and as it is most agreeable to their nature, to entertain with
nourishment, that which it had borne, and brought forth: whereby when he had
all the furniture of this inferior world, of these creatures, some he fixed
there still, and maintains the seeds, till the end of all things, and that
determinate time, which he has ordained, for the emptying of those seeds of
creatures, which he first endued the earth withal. Other some, that is to say,
the animals, he drew wholly from the earth at the beginning, and planted seed
in them only, and food from other creatures: as beasts, and man in respect of
his body: the difference only this: that likely it is, man's body was made of
purer mould, as a most precious tabernacle and temple, wherein the image of God
should afterward be inshrined: and being formed as it were by Gods proper hand,
received a greater dignity of beauty, and proportion, and stature erect:
thereby to be put in mind whither to direct the religious service of his
Creator. This tabernacle thus wrought, as the gross part yielded a mass for
the proportion to be framed of: so had it by the blessing of God, before
inspired, a spiritual thing of greater excellency, then the red earth,
which offered it self to the eye only. This is that which Philosophers call
the spirit: which spirit, so prepares that work to the receiving of the
soul, that with more agreement, the soul, and body, have grown into
acquaintance: and is ordained of God, as it were a true love knot, to couple
heaven and earth together; yea a more divine nature, then the heavens with a
base clod of earth: which otherwise would never have grown into society: and
has such indifferent affection unto both, that it is to both equally affected,
and communicates the body and corporal things with the mind, and spiritual,
and intelligible things, after a sort with the body: saving sometimes by
vehemency of eithers actio^, they seem to be distracted, and the mind to
neglect the body: and the body and bodily actions common with other
creatures, to refuse as it were for a moment that community whereby it comes
to pass, that in vehement contemplations, men see not, that which is before
their eyes: neither hear, though noise be at the air and sound: nor feel,
which at other time (such bent of the mind being remitted) they should
perceive the sense of, with pleasure or pain. This spirit is the chief
instrument, and immediate, whereby the soul bestows the exercises of her
faculty in her body, that passes to and fro in a moment, nothing in
swiftness and nimblenesse being comparable thereunto: which when it is
depraved by any occasion, either rising from the body: or by other means,
then becomes it an instrument unhandsome for performance of such actions, as
require the use thereof: and so the mind seems to be blame worthy: wherein it
is blameless: and fault of certain actions imputed thereunto: wherein the
body and this spirit are rather to be charged, things corporal and earthly:
the one, in substance, and the other in respect of that mixture, wherewith the
Lord tempered the whole mass in the beginning. And that you may have greater
assurance in reason of this corporal inclination of spirit, consider how it is
nourished: and with more evidence, it shall so appear unto you. It is
maintained by nourishments, whether they be of the vegetable, or animal kind:
which creatures, afford not only their corporal substance; but a spiritual
matter also: wherewith every nourishment, more or less is endued: this spirit
of theirs, is (as similitude of nature, more nighly approaches) altered more
speedely, or with larger travel of nature. Of all things of ordinary use, the
most speedy alteration is of wine: which in a moment repaireth our spirits, and
reuiueth us again, being spent with heaviness: or any otherwise whatsoever,
our natural spirits being diminished: which bread, and flesh, does in longer
time: being of slower passage, and their spirits not so subtle, or at least
fettered as it were in a more gross body: and without this spirit, no
creature could give us sustentation. For it is a knot, to join both our souls
and bodies together: so nothing of other nature can have corporal conjunction
with us; except their spirits with ours first grow into acquaintance: which
is more speedily done a great deal, then the increase of the firm substance:
which you may evidently perceive in that we are ready to faint, for want of
food; after a little taken into the stomach of refreshing, before any
concoction can be half reformed, the strength returns, and the spirit
reuiueth, and sufficient contentment seems to be given to nature: which
notwithstanding, not fully so satisfied, prepares farther the aliment of firm
substance, and spirits of purer sort, for the continual supply of those
ingenerate, for sense and motion, life and nourishment. Now although these
spirits rise from earthly creatures; yet are they more excellent, then earth,
or the earthie parts of those natures, from which they are drawn; and rise
from that divine influence of life, and are not of them selves earthie: neither
yet comparable in pureness and excellency, unto that breath of life,
wherewith the Lord made Adam a living soul, which proceeded not from any
creature, that he had before made, as the life of beasts and trees; but
immediately from him self, representing in some part the character of his
image. So then these three we have in our nature to consider distinct, for the
clearer understanding of that I am to entreat of: the body of earth: the
spirit from virtue of that spirit, which did as it were hatch that great egg
of Chaos: and the foul inspired from God, a nature eternal and divine, not
fettered with the body, as certain Philosophers have taken it: but handfasted
therewith, by that golden claspe of the spirit: whereby, one, (till the
predestinate time be expired, and the body become unmeet for so pure a spouse)
ioyeth at, and takes liking of the other. Now as it is not possible to pass
from one extreme to an other, but by a mean; and no mean is there in the
nature of man, but spirit: by this only the body affects the mind: and the
body and spirits affected, partly by disorder, and partly through outward
occasions, minister coffeehouse as it were to the mind: and in the end
break that band of fellowship, wherewith they were both linked together. This
affecting of the mind, I understand not to be any empairing of the nature
thereof; or decay of any faculty therein; or shortning of immortality; or any
such infirmity inflicted upon the soul from the body (for it is far exempt
from all such alteration): but such a disposition, and such coffeehouse, as
a false stringed lute, gives to the musician: or a rough and evil fashioned
pen, to the cunning writer: which only obscureth, the show of either art, and
nothing diminishes of that faculty, which with better instruments, would
fully content the eye with a fair hand; and satisfy the ear with most
pleasant and delectable harmony. Otherwise the soul receaueth no hurt from
the body; it being spiritual, and void of all passion of corporal things;
and the other gross, earthie, and far unable to annoy a nature of such
excellency.

CHAP. X. How the body affects the soul.
IN this sort then are you to conceive me, touching those actions, which the
body seems to offer violence to the soul; in that no alteration of
substance, or nature, can rise there from, nor any blemish of natural
faculty, or decay of such qualities, as are essential unto the soul:
otherwise, might it in the end perish, and destroy that immortal nature; which
can not by any means decaie, but by the same power which created it. But thus
only do (as I may so call them) passions force the soul; eue^ through the
evil disposed instrument of the body, they deprave the most excellent and
most perfect actions, whereto the soul is bent in the whole order of man's
nature, and by corruption of the Spirits, which should be the sacred band of
unity, cause such mislike, as the soul, without that mediation, disdaineth
the bodies longer fellowship, and betaketh it self, to that contemplation,
whereto it is by nature inclyned; and gives over the gross, and mechanical
actions of the body, whereto, by order of creation, it was allotted in the
earthly tabernacle. But you will say unto me, experience seems to declare a
further passion of the soul from the body then I mention: for we see what
issues, bodelie things, and the body it self drive our minds unto: as some
kind of music, to heaviness; other some to chearefulnes; other some to
compassion; other some to rage; other to modesty; and other to wantonness:
likewise of visible things, certain stir us to indignation and disdain;
and other to contentednes, and good liking. In like manner certain natures
taken inward, move us to mirth: as wine; and other to heaviness; some to rage,
fury and frenzy; and other some to dulnes and heaviness of spirit: as
certain poysones in both kinds do manifest these passions unto us; besides
such as rise of our humors bredde in our own bodies; which may be reasons, to
one not well advised, so to mistake these effects of corporal things, as
though the soul received farther impression, not only in affection, but also
in understanding, then I have unto you mentioned: for satisfying of you, in
which doubts, you are diligently to consider, what I shall declare, concerning
the several actions of body, soul and spirit, and how, each one of these
performs their actions: which must be kept distinct, for better understanding
of that I shall hereafter in this discourse lay open unto you. And first,
concerning the actions of the soul: you remember how it was first made by
inspiration from God himself, a creature immortal, proceeding from the
eternal; with whom there is no mortality. The end of this creation was, that
being united to the bodily substance, raised and furnished with corporal
faculties from the earth, common with other living creatures, there might rise
a creature of middle nature betwixt Angels, and beasts, to glorify his name.
This the soul does, by two kinds of actions: the one kind, is such as it
exercises, separated from the body; which are contemplations of God, in such
measure as he is by natural instinct opened unto it, with reverent
recognisaunce of such blessings, as by creation it is endued with. Next unto
God, whatsoever within compass of her conceit is immortal, without
tediousnes, or travel, and with spiritual joy incomparable. These actions she
is busied with in this life, so long as she inhabiteth her earthly tabernacle;
neither in such perfection, nor yet so freely, as she does separated, and the
knot loosed betwixt her and the body, being withdrawe^, by actions exercised
with corporal instrument, of baset sort. These are the other kind which the
soul, by the creators law is subject unto, for the continuance of the
creature, and maintenance of the whole nature, with duties thereto belonging;
animal, vital, natural; and whatsoever mixed, requires jointly ^ll three;
as this corporal praising of God for his goodness, and praying unto him for
necessities, releeuing our brothers want, and defending him from wrong; with
every ones several vocation, wherein his peculiar charge lies; whether it be
in peace, or in war; at home, or abroad, with our countrymen, or with
strangers; in our own famelies, or with our neighbors; whether it be
superiority of commaudement, or duty of obedience: which differ in degree, as
they be nigher, or farther of the actions peculiar to the soul; or communicate
more, or less with them. If you say unto me; how comes it to pass, that the
soul being of so single, and divine a nature, as the creation manifestly
shows, intermedleth with so gross actions, as are common, not only with
brute beasts; as sense, motion and appetite; but even also with natures of
far inferior condition, as plants, and mineralls: whereby it seems, that,
either the soul is not of such excellency, as in truth it is; or else that our
nature consists of three souls, to which several faculties, and actions are
allotted. By deeper consideration of the nature of the soul, this objection may
be easily answered. The soul, as the substance thereof is most pure, and
perfect, and far of removed from corruption; so it is endued with faculties of
like quality, pure, immortal and answerable to so divine a subject; and
carries with it, an instinct science, gotten, neither by precept, nor
practice; but naturally therewith furnished; whereby it is able, with one
universal, and simple faculty, to perform so many varieties of actions, as
the instrument, by which it performs them, carries an apt inclination
thereto: as the brain being an instrument of conceit, it therewith
conceiueth: the eye to see, it sees: the ear to hear, it hears: and so the
instrument of smelling, and taste, wanting nothing of their natural
disposition, the soul smells with, and discerns tastes: which otherwise
disposed, it can not show that ingenerate instinct, by outward senses, the
faculty yet notwithstanding remaining entyre and untouched: I say the faculty,
and not faculties. For if we plant so many faculties in the soul, as there be
outward, and inward actions performed by us, it certainly could not be simple,
but needs must receive variety of composition; to answer so many faculties,
as we see insensible creatures; which as they work diversely, so have they
diverse varieties of substance, of which sort among many other is Aloe,
Rhubarb, and diverse simples, that with one part of their substance, loose, and
open; and with the other stop and stay; the same also is sensible in
colewortes and Cabages; and in the substance of shell fisbes: whose decoction
loses the body, and procures soliblenes; their substance being of a quite
contrary operation: which rises of a diverse te^pered substance in one nature,
compounded of such variety, whereof as the soul together uniform, is void,
so can it not possess any variety of faculty. This if it seem strange unto
you, considering the diverse sorts of actions, and the vnlikelines of
performance of so many, and so diverse; I will as I may in a matter, so
difficult, and above the reach of any similitude of visible creature (except it
self) only by comparison, make the assertion more plain. Compare the skill of
painting, with this simple and uniform faculty of the soul: the faculty is
simple and one, and yet cold Apelles therewith use both the gross, and the
small pensill; he could draw a line evident to the eye a far of, and so
subtle, that scarce might it be discerned nigh at hand; he could apply
himself by his uniform faculty, to all the parts of Venus beauty: otherwise
must it of necessity follow, that so many instruments of painting as he used,
so many kinds of lines as he could draw, and so many parts as he could
counterfeit; the eye, the nose, the mouth, etc, so many sundry faculties of
painting had he; which to a man not destitute of the faculty of reason, must
needs seem most absurd. The same appears in the art of music, which being
attained unto, but one faculty, yet is it the same: in all the kinds of
moodes and variety of tune, and time: although the practice be diverse. Even
so, the soul has a faculty one, single, and essential, notwithstanding so
many and sundry parts are performed, in the organicall bodies, as we daily put
in practice: neither is it hereof to be gathered, that the soul affords no
mo actions, then there be instruments: for both her proper actions, require
none, and the other common with the body, by diverse using and applying of the
same instrument, are manifold and sundry, and the more sundry, the more
general the instrument is, and pliable, to diverse uses: even so, as the
soul, in organicall actions, uses one and the self same instrument to
chaungeable offices; likewise being separated from the body, although the
faculty be one, it also exercises of her self, without instrument, from one
faculty, diverse duties. And thus have you my opinion touching the actions of
the soul, either considered, separate: or co^ioyned with the body: and being
joined thereunto, such as it exercises of it self: or by those organicall
means as the body affords: it remains, next to entreat of the spirit,
and of the body, with their several actions. Of such organes, as the soul
uses for isntrumental actions, some are of substance, and nature most quick,
rare, and subtle: other some gross, slow, and earthy, more, or less. The
subtle instrument, is the spirit: which is the most universal instrument of
the soul, and embraces at full, so far as bodily uses require, all the
universal faculty, wherewith the soul is endued, and directs it, and guides
it, unto more particular instruments, for more special and private uses, as to
the eye, to see with; to the ear to hear; to the nose to smell; to the
bowels, stomach, and liver, to nourish, to the heart, to maintain life: and
to other parts, to the end of propagation: this is all performed by the self
same, one, and single spirit. If you demand whereof this spirit is made? I
take it, to be an effectual, and pregna^t substance, bred in all things, at
what time the spirit of the Lord did, as it were, hatch, and breed out all
living things, out of that Chaos mentioned in the Genesis; which Chaos, as it
was matter of corporal, and palpable substance to all things: so did it also,
minister this lively spirit unto the^, diverse and several, according to the
diversity of those seeds, which God endued it withal: to some more pure: to
other some more gross, according to the excellency of the creature, and
dignity of the uses, whereto it is to be employed: from this power of God,
sprange the spirit of man, as I take it, raised from the earth, together with
the body, whereby it received such furniture, and preparation; as it becomes
a lodging, for so noble a gest, except it may seem more likely, to be infused,
and inspired, into the body, with that breath of life, which was the soul of
man, at what time, god had first made his corpse, of the mould of the earth;
which I for certain reasons here following am moved to make doubt of. First,
although it be an excellent creature, and far excedeth the gross substance
of our body; yet is it baser, then to be attributed to so divine a beginning,
as from God immediately; especially considering it has not only beginning; but
perishes also: to which condition, nothing that proceeds from God in such
special manner, as the soul did, can be subject unto. Again, we see this
spirit maintained, and nourished by the use of earthly creatures; and is either
plentiful, or scanteth; as it has want, or abundance of such corporal
nourishment. Now to draw the original offspring of the spirit of man from
God, were in a manner to draw from him the spirit of all other things,
wherewith that of man is relieved: which can not be accounted to flow from
that breathing of God; both seeing the Scripture pronounces it, as peculiar to
the soul of man: and otherwise, should they be not inferior in that respect,
to the souls of men; which by nature, are set under his feet; and in all
respects are far inferior unto him: that I mention not, too nigh approaching
the majesty of God: which without impair thereof, admits not so nigh, the
access of the nature of inferior creatures; honoring mankind therewith only of
all his visible works. Thus then, as I take it, both the spirit had his first
beginning, and is of such nature as I have declared; and serves for these
uses. I know commonly there are accounted three spirits: animal, vital, and
natural: but these are in deed, rather distinctio^s of diverse offices of one
spirit; then diversity of nature. For as well might they make as many as there
be several parts, and offices in the body; which were both false, and
superfluous. Next ensues the nature of the body, and his several
instruments, with their uses; which my purpose is here so far to touch, as it
concerns the understanding of that ensues of my discourse: leaving the large
handling thereof to that most excellent hymn of Galen. Touching the use of the
parts: the body being of substance gross, and earthy; resembles the matter
whereof it was made: and is distinct into diverse members, and diverse parts,
for several uses required, partly of nature, and partly of the humane society
of life: whereupon, the brain is the chief instrument of sense, and motion,
which it deriueth by the spirit before mentioned, into all the parts of the
body; as also of thoughts, and cogitations, performed by common sense, and
fantasy: and storing up as it were, that which it has conceived in the chest
of memory: all which the brain it self with farther communication exercises
alone. The heart is the seat of life, and of affections, and perturbations, of
love, or hate, like, or dislike; of such things as fall within compass of
sense; either outward, or inward; in effect, or imagination only. The liver
the instrument of nourishment, and grows: and is served of the stomach by
appetite of meats and drinks; and of other parts, with lust of propagation:
and as the heart, by arteries conueigheth life to all parts of the body: so
the liver, by veins distributeth her faculties to every member; thereby the
body enjoying nourishment, and increase, served with natural appetite, whereby
each part satisfies it self with that, which thereto is most agreeable. And
these actions are bodily performed of the soul, by employing that excellent,
and catholic instrument of spirit, to the mechanical works of the gross,
and earthy parts of our bodies. Thus then the whole nature of man, being
compounded of two extremities, the soul, and the body: and of the mean of
spirits: the soul receaueth no other annoyance by the body; then the crafts
man by his instrument: with no impeach, or impair of cunning: but an
hinderance of exercising the excellent parts of his skill: either when the
instrument is altogether unapt, and serves for no use: or in part only fit;
whereby actions, and effects are wrought, much inferior to the faculty of the
worker: and as the instrument is of more particular use, so is the soul the
less impeached: and as more general, so yet more hindered: both from
variety, and perfection of actio^: as the heart, more then the liver: and the
liver, more then the brain: the stomach more then the rest of the entrailles:
and all public parts, more then private: of which sort the spirit being
disordered, either in temper, or lessened in quantity, or entermixed with
strange vapors, and spirits, most of all, works annoyance, and disgraceth
the work, and crosses the souls absolute intention: as shall more
particularly appear in the process of my discourse: which that it may yield
unto you full answer of such doubts, as may arise unto you, and make question
of the truth of this point: I will my self set down such objections, as may
encounter the credit thereof, and answer them, I hope, to your satisfying.

CHAP. XI. Objections against the former sentence, touching the manner how the
soul is affected of the body: with answer thereto.
THE objections which seem to enforce upon the body farther power over the
soul, then to withstand the organicall actions, are such, as are taken from
the disposition of our bodies, both in health, and in sickness. In health, we
see how the mind alters in appearance, not only in action, but also in
faculty: both in that some faculties spring up, which before were not: and
those through occasions of change of the body either more perfect, then
otherwise they have been, or would be. This appears in age, and in diverse
order of diet, and custom of sensual and sensible things. First touching age
and years: we see in childhoode, how childish the mind bears it self, in
faculty incomparable to that which afterward it shows: as the understanding
dull: the wit of blunter conceit: memory slipperie: and judgment scarce
appears. The body growing up, and attaining at length the height of his
increase, all these gifts, more and more grow up therewith: and (even as the
body) get maturitie, and strength, which is the perfection in their kind.
Again the body passing the point of his vigor and virilitie of age, turns
all the wits and sage counsels, into more then childish doring: by which
alterations and chaunges, in appearance the mind both suffers detriment, and
again receaueth greater ability of faculty. Neither is this only brought to
pass through process of years: but also it may seem that certain faculties,
which before were not, at a season of age, put forth, and advance them selves,
which before gave no countenance of show: and, except we shall make nature
keep idle holy day, in them were not at all: as the faculty of propagation,
of all natural sorts, one of the chiefest: which, if we say it slept, as it
were in the mind, or waited a day: it should seem very ridiculous, that
nature should be furnished so many years with a faculty, which it should put
in practice so long after: especially considering how particular faculties
attend only upon single and particular uses, and have no-other employing. If
it were not before, then either should the mind be imperfect at the first,
wanting some part of the furniture: or else should it seem to rise of the
temper of the body: either of which, attribute more unto the body, then of
right thereto belongs: and calls in question the immortality of the soul:
except you will say, it is a faculty, whereof the soul has no part, being
common with brute beasts: which carries with it these absurdities. First, this
faculty must needs have her seat, either in soul or body: if it be not in
soul, then in body: if in body; then should the instrument possess the
faculty, which is as one would attribute the faculty of the harmony to the
harp, and the writing to the pen, and not to the scriuener: esteeming the
skillful harps, and skillful pens, which are dead instruments, and have no
being of motion in them selves. Now middle subject is there none, whereto this
faculty should fall, except we will vainly, and against reason and philosophy
admit mo souls then one in our bodies. Again, to place any faculty otherwise
then of disposition, and aptness, in the body, without the soul, were to
disturb the uniform government, and that oeconomicall order, whereby our nature
is ruled; in placing mo commanders then one. So we see, how age, and course of
times affect the body, not only by alteration of faculty, as it should seem,
but also, by breeding new. Now the order of life, region, and diet, seem to
press the matter further: and as it were, to turn the mind about, with every
blast of corporal change. We may observe the nature of mariners, occupied in
the sea surges, who have their manners not much unlike framed, tempestuous and
stormy: likewise the villager, who busieth him self about his plow, and
cattle only, has his wits of no higher conceit: butchers acquainted with
slaughter, are accounted thereby to be of a more cruel disposition: and
therefore amongst us are discharged from iuries of life and death: these
experiences maintain the quarrel, against the immovable, and unchangeable
faculty of the soul, whereof I have before made mention. How region, and
air make demonstration of the same, the comparison of the gentle, and constant
air of Asia, with the sharp and unstable of Europe, does declare unto us:
whereby the Asians are mild, and gentle, unfit for war, and given to
subjection: the Europians, naturally, rough, hardy, stearne, right martial
impes, and harder to be subdued, and raunged under obedience: and of the same
region, such people as inhabit places barren, open, and dry, and subject to
mutabilitie of weather, are more fierce, bolder, sharp, and obstinate in
opinion, then people of contrary habitation. Neither has diet less part in
this case of affecting the soul, then the rest: for we see, how the cheerful
fruit of the vine makes the heart merry, and gives (with moderation used) an
edge of wit, and quickness to the spirits: and those nourishmentes that are
moist, gross, and not firmly compacted, aggrauateth the understanding, and
makes the conceit blunt, and disableth much the faculties of the mind: which
a thinner, drier, and more subtle food does entertain. To these obiectio^s
may be added, what alteration of mind, diversity of complexion, and excess
of the four humors; choler, fleume, blood, and melancholy do procure, not
only to the affections, as sanguine cheerfulness, melancholicke sadness,
fleume heaviness, and choler anger: but to the wits, and such faculties as
approach nigher to the sovereign parts of our nature, the mind it self: as
choler procures rashness, and unadvisedness, with mobilitie and
unstableness of purpose: melancholy contrarily, pertinacie, with advised
deliberatio^: sanguine simplicity: and fleume flat foolishness: and these
are, so far as my memory serves me, all that is wonted to be objected from
the state of our bodies, being in health, against the perpetual, and
immovable tranquillity of our minds, and immortal, unchangeable, and
incorruptible faculties thereof: which all in the next Chapter, I will satisfy
with full answer: now a few words touching the perturbarions, and
alterations through sickness: and so will I end this Chapter, and in the next
proceed to several aunswers. I my self have observed it diverse times, not
only perturbation of mind to arise by certain diseases, whereby it fancieth,
and reasons disorderly: but some faculties even amended by the same (neither
faculties of base action) as for the eye, to see clearer after an inflammation:
and conuulsions to be helped by agues: and in fevers, the hearing more quick
then before, and the smelling more subtle: and in phrenticke persons, the
strength doubled upon them: but also even apprehension more perfect, and memory
amended, and deliverance of tale more free, and eloquent without all
comparison: which are actions of the greatest organical practices of the mind:
in such sort that I have known children languishing of the spleen, obstructed,
and altered in temper, talk with gravity and wisdom, surpassing those
tender years, and their judgment carrying a marvelous imitation of the
wisdom of the ancient, having after a sort, attained that by disease, which
other have by course of years: whereupon I take it, the proverb arises: that
they be of short life, who are of wit so pregnant: because their bodies do
receive by nature so speedy a ripeness, as thereby age is hastened, through a
certain temper of their bodies, either the whole, or in some animal part:
which ripeness as in other creatures, it easily yields to rottenness, so in
our nature, that speedy maturitie hastes to declination, and sooner decays.
Thus for your full satisfying, I have called to mind such objections, as do
chiefly give check unto that which I have propounded touching the passions
which the body charge the soul with: now shall you understand the solution,
and clearing of these doubts. If you will descend into the consideration of the
effects of poisons in our natures, as of henbane, coriander, hemlock, night
shade, and such like, they will give greater evidence unto that which these
objections import: by which the mind seems greatly to be altered, and quite
put beside the reasonable use of her ingenerate faculties during the force of
the poisons: which being maistred, or at least rebated, by convenient remedies,
it recouereth those gifts, whero fit was in danger to suffer wrack before:
and if it be true which Plato affirms, that common wealths alter by change of
music, what stablenesse shall we account in the mind, wc is in this sort
subject to every blast of change?

CHAP. XII. The answer to the former objections and of the simple faculty of
the soul and only organicall of spirit, and body.
THESE doubts before mentioned, I will answer in such order as they were in
the former chapter objected: beginning with those alterations, which the soul
seems to sustain from the body, while it enjoys health, and good state of
all his parts: of which sort age and years first infer against us. For the
general answer whereof, as also for the rest, we are to hold two points, as
infallible, before mentioned: the one, is the simple faculty of the mind: and
the other, the organicall use only of the body and spirit: which two grounds,
before I enter into the particular disciphiring of the objections, I will first
establish by reason, and the^ apply them to the particular solutio^ of that
which has been objected. First, the simplicity of the nature of the soul,
more simple then the heavens, argues unity of faculty: seeing all simple
things by nature reject mixture and composition, and whatsoever tends to
plurality. For, whatsoever is more, is diverse, diversity, simple things
embrace not, neither does diversity of nature admit so nigh copulation, as to
settle themselves in the self same simple, and uniform subject: which if they
refuse to do, what shall we judge then of will, and appetite repugnant to
reason: and will sometime at variance with animal appetite? how can these so
contrary faculties concur in one single nature? That, simple things receive
neither co^trarietie, nor diversity, the consideration of the whole sort of
dissentanie, and disagreeing things, will make the matter manifest. All of that
kind are either such as we call diverse, or opposite: diverse, whose
disagreement is most gentle, have notwithstanding such strife, that they meet
not in the self same subject at any time: as beauty, and wisdom, riches, and
honesty: which have their diverse rooms in the same general nature, and do
not one farther encounter the other. The other, have one single subject, if
they be of accidentary natures, or qualities: and there one expels the
other: enduring no society: as virtue, vice, liberality, covetousness, and
prodigality: black, blew, yellow, and green: light, darkness, etc. And these
are at perpetual war, and admit no truice day, no not for a minute, and so,
because they will needs possess the same place, expel each other, and are in
Logic termed, Opposites. Now the^ whatsoever the soul simple, individual,
and without mixture or compositiongiueth entertaynement of disagreeing natures,
must of necessity fall into one of these: that is, to the opposite or diverse.
The opposite require, their own times, and will not accord in the same subject
at once, except you will account relatiues of a milder disposition, and more
sociable then their fellows which notwithstanding by the diverse respect, are
as far disioyned as the rest. Now then, if we hold that the mind has
diuerss faculties, then of necessity must there be in the same mind diversity
of subject: which if there be, then is the simplicity thereof turned into
multiplicity of substance, and composition of nature: a disposition contrary
both to the manner of the beginning of the soul void of mixture, and that
immortal perpetuity, wherewith it is induced. Peradventure it may seem
strange, and repugnant to the nature of things diverse, to disseuer them of
subject, seeing softnes and whitenes, white and heat, and such like, being
diverse enter into the same subject: as in snoe, the one and the other in
molton lead, or hot iron: which doubt, because it serves for proof of this
unity of faculty, I will lay open, and make plain unto you. Of all things
subject to corruption, the elements are most simple, which being diversely
mixed, yield the variety, we see of all compou^d things under heaven: these
have each of them, but one quality: fire hot, air moist, earth dry, and water
cold, if they should have twain, then must they needs either enter
communicate, or two quallities concur with the first matter:
entercommunication is there none: for then should they not be the elements of
other things seeing they should be elements one of each other: two qualities make
superfluities in the mixed, which nature eschueth in all her work: then
superfluity would be here in that there should in the compound be found a
drynes of fire, and the like of earth: a coldness of the earth, and the like of
water: and so in the heat of fire, and air: which were more then need: seeing
such quallities are sufficiently imparted to the compound by one. Now if the
elements which after a sort receive composition of a gross matter and form,
do admit no diverse quality, much less does the mind of a more pure
beginning, and simple substance, reject the same. But how then comes it to
pass, that a cole is black and hard, and chalk hard and white, in the same
part throughout, if diversities settle no nigher together? yea very well
notwithstanding. For compounded things, though they make one nature, yet are
they not by reason of composition in all parts alike, neither are the elements
so confused in the mixture but in all parts they may be found distinct by
their qualities simple or compound: which qualities although they be commonly
attributed to the whole, yet properly and cheefely, belong they to the
elements whereof the whole consists: so that in one nature, diversity of
subject is to be considered. Example shall make it plain: The heat of pepper
rises of the fiery element; the drynes and solidity, of substance which it
has of the earthie. In Rhubarb the purging virtue rises of the subtle
substance, and the strengthening faculty of the gross and earthy. Chalk is
white of the aerie moisture which it is endued with: and has his hardness of a
earthie drynes. The rose her rednes of a certain temper of single moistnes,
concocted with heat: and her smell, of an aierie moistnes mixed with an earthy
drynes, attenuated with heat, and virtue of the fiery element? So we see
diverse things, which seem to fall into one universal nature or subject, the
matter being more narrowly vined, betake them to their own subject, proper and
peculiar unto themselves, and only by communicating their substance with the
whole, endue it also with like qualities. But you will say: if the elements
have but one qualitye (which first was affirmed to the mainteynance of single
faculty) then is not the element of fire dry, nor of water moist, nor of air
warm. True: neither are they of their own natures such: but that which is in
fire beside heat, is only an absence of moistnes: in the earth accounted cold,
is an absence only of heat: in the rest likewise, and not an ingenerate
quallity: more then heaven may be said to be moist, because it is not dry or
hot, because it is not cold: which indifferently refuses all such kind of
quallity. Now an absence of one quallity, is not straight way an inferring of
the other: but only in priuants, whereof the one is a mere absence, and of that
contrary only, which naturally should be present: as blindness is not rightly
said of a stone, though it see not at any time. In the eleme^tary qualities, it
is not so: but they are all quallities importing a presence: because they
adjoined to the first matter of things, are the only forms of elements: now
absence forms nothing, and priuants are always contrary to form and nature:
It appears then, that elements which are less simple then the souls of men
are endued but with one faculty, and that diverse things require a diverse
peculiar seat, which being taken up in such natures as will abide mixture,
seem as though they were of the whole mixed, when as but after a sort only
they are so to be accounted. These two points being sufficiently proved
establish evidently the simple and uniform faculties of the soul: For hereby
it is most manifest that by reason of the simple nature thereof, it cannot
bear any mixture, or be support of diverse things: neither that diverse will
so neighbor it together, as to dwell in one individual subject. Then seeing
that they which of all the disagreers, least disagree, will not so nighly be
linked: neither can any diversity of faculty in the mind, in a nature so
simple, and impartible be coupled together, where there is no disagreeme^t of
substance, nor dissent of mixture, but every part like the whole, and each like
other. Again these pluralities being essential, can be but one: seeing essence
is not many, and nature always far unlike the sword of Delphos; which served
for diverse uses, ever employeth one to one, and not to many: otherwise want
should enforce her, which (she abounding with sufficiency) refuses in all her
actions. Moreover being in every part like it self, and each part like other,
no dissimilitude can arise by distinction of faculty. Accidental if they be:
then is the mind in danger of loosing all faculty, which it cannot do seeing
it is subject to no force, but of God himself that made it. Now whatsoever
natural faculty in any thing fades, it is by reason the thing first fades
which enjoys that faculty: else would they always continue: wherefore the
mind being everlasting, and exempt from change and corruption, her faculty is
also essential, and of like perpetuity: I need not yield reason why contrary
faculties, or such as we call disparates in logic, can have no room in a
nature so simple as the soul is, both in respect of the repugnance within
themselves, and unity of the subject: seeing such as are diverse only refuse
that cohabitation and neighborhood. Thus much shall suffice to prove the simple
faculty of the soul: it follows to prove the spirit and body to be wholly
organicall: by organicall I mean a disposition and aptnes only, without any
free work or action, otherwise then at the minds commandment: else should
there be mo beginninges and causes of action then one, in one nature: which
popularity of administration, nature will none of, nor yet with any
holygarcicall or mixed: but commands only by one souerainty: the rest being
vassals at the beck of the sovereign commander. The kinds of instruments are
of two sorts: the one dead in it self, and destitute of all motion: as a saw
before it be moved of the workman, and a ship before it be stirred with wind,
and hoised of sail: the other sort is lively, and carries in it self
aptnes, and disposition of motion: as the hound to hunt with, and the hawk to
foul with, both carried with hope of pray: the hand, to move at our pleasure,
and to use any other kind of instrument or tool. The second sort of these
twain, is also to be distinguished in twain, whereof the one obtains power
in it self, and requires derection only, as the beast, and foul above
mentioned: and the other not only direction, but impulsion also from an inward
virtue, and forcible power: as the motion of the hand, and the variety of the
hand actions do most evidently declare. Of these three kinds of instruments, I
place the spirit and body both to the mind, as the saw or axe in the workmans
hand, or to the lute touched of the Musician (according to the sundry qualities
and conditions of the instruments of the body) in the third sort; but so, as
the spirit, in comparison of the body, fares as the hand to the dead
instruments. Of the first sort they are not, because they partake of life: of
the second they may not be, because of them selves they have no impulsion, as
it appears evidently in animal and voluntary actions, and (although more
obscurely to be seen) in such as be called natural. For the spirit being
either withdrawn from the outward parts by vehement passion of grief, or
over prodigally scattered by joy, or wasted by pain, the outward parts not
only fail in their sense and motion, but even nourishment and growth thereby
are hindered: and contrarily, though the spirit be present, except the part be
also well disposed, not only feeling is impaired, and such actions as require
sense and motion, but also concoction and nourishment. Again, the spirit it
self without impulsion of mind lies idle in the body. This appears in
animal actions more plainly: as the mind employing vehemently the spirit an
other way, we neither see that is set before our eyes, nor hear, nor feel
that which otherwise with delight, or displeasure, would vehemently affect us.
In natural actions and parts, it is more obscure: either because the spirit
can not be altogether so separated by the order of nature, being rooted so in
the part, or because the very presence of the soul in an organicall body,
without further faculty or action, carries the life withal, and is not subject
to arbitrament and will: as the royal estate of a Prince, moves silence,
reverence, and expectation, although there be no charge, or commandment
thereof given, nor such purpose of presence: so life lies rather in the
essence, or substance of the soul, giving it to a fit organed body; rather
then by any such faculty resident therein. except we may think that less
portion of spirit serves for life only, then for life, sense, and motion, and
so the parts, contented with smaller provision thereof, are entertained with
life, though sense and moving require more plenty. But howsoever this be
obscure in natural actions, the mind transporting the spirits another way by
sudden conceit, study or passion. yet most certain it is, if it hold on long,
and release not, the nourishment will also fail, the increase of the body
diminish, and the flower of beauty fade, and finally death take his fatal
hold: which comes to pass, not only by expense of spirit, but by leaving
destitute the parts, whereby declining to decay, they become at length unmeet
for the entertainment of so noble an inhabitant as is the soul, of stock
divine, of immortal perpetuity, and exempt from all corruption. Then seeing
neither body, nor spirit are admitted in the first, or second sort of
instruments, they fall to the third kind, which being lively, or at the least
apt for life, require direction, and also foreine impulsion: foraine, in
respect of them selves, destitute of faculty, otherwise then disposition: but
inward and domestical, in that it proceeds from a natural power, (resident
in these corporal members) which we call the soul: not working as ingens, by
a force void of skill and cunning in it self, and by a motion given by devise
of the Mechenist: but far otherwise endued with science, and possessed of the
mouer: as if Architas had bin him self within his flying doves, and Vulcanne
within his walking stools, and the moving engine as it were animated with the
mind of the worker, therein excelling far all industry of art. For here the
natural Apelles painteth as well within as without; and Phydias is no less
curious in polishing the entralles, and parts withholden from the view, then
in garnishing the outward appearance, and show of his frame: and which is yet
more, here the crafts man enters him self into all the parts of the work,
and never would relinquish the same. Although we place the spirit and body in
the third kind of instruments, yet is there great odds, betwixt these two. For
the spirit answers at full all the organicall actions of the soul, and has
in it no distinction of members: the body is of more particular uses,
compounded of sundry parts, each of them framed of peculiar duties, as the mind
and spirit employeth them. The spirit is quick, nimble, and of marvelous
celeritie of motion; the body, slow, dull, and given to rest of it self: the
spirit the very hand of the soul; the body and bodily members like flailes,
sawes, or axes in the hand of him that uses them. For as we see God has given
us reason for all particular faculties, and hand for all instruments, of
pleasure, of necessity, of offense, of defense, that thereby, although man be
borne without covering, without teeth, without hoof or horn, only with tender
nails, and those neither in fashion, nor temper fit for fight: yet he clotheth
him self, both against the tempest warm, against force of weapon with coat
of steel, and makes unto him self weapons of war, no tush, no horn, no
hoof, no snout of elephant in force comparable thereunto: so the spirits of
our bodies, and this hand of our souls, though it be but one, yet handles it
all the instruments of our body: and it being light, subtle, and yielding, yet
forces it the heauiest, and grossest, and hardest parts of our bodies, chewing
with the teeth, and striking with the fist, and bearing down with the thrust
of shoulder, the resistance of that which stands firm, and containing alone
the force of all the members: sees with the eye, hears with the ears,
understands organically with the brain, distributeth life with the heart, and
nourishment with the liver, and whatsoever other bodily action is practiced.
This hand is applied to the gross instrument, and the effect brought to pass,
yet not absolutely of it self, but by impulsio^ of the mind, which is placed
the only agent, absolute and sovereign not only in respect of commanding,
but also offacultie and execution. This place then bears the spirits among
the instruments; and as the soul is one, and endued with one only faculty, so
the spirit is also one, and embraces that one faculty, and distributeth it
among the corporal members, as every one according to his diverse temper or
frame, or both jointly together is meet this way or that way to be employed;
yet so that by degrees, and diverse dispensations, it is communicated from the
principal and chief parts with the rest. As first life and vital spirit,
from the heart to the rest by arteries: nourishment and growth, from the liver
by veins: sense and motion, from the brain by nerves: not confusedly, and by
equal portions administered to all alike, but by such geometrical proportion as
justice requires, and is necessary for the office of every part. Thus you see
what nature the spirit is of, and to what use it serves in our nature, and of
what sort of instrument it is to be accounted. The corporal part and mebers,
because their services be many are distinct into diversity of shapes and
tempers, to answer all turns; whereof some be more general, and bear as it
were office over the rest; as the heart is most general, and extends it
self to all the parts, with this prerogative above the liver: that a part may
live for a time, and not be nourished, nether yet ca^ any part be nourished
without life. This rule it exercises by the ministry of his arteries extended
in branches throughout the body, and scattering the spirit of life throughout.
Next the heart in use and office toward other members, the liver obtains the
second place: by whose virtue, through the operation of the soul, and that
spiritual hand, nourishment, and preparation of aliment is performed in all
the parts, upon whom attends the stomach and the rest of the entralls under
the midriffe. The third place is allotted to the brain, which by his sense and
motion guides, and directs the parts maintained with life and nourishment:
his sense is of two sorts, and so his motion, both inward, and outward. The
inward sense, thinks, imagines and remembers, and is practiced with that
peculiar temper and frame which the brain has proper, as also his internal
motion not much unlike the panting of the heart. The outward sense and motion of
sinews is derived from it into all parts that require sense, or moving. The
other parts subject to these three principal and their ministers serve their
own turns only, and are of private condition; except the soul command a
voluntary or mixed action: as to walk, to go etc. or to take breath, give
passage of stool, or urine.

CHAP. XIII. How the soul by one simple faculty performs so many and
diverse actions.
THvs have you these parts, and organicall uses distinct: and if it seem yet
difficult unto you, to conceive, how one simple faculty can discharge such
multiplicitie of actions, way with me a little, by a comparison of similitude,
the truth of this point, and accordingly accept it. We see it evident in
automaticall instruments, as clockes, watches, and larums, how one right and
straight motion, through the aptness of the first wheel, not only causes
circular motion in the same, but in diverse others also: and not only so, but
distinct in pace, and time of motion: some wheels passing swifter then other
some, by diverse rases: now to these devises, some other instrument added, as
hammer, and bell, not only another right motion springs thereof, as the stroke
of the hammer, but sound also often repeated, and delivered it at certain times
by equal pauses; and that either larume or hours according as the parts of
the clock are framed. To these if yet moreover a directorie hand be added;
this first, and simple, and right motion by weight or strain, shall seem not
only to be author of deliberate sound, and to counterfeit voice, but also to
point with the finger as much as it has declared by sound. Besides these we
see yet a third motion with reciprocation in the balla^ce of the clock. So
many actions diverse in kind rise from one simple first motion, by reason of
variety of joints in one engine. If to these you add what wit can devise, you
may find all the motion of heaven with his planets counterfetted, in a small
modill, with distinction of time and season, as in the course of the heavenly
bodies. And this appears in such sort as carry their motion within them
selves. In water works I have seen a mill driven with the wind, which has
both served for grist, and avoiding of rivers of water out of drowned fennes
and marshes; which to an American ignorant of the devise, would seem to be
wrought by a lively actio^ of every part, and not by such a general mouer as
the wind is, which blows direct, and follows not by circular motion of the
mill sail. Now if this be brought to pass in artificial practices, and the
variety of action infer not so many faculties, but mere dispositions of the
instruments: let the similitude serve to illustrat that unto you, whereto the
reasons before alleged, may with more force of proof induce you. If yet you
be not satisfied, (for melancholicke persons are for the most part doubtful
and least assured) and although ye acknowledge the truth hereof in organicall
actions: yet in such as require no instrument, judge otherwise; that scruple
also by a similitude, I will take away and make it plain unto you, referring
you for strength of reason to that which has been aforsayd. Before, I showed
the variety of action, to spring of diversity of instrument; now, where there
is no instrument, what diversity (say you) can there be? and yet to give but
one action to the soul, were to deprive it of many goodly exercises, whereby
it apprehends the creator, thankfully acknowledges his goodness, and
directs it self to his honor, besides those spiritual offices, which the
souls departed out of this life, in love perform to each other, with that
knowledge of eternal things? If you require reason of proof, the simplicity
of the soul, and the nature of diverse things will make answer: if of
illustration and comparison of similitude: then consider, how with one view,
a man beholds both top, and bottom of height, and both ends of length at
once, the situation of the thing being convenient thereunto; yet are there
neither diverse faculties, nor diverse instruments: the Sun both ripeneth and
withers, and with an influence it brings forth metals, trees, herbs, and
whatsoever springs from the earth; some things it softeneth, and other some
it hardens: other some it makes sweet, and other some bitter: an hammer
drives in, and drives out, it looseneth and fasteneth, it makes and it
marreth, not with diversity of faculty, keeping the same weight temper, and
fashion it had before, but only diversely applied, and used upon diverse
matters: so many uses arise of one instrument. Moreover, if a man were double
fro^ted (as the Poets have fained Ianus) and the instruments disposed
thereafter, the same faculty of sight would address it self to see both
before and behind at one instant, which now it does by turning. As these
actions of so sundry sorts require no diverse faculty, but change of subject,
and altered application: so the mind, in action wonderful, and next unto the
supreme majesty of God, and by a peculiar manner proceeding from him self, as
the things are, subject unto the apprehension, and action thereof: so the same
faculty varieth not by nature, but by use only, or diversity of those things
whereto it applies it self: as the same faculty applied to differring
things, discerns: to things past, remembers: to things future, foreseeth:
of present things determines: and that which the eye does by turning of the
head, beholding before, behind, and on each side, that does the mind freely at
once (not being hindered, nor restrained by corporal instrument) in judging,
remembering, foreseeing, according as the things present them selves unto the
consideration thereof. For place mo then one, and where will you stay, and how
will you number them? and why are there not as well three score, as three? If
you measure them by kinds of actions, they are indefinite, and almost
infinite, and can not bear any certain rate in our natures: seeing such as
are voluntary, rise upon occasions, and necessity uncertain: and natural
are diverse in every several part, and so according to their number are
multiplied, and of them sundry actions being performed, as to attract, to
concoct, to retain, to expel, to assimilate, agglutinate, etc. not generally,
but the peculiar and proper nourishment, the number would fill up Erastosthenes
sieve to count the^ all. Wherefore to conclude this argument, and to leave you
resolved in this point, let the faculty be one, and plurality in application,
use, and diversity of those things whereabout it was conuersaunt: otherwise
the mind shall be distracted into parts, which is whole in every part: and admit
mixture, which is most simple: and become subject of diverse qualities, which
are distinct in nature, and communicated by mixture of substances whereto they
belong, and not confused together in one, against nature. Thus you have mine
opinion touching these three parts: of soul, of spirit, and body, with their
peculiar actions, and how every one is severally brought to pass: which I
thought necessary first to make plain, before I entered into particular answer
to the former objections, as the ground of the solution, and rule whereto the
particular aunswers are to be squared. So then I take generally the soul to be
affected of the body and spirit, as the instrument hinders the work of the
artificer; which is not by altering his skill, or diminishing his cunning, but
by deprauing the action through untowardness of tool, and fault of
instrument. This in the Chapter following, I will particularly apply to the
former objections.

CHAP. XIIII. The particular answer to the objections made in the 11 Chapter.
AS for those faculties which age seems not only to alter, but also to
breed, they are altogether organicall, and are not of this or that sort: or
appear not, because, the faculty suffers violence or wants, but because
the instruments as yet lacked such disposition, as the soul requires, being
altogether unapt, or else although faulty in part, yet employed as they may
be: whereupon the actions become imperfect. As the brain in a child newborn,
ouercharged with humidity causes discretion of sensible obiectes for 40 days,
as says Hippocrates and Aristotle, to be so dull, that they feel not, though
they be rubbed, neither laugh they, though they be tickled, as afterward they
do both, and take pleasure in the one, and as we be affected after a mixed
sort in the other: which obscurity of sense, joined with want of experience of
sensible things, and comparing of their events, with want of exercise, is the
chief cause of that simplicity of children in affairs of this life, wherein
prudence is most conversant. For better conceiving of which point, you are to
understand, or call to mind, how the soul has certain principles of
knowledge ingenerate, called Criteria of the Greeks, and certain taken from
observation of sensible things, and from them framed, agreeably to those
grounded principles and ingenerate knowledge of the soul. These Criteria
discern betwixt good and badde, truth and falsehood, and are ever firm, and
certain in themselves, and are abused only by the imperfection of such
instruments, by which the discretion and report of outward obiectes do pass.
From this do spring three several actions, whereby the whole course of reason
is made perfect. First, that which the greeks call Sinteresis, the ground,
whereupon the practice of reason consists, aunswering the proposition in a
sillogisme: the conscience applying, the assumption: and of them both, the
third, a certain truth concluded: these parts the soul does without
instrument of body, and never fails therein, so far as the natural
principles lead, or outward obiectes be sincerely taken, and truly reported to
the minds consideration. From the practices of these ingenerate, and infallible
grounds rise all the knowledge of outward things, and humane sciences: and as
a rule being but one rules equally gold, timber, and stone, and the balance
peaseth all kind of weighty things alike, so these applied to practices of
life, and wordly business, have engendered prudence, and circumspection: in the
conversation of men, and manner of behavior, the moral virtues: In the
perfection of voluntary actions, diverse arts and sciences, and above all,
disposes it self to the worship and adoration of God, in some one sort or
other: the right manner whereof depending upon his express oracles, and
operation of his spirit above nature: the want whereof has caused so many
rites, and sundry superstitions as are, and have been accounted religion in the
world, the human sense being neither able to deliver mysteries of such divine
quality unto the mind, and those grounds and rules being feebled, and crooked
in that kind, by the degenerate state of our first parents. So then that
wherein children seem to fail through age in reason, is not that the faculty
is unripe, or to seek: but because the exercise thereof through necessity of
life, is employed in such things, as sense not being before acquainted with,
makes offer thereof to the minds judgment confused, and delivers one thing
for another, or the same not sincerely: so the fault is in organicall action,
and not in ingenerate faculty, which organe has not yet, the full disposition
of all his parts, or mistaketh for want of experience, that which it
reports: according to which the mind pronounces, directed by her ingenerate
science: which both are manifest in tender years: whose brains are so soked,
and drowned with natural moisture, that in them the animal instruments are
most feeble, especially such as require use of the brain it self the moistest
part of all the body, the other actions which stand of a passive disposition
(as outward sense) being little or nothing thereby hindered. This appears
plainly in those things which children do distinctly comprehend, which their
ingenerate science, essential to the mind, does clearly, and perfectly
conceive and judge, as the ancient: as a child knowing the heat of fire, will
as readely judge of the perrill, as the wisest Senator, of the inroad of a
borderer, or the politic captain, of the unequal encounter with his enemy,
by place, occasion, of time, or what opportunity so ever, and having felt the
heat thereof, will as presently judge the sentence false, affirms it could,
as the sharpest witted philosopher, the most captious argument, and subtilest
Sorites of Stilpo. Moreover we daily see in children a Preludium as it were,
and draught of the grauest actions, that in earnest do afterward fall out in
our life, only the thing altered wherein the mind is occupied. For they will
both counterfeit the wise counselor, and the valiant captain: the Majesty of a
prince, and duty of homage and subjection, and give signification for the most
part of that hope in their youth, as a modill, whereof age afterward makes full
proof: which as it appears in all, so most notably in the worthy Cyrus, of
whose education Zenophon writes. Now it also appears in children (as their
organicall parts are tempered,) more quickly, to apprehend, eue^ those
childish matters wherewith they busy themselves or they therewith more or
less acquainted: which both concurred in Cyrus: his body being as it should
seem of excellent temper, and himself, son of a King, at those days the
great master of the world: as for his education, it was nothing else, but an
acquainting of his mind with those excellent parts of a prince, which
afterward being at full hability of instrument, he put in practice, as his
government required. This called Plato a remembrance only, and calling to mind
again of those things, which the soul, by being plunged in this gulf of the
body, had forgotten: which I so far otherwise count of as neither do I hold
that the soul had ever before any knowledge of these outward things, and such
whereof the senses be motions, neither being separated from this corporal
society, shall have any knowledge, or remembrance of hereafter, at least in
this manner, but only is conversant in those exercises which require no bodily
organ, till the resurrection, when joined to the body again, as after a
sleep, it recondeth with fresh memory what it has done good or evil, with
conscience excusing or accusing: because they rise of sense, and sensible
obiectes, and have no farther use then in humane society, which such actions do
uphold: neither carries it away more then it brought, as whereto nothing can be
added. That then, which generally I answered, touching organical practices
peculiar to body and spirit, the same do I apply particularly to the
objection from age, and such discretion as it brings with it; even that all
such are actions depending upon instrument, whereunto the faule whatsoever is to
be ascribed, and not unto any faculty of the mind, (which never suffers
increase nor decrease, or any other kind of alteration,) or else unto want of
experience, and exercise of those things, which greater years meddle with:
wherein the senses both external, and internal by use being perfect, like as
a true looking glass represents the countenance to the eye, in all points
as nature, has framed it, so offer they the relation true and distinct from
sensible things: whereof the mind delivers resolution and sentence: wills
good things, and refuses the contrary, whatsoever it seems to do
otherwise, through the inordinate instruments the seats of unruly appetite,
and disorderly affection, far different from that which the mind it self
wills entirely, free from all perturbation. That which I have answered
concerning the animal actions, fitteth also the objection of propagation: for
such parts have not as yet their natural disposition thereunto: neither does
the animal parts make such discretion in male and female, whereof that
appetite arises, although the sight and countenance and person of each party
be all one: neither is any faculty idle at any time, (the instruments only of
sense and motion take refreshing by rest,) especially so many years: which
must needs ensue, if it were a faculty distinct, and not rather according to
the aptnes of instrument, a peculiar exercise only. For nature employeth all to
the uttermost, and gives never over, except it be more chearefully and
strongly to lay hand to the work again, which to propagation needs not, no
use having been thereof at all before. If you say it rises of an internal
conceit, take this withal, that the conceit is taken from an external
object, together with a disposed part thereunto, which so soon as it is
perfected to the use: the mind being always occupied, and in continual
motion, employeth that also whereunto naturally it is bent. The objection
rising from custom of life in sailors, butchers, and ploughme^, receives the
same answer. For their instruments of action through continual practice of
such arts, makes them in common sense, imagination, and affection, to deliver
things unto the mind after an impure sort, always sauouring of their
ordinary trade of life. This is that puts of butchers from iuries, and
judgments of life and death amongst men: who although they know there is
difference betwixt man and beast, the cause of the one and the use of the
other, the giltles prisoner, and the innocent lamb, yet they being accustomed
with slaughter, the difference is not so sincerely taken, and the affection not
indifferent in such a case: and therefore from such capital causes they are
removed. The mariner as the Europians are more rough, bold, hardy, inconstant,
the^ the Asians, through inconstancy of the air, and tempestiousnes of the
regions: so the incertainty of the weather, and stormy seas with custom of
danger, makes them more rough, bold, and hasty, then they which be of other
trade of life, and their business on firm land: every action in respect and
comparison of due consideration, is either wind, tide, or tempest; the ancher,
sail, or steirne: every displeasure a storm, and every contentment a calm:
even as a man that has traveled all the day on horseback, or sailed on the
sea, though he be laid on his bed, yet keeps animagination of travel still,
his body fairing after a sort, as though it were on horseback, or yet
embarked, judges not so lightly of rest: by reason of the former inured
travel: so these men through their kind of life, either by false
representatio^s of such objects, or imperfect and mixed report, offer things to
the mind, otherwise then they are indeed, and receive judgment of them
thereafter: whereto their affections answering, they take things in far other
part, then they should, or the nature of the cause requires: Now the region or
habitation being as it were aparant unto us, ministering breath and food, no
marvel if our bodies be affected thereafter, and so the actions vary (as the
child of the parents in one sort or other carries the resemblaunce) the
faculty being all one, and keeping the same state, while the instruments stand
to such hazard, as outward things, either by region, diet, custom of life, or
else whatsoever does threaten and bring upon us. Most of all has region this
force, not only in that we feed as the soil affords, but because the air
whereof the spirits of our bodies are repaired, besides that which rises of
the internal spirit of aliment, is continually drunk in us, and passes into
all the secrets of our intrailes, stirs our humors, and diversely affects
all our organical parts: as the air and soil, dry, open, and barren, makes
the bodies firm, hard, and compact, and the spirits pure and subtle, whereby
what action soever is to be performed of them, is more quick, nimble, and
prompt, especially if nourishment be proportional, then of people of contrary
habitation. Of all the former objections, the humors of our bodies seem most
to urge, and challenge interest in disposing of the mind, both in respect of
those accidents, we see persons fall into ouercharged with them, as also,
because commonly the affections of the heart, as joy, sadness, delight,
displeasure, hope, fear, or whatsoever else of them is mixed among the
perturbations, commonly are all to them ascribed, which because it most
concerns the chief drift of this discourse of melancholy, I will more stand
upon, and afford it a more copious answer.

CHAP. XV. Whether the perturbations rise of the humor or not.
THE perturbations are taken commonly to rise of melancholy, choler, blood, or
fleume; so that men of hasty disposition we call choleric: of sad,
melancholicke: of heavy and dull flegmaticke: of merry and cheerful,
sanguine: and not only the common opinion so takes it but these affections
are accounted of the Physicians for tokens of such co^plexions, and such
humors reigning in the body. Let us consider therefore, whether the truth be
as they hold it, and perturbations have no other fountain the^ these humors.
What these humors are, we have sufficiently declared, and how they are
engendered: the use of them is to nourish the parts of the body, and to repair
the continual expense thereof through trauelles of this life; besides that,
which the natural heat continually consumes. The perturbations thus move us,
disturb our counsels, and disquiet our bodies on this sort. First occasion
rises from outward things, wherein we either take pleasure, or wherewith we are
offended: this object is carried to the internal senses from the outward; which
if it be a matter sensual only, the mind uses to impart it to the heart, by
the organicall internal senses, which with joy embraces it, or with
indignation, and mislike refuses it; if of such points, as it self likes,
without their help it gives knowledge thereof to the heart by the spirits,
which either embraces the same, impelled by the minds willing, or rejects it
with mislike and hatred, according to her nilling. But before I proceed further
in this Chapter, it shall be necessary to declare unto you, all the sorts of
perturbations, which being distinguished unto classes or proper families, shall
deliver great light unto us: both in laying open their natures, and also
compared with the nature of the humors, make more clear demonstration, what
likelihoode they carry to be effects of such causes as the humors are. All
perturbations are either simple, or co^pounded of the simple. Simple are such,
as have no mixture of any other perturbation: and those are either primitive,
and first, or deriuatiue and drawn from them. The primitiues have like or
dislike properties unto the^. Love and hate are the first kinds and primitiues
of the rest: love being a vehement liking, and hate a vehement affection of
disliking: from these spring all the deriuatiues, which arise either from
love, or hate, like, or dislike. From love and liking of a present good,
springs joy and rejoicing; if it be to come, hope entertaineth the heart with
expectation. From dislike and hate: if the thing be evil as the other good,
(in deed or in appearance it skilleth not) and present, rises heaviness of
heart, and disposition of sadness: if it be a future evil, fear rises from
the mislike of hate; and these I take to be all the simple perturbations. The
compound, are such as have part of the simple by mixture: and that either of
the primitiues with simple ones only, or mixed with deriuatiues. Such are mixed
with primitiues only, are either mixed unequally of love and liking, or of
mislike and hate; or equally of the^ both. Of the first sort, and taking more
part of liking, is the affection which moves us to laugh; this we call
merinesse wherewith we with some coffeehouse, take pleasure at that, which is
done or said ridiculously: of which sort are deeds, or words, unseemly or
unmeet, and yet move no compassion; as when a man scaldeth his mouth with his
pottage or an hot pie, we are disco^tented with the hurt, yet joy at the
event unexpected of the party, and that we have escaped it; from whence
comes laughter: which because it exceeds the mislike of the thing that
hurts, bursteth out into vehemence on that side, and procures that merry
gesture. If on the other side the thing besuch as the mislike excedeth the joy
we have of our freedom from that evil, then rises pity and compassion: and
these perturbations take their beginninges of the primitiues unequally mixed,
whereby one of them does after a sort obscure the other. The other are such as
have equal mixture, and those are envy and ielosie. If the thing we love be
such as we have not part of, then springs an hate or mislike of the party
who enjoys that we want and like of, and so breeds envy, a grief for the
prosperity of another, or good success whatsoever, wherein we have no part. If
it be such benefit as we enjoy, and are grieved it should be communicated with
other, and wherein we refuse a partener, that is called jealousy: and is seen
manifest in such, as at amorously affected, or of aspiring natures: and these
are compounded of the primitiues alone, like or mislike, love, or hate. Those
which are mixed of primitiues, or deriuatiues, are of two sorts, according as
the primitiues: that is to say mixed of love or hate. Now love mixed with
hope, breeds trust: with love and fear distrust. Hate or mislike compounded
with hope, breeds anger: whereby we are displeased with that misliketh us,
and by hope of being satisfied of that, that offered the dislike, are driven to
anger the affection of revenge. If it be any thing wherein we have displeased
our selves with, it is called shame: if it be compounded with fear, it is
called bashfulnesse; if the mislike be taken from another, the composition is
of hate and anger, and thereof springs, malice. Thus have you the
perturbations compounded of primitive passions with their deriuatiues. Of
deriuatiues betwixt them selves arise despair, and confident assurance.
Despair is compounded of heaviness, grief and fear: the other of joy and
hope: thus have you after my mind the perturbations raunged into their
several classes: to the end, the affinity of cause and effect (if any be)
betwixt them and the humors, may more easily appear; if none be, as in deed
there is none, then the contrary truth may with greater evidence, approve it
self unto your judgment. For love or liking, hate or mislike, being but two
primitive passions, how may we with reason refer them to the humors, which
are four: and if the perturbations should rise of humor, then should they
answer each other neither mo nor fewer: and as the one is compound, primitive
and deriuatiue, so should the humors be at the instant of those passions,
which is impossible: or if they be not at the instant mixed, but before, the
heart should not lie indifferent to all passions, and the mixture being once
made, by what means should they be again unmixed? Again if they rise of
humor, then should those parts wherein humors most abound, be instruments of
passions, and so the gall of anger, and the spleen of sadness, and not the
heart, which is the seat of all those affections, which we call perturbations:
from which both of those parts, are parted by the midriffe. But you will say:
these affections rise of the temper of the heart, and that temper of the humor.
Not so: for either the affections rise of the frame alone of the heart, or else
at the least joined with the temper: now the humors have so small force in
making temper, and framing the complexion, that them selves are all thereof
framed, the spirits applying the temper of the organical parts to that
business. Touching the frame of the heart, such as have bin most courageous
have it of substance firm, compact, and of quality moderate, the poores
neither ouerlarge nor narowe: in which points the temper and complexion has no
use: but the frame alone. Again, these passions being wrought of the heart by
a certain enlarging of it self, if it be pleased, and closing, if it be
contrarily affected: which be actions not of complexion, but of frame and
shape, make sufficient proof against the complexion in this part, which only
bears it self affected to that which it touches, altering it, if it be of
victuals into humors, and the humors into the substance of the body, which
it indueth with the same complexion. Again it fares often times that this or
that humor abounds by disordered diet, yet the complexion all one; neither
purgations of humor alter complexion, a fixed thing, ingenerate by nature, and
not ouerthrown but by some venomous quality direct opposite against it, or long
custom of other disorder, whereby nature is supplanted in time, and growing in
acquaintance, with which first is misliked, is ouermatched with a counterfeit
nature, gotten by use of that otherwise is unnatural. These points might be
more at large laid open, if it were necessary, or they did not withdraw from
the purpose I have in hand, to rest more upon them. But how then comes it to
pass, that melancholicke persons are more sad then other, and choleric more
angry etc. if these humors bear no sway herein? For answer of which
question, you are to understand that both joy and sadness are of two sorts,
as also the rest springing from them: the one is natural rising upon an
outward accasion, if the body be well tempered, and faultles in his
instruments, and the object made no greater nor less then it is in deed, and
the heart, answer proportionally thereunto: the other is unnatural, and
disordered, rising either of no outward occasion, but from inward delusion, or
else such as are (by fault of the report of the senses, or evil disposition of
the heart) otherwise taken then the object requires. In this second kind, the
humors seem to have greatest rule, which whether they have so, as causes or
not, and in what respect they entermeddle, I will now make plain unto you. Of
the first sort of perturbations natural, and rising upon evident occasion I
need stand less upon, seeing as the heart is by outward causes moved, so is it
neither more affected of this humor then of that, neither can there be any
such sudden separation of humors be wrought in the body, whereby through
anger choler should disioyne him self from his fellow humors, and possess
the heart: or melancholy in causes of grief, sorrow, or fear, especially an
humor of gross and earthy parts, as it were the very lies of the rest of the
blood. Again, it were very contrary to reason, to attribute an action of so
necessary use, as are the perturbations unto that, which is no organe of our
bodies, but only matter of food and nourishment; of which sort are all the
humors, keeping them selves within compass of good temper. Moreover if
through anger the heart be moved first, then is it first troubled, and the
perturbations wrought, before the humor receive impression: if the humor admit
first the motion of the thing lovely or hurtful, and impart that to the heart,
then should it receive a degree of excellency above the heart in this respect,
being more attendant upon the spirit, the chief steward of this faculty, then
the heart is, which next to the spirit has greatest place in the body. But why
the^ say you, have the Philosophers defined anger a boiling of the blood about
the heart? if it be according to that definition, then the more choleric a man
is, so much the more angry is he: because the choler is first apt to boil, as
it were brimstone to the match, in respect of the other humors. That
definition of anger, is to be taken not by proper speech, but by a metonymicall
phrase, whereby the cause is attributed to the effect. For first the heart
moves, kindled with anger, then the blood rises, which being choleric
increases the heat, but adds nothing to the passion: now because we
sensibly feel an extraordinary heat about our hearts when we be moved to
angry passions, therefore they have defined anger by that effect: which
boiling, rises not of the quality of the blood, but by a strife of a contrary
motion in the heart at one time, the one being a contraction of it self, and a
retraite of the blood and certain spirits not far of: with mislike of that
offends, as in fear, which commands even from the extreme and utmost
parts: whereby it gathers great heat within, which breathing out again with
revenge, causes through vehemence, and suddenness of the motion, that boiling
of heat, procured of anger: especially if it be not delivered by word and
deed, whereby liberty is given for the passion to break forth, which
restrained in any sort, breeds an agony of such feruency, as it may resemble
the scalding of a boiling chaldron not uncovered, or an hot furnace closed up
in all vents. Moreover if perturbation should be caused of humor, to whether
should we attribute it? to the natural humor, or to the excrement? the
excrement is far removed from the heart, and is not so ready to affect it, a
great distance being betwixt their several places; and in iau^des, the gal
ouerflowing the body, and passing through the veins, and staining all parts,
we see them not so affected, more angry then at other times, or their bodies
being cleared from the tincture of yellownes. If it be the natural humor, that
is to say, the subtilest part of the blood, always contained in the heart
(whether you understand that blood which is comprehended in the two bosoms, or
that wherewith the heart is sustained and nourished in every part) why is not
the^ the heart always affected without intermission, with such passions as the
blood enclineth unto, seeing it is always present, and keeps his disposition
alike? If you will have it of neither, but of that which is contained in the
great vain, rushing with violence into the right side of the heart, the quality
of that blood being of cooler temper the^ that which the heart has already
embraced, should serve to mitigate the mood, rather then to add mo sticks to
the fire. To conclude this point, lest I should seem to fight with a shadow:
if either humor, or excrement should have part in moving affections, no counsel
of philosophy, nor precept of wise men were comparable to calm these raging
passions, unto the purging potions of Physicians, and in this case the
Elleborans of Anticera; the Colocynthis of Spain, and the Rhubarb of
Alexandria, above all the schools of Divinity or Philosophy. The less I
labor against these humors in the kinds of natural perturbations, or such as
rise upon occasion, because I think the error is sone removed, and requires
no long reasoning. The other sort which move us without cause, or external
object, either to sadness, anger, fear, or joy, because they seem altogether
to be effects of humors, no other cause being apparent whereto to ascribe them,
I will more copiously debate this point in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XVI. Whether perturbatio^s, which are not moved by outward occasions
rise of humors or not? and how?
WE do see by experience certain persons which enjoy all the comfortes of this
life whatsoever wealth can procure, and whatsoever friendship offers of
kindness, and whatsoever security may assure them: yet to be overwhelmed with
heaviness, and dismaide with such fear, as they can neither receive
consolation, nor hope of assurance, notwithstanding there be neither matter of
fear, or coffeehouse, nor yet cause of danger, but contrarily of great
comfort, and gratulation. This passion being not moved by any adversity present
or imminent, is attributed to melancholy the grossest part of all the blood,
either while it is yet contained in the veins: or abounds in the spleen,
(ordained to purge the blood of that dross and settling of the humors)
surcharged therewith for want of free uent, by reason of obstruction, or any
ways else the passage being let of clear auoydance. The rather it seems to
be no less, because purgation, opening of a vain, diet, and other order of
cure and medicine, as physic prescribes, have been means of changing this
disposition, and mitigatio^ of those sorrows, and quieting of such fears, as
melancholy persons have fancied to themselves, and have as it seems restored
both wit and courage. Hitherto we have been led by reason of the objection from
humors, which imported great power in them of affecting the mind. It was
answered before generally, whatsoever was done in the body of any part to be
done organically, and that was applied specially to certain objections before
answered: it remains here, that the same be applied also to our humors,
which have no other power to affect the mind, then to alter the state of the
instruments: which next to the mind, and soul it self are the only causes
of all direct action in the body. So here we are to consider, in what sort the
humors move these perturbations above mentioned: whether as chief workers,
instruments, or other kind of helpers: and so how they may claim any interest
in terrifying, or soliciting the mind, this way or that way, as the objections
before mentioned would bear us in hand. It has been declared before how the
mind is the sole mouer in the body, and how the rest of the parts fare as
instruments, and ministers: whereby in natural affections the humors are
secluded from chief doers, and being no organicall parts serve for no
instruments. For whatsoever has any constant and firm action in our bodies,
the state of health remaining firm, is done either by soul, or by the parts
of the body: of which the humors are neither, and so utterly secluded of
nature from any peculiar actio^ to any use of the body. For that they are said
to nourish, it signifies only a passive disposition, by which through our
nourishing power, they receive the Character of our nature, and are altered
into the substance of the same, they themselves giving over their private
actio^, and submitting to the natural concoctiue virtue, which destroys all
particularities of nourishment, and brings them to that uniformity which our
nature requires. Then while the body is in health, the humors bear no sway of
private action, but it being once altered, and they evil disposed, and
breaking from that regiment whereunto they should be subject, are so far of
from subjection to the disposition of our bodies, and strength of our parts,
that they oppress them, and as it appears in simptomaticall euentes in
sickness, despise that government, whereto by natures law they stand bound. Thus
then I hold humors to be occasions of disorderly perturbations, even as they
are means of deprauing the instrument of perturbation, and turning it
otherwise, then nature has disposed, whose government when it has shaken of,
it affects us two manner of ways: the one by the corporal substance, whereby
it annoyeth the corporal mass of bodies, and complexion, and breaks out
into soars, Emposthumes, or other such anoyances: the other by a spirit which
it possesses, either contrary altogether, or diverse at the least from ours,
wherewith many ways it disturbeth the orderly actions, and weakneth the vigor
of the same: now both by substance, and by spirit it alters complexion where
it prevails, and thereby gives greatest stroke to the organicall members.
Then seeing all actions are performed both by spirit and corporal instrument,
and the humors exceeding the government of nature, and withdrawing themselves
from subjection thereof, affect us both ways, spirit against spirit, and
corporal substance against his like, we are to consider, how by these two
means our actions suffer through their disorder, and where their operation
takes most place in working such fantastical perturbations wherewith we are
deluded. Of all parts of the body, in each perturbation, two are chiefly
affected: first the brain, that both apprehends the offensive or pleasant
object, and judges of the same in like sort, and communicates it with the
heart, which is the second part affected: these being troubled carry with them
all the rest of the parts into a simpathy, they of all the rest being in
respect of affection of most importance. The humors then to work these
effects, which approach nigh to natural perturbations grounded upon just
occasion, of necessity, alter either brain or heart: if the brain be altered,
and the object not rightly apprehended then is it delivered otherwise then it
stands in nature, and so the heart moved to a disorderly passion. Again
though the brain be without fault, and report delivered to the heart
sincerely: yet that being distempered, or altered in complexion by fault of
humor, does not answer in affection as the object requires: but more or
less, as the distemper misleadeth: if both parts be ouercharged of humor,
the apprehension and affection both are corrupted, and miss of their right
action, and so all things mistaken, engender that confused spirit, and those
storms of outrageous love, hatred, hope or fear, wherewith bodies so
passionate are here and there, tossed with disquiet. Now particularly the
spirit of the humor being subtiler, thinner, and hoter then is meet, makes
the apprehension quicker then it should be, and the discretion more hasty, then
is meet for the upright delivery to the heart, what to embrace or to refuse:
this causes pronenes to anger, when we are offended without cause, commonly
called teastines, and frowardnes. If the humor also with his spirit possess
the brain, then are these passions of longer continuance: humor being of a
more sollid nature then the spirit, and so not easily dispersed, which causes
fittes of such passions to be of longer continuance: and thus the heart may be
abused from the brain: not much unlike as it falls often out in
communication of speech amongst us: a man of hasty disposition, ready to
answer, and quick witted, will make reply to that which should be said,
before the tale be half told, whereby he fails in his replication, and
answers from the purpose: which if he had been first assured, whereto to
reply, he should not have missed. This appears plain in Choleric persons,
or such as are disposed to anger: such are offended where they have no cause in
truth, but by mistaking: and where they have cause the vehemence of the
apprehension, and the sudde^nes of the report from the brain unto the seat of
perturbation, inforceth double the passion: especially when the heart is as
flexible, as the brain is light: then raungeth it into all extremity. This
comes to pass, not by any power of anger in the Choleric humor: but by
reason the instruments are misordered, either by vapor rising from that
humor, or the very substance of the same. They are disordered in this sort
through Choler. The natural spirit and complexio^ of these parts become
subtiler, thinner, and quicker, proner to action, then of their natures they
should be, through the heat which rises of Choler, and his spirit intermixed
with ours: by this mobility of vapor, our spirit (of a quieter and more stable
disposition,) is either made more rare, then is expedient for the use of our
bodies, or else striving as it were to subdue this bastard spirit and
unwelcome ghest, can not give that attendance upon his proper duty, which
naturally it should: and so the actions thereupon rise depraved, and having
wherewith it is encumbred within, admits the cause of displeasure more easily
which rises abroad: being an addition to that which molesteth at home: and
these natures for the most part are troubled with a Choleric humor, or
fretting, like to Choler, about the mouth of the stomach, which is of all the
inward parts of quickest sense and feeling. This causes them, especially
fasting, before the humor be mitigated, and delayed with nourishment, to be
most prone to that angry passion. The teasty waywardnes of sick persons, such
as are vexed with pain or fever, whereby the humors of the body become more
fell makes evident proof hereof. We see how small matters put them out of
patience, and every thing offends: whereas in health the same occasions would
little, or nothing move. The reason is because, they measure all outward
accidents, by that they find of coffeehouse within: not that the humor that
discontenteth is any instrument of passion, or carries with it faculty to be
displeased: but because it disquieteth the body, and gives coffeehouse to
nature, it is occasion why displeasures are made great: and where there is no
cause, nature troubled within, faireth as greatly displeased with that which
outwardly should not displease: the grief within, being added to an
indifferent thing without, and drawing it into like fellowship of displeasure,
even but for that it pleases not: like as in a troubled sea, a great vessel
is more easily stirred with small strength, then in the calm haven, or quiet
stream: so our spirits, and organicall instruments of passion, the part
tossed with stormy weather of internal coffeehouse, is with little occasion
disquieted, yea with the shaking of a rush, that has no show of calming those
domestical storms, that arise more troublesome, and boisterous to our nature,
then all the blustering winds in the Ocean sea. For when our passion is once
up by such occasion, the common sense is also carried therewith, and distinction
of outward things hindered at the least, if not taken away, all things being
wayed by that which nature finds offense at within: even as the taste altered
in feauers by choleric vapors, makes sweet things seem bitter, and
unpleasant, which of themselves are most delectable to the taste, and would
greatly satisfy the same party, the bitter relish through that taint of
choler once taken away. And in this sort in my opinion arises the disorderly,
and unruly passion of choler, both increased, where some occasion is offered,
and procured by inward disposition of the body and spirit, when there is no
pretense, or show of cause. This is seen as plainly in mirth and joy, which
rises as well upon inward harmony of spirit, humor, and complexion, as upon
glad tidings, or external benefit whereof we take rejoicing. A body of
sanguine complexion (as commonly we call it, although complexion be another
thing, then condition of humors) the spirits being in their just temper in
respect of quality, and of such plenty as nature requires, not mixed or
defiled, by any strange spirit or vapor, the humors in quantity and quality
rated in geometrical, and just proportion, the substance also of the body,
and all the members so qualified by mixture of elements, as all conspire
together in due proportion, breeds an indifferency to all passions. Now if
blood abound, and keep his sincerity, and the body receive by it, and the
spirits rising from the same, a comfort in the sensible parts, without doubt
then, as anger without cause external, rose upon inward displeasure; so this
spirit, these humors, and this temper, may move an inward joy, whereof no
external object may be accounted as just occasion. This is the cause that
makes some men prone to joy, and laughter at such things, as other men are
not drawn with into any passion, and makes them pick out, and seek for
causes of laughter, not only to move others to the like, but to express their
merry passion, which rises by the judgment of our senses imparted to the heart,
not regarding whether the cause be inward or outward, that moves, which takes
comfort thereat, as though the object were external. This especially comes
to pass if the blood be such about the heart, as his pureness and sincerenesse
with sweetness that carries moderation of temper does so comfort, and mollify
it, that it easily, and aptly enlarges it self: the^ such blood or such vapor
that has this tickling quality, causes a delight conceived in the brain;
and communicated with the heart, procures a comfortable gratulation, and inward
joy of that whereof nature takes pleasure. For as we have sights, tastes,
smelles, noyses, pleasant obiectes without us, and on the contrary part, as
many odious, and hateful, which do force our senses: so have we also all
these internal, pleasant or unpleasant: and as we have of sensual objects
internal, so in like manner pleasure and displeasure is communicated from
within of the brain to the heart, of such things as we are not able directly
to refer to this or that quality: as we see it fares with tastes oftentimes:
such mixtures may be in sauces, that something may please us we cannot express
what, raised of the compositio^. This chiefly falls to our bodies, when that
which gives this occasion carries force of gentle and light spirits: as wine,
and strong drink, and all aromaticall spices, which have a power to comfort
the brain, and heart, and affect all our body throughout with celeritie and
quickness, before their spirits be spent in the passage: then the brain
gives merry report, and the heart glad for it self, and all the fellow
members, as it were, daunceth for joy, and good liking, which it receaueth of
such internal prouocations. The^ as we see wine give occasion of mirth by his
excellent spirit, wherewith our spirit is delighted, and greatly increased, if
it be drunk with moderation; so such as are of merry dispositions, enjoy a
natural wine in their bodies, especially hearts and brains, which causes them
to laugh at the wagging of a feather, and without just matter of laughter,
without modest regard of circumstance, to bear them selves light and
ridiculous: and this my friend M. I take to be the cause of merry greeks,
who seek rather to discharge them selves of the iocond affection, stirred up
by their humor, then require true outward occasion of solace and recreation.
Now as before I have said that choler procures anger, not as cause, but as
occasion, so likewise blood thus tempered and replenished with these
aromaticall and merry spirits, gives occasion only of this pleasantness, and
is no cause thereof, the heart making just claim to these affections as the
only instrument, and under the soul, chief author of these unruly companions:
which instrument is so disposed, that obeying the mind, and those natural
rules whereby all things are esteemed, good or bad, true or false, to be done
or not to be done, no otherwise then by a civil subjection ruled by counsel
and no constraint, it repugneth often times all the strong co^clusions whatsoever
reason can make to the contrary. Thus you understand how a man may be angry
and merry without external object, or outward cause: now let us consider, how
sadness and fear, the points which most belong to this discourse, and your
present state, may also arise without occasion of outward terror either
presently molesting, or fearing us by likelihood, or possibility of future
danger. As the nature of choler is subtle, hot, bitter, and of a fretting and
biting quality, both it self and the vapors that pass from it, and blood
temperate, sweet, and full of cheerful and comfortable spirits, answerable to
those we have ingenerate, especially if they become aromaticall, as I may term
them, and of a fragrant nature, by natural temper, or by means of diet: so
melancholy of quality, gross, dull, and of few comfortable spirits; and
plentifully replenished with such as darken all the clernesse of those
sanguineous, and ingrosse their subtilnesse, defile their pureness with the
fogge of that slime, and fennie substance, and shut up the heart as it were in a
dungeon of obscurity, causes many fearful fancies, by abusing the brain
with ugly illusions, and locketh up the gates of the heart, whereout the
spirits should break forth upon just occasion, to the comfort of all the
family of their fellow members: whereby we are in heaviness, sit
comfortless, fear, distrust, doubt, despair, and lament, when no cause
requires it, but rather a behavior beseeminge a heart upon just cause, and
sound reason most comfortable, and cheerful. This does melancholy work, not
otherwise then the former humors, giving occasion, and false matter of these
passions, and not by any disposition as of instrument thereunto. Of all the
other humors melancholy is fullest of variety of passion, both according to
the diversity of place where it setleth, as brain, spleen, mesaraicke veins,
heart, womb, and stomach; as also through the diverse kinds, as natural,
unnatural: natural, either of the spleen, or of the veins, faulty only by
excess of quantity, or thickness of substance: unnatural by corruption, and
that either of blood adust, choler, or melancholy natural, by excessive
distemper of heat, turned in comparison of the natural, into a sharp lie by
force of adustion. These diverse sorts having diverse matter, cause mo strange
symptoms of fancy and affection to melancholic persons, then their humor to
such as are sanguine, choleric, or flegmaticke: which fleume of all the rest
serves least to stir up any affection: but breeding rather a kind of
stupiditie, and an impassionate heart, then easily moved to embrace or refuse,
to sorrow or joy, anger or contentedness: except it be a salt fleume, the^
approaches it to the nature of choler, and in like sort thereof rises anger and
frowardnes.

CHAP. XVII. How melancholy procures fear, sadness, despair, and such other
passions.
NOw let us consider what passions they are that melancholy drives us unto,
and the reason how it does so diversely distract those that are oppressed
therewith. The perturbations of melancholy are for the most part, sad and
fearful, and such as rise of them: as distrust, doubt, diffidence, or
despair, sometimes furious, and sometimes merry in apparaunce, through a kind
of Sardonia^, and false laughter, as the humor, is disposed that procures
these diversities. Those which are sad and pensive, rise of that melancholic
humor, which is the grossest part of the blood, whether it be juice or
excrement, not passing the natural temper in heat whereof it partaketh, and is
called cold in comparison only. This for the most part is settled in the
spleen, and with his vapors anoyeth the heart and passing up to the brain,
counterfetteth terible obiectes to the fantasy, and polluting both the
substance, and spirits of the brain, causes it without external occasion, to
forge monstrous fictions, and terrible to the conceit, which the judgment
taking as they are presented by the disordered instrument, deliver over to the
heart, which has no judgment of discretion in it self, but giving credit to
the mistaken report of the brain, breaks out into that inordinate passion,
against reason. This comes to pass, because the instrument of discretion is
depraved by these melancholic spirits, and a darkness and clouds of
melancholievapours rising from that pudle of the spleen obscure the clearenes,
which our spirits are endued with, and is requisite to the due discretion of
outward obiectes. This at the first is not so extreme, neither does it show so
apparauntly, as in process of time, when the substance of the brain has
plentifully drunk of that spleneticke fogge, whereby his nature is become of
the same quality, and the pure and bright spirits so defiled, and eclipsed,
that their indifferency alike to all sensible things, is now drawn to a
partiality, and inclination, as by melancholy they are enforced. For where that
natural and internal light is darkened, their fancies arise vain, false, and
void of ground even as in the external sensible darkness, a false illusion
will appear unto our imagination, which the light being brought in is
discerned to be an abuse of fancy: now the internal darkness affecting more
nigh by our nature, then the outward, is cause of greater fears, and more
molesteth us with terror, then that which takes from us the sight of sensible
things: especially arising not of absence of light only, but by a presence of
a substantial obscurity, which is possessed with an actual power of
operation: this taking hold of the brain by process of time gives it an
habit of depraved conceit, whereby it fancieth not according to truth: but as
the nature of that humor leads it, altogether gastely and fearful. This
causes not only fantastical apparitions wrought hy apprehe^sion only of
common sense, but fantasy, an other part of internal sense compoundeth, and
forgeth disguised shapes, which give great terror unto the heart, and cause it
with the lively spirit to hide it self as well as it can, by contraction in
all parts, from those counterfeit goblins, which the brain dispossessed of
right discerning, fayneth unto the heart. Neither only is common sense, and
fantasy thus overtaken with delusion, but memory also receives a wound
therewith: which disableth it both to keep in memory, and to record those
things, whereof it took some custody before this passion, and after,
therewith are defaced. For as the common sense and fantasy, which do offer
unto the memory to lay up, deliver but fables in stead of true report, and
those tragical that dismay all the sensible frame of our bodies, so either is
the memory wholly distract by importunity of those doubts and fears, that it
neglects the custody of other store: or else it records and apprehends
only such as by this importunity is thrust thereupon nothing but darkness,
peril, doubt, frightes, and whatsoever the heart of man most does abhor. And
these the senses do so melancholikely deliver to the minds consideration
(which judging of such things as they offered, not having farther to do in the
deeper examination) that it applies those certain ingenerate points of
reason and wisdom to a deceitful case, though it be always in the general,
and if particularities be delivered up a right, in them also most certain and
assured. For those things which are sensible, and are as it were the
counterfettes of ourward creatures, the report of them is committed by Gods
ordinance to the instruments of the brain furnished with his spirit, which
if it be, as the things are in nature, so does the mind judge and determine,
no farther submitting it self to examine the credit of these senses which
(the instruments being faultles, and certain other considerations required
necessary, agreeable unto their integrity,) never fail in their business, but
are the very first grounds of all this corporal action of life and wisdom,
that the mind for the most part here outwardly practices. If they be
contrary, so also does the mind judge, and pursues or shuneth, for these
sensible matters reposing trust in the corporal ministers, whose misereport,
no more ought to discredit the mind, or draw it into an accessory crime of
error, then the judicial sentence is to be blamed, which pronounces upon the
oath and credit of a jury impanelled of such as are reported men of honesty,
credit, and discretion though their verdict be not peradventure according as
the cause committed to them does require. The memory being thus freight with
perils past: and embracing only through the brains disorder that which is of
discomforte, causes the fantasy out of such records, to forge new matters of
sadness and fear, whereof no occasion was at any time before, nor like to be
given hereafter: to these fancies the heart answering with like melancholicke
affection, turns all hope into fear, assurance into distrust and despair,
joy into discomforte: and as the melancholy nature, or body any way
corrupt, defiles the pure and wholesome nourishment, and conuerteth it into the
same kind of impuritie: and as the fire of all kind of matter gives increase
of heat, whether it be wood, stone, metal, or liquor: so the body thus
possessed with the vnchearefull, and discomfortable darkness of mela^cholie,
obscureth the Son and Moon, and all the comfortable planetts of our natures,
in such sort, that if they appear, they appear all dark, and more then half
eclipsed of this mist of blackenes, rising from that hidious lake: and in all
things comfortable, either curiously pryeth out, and snatcheth at whatsoever
of mislike may be drawn to the nourishment of it self: or else neglects
altogether that which is of other quality, then food, and pasture of those
monsters, which nature never bred, nor perfect since conceived, nor memory
vncorrupt would ever allow entertainment, but are hatched out of this muddie
humor, by an unnatural temper and bastard spirit, to the disorder of the
whole regiment of humane nature, both in judgment and affection. Thus the heart
a while being acquainted, with nothing else, but domestical terror, fears
every thing, and the brain simpathetically partaking with the hearts fear,
makes doubt, distrusteth, and suspecteth without cause, always standing in
awe of grieuaunce: where with in time it be comes so tender, that the least
touch, as it were ones nail in an ulcer, gives discouragement thereto,
rubbing it upon the gale exulcerate with sorrow and fear: neither only doubleth
it sorrow upon small occasion, but takes it where none is offered: even as the
Choleric man feeds his passion with ridiculous causes of displeasure. For
first (the general being in all natures actions before the particular) the
heart by the brain solicited to passion, and used to grief and fear, takes
the accustomed way of flight and auoydance, abhorring and fearing those
things, which of themselves are most amiable and grateful: at the first not
being a duised, whereto to apply the passion: even as one condemned to death
with undoubted expectation of execution, fearing every knock at the prison
door, has horror, though the messenger of pardon with knock require to be
admitted and let in, and every messenger, where danger is feared, though he
come with cherefull countenance, gives cause of distrust when there may be
assurance: even so, the heart overcome with inward heaviness, and skared with
inward fears, faireth as though whatsoever cause of affection and perturbation
were minister of present grief, or messenger of future danger, by mistaking
only, and withdraws it self, and shroudeth it as secret and closse, as
nature will suffer, from that, which if custom had not bent it another way,
upon aduisement (now banished through swiftnes and veheme^cy of passion) it
would have with joyful cheer embraced. For eue^ as we se in outward sense: the
ey, or the ear long and vehemently affected with color, or sound, or the nose
with strong sent: retain the very color, sound, and sent in the
instruments, though the thing be removed that yielded such qualities; so the
internal senses molested continually with this fearful object of internal
darkness, esteems every thing of that nature: the true quality thereof being
obscure, by that which has taken possession of the^ before. The brain thus
affected, and the heart answering his passion thereafter drives us into those
extremities of heavy mood, which assail and dispossess of right use of
reason those who are melancholickly disposed: much more if the heart be as
melancholickly bent, as the brain: then diverse times does it prevent the
fancy with fear, and as a man transported with passion is utterly bereft of
aduiseme^t, causes the senses both outward and inward preposterously to
conceive, as the heart vainly fears. This melancholy as the parts are
diverse, and actions vary, so does it as it is seated, or passes this or that
way, breed diversity of passion: as in the heart a trembling, in the stomach a
greedy appetite: in the brain false illusions, and in the other parts as they
are disposed: so deprauing their actions, it causes much variety of effects,
which are not in the nature of the humor, but as it disturbeth the active
instruments, no more then darkness causes some to stu^ble, other some to go
out of their way, and wander, and other some to bring to pass such purposes,
as light would bewray and hinder, alas they be disposed and occupied wc take
the^ to their business in the dark, and not through any such effectual
operation of darkness, which is naught else but mere absence of light. Neither
does so many strange sorts of accidents follow mela^cholie through diversity
of parts only: but as the custom of life has been before, and the fancy, and
heart some way vehemently occupied: there through this humor all the faculties
before named, are carried the same way, as it were with the stream of a tide,
driven with a boisterous wind; which causes that melancholicke men, are not
all of one nature passionate this way: the one taking his dolorous passion from
his love, another from his wealth: the other from his pleasures, whereof his
melancholy bears him in hand the present loss, or imminent danger of that
wherein affection in former times had surest footing: and on the other part,
which before a man most abhorred, that now that humor urges with most
vehemency. Again as it is mixed with other humors, either keeping
mediocrity, or abounding; so likewise breaks it forth into such diversities,
and many times into plain contrarieties of conceit and perturbation. Thus you
understand, how fears and sorrows rise, without cause from natural
melancholy, whether it be juice, or excrement, not through chief action, as
from work of faculty, but by abuse of instrument through occasion. If the
spleneticke excrement surcharge the body, not being purged by help of the
spleen: then are these perturbations far more outrageous, and hard to be
mitigated by counsel or persuasion: and more do they enforce us, the parts
being altered with corporal humor, then with spiritual vapor: and so are
the passions longer in continuance, and more extreme in vehemency. For as the
flame carries not such force of burning as the cole, neither contains the
heat so long; even so the parts affected with the humor, which carries
both grossness of substance, with continual supply of that dim vapor,
settleth a more fixed passion of fear and heaviness, then that which rises
from the vapor only, partly of the own accord more easily vanishing and
partly with greater facillitie wasted by natures strife and resistance. Now it
follows to declare, how the other unnatural melancholy annoyeth with
passions, and abuses us with cou^terfet cause of perturbation, whereof there
is no ground in truth, but only a vain and fantastical conceit.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the unnatural melancholy rising die adustion, how it
affects us with diuerspassions.
BEsides the former kinds, there are sorts of unnatural melancholy: which I
call so rather then the other, because the other offends only in quality,
or quantity: these are of another nature far disagreeing from the other, and
by an improper speech called melancholy. They rise of the natural humors, or
their excrements by excessive diste^per of heat, burned as it were into ashes
in comparison of humor, by which the humor of like nature being mixed,
turns it into a sharp lie: sanguine, choleric, or melancholicke, according
to the humor thus burned, which we call by name of melancholy. This sort
raises the greatest tempest of perturbatio^s and most of all destroys the
brain with all his faculties, and disposition of action, and makes both it,
and the heart cheer more uncomfortably: and if it rise of the natural
melancholy, beyond all likelihood of truth, frame monst ous terrors of fear
and heaviness without cause. If it rise of choler, then rage plays her part,
and fury joined with madness, puts all out of frame. If blood minister
matter to this fire, every serious thing for a time, is turned into a jest, and
tragedies into comedies, and lamentation into gigges and daunces: thus the
passion whereof the humor min streth occasion, by this unkindly heat
aduaunceth it self into greater extremities. For becoming more subtle by
heat, both in substance, and spirit, it passes more deeply into all the parts
of the instrument it self, and is a conueyance also to the humor of the same
kind: making away for natural melancholy, wherewith it is mixed, into the
very inward secrets of those instruments, whereof passions are affected, even
heart and brain. Thus affected, you have men, when desperate fury is joined
with fear: which so terrifieth, that to avoid the terror, they attempt
sometimes to deprive the^ selves of life: so irksome it is unto them through
these tragical conceits, although waighing and considering death by it self
without comparison, and force of the passion, none more fear it the^ they.
These most seek to avoid the society of men, and betake them to wildernesses,
and deserts, finding matter of fear in every thing they behold, and best at
ease, when alone they may digest these fancies without new prouocations, which
they apprehende in humane society. If choler have yielded matter to this
sharp kind of melnncholie, then rage, revenge, and fury, possess both heart
and head, and the whole body is carried with that storm, contrary to
persuasion of reason: which has no farther power over these affections, then
by way of counsel to give other direction (whereof the heart it self is
destitute) and taking these discomfortes of the credit of the senses, according
thereto it applies it self, working, and disposing the ingenerate wisdom it
is endued with, unto these particulars, which the corporal instruments
corruptly offer unto it: which ministers doubt and question to some not well
advised in this point, whether reason it self be not impaired by these
corporal alterations, and the immortal and impatible mind hereby suffers not
violence; which is far otherwise, if we duly way the matter. For the mad man,
of what kind soever he be of, as truly concludes of that which fantasy
ministers of conceit, as the wisest: only therein lies the abuse and defect,
that the organicall parts which are ordained ambassadors, and notaries unto
the mind in these cases, falsify the report, and deliver corrupt records.
This is to be helped, as it shall be declared more at large hereafter, by
counsel only sincerely ministered, which is free from the corruptions of those
officers, and delivers truth unto the mind, whereby it puts in practice
contrary to these importunate and furious sollicitors. This fury is bred,
because choler thus adust, gets a greater egernesse of quality, and
molesting the inward parts, and toyling the spirits, ingendreth a greater
inward disquiet and coffeehouse, then cruder choler does procure. The third
sort is of merry mela^cholie, which rises of the blood over heated in such
sort as I have declared. Of all the rest of humors, blood is most temperat and
mild of disposition, and comfort the body, as has been mentioned, whose
substance receiving that burning heat, whereof rises the third kind of this
unnatural melancholy, procures it to be of a nature quick and fresh, and
indueth it with a spirit of a nature somewhat more itching, and as it were, of
a tickling quality then blood it self. For of it self being (if it be pure
and perfect) nutsweete, or milkesweete, by this heat becomes first sugar or
honey sweet, which has more force of affecting, and obtayneth a more subtle
and quick spirit: afterward by operation of heat, this sweetness is
converted into a mild saltness, void of fretting, which tickling and itching
in these melancholicke bodies, cause them rather to be given to a ridiculous
and absurd meriment, then a sound joy of heart, and comfortable gladness:
which forces them into laughter sometimes, that without ceasing, to the tyring
and wearying of their bodies, no persuasion of reason is able to call them to
more sobriety. We may see in boiling of milk, what sweetness is procured
unto it thereby: and how honey much boiled, becomes salt and bitter: such is
the force of heat in blood, that it turns that milk sweet taste, into honey
sweet: and that into a gentle and itching brackishnes, whereby the
melancholicke bodies, being as it were tickled, render from their foolish
fantasy, and false liking of the heart, many absurd and ridiculous gestures and
speeches, and (as far altered this way, as the melancholic on the other
side) snatch at small occasions, or none at all ofttimes, of answering this fond
humor in outward lightness of gesture and countenance. Thus you hear in what
sort the humors seem to affect the mind, every one singled and keeping
apart from his other fellow humors: which, as they be tempered with the other
natural, or compounded together with one or twain of the like unnatural
sorts of melancholy, make many distinctions, and differences of melancholy
passions: as some more sad, the other some more merry, some quieter, and
other some more prone to rage and fury: and as the humors have their courses,
as for the year, blood in the spring, choler in summer, melancholy in
autumn, and fleume in winter: for the hour according to Soranus Ephesius
opinion, blood from three of the clock in the morning, till nine of the same
day, choler from nine of the morning, till three at after noone, melancholy
from 3. at after noone till nine at night, and fleume from nine at night til
the third of the morning. I say if a man observe all these varieties, by
mixture, and season, with inclination of the parts, custom of life, and
imbecillitie of some part, and proportionallie match the multitude of passions
with these occasions, he might have the ground of all these troublesome
perturbations made plain unto him: why some are contrary affected to other
some in their melancholicke fits, and are not all times alike, but sometimes
sad, and sometimes excessive in mirth, now more outrageous, then at another
time, as season of the year, and time of the day approach, wherein these
humors have more special and particular operation. But it were too long to
descend into such particularities: it shall suffice only, to have declared how
these humors become occasions of passions unto us, and to have noted such a
generality of rule, as any one may with ease thereby discipher the
particulars. By that which hitherto has bin showed, it appears these humors
only affect the organ and corporal part, and nothing come nigh the mind and
soul: which in the mean time of these storms and tempests of passion, these
delusions, fears, false terrors, and poetical fictions of the brain,
sits quiet and still, nothing altered in faculty, or any part of that
divine and impatible disposition, which it obtains by the excellency of
creation: no more then the Sun is moved in the heavens, or receaueth in it
self an obscurity, when storms arise, thunder, lightning, and clouds of
darkness, and boisterous whirlewindes, seem here below to mix heaven and
earth together, and to make confusion in the course and frame of nature. And
thus have you the objections aleaged against that freedom of the soul from
the inconveniences, answered I trust to your contentment. Diverse accidents
follow these humors, which are to be showed, both of fancy, sense, and
affection, and also gestures and actions of weeping, sighing, sobbing,
laughing, and such like, with the reasons of each one, and how they be wrought
by these passions: which I defer in this place to discuss, being called on
to prosecute the answer to the rest of the doubts propounded before: which
done (that nothing, so far as my understanding and memory will help to the
matter, may be leaft obscure unto you in this case of melancholy) I will
hereafter prosecute those also, as I shall have done the causes from whence
they proceed.

CHAP. XIX. How sickness and years seem to alter the mind: and the cause:
and how the soul has practice of senses, being separated from the body.
ALthough persons so disposed with melancholy (as has been declared) enjoy
not perfect estate of health, yet because they complain not, neither are
accounted sick, neither lie for the matter, but seem (their fancies and vain
fears excepted) to be otherwise healthful, I so take them in this place
though their body be in that sort, as I have mentioned to be charged with
defect, as unfound and imperfect. The last of the objections is taken from the
condition of sick persons, who as in appearance it seems both receive in
their minds alteration of defect, and increase of faculties through the
corporal imbecillitie: as though at certain times the bodies health were
transported to the establishment of the mind, or the body at other times, and
after another sort weak, did communicate that also unto the soul, as
disburthening itself thereon. To which objection, the general answer of
organicall disposition of parts is here more particularly to be applied: and as
in the former doubts, so in this I judge all such actions, as the mind seems
to perform in that state of body, better or worse, to be organicall,
pertinent to sensible things: and which as it practices not but in this life,
neither has such use of being disioyned from this mass of earth whereto it is
with spirit coupled, so in her faculties she is not to be esteemed subject to
these alteratio^s. But you demand a farther declaration of this point, whether
the mind has use of sense or not, after it dislodgeth from this earthly
tabernacle. To satisfy you herein, if probability of reason will serve, I do
not take it otherwise, then that it is all an eye, all an care, all nose, taste
and sinewe, without distinction, as these several instruments which now it
employeth make show of: For then were it not simple in substance, but must
needs have compounded substance, to answer these particular senses. If you
require experience and example of this, because it cannot be had in souls
departed (but reason only vpholdeth the rule in respect of them) let us take
that which dreams in sleep do minister for declaration of this point, which
sleep is a kind of separation of the soul from the body for a time, at the
least a rest from outward sensible actions, whereby it more freely applies it
self to those divine contemplations, which is only learned from the instinct
of creation, and never apprehended by any other instruction. In sleep I say,
our dreams in some sort make evident unto us, how the soul without
instrument, lacks not the practice of senses: in which dreams we see with
our souls, hear, talk, confer, and practice what action soever, as
evidently with affection of joy or sorrow, as if the very object of these
senses were represented unto us broad awake at noone day. If you will say it is
nothing else, but the images of outward things, which hang in the common sense
presented to the fantasy, or offered of the memory, which inward senses are
always watchful when the outward take rest: how then comes it to pass,
that we can not in like sort fancy being awake? If we should strive to do it,
every one should find it impossible, as I take it: because the soul is in a
sort by that great law of necessity (being chained with that golden chain)
in all parts linked to this body, which being awake, lets those sincere
actions whereabout it is busied in sleep: wherein every dream seems to be a
kind of ecstasy, or trance, and separation of the soul from this bodily
society, in which it has been in old time instructed of God by revelation,
and mysteries of secrets revealed unto it, as then more fit to apprehend such
divine oracles, then altogether enjoying awake the corporal society of these
earthly members. But you will say such dreams are often times but fancies. True:
and many times they be no fancies; whereof infinite examples may be brought,
both sacred and profane. Now when they be not, sufficient proof arises to
that I now dispute, that souls have sense of things without organicall
senses: and when they be but fancies, yet that which ministers the object,
from some distemper of diet, or condition of the body, good or bad, is sented
with the mind only, the outward senses being all in deep sleep, and the
inward having no power at all to see, hear, smell, taste or feel, but only of
discerning that which the outward sense delivers: for third, there is none to
whom these actions are to be ascribed. Neither are these sensible actions of
the mind to be accounted false: because it sees in dreams things past as
present: for so it does also future things sometimes: which rather may argue,
that both past, and to come are both present unto the mind, of such things as
fall into the capacity of her consideration. If any man think it much to
advance the mind so high, let him remember from whom it proceeded, and the
manner how it was created, and the most excellent estate thereof before the
fall, and no doubt it will sufficiently answer that difficulty, and confirm
that which I have said. And thus much for that interruption of my answer to
the objection from sickness: whether the soul has outward sense and not
organicall, or no. Now to prosecute the answer: I say all those which seem
to be faculties altered in sicknesses, be only organicall dispositions which
the soul uses as she finds them. As for the outward senses, the humidities,
and superfluities of the ears in some sickness being dried up, makes hearing
more quick then in health: so the poores of smelling may be more open: and the
eye by the same reason receive quicker sight: and the sense of feeling more
exact: or by reason the spirits are more subtle, which thereby with greater
case flow into all parts of the instrument now emptied of superfluity.
Again in phrenticke persons, we see through dryness of the brain and
sinews, what strength they become of, that four men in health are scarce able
to hold them, though otherwise weak and feeble Now the outward passages of
senses thus cleared, and the spirits more rare and subtle, deliver more
exactly to the inward the Ideas of such things as require to be admitted:
which inward senses by like disposition of the brain, more exactly discern
the outward quality of things, and deliver more sincere report unto the
mind, which finding all so clear gives sentence, pronounces, and debateth
more perfectly, in respect of that distinction and clearness it finds in
those personal representations of things; which may seem unto such as
consider not duly whereof it rises, to be an increase of gift in the mind by
sickness, and not greater clearenesse of the object. This disposition of
instrument causes some children to be more pregnant then other some, and in
sickness many one to be of better aduisement then in health: and if you list
infer it upon the former grounds; I will not deny this to be the cause
why some be idiottes and fools, and other some of quick spirit, and prompt
witted. Now as this clearing of the poores, and subtiliation of spirits, is
cause of these more ready and distinct actions in sickness then in health,
and in youth above the tenderness of years: so in health the poores
replenished with their humors, and the spirits recovering their ordinary
grossness, or mediocritie, the actions become of the same condition they were
before: not by any alteration of faculty, but through instrument diversely
disposed. In like manner the aged, far stricken in years, fail in the
execution of external actions: though their minds should rather be wiser
through experience, (if any thing be learned by the practice of this life) by
excrementitious humiditie, and rewmaticke superfluities, which drown the
instrument; and an internal dryness, whereby all ways to that small re^nant
of spirit is stopped, through contraction and shrinking of poores, the very
cundites of the spirit into all the corporal members: neither only do they
fail in outward sense and motion, but by the internal also suffer like
imbecillitie, whereupon their mind framinge conclusions upon false grounds,
seem to fail in that action also, not having better matter to work on. If you
say unto me: why is not this helped by that inorganicall sense of the mind,
and so these in conueniences avoided? you must consider the mind never
exercises that, but being withdrawn from the corporal socie^y, and these
mechanical actions, which in a manner in sleep and ecstasy it is: then it
makes choice of particulars, as it lists it self: what, who, where, and
when: neither is it tied to these outward ministers, or those Ideas which they
take view of. Moreover we must remember that during this life (saving upon
certain occasions extraordinary,) God has ordained these actions corporal:
neither is it necessary that wants of outward senses should be so supplied,
which (before sin took such hold of soul and body) were not subject to
these imbecillities, but perfectly and sincerely delivered the condition of
sensible things to the minds consideration, which reposing trust in them,
according to the integrity wherein they first stood, discharges her office of
understanding, judging, and willing, as this way only it finds cause. And
thus much touching the answer to the former objections: notwithstanding whose
probabilities to the contrary, you may perceive how the body only receives
these alterations before mentioned, even as instruments of a corporal
substance, and raised from the earth, subject to earthly and elementary
chaunges, without touch of soul, or disturbing of that immortal nature, which
proceeded from the breath of God, and is of a more noble race: neither are you
so to understand me, as though I accounted the soul in this present state
equal with the first creation: that were erroneous and against the history of
ma^s fall, and of that curse, which ensued through disobedience, and contrary
to that experience, which every one finds of imbecility in the most
excellent actions of the mind, and such as require no organ: but my discourse
tends in this point to exempt it from corporal contagion only, which it can
not in any sort receive, more then the heavens pollution from the earth, being
a nature far more different in comparison then the heavens, from this
inferior world, which is allotted to our use, of habitation. Having hitherto
declared how perturbations rise of humors, although it be not greatly pertinent
to the matter in hand, of counsel, in this passion: yet because my meaning is
not only to satisfy your request in that, but also to give you argument of
philosophical discourse, to occupy your self in this heavy time, wherein
both melancholy does all it may to discourage you, and Satan the old enemy
takes advantage to serve his turn upon your present imbecility, I will add
the reason of such accidents as fall unto these passions, in such probability,
as my ability will afford, both for mine own exercise, and your
contentment, whom in times past I have known to be delighted with study of
philosophy.

CHAP. XX. The accidents which befall melancholicke persons.
AS all other state of body, so the melancholic shows it self, either in
the qualities of the body, or in the deeds. Of the qualities which are first
taken from the elements, the mela^cholick without adustion, is cold and dry:
of such as are second, rising from the first, of color black and swart, of
substance inclyning to hardness, lean, and spare of flesh: which causes
hollownes of eye, and vnchearefulnes of countenance, all these more or less,
some or all: either as the mela^choly is ingenerate, or gotten by error of
diet, has continued longer, or short time. Of deeds, and such as are actions
of the brain, either of sense and motions, dull, both in outward senses, and
conceit. Of memory reasonable good, if fancies deface it not: firm in
opinion, and hardly removed where it is resolved: doubtful before, and long in
deliberation: suspicious, painful in study, and circumspect, given to
fearful and terrible dreams: in affection sad, and full of fear hardly
moved to anger, but keeping it long, and not easy to be reconciled: envious,
and ielous, apt to take occasions in the worse part, and out of measure
passionate, whereto it is moved. From these two dispositions of brain and
heart arise solitarines, morning, weeping, and (if it be of sanguine adust)
melancholy laughter, sighing, sobbing, lamentation, countenance demisse, and
hanging down, blushing and bashful, of pace slow, silent, negligent, refusing
the light and frequency of men, delighted more in solitarines and obscurity.
These are actions which lie in our powers to do, and are called animal. Of
natural actions, their appetite is of greater then their concoction, digestion
slow, and excretion not so ready, pulse rare, and slow. And thus faireth it
with melancholy persons in those deeds which are actions. Other deeds are
certain works, and effects of their natural actions: such are nutritive
juice, or excrement. Their nutritive juice as blood, and the secondary humors
that rise there from, are thick and gross, their blood black, and nothing
fresh. Their melancholicke excrement very much, if the spleen do his part: if
it fail, either by imbecility of attraction, or any hinderance of
obstruction, then is it more plentiful in the veins, and greatly alters
the complexion: if it discharge not itself of the superfluity of that it has
drawn from the blood, then swells it, and grows it into obstructions,
causes shortness of breathing, especially after meat, and an unnatural
boiling of heat, with wyndines under the left side, and plenty of humidity in
the stomach, which abounds in spitting by hindering the first concoction in
the stomach and noisome vapors, causing palpitation of the heart. The
excrement of stool is hard, black, and seeldome: urine pale, and very low
colored, nor much in quantity. These are the chief accidents which fall
unto mela^cholicke persons: of them I will deliver unto you the particular
causes, so far as belongs unto the charge of this melancholicke discourse.

CHAP. XXI. How melancholy alters the quallities of the body.
THE bodies of melancholic persons, if they be naturally given to that humor,
or otherwise it has prevailed in time upon them, are colder, and dryer then
others, or if they be such by error of diet, the^ in times past they themselves
have been: partly through contagion of that humor, which with his cold alters
the complexion, and partly by the nourishment taken from the mass of blood:
because all the parts are maintained, and relieved with cold and dry aliment,
the rest of the blood being cooled by that gross, and earthy part. Sometimes
it faireth with them otherwise, to be intemperately hot through obstruction,
which may gather heat in the spleen, and so accidentally breed an hoate
distemper. Again if the melancholy be of the adust kind, which pertaketh of
heat, and becomes eger and fell, then are they also diste^pered in heat, or
at the least not molested with cold, and howsoever it fair with them in hoate
or cold, always they keep dry in substance of their bodies, both the
natural, and the adust amelancholy agreeing therewith. An humidity they have
of Rewme, and spitting from the stomach, whose concoction is hindered, and
natural heat cooled sometimes by the splenes disorder, which lies nigh
thereunto, and may with more plenty then need requires of that sour juice,
which serves to stir up appetite, dull that heat of the stomach wherewith
the concoction is made perfect, and excrementes become few: but this is a
moistnes excrementitious, and accidental in that part, and peradventure like
in the brain, by consent of the stomach: the substance of the rest keeping
dry through the nature of the nourishment, which in time makes the complexion
of like quality. They are not so well flesht, nor in such good plight, as
either they have been, or as some other complexion: by reason all the natural
actions, that should serve that use, are become weaker, and as it were
smothered with this soote of melancholy: neither is the melancholy blood cold
and dry, a fit matter to raise up fatt, or plenty of flesh: for to both
these are requisite a moderation of complexio^ in the first qualities, and a
matter of moderate temper, which may entertain both flesh and fat. Thirdly the
poores of the body being not so free, for distribution of blood, by reason of
their gross nourishment, and nature of the humor with which his coldness and
sowernes, (for such is the taste of melancholy) closes up the poores, or
straightneth the passages, and of it self also slow of moving, the body can
not be filled with that corpulency which falls to other co^plexions. To the
nourishment and good plight of the body, these three are necessiarie:
complexion temperat, matter moderat, and passage free: which all falling
contrary in melancholic persons, hinders them of that good liking, and
fullnes of body, which otherwise they might enjoy. For if the complexio^ be too
hot then wastes it, and therein rises the choleric skreetnes: if it be too
cold, then raises it not sufficiency of nourishment of meats, drinckes, and
whatsoever we use for sustentatio^ of life: but leaves it crude and makes mo
superfluities. If it be dry, then drinks it up unto the solid parts, that
which should baste and line the body with, having not to spare. If moist, then
in stead of firm substance, the body is ouercharged with a counterfette kind
of fat, and hydropical fogge, which bears show of good habit. If the
matter be hot or dry, it soon vanishes, or has not that store of
nourishing juice, to yield matter of flesh and fat, besides the firm
nourishment. If moist, then swells it the body: and as water enlarges a
sponge, so does moist nourishment soake into the body, and bears it out, as
fast substance does naturally fill, raised from temperate nourishment. If cold,
then both has it small portion of natural juice, and flow to be passed from
part to part, it is not easily received into every member, where of
corpulencie does rise. The passages being either narrow of themselves, or
hindered by stopping, distribution is likewise let, very requisite to the
maintenance of good liking, and moderate habit of the body: which being
ouerlarge give entertainment and place to grossenes, whether it be sound, or
in appearance. Now these three falling out, cold, dry, thick and hard of
passage, in melancholic persons, procure that lean, and spare body of the
melancholicke: except it be by former custom of diet, or naturally otherwise,
which the force of melancholy has not yet so far altered. Of this coldness
and drynes, rises hardness whereof the flesh of melancholy persons is: except
the melancholy rise of some disorder of diet, or passions, and has not yet
entered so far upon the complexion. Of color they be black, according to the
humor whereof they are nourished, and the skin always receiving the black
vapors, which insensibly do pass from the inward parts, takes die and stain
thereof: saving that in the beginning it may come to pass otherwise, the body
white, and blood black; nature for a time serving her self of that which is
purest, and leaving the grossest in the veins, till for want of better, in the
end it be feign to take of the melancholicke, which before it disdained: then
alters it the color, and fairness is turned into morphe, makes evident
the humor which gave the die, and has obscured the former beauty. And thus
are the qualities of melancholy bodies altered by this gross, earthie and
dark humor.

CHAP. XXII. How melancholy alters those actions which rise out of the
brain.
TOuching actions which rise from the brain, melancholy causes dullness of
conceit, both by reason the substance of the brain in such persons is more
gross, and their spirit not so prompt and subtle as is requisite for ready
understanding. Again almost all the senses standing in a kind of passive
nature, a substance cold and dry, and by consequent hard, is not so meet
thereto; which as it serves well to retain that which is once engraven, so
like adamant it keeps, in comparison of other tempers, that which once it
has received: whereby as they are unfit to commit readily to memory, so
retain they that is committed in surer custody. Sometime it falls out, that
melancholy men are found very witty, and quickly discern: either because
the humor of melancholy with some heat is so made subtle, that as from the
driest wood rises the clearest flame, and from the lies of wine is distilled
a strong and burning aqua vitae, in like fort their spirits, both from the
dryness of the matter, and straining of the gross substance from which they
pass, receiving a pureness, are instruments of such sharpness: which is the
dry light that Heraclitus approved. To this, other reasons may be added: as
exercise of their wits, wherein they be indefatigable: which makes them
seem to have that of a natural readiness, which custom of exercise, and use
has found in them. Moreover, while their passions be not yet vehement, whereby
they might be ouercaried, melancholy breeds a jealousy of doubt in that they
take in deliberation, and causes them to be the more exact and curious in
po^dering the very moments of things: to these reasons may be added, the
vehemency of their affection once raised: which carries them, with all their
faculties thereto belonging, into the deapth of that they take pleasure to
intermeddle in. For though the melancholy man be not so easily affected with
any other passion, as with those of fear, sadness, and ielosie, yet being
once thoroughly heat with a contrary passion, retains the feruency thereof
far longer time then any other complexion: and more fervently boyleth
therewith, by reason his heart and spirit has more solliditie of substance to
entertayne deeply the passion, which in a more rare and thin sooner
vanishes away. Thus greediness of desire in those things which they affect,
makes them diligent and painful, wary and circumspect, and so in actions of
brain and sense not inferior to the best tempers; as also it makes them
stiff in opinion. Their resolution rises of long deliberation, because of
doubt and distrust: which as it is not easily bred, so it is also hard to
remove. Such persons are doubtful, suspicious, and thereby long in
deliberation, because those domestical fears, or that internal obscurity,
causes an opinion of danger in outward affairs, where there is no cause of
doubt: their dreams are fearful: partly by reason of their fancy waking, is
most occupied about fears, and terrors, which retayneth the impression in
sleep, and partly through black and dark fumes of melancholy, rising up to
the brain, whereof the fantasy forgeth obiectes, and disturbeth the sleep of
melancholy persons. These persons are also subject to that kind of suffocation
in the night, which is called the mare, wherein, with some horrible vision in
dream they are half strangled, and intercepted of speech, through they strive
to call. This happens through gross melacholicke vapors in them which cause
horrible and fearful apparitions, by reason of the nature of that humor, and
the fancy prone through custom to conceive on the worse part, and stops
their wind, by occupying the passages of such spirits as rise from the brain,
and flow into the nerves which serve certain muscles of respiration: it
happens chiefly when they lie on their back, and somewhat too low with their
head; because both the midriffe (a chief muscle of respiration) is more
pressed with the bowelles, which lie under it, the stomach is not so firmly
closed, whereby vapors more easily have vent, and the whole bulk of the chest
in that position of the body, lying more heavily upon them, requires greater
force of moving faculty, whose spirit receaueth impediment of passages by
these thick and melancholicke fumes: and thus are the actions of the brain
altered by melancholy.

CHAP. XXIII. How affections be altered.
TOUCHING their affections of fear and sadness, sufficiently has been said
before; saving whether is first in place, and possesses first the
melancholicke heart, it may make some question. In mine opinion, fear is the
very ground and root of that sorrow, which melancholic me^ are thrown into.
For a continuance of fear, which is of danger to come, so ouerlayeth the
heart that it makes it as now present, which is only in expectation; and
although the danger feared be absent, yet the assuredness thereof in the
opinion of a melancholicke brain is always present, which ingendreth a sorrow
always accompanying their fears. They are hardely moved to anger, except a
biting and fretting choler be mixed with their melancholy, or the melancholy
be of an adust kind: by reason they be over passion at another way, and have
their parts of grosser sense then easily to be offended, and the heart not
ready to be moved, being of a colder and drier nature: or so affected by the
humor, which being once thoroughly kindled with that passion, retayneth the
heat longer, and is not easily brought again into the former temper. Envious
they are, because of their own false conceived want, whereby their estate,
seeminge in their own fantasy much worse then it is, or then the condition of
other men, makes them desire that they see other to enjoy, to better their
estate: this makes them couetours of getting, though in expense where their
humor moves them with liking, or a voydance of peril, more then prodigal.
Jealousy pricketh them, because they are not contented with any moderation, but
think all too little for supply of their want: especially if it stand in such
matters as import great supply, or otherwise they do earnestly affect: and
are in fear least communication breed whole dispossession, or make inequall
partition. They interpret readily all to the worse part, suspicious least it
be a matter of farther fear, and not indifferently weighing the case, but
poysing it by their fantastical fear, and doubt at home. Passionate they be
out of measure, whereto a vehement object and of long connuaunce urges them:
this causes them to be amorous, both because it is a pleasure to love, which
mittigateth their inward sorrow and timiditie, thinneth their blood, and
dilateth the heart, and a cause to be beloved again, which of all things
likes the melancholy persons, being the greatest means of comfort unto
them: from which all offices of kindness, courtesy, and grace do flow: this
affection rises not unto them by pureness of nature, but by the force of that
which draws them unto the vehemency of passion, wherein they so often times
exceed, that it bereaueth them for a time (jealousy excepted) of all other
affection. If the melancholy be sanguine adust, then may it supply the want in
the object, and cause an internal amorous disposition, with such dotage, that
makes no discretion where the affection is bestowed: as he that is of a merry
nature will laugh at his conceit, and the angry man displeased with his own
shadow. Thus far of the simple actions of brain and heart, which are
altered in melancholicke persons, and the manner how, with reason of their
alteration: other actions are in comparison of these mixed: as mourning, rising
of vain fear, or counterfeit misery, solitariness, least occasion of grief
be ministered by company and resort: silence, thorough retraction of spirits by
their passion (except it be in mornfull plaintes) to mitigate the sorrow, and
stiffenesse of the instruments, besides the disorderly fear and heaviness
which cannot either minister, nor take occasion of familiar conference and
communication, wholly transporting them to the concocting of their sorrowful
humor: which breeds in them (the passion more and more increasing) a
negligence in their affairs, and dissoluteness, where should be diligence. Of
pace, they are for the most part slow, except peril cause them to hasten;
both by reason of their members not so nimble for motion, and the mind occupied
with cogitation and study stays the pace: as we find our selves affected,
when any matter of weight enters into our meditatation. Moreover they are
given to weeping sometimes (if the melancholy be sanguine, they exceed in
laughter) sighing, sobbing, lamentation, countenance demisse, and lowering,
bashfulnesse, and blushing, the reasons whereof and manner how they arise,
because it requires a larger discourse, I will refer them more particularly to
be discussed in several Chapters followinge, with Philosophical causes, or
probabilities (at the least) how every one of these are wrought, that you be
fully instructed in that speculation of melancholy, and the accidents which
follow it, as you are (more then I wish, or stands with your present
comfort) exercised in the practice.

CHAP. XXIIII. The causes of tears, and their saltness.
OF all the actions of melancholy, or rather of heaviness and sadness, none
is so mamanifolde and diverse in parts, as that of weeping. First of all it
puts finger in the eye, and sheadeth tears: then it baseth the countenance
into the bosom: thirdly it draws the cheeks with a kind of conuulsion on
both sides, and turns the countenance into a resemblaunce of girninge, and
lets the brows fall upon the eye liddes; it bleareth the eyes, and makes
the cheeks read: it causes the head to ache, the nose to run, and mouth to
slauer, the lips to tremble: interrupteth the speech, and shakes the whole
chest with sighs, and sobbes: and such are the companions of this sorrowful
gesture of weeping: of which I will deliver you the reason one by one, first
beginning with tears. All objects, or cause of perturbation rises more or
less grievous, or acceptable, as it is taken: and although the cause be
great, if it be not apprehended, it moves no perturbation at all. This
causes some to sorrow, whereat another rejoices: and other some to lament,
which other some bear out with courage, or have no such sense of: and to
exceed in joy or sorrow, (except reason moderate the affection) where other
some keep mediocritie: by reason of certain degree of apprehension: yea
though reason bear no part in the moderation. Moreover seeing it is
necessary, that both brain and heart be disposed in a kind of Sympathy, to
show forth the affection, as they be diversely disposed, so may the cause of
perturbation more or less move and trouble. As if the brain be quicker of
conceit, and of more exact diseretion then the heart is ready to yield his
passion, by reason of a more compact and firm temper, then is it not
aunswerable to the apprehended hurt or danger. If it be more dull, then by
reason the apprehension enters not duly into the consideration of the present
state, or imminent peril, the affection answers not the cause. If the heart
be more tender, then the brain ready: there is fear and heaviness often times,
either without cause, or more vehement then cause requires: and thus it fares
in the rest of the perturbations, these three always concurring in the
affection: the outward mouer or cause, the apprehension of the brain, and the
motion of the heart: according to the variety and diverse disposition of which
three, the perturbations become distinct in kind, and diverse in degree. This
is necessary for you to know, for the more plain delivery of the causes of
the accidents before mentioned: and first of tears, whose passion is not
every kind of grief, nor any one kind alike taken, neither though the
grief be taken alike, and the cause just and true, yet does the party not
always sheade tears, thus affected. First therefore, for the manifestation of
this matter of tears we are to search what kind of thing it is that moves
weeping, then how it is to be received to work this effect, and thirdly of what
disposition they are when just occasion is ministered, and the cause be so
taken, that readily signify their inward passion, by that dolorous outward
gesture and action. Of such causes as draw us into perturbatton and passion,
that only which moves grief and sorrow of heart causes tears. Such weeping
as seems to proceed of joy is of a mixed cause as shall hereafter be declared,
and makes no exception to that universal cause ofteares procured by
affliction, or greeuance: for else we see no man weep but in sorrow: neither do
any sorrow, but upon occasion or persuasion of calamity, or hurt, either
present or to come: saving those which are mela^cholick passionate, who
notwithstanding fancy unto themselves a counterfeit occasion thereof without
cause. This I need not stand upon, because it is evident of it self, and
requires no farther demonstration, the other two being of greater difficulty,
and of more diligent consideration. Touching the first of the two latter, how
the affection is moved for weeping, I take it necessary, the passion be not
very extreme, nor of the highest degree of sorrow, neither so light and gentle
that the object be contemned. For the first: if the perturbation be too
extreme, and as it were rauisheth the conceit, and astonieth the heart, then
tears being ordinary, and natural to a kind of mediocritie of that passion,
are not affoorded to an extraordinary affection: even as a joy sudden and
rare takes away for the present, the signification of rejoicing, and turns
the comfort which should be received into an admiration, in stead of mirth
and cheer: so in great extremity offeare and heaviness, sorrow being converted
into an astonishment, the senses ravished, and the benu^med therewith, the
tears are dried up or stayed, (being effects of ordinary and of natural
passion,) and others more stranger come in place, as voydaunce of urine, and
ordure. For as cold in a kind of degree, moves sense, and the same extreme
becomes and takes it quite away: and as exceeding brightness blinds, or at
the least dazeleth the sight as well as darkness obscureth the object: so an
occasion of fear being beyond ordinary compass of natural passion, seems
to the heart, and understanding of another sort, then whereat to sorrow, or
tears belong, and the tokens of ordinary affection are due: which flow not,
by reason (through that great perturbation) nature is wholly violated, and
keeps no course of accustomed order: or because such is the flight of nature,
from that which she so abhors, that hiding her self in her own ce^ter, she
draws with her those humidities, which easily follow with the spirits and
blood, and are not seperable for usual excretion, besides that contraction of
her poores, whereby the effluxe of tears is hindered: this in my opinion is
the cause: why extremity of terror or heaviness refraineth tears, especially if
a fright have gone before: which is of greatest force to make this
perturbation, and to shut up the poores of our bodies. This appears in such
as are scarred: whose hair seems to stand upright and stiff through that
contraction. So then the same cause of passion in kind differing by degrees,
both dolorous and full of calamity now causes abundance of weeping, and
gusheth out into brooks of tears, and anon dricth them al up, through
destruction of the mind, and stupiditye as it were of the heart: as though
the cause of morning were altogether removed. If you do require example in the
self same person of weeping, and refraining from tears in the same kind of
object, yet differing in degree, that is most singular which is reported by
Aristotle in the second book of his thetoricke, out of Herodotus of Amasis
king of Egypt. We are moved with compassion only (says he) at the affliction
of such familiars, as are not very nighly knitte unto us, either by
acquaintance or affinity: and of the calamity of diverse most dear friends
or allies, we have not compassion: but we are affected with their hurt, as
with our own: wherefore it is reported of Amasis that although he did not weep
for his son, whom he saw led to be put to death: yet at the calamity of
his friend Philippus, he shed tears: for that which in his friend was
pityfull, showed in his son horrible, and terrible to behold: now terror,
chaseth away, and swalloweth up alco^passion. Which history of Amasis, makes
clear al doubt in this point, and confirms that which we propound by the
reason of one of the most grauest philosophers. As this over vehement fear
dries up these springes of tears, or shuts up the passages that no way is
given for them to distill: so the cause being light, and not greatly urging
the heart, nature uses not to make such show of sorrow: so that at small
matters or so taken, no man uses to weep. Children (for want of
understanding) in a manner weep at all occasions of offense alike: which time
and age afterward corrects. Thus then in my opinion the affection is to be
disposed for weeping: even in a mean, betwixt that light regard of peril or
calamity wherewith no man is moved to tears, and that vehement extremity,
which ingendreth amazednes and astonishment, wherewith nature either is
benumbed as it were, and dazeled with the extremity of passion, and neglects
her ordinary signification of sorrow, in a case so far extraordinary: or
else so far withdraws her self into the center of the body with her
spirit, blood, and humiditie, and closes up her poores so straightly, that
neither matter of tears is ready, nor passage free for them to distill by.
For the natural passages and such as depend not upon voluntary opening or
shutting (as of the bladder, and stool) so far only are open, as they be
distended and filled with blood, humor, and spirit: which being withdrawn as
in a dead body, they close together like an empty bag. But why the^ (say
you) do some make urine for fear: and why does not nature withold it, as well
as tears, being a kind of excreme^t not much unlike? The reafon is ready:
such retention as is performed by muscle and animal faculty, descending from
the brain by sinues, is of another sort, then that which is accomplished by
astriction of poor: again such excrementes as are already congregated into a
place of recept, from whence they are to be voided out of the body hereafter,
are not of like condition with that which has as yet no seperatio^. For the
first point: the bladder; as also the fundament, have each of them a certain
round muscle, which has power of opening and closing within it self: which
opening, way is given to the excrement, that of it self (finding passage)
issues out of the body: or without opening (and it be a liquid excrement as
urine is) if the muscle shutt not close, or retentiue feebled, it voydeth also,
though not so plentifully as being full open. Now in fears that exceed, the
spirits influent into that muscle (as al are such that pertain to sense and
motion) are caled back, as I have before declared, to their proper fountains,
and so it being left destitute, receives a kind of paraliticall disposition
for the time, and fails in his office, which is the cause of such vnuoluntary
excretion. Now if you consider and remember how the urine passes from the
kideneys by those long vessels, you shall well perceive there can be no refluxe
backward, though it be forced. for they disce^d not directly, opening
themselves as a touch hole into a gune, but sloplings betwixt the substance of
the bladder, with certain slender and thin skins, which immediately after
the entrance of the humor close up, in such sort, as the fuller the bladder
is, the firmer is their hold, as you may see in the leather clacke of a pair
of bellows: experience hereof is made manifest in a bladder, which being
blown retains the air and suffers not to vent, though it have enterances,
such as I have spoken for the urine. This then is one hinderaunce why the urine
can not be retracted the way being made up by those skins, and the manner of
the entrance such of that excreme^t into the bladder, why such stopping can
not be in them, as falls out by closing of poores, that happens to other
parts through euacuation for these passages are neither open, because they be
full: nor closse, because they be empty, but are the one for the other, at our
voluntary pleasures: to this is the largenes of the passages to be added, which
hinder the close sinking of all sides together, whith the position of the body
downward direct: and thus much for the difference of the retention and
excretion, and how by reason the parts containing the exerement no calling
back of humors can be, as in other parts which have flux and refluxe free.
Touching the manner of excreme^t, this difference also is to be holden, that
vuch humors as are not yet separated for euacuation, follow the course of
spirits, and ebb and flow with them, being within the regiment of nature,
which the urine contained in his natural vrinall, and attending the opening of
the passage and destitute of those active spirits can not do: and this I take
to be the causes, why in extreme passions of fear, urine may pass against
his will, that notwithstanding can shed no tears by the same extremity. The
third point remains, for the more easy declaration of this doleful
gesture, of what disposition of body they are of, who are apt to tears. They
are almost altogether of a moist, rare, and tender body, especially of brain
and heart, which both being of that temper, carry the rest of the parts into
like disposition: this is the cause why children are more apt to weep, then
those that are of greater years, and women more then men, the one having by
youth the body moist, rare and soft, and the other by sex. Whereby tears both
easily flow, and are supplied with plentiful matter, if with rarenes of body
and humidity, the brain above the rest exceed that way: and the eyes be
great, and veins and passages there about large: the^ wa^teth there nothing to
the fou^tain of tears, eue^ upon small occasion: co^trarily they which have
their bodies drier by nature, and more co^pact, and the passages and poores
close, as men in comparison of women and children: such hardly yield forth that
sign of sorrow though the occasion may require it. Thus you understand what
occasion moves weeping, how taken, and what state of body they be of, that
easily water their cheeks, when sorrow and calamity afflicts. Now let us
consider the matter of tears, what it is, and whence particularly, and
properly they flow, and manner how. The matter is the excrementitious humiditie
of the brain, not contained in the veins: for else would tears not be
clear, nor of a waterish color: but resembling the color of urine, receive a
tincture from the thinnest part of the blood, and so appear yellow, except
the straining of the humor might seem to clarify them, which can not so be.
For, straining, although it cast away impuritie, it alters not color: as
strain claret wine as often as you will, it keeps still the color. Again
the tincture of yellow; being of a choleric whay in the blood which is most
thin, would nothing hinder the passage of the tear, nor remain behind in
the strainer. Then we may resolve upon this point, that tears rise of the
brains, thinnest and most liquide excrement; whereof (being the moystest part
of the whole body, and twice so much in quantity as the brain of an ox) it
has great plenty, even more then any other part, both in respect of his
temper, and largeness. This excrement is voyded ordinarily by the palate, the
nose, and the eyes, by certain passages ordained for veins, arteries, and
sinues, from that carnell which is placed in the sadle of the bone called the
wedge, which is direct over the palate of the mouth: this carnell is there
placed, that the excreme^t might not rush suddenly into these parts, but gently
distill into them. The most ordinary passage of thin humor is by the
palate and nose: the palate receaueth it directly, the nose from the eyes;
lest they should be molested by continual flux: into the eyes it flows by
the passage of the second couple of nerves, which serve to move the eye, not
entering the substance of them, but passing on all sides flows to the eyes,
and from thence is received of the fleshly carnell in the inner corner of the
eye, and so passes into the nose, and voydeth out, to purge the head thereby:
and this is the ordinary course of that humiditie, which voyded from the
brain into the nose. Upon occasion of grief, or trouble of smoke or wind, this
thin liquor flows from all parts, and is received of another fleshly
carnell under the upper eye lid toward the ears, and from thence also
waters them, and trickleth down the cheeks. So then you perceive the matter
of tears, and by what streams it voydeth, and how it is conueighed: it
remains last of all to lay open unto you what causes the flux out of the
eyes, seeing ordinarily it should pass into the nose, or through the palate be
voyded out at the mouth; and how in weeping, nature discharges her self of
this excrement. For clearing of which point, you must call to remembrance the
kind of passion, wherewith nature is charged in matter of grief or fear;
which is an enforcement of flight into her own center, not having whither else
to flee: whereby she gathers in one her spirits, and blood, and calls them
in, partly withdrawing them from that fearful object, and partly by uniting
of forces, inableth her self to make greater resistance against that which
annoyeth. These spirits are such as pass from the principal parts, of the
heart, brain, and liver, and give life, nourishment, sense and motion to the
rest of the members of our bodies. So then the brain being thus replenished
with his flowing spirits, is fuller then it was before, and of necessity
warmer, heat always accompanying spirit: with the spirit, refloweth also the
blood, and humors: and that all may become safe, nature makes such
contraction of the substance of the brain, and parts thereabout, that as one
desirous to hold fast with his hand that which is apt to flow forth, loses by
his hard handlinge and compression, which otherwise he might retain, so it
expresses that which by thinness is ready to void, and forcing with spirit,
and pressing with contracted substance, signifies by shower of tears, what
storm tosseth the afflicted heart, and ouercasteth the cheerful countenance.
And this is the manner of the watering of the sorrowful cheeks, and visage
disfigured with lamentatio^, which being by this double means enforced, issue
in more plenty, then the passage into the nostrells can readily discharge:
the abundance whereof drencheth the eyes, and ouerflowing the brimmes of the
eye liddes, fills the bosom with tears. This causes the nose to run, and
the mouth to slauer: even the sudden breach of these waters, faster seeking
vent, then agrees with natures ordinary auoydaunce. They are salt of taste,
through that heat of the eye, which turns easily that excrement into
saltness, besides the mixture of the salt humiditie which is always about it.
For the eye of any one being touched with the tongue, gives a manifest release
of saltness: which rises of that moist excrement, altered into such taste by
the eyes heat. That the eyes be exceeding in heat, besides manifest
experience of of touch, the plenty of spirit which they ordinarily possess,
the store of arteries and veins, the plenty of fat round about, the celeritie
of motion do argue sufficiently the same. Neither is that ordinary passage of
humidity from the brain, whereby their heat may be tempered, lest they become
thereby sore, and withered, the least argument of their hot temper, which is
not afforfoorded to any part of the body the heart only excepted. Lastly the
aptness to be offended with heat, and ready offense taken that way,
sufficiently declares whereto their nature bends.

CHAP. XXV. Why and how one weepeth for joy, and laugheth for grief: why
tears and weeping endure not all the time of the cause; and why the finger is
put in the eye.
IN the former chapter mention was made of weeping for joy: here you may
demand a reason, why a joyful passion, yields forth so sorrowful an action;
neither do they that weep feign, as a man will counterfeit laughter: for tears
cannot be counterfetted, because they rise not of any action or faculty
voluntary, but natural: and the weeping caused of joy is as hearty, as that
which rises upon conceit of sorrow. We do see in the works of nature contrary
effects wrought by the same cause; so the same effect ensues upon contrary
causes, through the diverse manner of the working. You see how the Sun
alters the whiteness of a man's skin into blackness, and how it makes
cloth white, it softeneth wax, and hardens clay. Again we see how the cold
withers the herb, as does the heat: and causes the earth to be warm, that
the fountains smoke again, as does the Sun: and is as requisite with us in
his season, for the fertility of the earth, as the reflection of the Sun
beams. What marvel then, if contraries in passions bring forth like effects;
as to weep and laugh, both for joy and sorrow? For as it is often seen that a
man weepeth for joy, so is not strange to see one laugh for grief; whereof
examples are daily: as if a man takes up that which is burning hot, having
thought it had bin cold, he will laugh at the hurt he feels: likewise if one
assay to handle another man's wound, the wounded will declare the coffeehouse
with laughter: even as a man that is tickled, will laugh though he take no
pleasure in tickling, but rather mislike and discontentme^t. With such kind of
laughter did Democritus grieve at the vanities of this life: which also moved
Heraclitus to weep. And sometimes in urgent distress, the anguish and vexation
of mind, is declared with this kind of Sardonia^ laughter, as if the heart took
pleasure, whereat it is grieved. This is clear, and needs no longer discourse:
the reason is not so evident, which I will now make plain unto you. As you
heard before how tears in sorrow do issue out of the eyes by compressio^, and
that internal fullness of spirits, and heat which forces out these tears; so
joy and gladness being an enlargement of the heart, and brain, and all the
internal parts, especially of the spirits, which do as it were issue out, to
welcome the joyful object, partly thaough the enlargement of the passages, and
partly through the access of spirits to the outward parts, the moisture before
mentioned is forced out of the eyes, and distilleth into drops of tears:
especially if co^miseration and co^passio^ be mixed therwt: such was Joseph's
weping over his brethren; framed of joy of their presence and compassion of
their estate: and so did Jonathan weep over David; and David ioying at
Ionathans kindness, with commisseration of his tears, exceeded him in
weeping. This most commonly falls out, when he whom we love has escaped
danger, or we think through over long absence, somewhat unprosperous might,
or has befallen him. Now the consideration of the present safety, mingled
with remembrance of peril or want, for the present, breaks out into tears,
which are easily to be voyded, both through compression, as has bin before
showed, and by forcible expulsion. I see you desire farther, as well why grief
procures laughter, as strange an effect from the cause, as tears are from joy
and comfort. Before I lay this open unto you, ye are to know what parts are
first affected with laughter, and how they draw others into the same
fellowship of action. The parts which first are affected in laughter, are the
heart and the midriffe, whereto the heart by his call and skin is more
straightly fastened then in beasts; the object of laughter being a ridiculous
thing, mixed of pleasure and displeasure (else were it not ridiculous) causes
the heart to move with great celerity his contrary motions of opening, and
shutting, which being so repugnaunt, cause a marvelous agitation in the part,
by this agitation, and straight coupling of the heart to the midriffe, which
draws by consent other parts into like motion, the laughter is delivered by
interrupted expiration: by reason the midriffe in his contraction is not
suffered quietly to finish it, but is by the hearts trouble restrained and
slowed in his fall. Thus knowing the cause of laughter, and the instruments of
the gesture, I shall more easily manifest unto you, why a man may sometimes
laugh for grief and coffeehouse, as well as weep for joy. Of all the
muscles in the body, the midriffe is the most noble, and of greatest use,
whose action is in continual motion, and never cease, not so much as in sleep
(when all the rest take their ease) for the necessity of breathing: with this
muscle do accord diverse others; especially those of the nether iaw and
cheeks and lips, taking their nerves from the fourth couple increased by the
sixth, which rise from the pith of the chine in the neck. So then, the midriffe
being affected with any kind of extraordinary motion (as it is in grief)
easily draws the cheeks, and lips into like motion. But how is the
midriffe affected in grief? even much like as it is in laughter: that is to
say, hindered in his free falling by the contraction of the heart, which in
grief calls in his spirits, closes it self, and fills the neighbor
parts with more store of blood then is ordinary; which being so replenished,
the midriffe is drawn with the call of the heart, and has not his own
liberty in his contraction: by which means the expiration is delivered by
fits, and not wholly, as in ordinary breathing, the midriffe (resembling in use
the leather of a pair of bellows) being joined round about to the sides of the
chest: which answers the two boords of the bellows. This also draws the
consent of the lips and cheeks, the muscles thereof agreing with the
midriffe in their nerves, which make like contractio^ to that in laughter,
after a counterfeit manner in pain and ache that one presently feels or
fears. The other kind, which is of grief of mind, as that of Hanniball for
the distress of Carthage, and his present calamity, is of a mixed cause,
compounded of some joy, which rises of considence of remedy or revenge, which
causes a dilatation of joy, entermeddled with contractio^ of grief: so a man
that has received a displeasure of his enemy, and assured how he may be even
with him, will laugh, though he have indignation at the displeasure, upon hope
of requittance: whereof rises a certain joy mixed with grief, that forces
out a Sardonian, bitter laughter, short, and overtaken with more grief, which
with vapor and spirit, through that dilatation of the heart, silleth the
cheeks, and causes their muscles to be withdrawn to their heads, show their
teeth, and fashion the countenance into that kind of grinning which is apparent
in laughter. Thus much by the way of laugter, by occasion of that weeping,
which falls unto such as upon cause of joy break out into tears. If you
desire to know more of this merry gesture, I refer you to a treatise of
laughter, written by Laurence Ioubert of Mountpellier, a Philosopher, and
Physician, in my judgment not inferior to any of this age. The cause why
weeping endures not all the time of the sorrow, but most commonly at the first
brunt only of grief tears are shed, is partly by reason time acquainteth the
heart with the sorrow, so is the contraction less, the danger not being so
strange. Again, that moisture is partly emptied, which ministers matter unto
tears, and reason in time deals with the affection, which peradventure
moderateth the grief, whereby it less urges. The finger is usually put in
the eye in weeping, by reason the tear falling into the eye with his saltness
procures a kind of itching about the carnell of tears, which requires aid
of the singer to be expressed at their first fall: afterward the part acquainted
with that quality, and one tear drawing on another, such expression is not so
necessary. Besides this cause of rubbing the weeping eye, a strange matter
therein requires wyping, which also moves the finger to have to the eye
watered with tears: but this is after a while; the other before almost any
tear fall, as though they were expressed with rubbing. And thus much touching
the causes of tears, which bear the greatest part in weeping: now ye shall
understand how other parts of that gesture are performed, and by what means.

CHAP. XXVI. Of other parts of weeping: why the countenance is cast down, the
forehead loureth, the nose droppeth, the lip trembles, the cheeks are drawn,
and the speech is interrupted.
IN weeping the countenance is cast down, by reason the spirits are retracted,
which are the authors (by tonicall motion) of erection: as a maste corded on
all sides stands erect: which in sorrow being withdrawe^ from the muscle,
causes them to yield to the poyse of the head: and so bends it downward,
whereto it is more inclined then backward: by reason the rowells of the
neckbone, with their snaggs hinder that inclination. The forehead lowreth after
a paraliticall fashion, being destitute of his spirits, and all the former
parts filled with that excrementitious moisture of tears before mentioned:
which is in that abundance in persons moist of brain, tender and rare of
poores, that not finding sufficient way at the eyes, it passes through the
nose, as the other part by the palate into the mouth, and so fills all full
of tears and slauer. The lipe trembles, because the spirit which should
uphold it in his right position, is now in greatest measure departed: so that
the weight of the lip, striving with the imbecillitie of the part, causes a
trembling, which is betwixt erection, and plain declination: as if a man hold
a thing too heavy till he begin to be weary: though at the first he hold it
steady, at the length striving above his power to bear it, makes his hand to
quake and tremble, the remnaunte of strength, striving with the weight. The
upper lip remains steadie and still, because it hangs, and requires no
proppe of erection: yet appears it somewhat longer then before, being fully
stretched out with the weight, and not borne up, and restrained by the spirit.
The cheeks are drawn much like as in laughter: not by any influence of the
lively spirit, which in laughter replenisheth the countenance, and causes the
eyes to sparcle, and filling the muscles of the cheeks with a subtle vapor,
causes them to strain for the auoydance: as in streaking, the muscles are
contracted to exclude a vaporous excrement: but the contraction of the cheeks
in weeping seems to me, not to rise of any other cause, then by an
excrementitious vapor, which passes with the humiditie of tears, from the
brain into the cheeks, and forces nature to make contraction to discharge it
self of that vapor: joined with the consent, which is betwixt the muscles of
the jaws and lips with the midriffe: whose remission, and slackening, being
hastened by the contraction of the heart in grief, contracteth also the
foresaid lips and cheeks, with which it consents by the fourth and sixth
pair of nerves, derived into both parts, from the marow of the chine bone of
the neck. These are also the causes, of the whole deformity of the face in
weeping, which chiefly contracteth the visage in expiration, in which the
heart has more power over the mydriffe being slakened, then in inspiration,
wherein by dilating of the chest for use of breath it is exte^ded. The speech
is interrupted in weeping, because the chest in expiration does not fall and
sinck, by gentle declination equally: but hindered by that contraction of the
heart, remitteth his extension, as it were by strokes: as if a man would take
a pair of bellows, and not suffer them being enlarged, and full of air to
shutt of themselves, but by an unequal pressing of the hands, cause them to
puff by fittes, and part the blowing into sundry blastes, which at once might
be avoided. So the voice rising of the air expired, as that is voyded, in like
sort the voice is fraimed: which causes those that weep to speak more
indistinctly, and divided sentences, then when they are free from that
affection. Moreover speech does require not only the yeeldinge of the chest
through the poyse, but stands in need also of the intercostall muscles, and
those of the top of the windpipe with the^ of the belly which through grief or
fear being now not so replenished with spirits, the authors of motion of
those muscles, can not deliver the voice smoth and uniform as before, more
then a child is able sufficiently to way down by his strength of hand a
smithes bellow, that is forced by poyces to finish that which strength would
perform at once. Neither is the speech interrupted, and broken only by the
disorderly expiratio^, but the inspiratio^ being by sobs cutteth also the
voice, and marreth the distinct pronu^tiatio^, the cause whereof as also of
sighing I will deliver unto you in the next chapter. Thus you have (sobbing
excepted) the reasons of all the parts of weeping, so far as my conjecture
by reason in matters so hidden can gather: I will proceed to the causes of
sighing and sobbing, and how they be procured, and by what means, and so
finish the whole mournful gesture of weeping.

CHAP. XXVII. The causes of sobbing and sighing and how weeping eases the
heart.
BEsides the former actions of sorrow, weping is for the most part accompanied
(if it be vehement) with sobbes and sighs: of which two, sobbing is never
without weeping, sighs are ordinary and common upon causes that force no
tears, as every one has experience. For understanding of the causes of
sobbes, it is necessary for you to call to mind that which has bin said of
the use of the Diaphragma, or midriffe, and the outward intercostalls, or
outward muscles betwixt the ribs, and the manner how the heart is affected
in grief and sorrow. The dilating of Diaphragma is to enlarge the chest for
taking breath. This is only required, if we be not more the^ ordinarily urged
to breath: which if we be, then do the outward muscles of the ribs dilate
the chest also, and so increase the enlargement. Now when matter of grief
inforceth tears, the Diaphragme, and the muscles receive a weakness, by reason
of retraction of spirits, that they are feign for the dilatation of the chest
to make mo pulls then one, as you heard before in the motion of contraction, so
that the breath is not drawn at one straining of their coares and fibers, but
by diverse inspiration: besides the heat of those parts being retracted, makes
them less pliable unto the force of the muscles: whereby the respiration is
with more difficulty perfoormed, which requires more use of dilatation, then
before: by reason the heat about the heart it self is now greater then before
the passion, which brings thereto a kind of suffocation. That cooling of the
heart which is sensibly felt by sudden evil tydinges, or mishappe unlooked
for, or whatsoever new calamity, rises through access of the blood and
spirits: which although they be hot, yet wanting somewhat of that heat which
is fervent, and natural to the heart, and of the heat of those spirits which
are resident there, for the time seems to cool in comparison of the heat
which the heart felt before: as a man would cast hot water to that which
boyleth most fervently: which although it be hot, yet inferior in degree to
the heat of feruentnes, it mitigateth the scalding heat, and slaketh the
boiling. In like manner at the first recourse of these humors, and raunging
spirits, although the heart seem to receive a chilling, yet anon by
contraction, and plenty of spirits which are apt to take heat it receives a
greater necessity of breathing, which being not answered through imbecillitie
of the breathing parts, discharges the office of respiration by sobbes, which
should be persormed by one draught of breath. And these I take to be the causes
of sobbing. Sighing has no other cause of moving then to cool and refresh the
heart, with fresh breath, and pure air, which is the nourishment and food of
the vital spirits, besides the cooling which the heart it self receives
thereby. The heart being contracted as has been said, delivers not so freely
his sootie and smokie excrementes, whereby the spirits become impure, and it
boyleth with more distemper: which necessity of fresh spirit and cool air
enforces a deeper enlargement of the chest then is ordinary; in which not
only the midriffe plays his part, but outward intercostalls or middle
muscles of the ribs, besides certain of the shoulders, do their endeavor to
this so necessary an office. Moreover it is very probable that the midriffe by
access of humors and vapors to the parts there about is charged with
vaperous superfluity, which is by stretching it self, as in yawning, avoided:
when the muscles are distended by any vapor, of what sort soever it be of,
being plentiful and abundant, it stirs them to a contraction, which
causes a kind of pressing, whereby they deliver themselves of this excrement.
This in yawning causes that gaping, and sometimes accompanied with streaking,
when we find our selves unlusty, and undisposed to stir or exercise: which
falling to the midriffe, may cause a kind of sighing, when a man has no
cause: as having cause, it helps it foreward. For whosoever yawneth, shall
perceive his chest and midriffe dilated in such manner as in sighing, and feel
about the heart a kind of refreshing: even as when he sigheth. To these causes
may be added the weight of the heart, which is by reason of the access of
humors about his veins and arteries to his contraction, increased: whereby it
lies more heavily upon the midriffe then before the burden whereof it seeks
to ease it self of, by such streitching, which somewhat lifts up the heart
for the time, and so the Diaphragma is reco^forted: so that the necessity of
fresh air, the cooling of the heart, the easing of the burden thereof upon
the midriffe, the avoiding of vaporous excrements out of the midriffe, seem to
me causes final, and the midriffes dilatatio^, whose motion the whole chest
follows the efficient cause of sobing and sighing. And thus much concerning
the two dolorous actions of sighing and sobbing, whereto after I have added how
it eases the heart to weep and sobbe, I will end this chapter. By reason of
the withdrawing of the blood and spirits about the heart in fear, and sorrow,
it is necessary, that much vapor should arise, stirred up by the heat thereof
working upon the moisture these vapors besides the ordinary excrements of the
brain before mentioned, may yield another part unto tears, being congeled in
the brain, and upper parts that are thick, cool, membranous, enclosed with
the skull, and placed over the rest, as a stillitorie helm over the body. Now
weeping by making auoyda^ce to these vapors, does discharge that fulness
wherewith it was before strayned and oppressed. These vapors cause that rednes
in the cheeks, and about the ears of those that weep, heateth the face, and
causes the head to ache, whereof the heart being eased, receives a farther
enlargement then at the beginning of the grief, and so enjoys that small
comfort which weeping affoordeth. It may seem probable that the sobbing and
sighing (differing only in that sobbes are sighinges interrupted, and sighs
sobbes at large) if they be not vehement and long by agitation of the chest
expelling of the smothered vapors, and drawing in of fresh air, give also
some comfort: if they be vehement, then shake they the heart and midriffe too
much, and cause a soreness about those parts, especially about the heart
spoone, which is most traveled in sobbing, and whereto the midriffe is
fastened. Thus much concerning those actions which are animal, and ly in our
power (some absolutely, and some after a sort) to do or not to do, altered by
passion of sorrow, and falling into melancholy persons: it rests to show,
how melancholy procures this laughing and weeping, and so to proceed to
those natural actions which are altered by this humor, with the reason of such
effects.

CHAP. XXVIII. How melancholy causes both weeping and laughing, and the
reasons how.
IT has been before declared how melancholy causes fear and sorrow of heart,
by false imagination, raised through fearful vapors rising to the brain,
and passing by the heart, even before the imagination be moved, causes a
contraction thereof: which is the action of fear: this fear breeds sorrow;
the sorrow and fear accompanying each other, make such contractio^ as before
has been said to be cause of tears; the matter being partly supplied by the
ordinary excrements of the brain, and partly through those vapors which arise
from the heart ouercharged with concourse of humors, which are retracted by the
spirits; who upon matter of coffeehouse have unto the place of defense, and
assemble together, flying the irksome object, and addressing them selves as it
were to make resistance. The parts about the eyes being porous and rare, the
brain moist, and the party apt to weep, upon this melancholy disposition
springs that issue of tears out of melancholicke eyes: and these I suppose
to be the causes, why melancholicke persons without any outward occasion, fall
into weeping and lamentation. Why they laugh, and that excessiuely, the cause
is of more difficulty to find out, and the reason not so manifest, whereof as
I am led by conjecture and probabilities, I will deliver you mine opinion.
You may remember how the midriffe next unto the heart is the chief cause of
laughter; so that of necessity one of these must be affected in that action.
The heart is always affected in true laughter, and not always in a fained
kind, which is only a shaking of the chest, and retraction of the lips,
without the lively and cheerful eye, fraught with the joyful spirits, which
replenish the merry countenance. This kind is that which melancholicke
persons without object break out into; except the melancholy rise of adustion
of blood, and become black choler, which affects also the heart with a
feigned conceit of merinesse; even as wine gives it comfort, and stirs the
spirits to that liuelines and cheer, whereof every one has experience. Now
then for the better laying open this melancholic action, we are to distinguish
of laughter: whereof there be two sorts; the one is true and unfeigned, rising
from a comfort and rejoicing of the heart; and the other a counterfeit and false,
wherein the heart receaueth no contentment, but either it self, or the
midriffe moved dissorderly with shaking by any annoyance; and moves also the
chest, and muscles of the jaws and checkes by consent of nerves, and so
counterfetting a laughinge gesture, wherein the heart takes no pleasure. The
former kind may rise of inward cause, as well as outward; when the vapor of
adust melancholy of blood, or rather when it first takes that heat,
perfumeth the heart with a pure and clear fume, whereat it is allured to joy
and cheer: which vapor and fume risinge of the most mildest and temperate
humor, before the full adustion be accomplished, and mixed with the other
humors and spirits, breeds that pleasant vain, which ouertaketh
melancholicke persons, which peradventure otherwise not so delayed, would turn
the heart to annoyance. This way melancholy carrying a winie and aromaticall
spirit, raised by that heat, may procure an hearty laughter, and not only
dispose as wine does, the spirit thus raised being more familiar the^ that of
wine, and so compelling as it were the heart to break forth into that actio^ of
rejoicing. The false kind of laughter which proceeds first from the
midriffe, most commonly is affected by melancholy, through a tickling vapor or
spirit, which rises from the lower parts, and stirs the midriffe; as they
which are wounded in the chest, and upon dressing are there about touched, do
plainly perceive to move, and shake, and retract it self, (whose motion the
chest follows) and to force out a count erfet manner of laughter, whereof the
heart has no part; nor countenance, saving the girning of the mouth, which is
here but small, makes any pleasant show. This accident pertains chiefly to
that melancholy which rests about the spleen, the mesaraicke veins, and
port vain of the liver; which breaths an itching and tickling breath,
whereof the midriffe taking the sense, shakes and moves, with endeavor to
shun the unwelcome ghest, and to avoid the touch thereof. Now that being once
moved, the other instruments of laughter answer with like motion, and all
agree in this counterfeit gesture, which in appearance seems like the
pleasant look of a light and merrily disposed heart. This accident of laughter
for the most part is when the melancholy passion begins, or anon after,
before the blood gets a farther egernesse, and those iolie spirits be
wasted: which after they once be spent, and the heat either outrageous, or
delayed or distinguished by unaptness of matter, the^ is the comedy turned into
tragedy, pleasantnes into fury, and in the end, mirth into mourning much like
as it fares with such as intemperatly take in their cups, and are over
surfeted with wine or strong drink; these of them that are of nature cold and
dry, and of this melancholy complexion void of adustion, at the first cup
receive a marvelous cheering about the heart, the dryness and coldness of
their inward parts being soked and steeped as it were, like dry leather in
oil: if they proceed farther, the former modesty anon alters it self into
the contrary extremity of chat and excessive babbling, the spirit of the wine
ouerruling the spirit of their natural complexion: yet a little more sipping,
and this melancholy receaueth such heat, as rage and fury enters possession
of heart, and brain; and as he had taken a draught of Circes cup, he fares in
respect of manners and behavior, as though he were turned into a wild beast. In
the end with farther carouses of excess, the wine, for the while quite dispos
sessing the spirits of their regiment and office, and quenching as it were the
one heat, and delaying the natural heat of his body with immoderate quantity,
the mirth and chere, the pleasant talk, the rage and fury give place, and in
steed of that iolitie, succedeth silence, stupiditie, sleep and sottishness.
So in mela^cholie, while that dry and subtle spirit is supplied with
convenient matter, and is lightened in the melancholic part, all is on the
hoigh for a time, which being consumed by heat, the store thereof being but
small in respect of the gross reside^ce, the melancholic person becomes
afterward sad, heavy, and vncherful. Thus you perceive (I think) sufficiently
how melancholic persons, some laugh and some weep, and in the same
melancholicke, what causes mirth, and what tears. Before I proceed to the
natural actions changed and depraved by melancholy, I cannot pass over an
action which is very usual to melancholicke folk, and that is blushing, with
shunning of the look and countenance of men, which the Grecians call Dysopia;
and because it requires a larger discourse then the end of this Chapter will
suffer, I will treat of them in the next.

CHAP. XXIX. The causes of blushing and bashfulnesse, and why melancholicke
persons are given thereunto.
THE affection that moves blushinge is shame, howsoever it rises, either
upon false conceit, or deserved cause. Shame is an affection of grief, mixed
with anger against our selves, rising of the conscience of some known, or
supposed to be known offense, either in doing that, which ought not to be
done, or omitting that which was requisite of us to be done. This description I
will unfold unto you more at large: that in shame every one is grieved,
experience makes plain, besides reason leads thereunto. Every passion of
the heart is with joy, or with grief, either sincere and simple, or mixed, as
in ridiculous occasions: in shame there is no absolute joy nor comfort,
therefore there must needs be a displeasantnesse or else a mixed disposition of
sorrow and cheer: this there is not, by reason shame casts down the
countenance, fills the eye with sorrow, and as much as may be withdraws the
lively and comfortable spirit into the center of the body, not unlike unto
fear and sadness. It appears mixed with anger, by reason every one feels
a kind of indignation within him self, and offers as it were a vehement
inablinge of him self: for the offense we are angry with our selves, because
the fault is ours, and from us rises the cause of grief; as in absolute anger
the cause is from other, and upon others we seek the revenge. Where there is
no conscience, there can not be any sense of fault: for that it is which lays
our actions to the rule, and concludes them good or bad: so although the fault
be committed in deed, and yet no conscience made thereof, it is taken for no
offense, neither can give cause of this internal grief and reuengement. To
these clauses I ad an offense known, or so supposed: for otherwise, though a
man be grieved and sorry therefore, yet before it be known to others is he not
ashamed. This causes that men make no doubt of doing that in secret, which for
shame they would not do openly; yea in such things as of them selves are not
dishonest, nor disalowable. Moreover, it rises upon offense, committed in that
thing which lay in our power (as we took it) to remedy, or better to have
discharged our selves in doing or omitting. Therefore no man is ashamed of an
ague, or of the gout, or to have broken his legs, or any such occasion, as
to have been spoiled, or to die etc. but only in those things wherein we take
our selves to have our part, and to rise upon our own default: so are we both
ashamed of the action, and of all tokens thereof. Now seeing that all offense,
is neither in doing amiss, or neglecting that should be done, in either of
both consists matter of shame. The description of shame thus being declared,
I proceed to show how it forces redness into the ears and cheeks, and
causes us neither to bear other men's countenaunces and looks, nor with
courage and boldness to bear up our own. The grief that nature conceaueth
from our selves, is not so strange, as that which is foraine, and outward, but
far more familiar, and thence therefore in all parts more known. Moreover
the cause is more transitory and fading; especially, if the offense be small
and of no great note. Again the grief is not for any deprivation of that,
whereof the use is so necessary, as loss of friends, goods, peril,
poverty do all import, nor of any singular pleasure, wherein nature or will
took their chief contentment. These qualities of shame joined with anger,
procures that redness in the face, which we call blushing. The tincture of
read arises on this sort: the heart discontented with the opennesse of the
offense, makes a retraction of blood, and spirit at the first, as in fear and
grief; and because it feels no greater hurt then of laughter, or rebuke of
word, or such like touch, seeks no farther escape, then a small withdrawing
of the spirit and blood by the first entrance of the perturbation: so that the
necessity being no more urgent, the blood and spirit break forth again more
vehemently, and fill the parts about the face more then before, and causes
the redness. This is helped forward with that anger, which is mixed with
shame, which forces in some sort, these retracted spirits and blood to
reflowe with more strength, as we see the blood soon up of a choleric
person. The passion is not so vehement to close up the spirits, and to retain
any longer time, for the cause before alleged; and although it were, yet
would the anger, and inward reuengement make way to the blood and spirits, to
give that shamefast color. Thus you understand what manner of perturbation
causes blushing, what it is, and how it breeds the stain: but you will
peradventure say, why do not all that are ashamed blush, and why some more then
other some? This I suppose to be cause: in blushing these points are to be
considered for answer of this question; the quality of the blood and spirit,
the passage, and nature or substance of the face, which receives this reflux.
If the blud be gross and thick, and the passages not so free, then is the
course of blood slow, and the countenance little altered. If the skin be over
thick, or over rare, the^ does it not admit through the thicknes of the
spirits, or at the least makes not that show, nor retains them through the
rarenes and thinnes, and by exoperation make no apparaunce of rednes: this is
the cause why many ashamed be not so ready to blush. Besides this disposition
of spirit, humor and substance of the face, the measure of the shame more or
less, helps and hinders blushing. For some there are affected more
vehemently, and othersome moderately, and othersome not a whit: who blush not,
because they are not at all ashamed. By that has bin declared you may gather,
why the younger sort, and women easily blush: even through rarenes of their body
and spirits, joined with simplicity, which causes doubt of offense: and this
is the cause why we commend blushers, because it declares a tender heart, and
easily moved with remorse of that which is done amiss, and a fear to offend,
and a care least it should commit ought worthy of blame. Furthermore it shows
a conscience quick, and tender, and an upright sentence of the mind, agreeable
to this engraven maxims of good and evil: and thus much shall suffice you for
blushing. As for the shunning of men's countenances, and bashfulnes, either in
beholding, or being beheld, it rises upon a giltines in conceit, or in
effect, in that we fear is known to others wherein we have offended, or stand
in doubt we shall offend. This conceit causes us to hide our selves, and to
withdraw our presence from the society of me^, whom we fear do view our
faults in beholding us, and whereof our presence stirs up the remembrance.
Wherefore we being desirous to cover and hyde our offense, seek also to be
hidden and covered, who have deserved the blame: especially from such of whom
we have greatest reverence, and of whose estimation and censure we stand most
in awe of. Now because the vewing of another causes the like from him again,
therefore does the guilty mind abstain there from: that it provoke not the eye
of another whom he does behold: especially if the other party look upon him
again, then is he presently outcountenanced through the guilty conceit, and
jealousy of the crime which he suspect to be reueiled. Moreover the countenance
being as it were the graven character of the mind, the guilty person fears
least that be red in his forehead, whereof he is guilty in his heart: which
augmenteth the grief, when he sees himself eyed more then (by turning aside
his own countenance) when he beholds it not. Thus much touching the former
bashful actions, whether they rise upon cause, or opinion only: it remains
of this chapter to show, how melancholicke persons are much subject to both,
though they have committed nothing deserving rebuke, or worthy of shame. That
which befalls youth, by their tender age in blushing, the same in a manner
happens to melancholicke persons by their complexion: youth and children, if
they come in place of reverend persons will easily blush, not of any fault
committed, but of reverence to the parties: nature as it were secretly in
respect, condemning her imperfections in that age, whereof the presence of both
makes a kind of comparison. Moreover the nature careful of that which is
seemly and decent, not acquainted with such presence, doubts of error and
uncomeliness, and distrusting it self, blusheth as if offense had been
committed. This is the cause why the young take occasion sooner then the aged,
and why reverend and unacquainted presence causes this passion. They which are
of mo years, by reason of experience and further knowledge, which breeds an
assurance, more hardly blush, and familiarity and custom makes greater
boldness. Even so the melancholic person, through his internal mislike, and
cause of discouragement, has little assurance or contentment in his actions
whatsoever: Whereby without cause he easily grows into a conceit of some
absurdity committed where none is: this causes him to blush, and to express
by outward rednes of color the internal passion: especially this befalls
him, if he carry any conscience of former vice committed: then does that
ouercharge and set all out of order, chiefly if it mingle the passion with
fear, and the quality of the blood and spirit, largenes of poores, and
disposition of the skin in the face answer thereunto. But how, will you
say, can the melancholy person have his spirit and blood so disposed, which I
have declared to be gross and thick, and the passages of their bodies not
free? Truth it is that all melancholicke persons are not so disposed to this
action of blushing, by reason they are of blood, spirit, and body unapt
thereunto: but certain only who have melancholy not equally disposed, but
rests under the ribs, and anoieth chiefly with his vapor, and who are such
not from their parents, but by some accident of diet or evil custom, which
notwithstanding retain as yet the same disposition of their firm parts they
had before: or have some other humor of thinner substance, whereby their blood
is not so dull of ebbing and flowing: these I take to be the melancholic
blushers only, and the rest in all respects far removed there from: whose
swartnes of the skin with other impediments both hinders the recourse of
the blood: and if they did blush, ouershadoweth the color. The same cause
which stirs blushing in melancholicke men, forces them to avoid
assemblies, and public theaters: and this is common to all melancholickes,
howsoever they be tempered in their bodies: even the opinion and fancy of some
disgrace from others, who are greatly displeased with themselves, and by their
erroneous conceit prevent the sentence of others upon themselves, and condemn
that unjustly, which ducly wayed, and without passion, has no desert of blame.
Thus much for these actions of blushing, and bashfullnes.

CHAP. XXX. Of the natural actions altered by melancholy.
HItherto you have had declared the alteration of such actions as lie in our
power, and are for the most part arbitrarie: it follows to show unto you the
rest which are natural, and are not at our beck, but are performed by a
certain instinct of nature will we, nil we. These actions are of appetite, or
of nourishment: the actions of appetite are of meat and drink, or of
procreation. Touching appetite of meat, melancholy persons have it for the
most part exceeding, and far surpassing their digesture. The cause why, it is
through an abundance of melancholy, which easily passes from the spleen, the
sincke of that humor, to the stomach, whose sowernes provoke an appetite of
nourishment, to delay that sharpnes which molesteth the mouth thereof: and that
you may with more facility conceive this point, mark what I shall say of the
spleen, the stomach, and the passage of that humor thereinto. The spleen lies
under the short ribs on the left side of the stomach backward, and is
ordained to purge the blood of mela^cholick juice, which it draws unto it
self by mean of veins, and being satisfied with some part wherewith it is
nourished, the remnaunte sower of taste, and as a natural sauce, it belcheth
as it were into the stomach, whose sharpnes causes a kind of grief and
knawing therein, especially about the entrance, which is most sensible, and so
provoke the appetite of nourishment: by whose sweet and familiar juice, the
sharpnes or sowernes of the other is dulled and tempered, and so the biting
eased. Besides this sense which the quallity of melancholy offers to the
stomach it (according to the nature of all things of that taste) binds and
contracteth the stomach: which may also be another cause of the increase of
that pain which inforceth to seek after nourishment. Thus then the stomach
being subject unto the splenetick humor, as it exceeds or is more sour, so
does this appetite more increase. Now in persons melancholicke, the superfluity
of this humor is in great abundance, which thereby the more forces the
appetite: and this I take to be one cause of that greedy hunger, which is more
insatiable in melancholicke men then in others. To this may be added the desire
that nature has to seek and supply, that thick, gross and dry humor, with
new and fresh nourishment, and to temper the foggy spirits of that humor,
with more clear, fresh and new: these wants of nature happily are another
cause of that greedy appetite of melancholicke persons. Their concoction and
digestion is not aunswerable to the appetite: through the coldness of the
stomach, both by the melancholicke blood, wherewith it is fedder, and more
neighborhood of the spleen, which is a part inclyning from mediocrity to
coldness in temper: this hinders the concoction. The digestion or distribution
fails through difficulty of passage, both by thicknes and slownes of the
melancholy juice, and narrownes of the way, especially if the party be by
nature, and not through other occasion melancholicke. To this may be added the
dulnes of attractiue power of the parts, caused by coldness and dryness, and
the unsavory juice, in comparison of the pure blood, whereof nature is not
pricked so vehemently with the desire. These I take to be reasons of the quick
appetite of melancholicke persons, and slow digestion, and concoction, which
parts of the former division belonging to nourishment, by order should
afterward be handled: but because the comparison with the appetite ministered
occasion, you shall take them in this place, and not look for them hereafter.
Whatsoever other imbecility of natural action about nourishment is depraved
by melancholy, the reason may be drawn from that has bin showed of the other.
They are not so desirous of drink, although melancholy be a dry humor, both
because their coldness stakeneth the thirst and their stomachs be moist by want
of digestion, which sends up waterie vapors into the mouth, besides the
ascent of the humor it self, which satisfies the drought if any be, and
preuenteth the desire of drink. Their stomach is cold through melancholy,
which by the abundance which flows therein from the spleen is cooled, as
also by the vicinetie of the same, which lies close thereunto. The other
appetite is of procreation, wherewith or the most part melancholy persons are
more vehemently stirred: the cause where of I take to be double: the one from
the affection of love, wherewith they are soon overtaken: the other a windy
disposition of their bodies, which procures that desire. They are allured to
love more easily, because they more admire other then themselves, and being
cast down with co^ceite of their own imperfection, extol in their fancy that
which has any small grace of louelines in another. The other reason I refer
you to read at large of in treatises of philosophy, written of the matter in
other languages: the gravity and modesty of our tongue not fitting with phrase
to deliver such problemes. Thus much shall suffice for the appetite depraved by
melancholy: other sorts of natural actions besides concoction and
distribution, (which have been before sufficiently to the purpose in hand
entreated of) are the retention over fast, and assimulation, or turning of the
nourishment into our substances imperfect. The first fault rises chiefly of
the drinessse of the parts, which thereby retain any humiditie, the slownesse
of the humor which makes no way though nature expel; and if it be an
excrement that should pass, the grossness wherewith she has been
acquainted, causes the offense thereof less to be felt, and so nature
becomes more sluttish in cleansing the body of his impurities. Again the
sense of such persons is not very quick, neither carries the excrement any
prickinge of provocation, which should put nature in remembrance of auoydance,
except immoderate quantity serve that turn, whereof the dryness of
melancholicke natures is an impediment. The assimilation is faulty by reason
of cold; this causes that morphewe, which often staineth melancholicke bodies,
and bespeckleth their skin here and there with black stains of this humor:
and then the nourishment in steed of supplying the perpetual flux of our
bodies, and aunswering in like substance, is (by fault of the part of
melancholicke disposition) depraved, and turned into like juice, wherewith the
part is dyed into that black color. The color is black of the nature of
of the humor, and disposition of the part which by imbecillitie is not able to
alter it into whiteness, to the similitude of it self. Hitherto I have
declared unto you what actions melancholy depraueth; whether voluntary, or
natural; of voluntary, whether of sense and motion, or of affection and
perturbation; of natural whether action of appetite, or belonging to the
working of nourishment: of appetite, whether of victualles, or of lust:
touching dressing and preparation of nourishment, whether it be coction,
digestion, attraction, retention, assimulation or expulsion: it remains to
deliver unto you, what works are depraved by this humor, and how it
corrupts the perfection of them.

CHAP. XXXI. How melancholy alters natural works of the body, juice and
excrement.
ALL the works which rise of natural actions in our bodies may be reduced to
two sorts: the one is natural juice, apt for nourishment and building up the
decay of our bodies through the business of this life and the internal fire,
which continually craves fuel of victual: the other is a superfluity which
rises of the mass of meats and drinks, separated from the pure and
nutritive, by the trial of our natural heat: as we see the dross and
impuritie of metalles discovered by the fire. This superfluity nature
expels out of the body, not being of that sincerity and familiar quality,
which nourishment is endued with. Both these are altered by this melancholicke
disposition, whereof my discourse runs. The nourishing juice (by
melancholy) of such nourishmentes as are pure and good receaueth imperfection,
and becomes grosser, thicker, and more crude then by the quality of the
substance it might be: the rather also, because melancholicke appetite is not
proportional to their digestion, but exceeds. These causes procure the
nourishing juice thick, gross, and crude, because the heat of melancholicke
persons is abated by this humor; which heat is the worker of separation, and
makes subtle and liquide that which of nature has no contrary disposition.
This nourishing juice is either primitive, and the first where of the other
take beginning and matter; or else deriuatiue and rising from the primitive.
The primitive is that which is wrought in the stomach, and is in color white,
liquide, equal, of a cremy substance: in this, as yet, no separation is made
of place, but wholesome and unwholesome, excrement and nourishment are mixed
together; only there they are as it were dissolved and broken, and by our
heat made more familiar unto us, and prepared for other parts more easy
handling This is the grosser, for causes before alleged, and yields the
excrement voyded by stool, the thickest and grossest of all the rest; which
being increased in those qualities by the melancholicke disposition, molesteth
them with costiuenesse, and hardness of belly. For through the qualities
before mentioned it passes not so easily the guts, which besides the foulds
they have, lest we should be oftener then were meet forced to the stool, they
have plaits overthwart, as is to be seen in the inwardes of beasts, which the
dry excrement more hardly passes over. Again, such as are inclined to one
excess of humor, are for the most part less prone to another: especially if
it has any contrary quality: so melancholy, exceeding through the cooling
of the temper, therewith less plenty of choler is engendered; which choler
nature serves her self of for a natural clyster of the intrailes and guts,
both to scour them, and with bitterness to stir up more readily the natural
excretion. Of this humor then melancholicke persons possessing but small
portion, and the excrement of it self gross and dry, stays longer in the
passage, then nature without annoyance may well bear: and this is the cause
why melancholicke persons are for the most part encumbred with costiuenesse,
especially if they be lean with all, (as hardly are they otherwise) and want
that natural basting of fat (which some have more then sufficient) then is this
hardness of stool much more increased. The nourishment thus delivered of this
excrement, in the liver is turned into blood, and of white by farther process
of heat is made red. In passing of this trial it yeldeth two excrements, the
one choleric, and the other melancholicke, while it remains in the liver,
and before it be yet passed into the veins; the choleric is in her
quantity, except the meats and drinks of them selves do minister greater
store of that matter, else their bodies are unapt for generation of that
humor; the melancholy is in great abundance, by reason of the inclination of
the complexion thereunto, and want of pure refining in the liver; the
abundance whereof is such, that it passes down from the spleen with gross
and melancholy juice into the Hemerodes, and delivers of pleurisies,
phrensies, and madness, (whereto the melancholickes are subject) if their flow
be not too sparing. This abundance, and thickness causes their spleen to
swell, which is said therefore to procure laughter, because it draws, and
sucketh the melancholicke excrement, and purges that humor which has been
before declared to breed so many fearful passions and breeds stoppings,
whereby it defiles the whole supply of the humors. The blood now discharged of
the liver, and possessed of the vains, yet leaves another excreme^t more
liquid and thin then the rest: this nature disburdeneth it self of by the
virtue of the reins, whose office is to suck out that thin humor, and to
distill it into the bladder, from whence after a while nature remembered thereof,
either by quantity, heat, or sharpnes delivers it quite out of the body. This
excrement is not plentiful in melancholicke persons, but of color white, by
reason of cold, and little stained for want of choler, and thick of substance
according to the blood, from whence it is drawn. The blood thus purified, and
delivered of so many superfluous excrements, in the end passes from the
great, into the small veins, and from the small into the private poores of
every member, and by diverse degrees at the length receaueth the similitude of
our nature, by the complexion of every part, and is united in all respects
unto our natural substance. In this degree of natures work, sundry
superfluities arise, partly common to all parts, and partly private to
certain. The common is sweat, whereof melancholicke persons are spare, through
dryness, and sweat requiring heat working upon a moisture, which both fail
in the melancholicks. For want of sufficient heat they are not much annoyed
that way, neither does the humors of their bodies gross of substance deliver
ready matter thereunto. The other universal kind is a kind of insensible
steme, which breaths continually from our bodies, and appears on a man's
shirt, though he have not sweat and soiled it. This melancholic men have more
foul, then the other estates of body, and deliver more plenty, especially
if their bodies be chafed with exercise: for not having free passage otherwise,
for causes before mentioned, it setleth about the skin more abundantly, and
upon exercise which opens the poores, and rarisieth the body, makes plain
an outward show. The particular excrements, especially worth noting, are that
void from our head, stomach, and chest. From the head, melancholicke men have
abundance, by reason of the stomaches cruditie, whose vapors it congeleth, or
gathers into rhewme, and distilleth it into the mouth. From the stomach, it
rises by the grain of the throat, as you see moisture rise from the water pot
by a clout in watering of millions and cucumbers. The longes void not much
although through want of heat it gathers of crude excreme^t in those parts,
thicker, with less sense of heat, then moderate. These be the accidents which
fall unto melancholicke persons, and thus procured: if any have been omitted,
either they be such as are of no moment to be known, or the reason of them is
easily rendered from that which has of the rest been shown, neither was my
purpose in precise manner to deliver these points unto you, as they are to be
taught in a school of Philosophy, but only to give you a taste of the^ for
better understanding of your present state, and discharge of that duty of
friendship which your request lays upon me in this melancholicke theme. This
far I have proceeded in my discourse philosophically, in laying the whole case
of melancholy (so far as my skill in nature exte^deth) before you, as the
first part of your desire pretended: hereafter as the order of your request
prescribes, you shall have mine opinion of that affection which rises upon
horror, and conscience of sin, with fear and feelingof Gods revenging hand
against the same; whether it be any part of melancholy or not; whether
melancholic persons are subject most thereunto; what advantage Satan takes in
this case by the frailty of the body; with such other doubts, as your letter
ministered unto me; and in the end my counsel and comfort, and what direction
else my physic help will afford, for restoring you to the former estate of
your body, fallen in decay through this humor, and to that tranquillity of
mind, and those comfortes of Gods grace, which before this temptation assailed
you, you ioyed in, and was able to minister comfort unto others afflicted with
like distress; and so commit the success of this my labor to the blessing of
God, and refer my loving endeavor to that friendly acceptatio^, wherewith you
are wont to value the slender offices of great good will unto you.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the affliction of conscience for sin.
OF all kinds of miseries that befall unto man, none is so miserable as that
which rises of the sense of Gods wrath, and revenging hand against the guilty
soul of a sinner. Other calamities afflict the body, and one part only of our
nature: this the soul, which carries the whole into society of the same
misery. Such as are of the body, although they approach nigher the quick then
poverty, or want of necessaries for maintenance of this life, yet they fail
in degree of misery, and come short of that which this forces upon the soul.
The other touch those parts where the soul commands; poverty, nakedness,
sickness and other of that kind are mitigated with a mind resolute in
patience, or endued with wisdom to ease that grieueth by supply of remedy:
this sezeth upon the seat of wisdom it self, and charge upon all the
excellency of understanding, and grindeth into powder all that stands firm,
and melts like the dew before the Sun whatsoever we recke^ of as support of
our defectes, and subdueth that wherewith all things else are of us subdued:
the cause, the guilt, the punishment, the revenge, the ministers of the wrath,
all concurring together in more forcible sort (and that against the universal
state of our nature, not for a time, but for ever) then in any other kind of
calamity whatsoever. Here the cause is not either wou^d or surfeit, shipwreck
or spoil, infamy, or disgrace, but all kind of misery joined together with a
troubled spirit, feeling the beginnings, and expecting with desperate fear the
eternal consummatio^ of the indignation, and fierce wrath of Gods vengeance
against the violation of his holy co^mandeme^ts: which although in this life it
takes not away the use of outward benefits, yet does the internal anguish
bereue us of all delight of the^, and that pleasant relish they are endued with
to our comforts: so that manifold, better were it the use of the^ were quite
taken away, the^ for us in such sort to enjoy them. Neither is here the
guiltines of breach of humane laws (whose punishment extends no farther then
this present life, which even of it self is full of calamities not much
inferior to the pain adjoined unto the transgression of civil laws) but of
the Law divine, and the censure executed with the hand of God, whose fierce
wrath prosecuteth the punishment eternally as his displeasure is like to him
self, and follows us into our graves, and receaueth no satisfaction with
any punishment, either in regard of continuance or of extremity. Such is the
crime, and such is the guiltiness which infer the reward fitting and fully
answering the desert: which being a seaparation from Gods favor the creator
and blesser of all things, the fountain of all peace and comfort, what
creature the work of his hands dare cheer us with any consolation? or what
assurance may we have of escape if we would flee? the punishment as it has no
misery to compare with, and the sense thereof not to be described to the
capacity of any, but of such as have felt the anguish, as your self at this
present, is rather to be showed by negation of all happiness, then by direct
affirmation of torment. For as the happiness rising of Gods favor, besides the
enjoying of all bodily and earthly blessings, so far forth as is expedient
for us, and tending to his glory, is above al conceit of man's heart, and
report of tunge: so the contrary estate exceeds all understanding of the
mind, and vtteraunce of speech, and is such as it is above measure unhappy and
most miserable, inflicted by Gods revenge, who is himself a consuming fire, and
whose wrath once kindled, burns to the bottom of hell. In other miseries of
execution, the minister may upon compassion and entreaty mitigate the rigor:
here Satan moved with the old ranchor, and an ennimy vnreco^cilable has the
charge, who is so far of from pitying our estate, that to the increase of
torment, where the Lord chasteneth with mercy, and limiteth sometimes this
tormentor in compass of our possessions and goods, he urges skin for
skin, streatch out thy hand, touch his bones and his flesh: and if express
charge were not to the contrary would not satisfy himself therewith, except
life, yea not only temporal, but that everlasting, whereof we have assured
promises of God, went also for payment. But what do I describe this unto you,
whose present experience exceeds my discourse? Although it be necessary to be
laid open, for more clear distinguishing thereof from the melancholy passions
above mentioned, and the quality of this misery thus being known, such as by
Godds mercy are yet free, may acknowledge his grace therein, pray for the
continewance of that freedom, and pity the estate of such as groan under the
burden of that heavy cross, wherein no reason is able to minister
co^solatio^, nor the burden whereof the Angels themselves have ability to
sustain. Leaving the description of this affliction I will fall to the
deliberation, whether this kind be of melancholy or not, and so proceed to
the doubts, which the comparison of them both together may minister unto us.

CHAP. XXXIII. Whether the conscience of sin and the affliction thereof be
melancholy or not.
BY that has been before declared it may easily appear the affliction of
soul through conscience of sin is quite another thing then mela^choly: but
yet to the end it may lie most clear, I will lay them together, so shall their
distinct natures thus compared be wray the error of some, and the prophanes of
othersome, who either account the cause natural, melancholy, or madness, or
else having some farther insighte, with a Stoicall prophanes of Atheism,
skoffe at that kind of affliction, against which they themselves labor to
shut up their hard hearts, and with obstinacy of stomach to bear out that
whereof they tremble with horror, and not having other refuge, pass over the
sense with a desperate resolution: which would awake, and does not fail at
times, to touch the quick of the securest, and most flinty hearted gallantes of
the world. Therefore to the end, the one may be reformed in their judgment, and
the other may thereby take occasion to reform their manners, let them consider
that this is a sorrow and fear upon cause, and that the greatest cause that
works misery unto man: the other contrarily a mere fancy and has no ground
of true and just object, but is only raised upon disorder of humor in the
fancy, and rashly delivered to the heart, which upon natural credulity faireth
in passion, as if that were in deed whereof the fancy gives a false larume. In
this the body stands often times in firm state of health, perfect in
complexion, and perfect in shape, and al symmetrie of his parts, the humors in
quantity and quality not exceeding nor wanting their natural proportion. In
the other, the complexio^ is depraved, obstructions hinder the free course of
spirits and humors, the blood is over gross, thick, and impure, and nature so
disordered, that diverse melancholicke persons have judged themselves some
earthie pitchers, othersome cocks, other some to have wanted their heads etc,
as if they had bin transported by the evil quality of the humor into strange
natures: here the se^ses are often times perfect both outward and inward, the
imagination sound, the heart well compact and resolute, and this excepted, want
no courage. In the other, the inward sense and outward to feebled, the fancy
overtaken with ghastly sumes of mela^choly, and the whole force of the spirit
closed up in the dungion of melancholy darkness, imagines all dark, black
and full of fear, their hearts are either ouertender and rare, and so easily
admit the passion, or over closse of nature serve more easily to imprison,
the cheerful spirits the causes of comfort to the rest of the body:
whereby they are not in one respect only fainte hearted, and full of discourage:
but every small occasion, yea though none be, they are driven with tide of that
humor to fear, eue^ in the midst of security. Here it first proceeds from
the minds apprehension: there from the humor, which deluding the organicall
actions, abuses the mind, and draws it into erroneous judgment, through
false testimony of the outward report. Here no medicine, no purgation, no
cordial, no tryacle or balm are able to assure the afflicted soul and
trembling heart, now painting under the terrors of God: there in melancholy the
vain opened, neesing powder or bearefoote ministered, cordialls of pearl,
Saphires, and rubies, with such like, recomforte the heart thrown down, and
appaled with fa^tasticall fear. In this affliction, the peril is not of body,
and corporal actions, or decay of servile, and temporal uses, but of the
whole nature soul and body cut of from the life of God, and from the sweet
influence of his favor, the fountain of all happiness and eternal felicity.
Finally if they be diligently compared in cause, in effect, in quality, in
whatsoever respect these vnreuerent and profane persons list to match them,
they shall appear of diverse nature, never to be be coupled in one fellowship,
as more particularly shall be showed hereafter. The cause here is the severity of
Gods judgment, summoning the guilty conscience: the subject is the sinful
soul apprehending the terror thereof, which is not momentary or for a season,
but for ever and ever: the issue of this affliction is eternal punishment,
satisfactory to the justice of the eternal God, which is endless, and whose
severity admits no mediation, neither that extended to one ioynte, sinue or
vain, but to all, neither that of the body only, but of the soul, whose
nature, as it is impatible of all other things, and of all other things in
greatest peace, assurance and tranquillitye, so once shaken by the terrors of
Gods wrath, and blasted with that whirlewinde of his displeasure, falls and
with it drives the whole frame of our nature into extreme misery and utter
confusion: so far they are abused who judge these cases as natural, and such
is the calamity of those whom the profane ones of this world propound unto
themselves as matter of scoff and derision, laboring by all means to benumme
the sense of that stinge, which sin ever carries in the tail, what pretense
so ever it shows of right, profit or pleasure, in face of outward appearance,
to delude the fool and simple in his ways, skillfull to do evil, sottish in
the paths of righteousness, and utterly ignorant of her rule, and wherein
nature gives some spark of light, more distinctly to discern, even there
with corruption of affection, like to stubburne and vnbroaken horse, shakes of
reason, dispiseth her manage, and lays the noble ryder in the dust. In
respect of you my dear M. I know this discourse were superfluous, who stands
in need of salve to the sore, and bears not the least touch of this gale,
but because my purpose in this labor is not only to inform and to comfort
you, but also for the instruction of others, bear with this, and pass it
over, as not belonging unto you, but to the fool: of whom Solomon speaks,
that follows wickedness like an Ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a
fool to the stocks for correction, and as a bird hastes to the snare, not
knowing that he is in danger. Touching your particular estate, that you may
judge thereof more sincerely, you are to esteem of it, as mixed of the
melancholic humor and that terror of God: which as it is upon the wicked an
entrance into their eternal destruction, so unto you, it is, (as I shall
hereafter at large make proof) a fatherly frowning only for a time, to correct
that which in you is to be reformed, and an admonition of farther
circumspection in your ways and course of life hereafter. For the first point
you may remember your swollen spleen, with windnes and hardenes under the left
ribs, the hemeroydes not flowing according to their usual manner, the
blacknes and grossenes of that blood which has been taken from you upon
occasion, your dreams ordinarily fearful, your solitarines and exceeding
sadness, with almost all kind of accidents which accompany melancholy. For
the other part whereof most you complain, the manner leads me to judge
thereof otherwise then natural, both because such is indeed the fear and
terror of God sent upon man, and no effect of any creature or cause besides: as
also because the object or moving cause is, in reason and clear understanding,
void of all abuse of fancy, such as of necessity inforceth these lamentable
effects which your soul feels and desires the release of, upon you the
cross falls more heavily, in so much as you are under the disadvantage of
the melancholicke complexion: whose opportunity Satan embraces to urge all
terror against you to the fall. But remember that he who has redeemed us,
passed under these fears and has sanctified them to his redeemed, and
according to his example, who was heard in that which he feared, when in the
days of his flesh he did offer up prayers and supplications with strong crying
and tears unto him that was able to save him from death: so follow him in hope
and patience, who has obtained the victory not for him self only, but for
all such as in like temptation depend upon him. To the end my labor may give
you a more perfect direction in this heavy case, what is natural, and what is
according to the good pleasure of God in the other distress above nature, I
will make particular distinction of both in the Chapter following, to your
clearer understanding.

CHAP. XXXIIII. The particular difference betwixt melancholy, and the
distressed conscience in the same person.
Whatsoever molestation rises directly as a proper object of the mind, that
in that respect is not melancholicke, but has a farther ground then fancy,
and rises from conscience, condemning the guilty soul of those engraven
laws of nature, which no man is void of, be he never so laborous. This is it,
that has caused the profane poets to have fained Hecates Eumenides, and the
infernal furies; which although they be but fained persons, yet the matter
which is showed under their mask, is serious, true, and of woeful experience.
This takes nothing of the body, nor intermedleth with humor, but gives a
direct wound with those fiery darts, which men so afflicted make their moan
of. Of this kind Saul was possessed, to whom the Lord sent an evil spirit
to increase the torment; and Judas the traitor, who took the revenge of
betraying the innocent upon him self with his own hands; such was the
anguish that Esau felt when he found no repentance, after he had sold his
birthright for a mess of pottage; and such is the estate of all defiled
consciences with heinous crimes; whose hearts are never free from that worm,
but with deadly bite thereof are driven to despair. These terrible obiectes
which properly appertain unto the mind, are such as only affect it with
horror of Gods justice for breach of those laws natural, or written in his
word, which by duty of creation, we are holden to obey. For the mind as it is
impatible of any thing but of God only that made it, so stands it in awe of
none but of him, neither admits it any other violence then from him, into
whose hands it is most terrible and fearful to fall. This causes such
distress unto those that feel the torment hereof, that they would redeem it
gladly, if it were possible with any other kind, yea mith suffering all other
kind of misery. This has befallen unto the wisest among men while the
integrity of their understanding has stood sound; it takes of a sudden like
lightning, and gives no warning. Here the puririe of the blood, and the
sincerity and liveliness of the spirits avail nothing to mitigate the pain,
but only the expiatorie sacrifice of the unspotted lamb. On the contrary
part, when any conceit troubles you that has no sufficient ground of
reason, but rises only upon the frame of your brain, which is subject (as
has been before showed) unto the humor, that is right melancholicke, and so
to be accounted of you. These are false points of reason deceived by the
melancholy brain, and disguised scarres of the heart, without ability to
work the pretenced annoyaunce: neither do they approach the substance, and the
substantial and sovereign actions of the soul, as the other does. This
estate happens by degrees, and gets strength in time, to the encumbrance
of all the isntrumental actions, and drive the brain into a sottishness, and
obscure the clear light of reason. Here the humor purged, and the spirit
attenuate and refreshed with remedy convenient, the brain strengthened, and
the heart comforted with cordial, are means most excellent ordained of God for
this infirmity. And to deliver you in a word the difference, whatsoever is
besides conscience of sin in this case, it is melancholy: which conscience
terrified, is of such nature, so beset with infinite fears and distrust, that
it easily wastes the pure spirit, congeleth the lively blood, and strikes
our nature in such sort, that it soon becomes melancholicke, vile and base,
and turns reason into foolishness, and disgraceth the beauty of the
countenance, and tranfor meth the stoutest Nabucadnezar in the world into a
brute beast; so easily is the body subject to alteration of mind, and soon
loses with anguish and destruction thereof, all the support of his
excellency. Besides this in you, vain fears, and false conceits of
apparitions, imagination of a voice sounding in your ears, frightfull dreams,
distrust of the consumption, and putrefying of one part or other of your body,
and the rest of this crew, are causes of molestation, which are whelps of that
melancholicke litter, and are bred of the corrupted state of the body alaltered
altered in spirit, in blood, in substance and complexion, by the abundance of
this settling of the blood, which we call melancholy. This increases the
terror of the afflicted mind, doubling the fear and discouragement, and
shuts up the means of consolation, which is after another sort to be
conveyed to the mind, then the way which the temptation takes to breed
distrust of Gods mercy, and pardon. For that has sin the means, which
needs no conueyaunce, but is bred with us, and enters even into our
conceptio^: neither is the guiltiness brought unto us by foreine report, but
the knowledge rises from the conscience of the offender: the means (I mean
the outward means of consolation and cure) must needs pass by our senses to
enter the mind whose instrument being altered by the humor, and their sincerity
stained with the obscure and dark spots of melancholy, receive not
indifferently the medicine of co^solatio^. So it both mistaketh, that which it
apprehends, and delivers it imperfectly to the minds consideration. As
their brains are thus evil disposed, so their hearts in no better case, and
acquainted with terror, and ouertbrown with that fearful passion, hardly set
free the cherfull spirits, feebled with the corporal prison of the body, and
hardly yield to persuasion of comfort what soever it brings of assurance.
This causes the release of the affliction to be long and hard, and not
answerable to the swiftness of the procuring cause, having so many ways top
ass, and encountering so many lets before it meet with the sore. For as the
cause respects not time nor place, no circumstance of person, nor condition,
seeks no opportunity of corporal imbecility, but breakeath through all such
considerations, and bears down all resistance: so the comfort requires them
all agreeable, and missing any one, works feeble effects, and slow. Here the
co^forters person, his manner, the time, and place, may hinder the consolation:
here the brain and heart, being as it were the gates and entrance unto the
soul, as they be affected, aid, or hinder the consolation; so that the
conscience distressed falling into a mela^choly state of body, thereby receives
delay of restoring in respect of outward means; though the grace of God, and
his mercy, his comfortable spirit, and gracious favor in like swiftness
without means may restore the mind thus distressed: which lies equally open
to the kind of cure, eue^ as it lay to the wound. Thus I conclude this point of
difference, and mark betwixt melancholy and the souls proper anguish, whose
only cause proceeds from Gods vengeance and wrath apprehended of the guilty
soul: neither does melancholy alone, (though it may hinder the outward means
of consolation, as it has bin before showed) any thing make men more subject
unto this kind of affliction. First because the body works nothing upon the
soul altogether impatible of any other saving of God alone. 2. The torment is
such as rises from an efficient that requires no disposition of means; God
himself. 3. The comfort is not procured by any corporal instruments, so neither
is the disco^fort procured or increased that way; moreover the cause, the
subject, the proper effects are other then corporal. For although in that case
the heart is heavy, delivering a passion answerable to the fearful
apprehension, yet the sense of those that are under this cross feel an
anguish far beyond all affliction of natural passion coupled with that
organicall fear and heaviness of heart. The melancholy disposes to fear,
doubt, distrust, and heaviness, but all either without cause, or where there
is cause above it inforceth the passion. Here both the most vehement cause
urges, and always carries a passion therewith above the hearts affection, even
the entry of those torments, which cannot be conceived at full, as our nature
now stands, nor delivered by report. Here in this passion, the cause is not
fear nor passionate grief, but a torment procuring these affections: and even
as the punishment of bodily racking is not the passion of the heart, but causes
it only; so the heart fares under this sore of the mind, which here properly
fretteth and straineth the sins of the soul, wherefrom the heart takes his
grievous discouragement, and faints under Gods justice. Hitherto you have
described that which your soul feels, not to instruct you, but that other
may more truly judge of the case, and the distinction betwixt melancholy and
it, may be more apparent.

CHAP. XXXV. The affliction of mind to what persons it befalls, and by what
means.
ALthough no man is by nature freed from this affliction, in so much as all men
are sinners, and being culpable of the breach of God laws, incur the
punishment of condemnation: yet is the melancholicke person more then any
subject thereunto: not that the humor has such power, which has before bin
declared to stand far a loofe of such effect, but by reason the mela^cholicke
person is most doubtful, and iclous of his estate, not only of this life, but
also of the life to come; this makes him fall into debate with him self, and
to be more then curious; who finding his actions not fitting the natural, or
written line of righteousness, and wanting that archpiller of faith and
assurance in Christ Jesus our hope, partly thorough fear finds the horror,
and partly (if it please God so far to touch) feels the very anguish due
unto the sinner, and in that most miserable condition falls into flat
despair. This comes to pass, when the curious melancholy carries the mind
into the senses of such mysteries as exceed humayne capacity, and is desirous
to know more the^ is revealed in the word of truth: or being ignorant of that
which is revealed thorough importunate inquiry, of a sudden falls into that
gulf of Gods secret counselles which swalloweth up all conceit of man or
angel: and measuring the truth of such depth of mysteries by the shallow
modill of his own wit, is caught and devoured of that which his presumptuous
curiosity moved him to attempt to apprehend. Of melancholy persons, especially
such as are most contemplative, except they be well grounded in the word of
God, and remove not one hair therfrom in their speculations, are this ways
most overtaken, and receive the punishment of ouerbold attempt of those holy
things, which the Lord has reserved to his own counsel: while they neglect
the declared truth, propounded for rule of life and practice, in written words
revealed; not remembering the exhortation of Moses to the children of Israel:
the secrets are the Lords but the revealed will, appertains to us, and our
children. And this in mine opinion is one cause wherefore melancholicke
persons are more prone to fall into this pit, then such as are in their
organicall members otherwise affected. Now contemplations are more familiar
with melancholicke persons then with other, by reason they be not so apt for
action, consisting also of a temper still and slow according to the nature of
the melancholy humor, which if it be attenuated with heat, delivers a
dry, subtle and pearcing spirit, more constant and stable then any other
humor, which is a great help to this contemplation. As the melancholicke is
most subject to the calamity before mentioned, and especially the
contemplative, so of them most of all, such whose vocation consists in study
of hard points of learning, and that philosophical (especially of Nature)
have cause in this case to carry a low sail, and sometime to strike, and lay
at the anchor of the Scriptures of God, lest by tempest of their presumption,
they be carried into that whirle poole, whereout they be in danger (without the
especial grace of Gods mercy) never to deliver them selves. Such except they
be well ballaced with knowledge of the Scriptures, and assurance of Gods
spirit, are never able to abide the ouglinesse of their sins, when they
shall be once vnfolden, and the narrow point of reprobration and clection
propounded unto their melancholicke brains and hearts, and most miserale
polluted souls: unacquainted with Gods covenant of mercy, and that earnest
of his favor, the comfortable spirit of his grace. Of such as have some
knowledge in the word, and practice of obedience, the want of the true
apprehending of gods revealed will touching election and reprobation, and the
right method of learning and conceauing the doctrine, causes some to stumble,
and fall at this stone. For as a sword taken at the wrong end is ready to
wound the hand of the taker, and held by the handle is a fit weapon of defense;
even so the doctrine of predestination being preposterously conceived, may
through fault of the conceiuer procure hurt; whereas of it self it is the most
strong rock of assurance, in all storms of temptations that can befall unto
body or soul. The one part of predestination, is Gods immutable will, the
cause and rule of all justice, and uttermost of all reason in his works: the
other part is the execution of that will, according to mercy or justice,
saving or condemning, with all the means thereto belonging: Christ Jesus in
those of whom the Lord will show mercy, and the just desert of a sinner on
whom he is determined to show the justice of his wrath. If this most
comfortable doctrine, and the firm ancher of our profession be not in all
parts equally apprehended, we may not only miss the benefit thereof through
our own fault, but receive wound and dangerous hurt thereby. For if the
consideration be bent upon Gods will and counsel only, without respect of the
means, it is impossible but the frailty of man's nature must needs be
distracted into diverse perilous and desperate fears, finding nothing in it
self that may answer his justice, and withstand the fearful sentence of
condemnation: if it stay in the means of his justice only, and have not eye
upon his mercy in his son Christ, then likewise arises an assurance of
eternal destruction to the conscience defiled, and the guilty soul deformed
with iniquity: if the means of his mercy be regarded without farther respect
of his eternal decree and immouable justice, then is there also no assurance
of his mercy unto miserable man, who melts like snow and vanishes like a
vapor before his justice, and doubting of the continuance of his favor
always hangs in suspense. All these considerations thus severally falling
into the melancholic person, move doubt and care, and either breed a resolute
desperatnes, or a continual distrust, tossing hither and thither the soul not
established by knowledge and faith in Gods eternal counsel, and the most
wise, just and merciful means of his execution: which being perfectly known
according to the word, and sealed up in the christian heart by the work of
Gods spirit, is so far of from disquieting the spirit or breeding doubt,
that the children of God in all temptations find the immutability mutability
of Gods counsel, and the testimony of his favor in their consciences by his
spirit, to supporte them in all storms of temptation, and to be the rock
against which no violence of Satan, or his ministers, or whatsoever their own
infirmity offers of discouragement can prevail. Besides these, such as read
the word of God with passionate humor, fall into this inconvenience:
especially if without guide and instruction they carry any presumption of mind
and are not modest and wary in their collections, such being melancholicke may
easily fall into distrust of Gods mercy, and perish in despair. So that
ignorance and infidelity, are the chief causes of this miserable estate:
whereinto many have fallen, especially such as have never been able to be
recomforted, which for the most part are they who with neglect of Godds fear
and hardness of heart, against their conscience and knowledge, have with
desperate purpose gathered strength in the ways of sin, and have cast of all
remorse, til the Lords vengeance in this sort overtake them, or have fallen
into that sin whereof the Apostle speaks of, that none should pray for, and
which our Savior calls the sin against the holy Ghost. Other some there be
(of which number I know you dear M.) that fearing the Lord with sincerity of
heart, have been notwithstanding this way distressed, the weight of their
sins exceeding for a time the strength of their faith, whose case I take to
be thus far, other then such as I have before mentioned: even as in stormy
tempest the ship stirs at every blast and sourge of the sea to be in danger
of wrack, and the young ash bending to every blast of wind, seems in peril
of breaking and rooting up, when both the ship keeps her constant course, and
the tree yet has his rooting; so in you, and those of your disposition in this
case, the tempest, and storm of this temptation, raised partly by your own
weakness, and partly through Satan's tempestious malice: causes your faith to
bend, and seem feeble, and yielding to this force, while notwithstanding you
be built on the rock, and planted with the hand of God in the Eden of his
gracious election, and remain a plant for ever in his paradise of eternal
felicity. Such (as you your self) herm offend, that you measure your selves by
your infirmities, which has so far use in us to breed a watchful care over
our own ways, and not to discourage us: and consider that we are as the Lord
esteems, who is more glorified in showing mercy, the^ in executing of his
wrath: whose word declares unto us, that he loved us being ennemies, and found
us when we were lost, and loathed not our polution, but for himself only
offered his mercy: so that we must stand in that reckning of our selves which
the Lord will have us to do in his mercy: else shall we be wrong judges of the
ways of the Almighty. Even as one that has not had experience of travail by
sea, fears every wea uing of the ship, and doubts of peril, where the
nature of the trauailer is such without hazard or danger; So you, and such as
are in like case afflicted, imagine every puff of this kind of temptation to
be nothing else but the gate of destruction, when as notwithstanding it is the
very course and way where through God does lead his dearest children: whose
counsels are not to be measured, by our infirmities, nor by that we cast,
forecast, or doubt, but as he himself has pronounced of his own ways, and as
many of his children have proved before us. Here the mela^cholie takes
advantage and Satan prosecuteth a maine, with be^ding your affections to fear,
doubt, and distrust, stops that consolation the mercy of god affords, and
which his children are ready to minister unto you. And these are melancholickes
of another sort; who notwithstanding they endeavor to fear God, yet not
advised, through this base and vile humor, receive discourageme^t in themselves
more then (through Gods mercy) they have need, til such time as the comfort of
his spirit by due means, and alteration of their body by convenient remedy of
the godly phisician raise the^ up again. These are mela^choliks most disposed,
by reason of the evil temper of their bodies to this affliction, not by power
of the humor, which rests in their bodies, and touches not the mind, but by
reason they are more curious and distrustful the^ other co^plexio^s: which
being joined with ignorance, or a preposterous knowledge cast the^ into these
laberinthes of spiritual sorrow, whereout very hardly are they at the length
able to dispatch themselves without great mercy of God, and diligent and
careful applying of his means. But you may say unto me, can a man by his own
power draw on this kind of cross, which you have before declared to be the
hand of God? yea verily, if Gods only mercy be not his stay, even as our first
parents voluntarily gave their necks, and in them all their posterity under
the yoke of Satan: and as the vengeance of Gods justice always burns
against the wicked, and his sword continually employed, which nothing ca^
quench but the water of his grace flowing from the sids of his Son, and that
spiritual complet armor where of S. Paul speaks of: so should even all of us
in this life taste of the heat, and feel the dint of that sword, if his mercy
in his Son and for his Saints cause on the earth, he stayed not the jealousy
of his wrath: His anger our sins pull on, but his mercy is only for himself.
Thus you have heard what manner affliction this of the mind and conscience of
sin, not comforted by assurance of pardon is, how it differs from
melancholy, how melancholicke persons are most subject thereunto, and by what
means this calamity is procured, with the diversity of persons thus afflicted:
hereafter you shall understand (which is your chief desire) my counsel and
cure, both in that state of mind wherein you stand, and whereof the Lord grant
you speedy and comfortable release, and also in what your crased body surgayned
with melancholy and all his uncomfortable accidents does of natural and
physic help of medicine require. But first my dear M. give way to my words
of comfort, and for the old friendships sake, and sweet society we have had in
times past, always seasoned with heavenly meditations and spiritual
conferences, deny me not that interest which shall be both comfortable unto you,
and joyful to many of your friends, whose prayers are with sobbes powered out
for your release: especially beware least unadvisedly you dishonor god in this
kind of sorrow, who is the God of peace and comfort.

CHAP. XXX. A consolation unto the afflicted conscience.
YOu feel (you say) the wrath of God kindled against your soul, and anguish
of conscience most intolerable, and can find (notwithstanding continuail
prayers and incessaunt supplication made unto the Lord) no release, and in your
own judgment stand reprobate from Gods covenant, and void of all hope of his
inheritance, expecting the consummation of your misery and fearful sentence
of eternal comdemnation: I pray you (dear brother) consider Gods mercies of
old, and the former experience of his favor, and those holy testimonies of
election which you have in times past made plentifully show of, and consider
whether it be not rather a temptation, then as you imagine, Gods anger against
you. Of temptations there are diverse sorts, some rising from our own
natures, othersome from without us: such as are without our natures, either
spring from our malicious enemy Satan, or from such allurementes, or terrors
which the world tosseth us withal: In these Satan is a worker, besides his
own peculiar manner of tempting. His temptations are either by corporal
possession, or with more liberty and freedom to the tempted. Of our own
natures spring the temptations which rise of the root of original sin,
without any foreign instigation from the world, whatsoever is either a bayte
of pleasure, or fright of terror, which increase the actual sins springing
from the original root, and lay as it were compass, and powers on water, to
that ungracious stock. Now if this your affliction be no other, but some kind
of these te^ptatio^s (which I have no doubt to make manifest and plain unto
you) then are you to esteem of your case more comfortably the^ you do, and to
attend with patience the issue, which not only is not infallible to signify
determinatly of election or reprobation, but in such as are of like
conversation unto you, and have given evident testimonies of a sound faith
grounded upon knowledge, as you have done, brings forth the fruits of
patience, experience, hope, increase of faith, and not only in the end
yields plenty of spiritual joy, and comfort unto themselves, but furnishes
also with power, and hability to confirm others, both by their own example,
and words of great consolation from their own experience. In all the former
kinds of temptations, there is hope, and examples are sundry in each kind: of
which the corporal inhabiting of Satan is the greatest, fullest of tertour
and despair: yet the history of the deeds and sayings of Christ, the
wrytinges of the Evangelist do testify of whole legions dispossessed of that
habitation, by the power of Christ mercifully extended upon such poor and
miserable captives; which examples are written for our instruction against like
times of affliction, that we give not over hope, though millions of devils
should possess us within, and enuirone us without; but know his power is
above all force of the enemy, and his mercy far surmounting Satan's malice.
But before I proceed in this particular, I will make plain demonstration unto
you, that you have no cause in this sort to fear, nor have any shadow of
ground whereon you should resolve against your self upon the point of
reprobation, but that these molestations and terrors, which you now endure
are temptations, rather for your farther good and profit, then grounded
resolutions, of such lamentable issue: which having declared unto you in the
generality, I will enter into the particular kinds, wherewith I judge you are
thus distressed. First I will endeavor to loose the hold your melancholy has
laid upon the assurance (as you take it) of reprobation; which having first
performed, your judgment may more easily embrace the other part, which is a
trial only for a time, and a mere temptation. Although Gods children every
one have their salvation founded upon his eternal decree of mercy toward
them, published by the preaching of the Gospel, and written, and sealed in the
heart of his chosen, by the power of the spirit of adoption, which cries
Abba, father, and testifies in measure, some more and some less, according to
the dispensatio^ of that grace; yet on the contrary part, there is no evident
and undoubted sign of reprobation in any, while they live: (because there may
be hope of repentance) but only that sin, which Christ calls the sin
against the holy Ghost, and for which the Apostle forbids to pray: this the
Divines do expound to be an open and wilful apostasy from God, with malicious
hate against the profession of his known truth. Next unto this sin, is
impenitencie: which can not be known, till death make show thereof, and cut
of time of repentance. Of the first of these, examples are very rare, as
Iulianus the Emperor called apostata: of the other, Cain, Esau, Saul, Judas,
and the profane people of the world that know not Christ, and such as know
him only in vain profession outwardly, and so continue, are patterns of the
sin, and shall be examples of Gods vengeance. But first touching that sin,
wherefore no prayer is to be made, (because it witnesses, and seals up
reprobation to the offender in this life) I will by comparinge your course of
life, and your present demeanor with that sin, manifestly lay open your case
to be far other then reprobate. Before I enter hereinto, you must beware you
make no mo sins of that kind, then God him self has pronounced to be of
that sort: for in these matters that concern Gods religion, even the
perfection of our wisdom is but folly, much more our sick brains, and
melancholicke understanding, is far to be removed from handling such holy
things, whereof none can give rule, but he who knows the perfect nature, (as
I may so speak) of God, which is known only to him self; so that here you
must rest in this case, and strive to see with no sharper eye, then so far as
God has revealed; nor enter other course in search of such matters of his
secrecy, then he has him self manifested: by whose Oracles we are
instructed, that only one kind of sin cutteth of all hope of salvation in
such as have professed Christ, and that only because it is of such nature, that
it closes up all remorse of repentance: being the height of all iniquity,
equal with that of the deuilles them selves, who are shut out of Gods favor
for ever. If this then be the only sin which brandeth the wicked soul to
eternal condemnation, and you (dear heart) have not in any sort thus
offended, (as I have no doubt to make evident proof) why do you unkindly
torment your own heart, and throw your self into that pit of destruction,
from which the Lord has redeemed you? and as though you were your own and not
his, a possession of your own purchase to be bestowed as fancy leads you,
and not Gods creation, wrought by his spirit of regeneration, ordained for his
service and glory. Now let us enter into the consideration, whether you have
sinned against the holy Ghost or not: which if you have in deed done (as
peradventure your humor would lead you) where is the renouncing of Gods
religion, which you have hitherto professed and presently do heartily embrace?
Where is that malice, which prosecuteth this mischief? What persecution have
you in word or deed raised against the truth? What sword have you ever drawn
against it, or what volumes have you written against sound doctrine, with
purposed opposition against your own conscience, neither that of frailty, but
of mere will and obstinacy? If your humor be not able to allege such
testimonies, (as it cannot in deed, these things being matters of judgment
and will, and not of fancy, and consisting of euidencie to be known of
others, and not of imaginacie conceit of a fearful and distrustful heart) give
over I pray you these melancholicke priudices against your self, and prepare
your heart to receive comfort, which the word of promise ministers unto you.
For that sin except only, all other are within compass of grace, and have
no power to shut us from Gods favor. Be it that you have sinned against your
conscience; yet certain, condemnation and casting of, does not necessarily
ensue thereupon; else should there be not a person on whom God should show
mercy. For we all sin in that manner, and the good we would (our conscience
bearing witness of our duty, and breach of that we are bound to do) we do
not; but the sin which we would not do in respect of regeneration, that we
commit through our frailty, which grows up in strenghth, by increases of God
to perfefection, and has evermore in it not to discourage us, but to breed
circumspection, and to remember us where our perfection and excellency lies,
even without us, in that unspotted lamb Christ Jesus. For our wills are
corrupted, not only in that they are seduced by corrupt judgment, which is
the least part of their want; but when contrary to judgment grounded either
upon nature, or the plain word of truth, we make choice of that we know is
naught, or prefer the greater evil before the less. Otherwise should our
nature obtain in this life a greater perfection, then our first parents had
in paradise, whose freedom of will was perverted to that, which was against
the known commandment of God: and give any one faculty or practice of the
mind be perfect, all must needs be of like pureness; seeing equally they
were corrupted, and equally receive restoration. This perfection we are to
hope for, and attend the consummation of the rudimentes of righteousness,
which both in knowledge and use are in part blind and impotent, and in heaven
are to receive the absolute perfection and beauty, fully agreeable to Gods
good will and uprightness of his justice. If then you have neither sinned
against the holy Ghost, which is plain through manifold testimonies of
unfeigned faith, even at this time being full of sighs and groans for your
offenses, careful to eschew what soever is repugnaunt to Gods will, releeuinge
with tender affection of Christian love the necessities of others; neither in
the whole course of your life, having been of notorious mark of iniquity,
much less a blasphemer of that holy name, and a renouncer, with contumely of
the holy profession: assure your self that your present estate is no other,
but a storm of temptation, and no mark of perdition) from which the Lord,
(after trial of faith and patience) will deliver you, and send that calm
peace and tranquillity, which in times past you have enjoyed, and shall by his
grace again recover, to your everlasting comfort. Of temptations some touch
our faith, and other some the fruits thereof. Our faith; as whether we believe
or not. The fruits: either of profession of the truth, when persecution or
fear, or favor of men, slaken our zeal, and smother the outward show of
those glorious graces of faith, and of the spirit, or in the fruits of
obedience suitable and kindly unto our profession, as those which concern
persons, possessions, or name, wherein charity toward men is broken: all
these temptations, though both affection do incline unto them, (excepting
incredulity, which brings forth impenitencie, and renunciation of the
faith) and will bring them to effect, yet are they not of power to separate us
from the love of God in Christ, whose sacrifice is all sufficient, and
propitiatory for all kinds of sin, (that only before mentioned excepted.)
You say you believe not, and therefore draw upon you the pain due to the
unfaithful: here beware dear brother, and weigh with circumspectipn, and due
consideration of your state in so weighty a point as this is, and although you
have not at this time the sense thereof in your imagination, which is now
disguised and blemished with melancholy conceits, and corporal alteration of
the instrument of the body, yet do you believe, and shall hereafter feel the
sweet comfort thereof, as you now abundantly declare the fruits of so holy
a root; patience, meekness, charity, prayer, newness of life, and what
soever good virtue springs in the children of God therefrom. For even as in
outward senses we do see sometimes and feel, and hear; when we do not
perceive it, so we may also have faith, and not always have the sensible
perceauing thereof; especially our bodies (as yours presently is) being
oppressed with melancholy, which always urges terror and distrust: and
deludeth us with opinion of want of that, whereof we have no lack: even as in
another extremity, other men are often carried with an opinion and confidence of
those things whereof they have no part. And if it be so with melancholickes,
(as it is credibly recorded in history) that some have complained they have
been headless, so that (as Aetius reports) Phylotymus the Physician was
feign to put a cap of lead, upon a melancholickes head, that he might by
feeling the weight conceive otherwise; and Artemidorus the Grammarian did
imagine he wanted both a hand and a leg, though he wanted neither, you are to
lay aside this fancy, and to weigh the presence of the cause by the effects
which are most evident tokens of faith in you, and not to rest upon your
deluded conceits, which if you yield unto, will persuade you in the end, that
you want both head and heart also, after it has dispossessed you in part of
the right use of both: but you will say unto me, do not men otherwise doubt of
this point but upon melancholy? Yes verily: and especially such as most hunger
and thirst after righteousness, and are poor in spirit, and broken in heart:
the rest of the world, (except some vengeance of God lay hold upon them, or
some horrible fact gnawe their wounded conscience,) passing their time in a
blind security, careless of God, and empty of all sense and hope of a
better life, or fear of that eternal destruction; pass their days, and
finish their course, as the calfe passes to the shambles not knowing their
end to be slaughter by the butchers knife. Such I say as are most careful to
walk before their God in righteousness, as they doubt and fear in every
action, lest God be dishonored by their conversation, so are they jealous of
their precious faith, lest it be not in such measure as they defire, or in
truth be none at all: wherein they may easily be deceived; first in the
discerning, then in the measure and portion. Touching the discerning thus may
they be overtaken: when the inward feeling thereof does not answer their
desire, and the actions proceeding therfrom do not satisfy their thirst of
righteousness, whereby relief may rise to the nourishment of faith, and the
satisfying of that holy appetite; they are discouraged, and entangled with
spiritual cares, from which a more advised consideration agreeable to Gods
word might easily deliver them. Touching the portion, their fault lies in
this, that they measure the excellency thereof and the power, partly by
measure, and quantity, and not by virtue, wherewith through Gods merciful
grace it is endued to the salvation of all those that have it but in measure of
a grain of mustard seed: which both errors are to be corrected, by pondering
of the case, not by that we judge, but by that God him self has given rule
of: both touching the sense of faith, the sincerity of the fruits, and
increase of measure: all being his gifts and graces dispensed unto us,
according to his mercy and wisdom, as is most for his glory, and expedient
for us. For if we duly weigh from whence we are fallen, and how deep into
this degenerate nature wherein we are captives of Satan, and slaves of all
iniquity, we shall receive comfort of the least spark of faith, and may
praise God, and receive comfort in the smallest work of obedience performed
in sincerity, though not in perfection: and if we find the increases slow,
and the victory hard in this our warfare: let us consider with whom we
fight, and for what crown: and how both heaven and earth was moved at our
redemptiion: and the same power concurred thereto, as in our first creation.
And as the great and mighty oaks are slower in attaining their full grouth,
then shrubs and weeds, whose enduring is for many ages, when the other in
short time wither and fadde away, so esteem your increase of heavenly graces
slow, but sure, everlasting as immortalitye, that you may be as a beam or a
pillar in the temple of God for ever and ever. Neither are we to account the
nature of any thing according to our sense or to the show it makes. For then
should the most fruitful tree in winter be taken for barren, and the lusty
soil dry, and unfruitful while it is shut up with the hard frost: but rea
son (as in other deliberatio^s) so in this must lead us (being guided by the
word of God) rightly to judge of the presence, and life of faith in our souls:
which being the shield in this our spiritual warfaire, endures much battering
and many bruntes and receives the forefront of the encounter, and often times
faireth as if it were pierced through and worn, unfit for battle: yet is it
in deed of nature invincible, and repelleth whatsoever ingine the enemy
inforceth against us, and stands firm rooted: whatsoever storm Satan
raises for the displacing thereof. How then are we to behave our selves in
this temptation: when both the sense of faith is dulled in us, and the fruits
minister coffeehouse? you remember the saying of the Apostle, the graces and
mercy of God is without repentance, and Christ Jesus whom he loves, to the
end he loves them: if then you have in times past felt that gift of the
spirit, (which you have done) and have ioyed therein: be assured it is a mark
never to be defaced, of your election and firm standing in Gods favor. For
what moved the Lord to bestow the grace: but his own mercy: and that he
bestows: who ca^ take away if he himself take it from us, for some deserte of
ours, did not he foresee the same long before? and so why did he not withold
his mercy? but as he knew us when we were strangers from him, and loved us,
when we hated him, and had nothing which might provoke his mercy, but our
misery: so is his goodness continued upon us still for his own sake, and not at
all for our deserving: that all being subject to his condemnation, he might be
glorified in the salvation of some, for that righteousness sake which is in his
son, and that oblation of his offered up, not for himself but for others:
from whose righteousness so much is detracted as we attribute unto our selves,
or seek to attain unto, in respect of satisfying Gods justice: and so much
impaired of Gods mercy, as we shall rest upon any virtue or power in our
selves, whereby to avoid his vengeance of justice: Our election as it first
rises from God, and is established in his immutable counsel and decree, and
lies in no power else befide: so the hazard thereof is not committed to the
adventure of our frailty, but the continuance and stablenes in the same decree
has the foundation. For alas the woeful experience of Adams frailty in his
best estate gives sufficient testimony, and more then sufficient: what hope
there is of continuance of grace, if the assurance of our salvation should
depend upon our keep: who without support of God are like the wind inconstant
and as frail as the tender herbs, and want all habil tie of withstanding the
affaults of our enemy: and constant perseverance in any religious virtue, and
work of piety. Then if the foundation of our election lie in the counsel of
God, and be founded upon his decree: who has revealed the one but the Spirit
of the Lord, and what is able to undermine the other where the Lord himself
has laid the corner stone? This assurance in time past the Spirit of God
has confirmed unto you, and you have felt it with plenty of heavenly joy, and
comfort: and if in the conflict of temptation you esteem the strength
according to that remains after the battle, or that which you feel being
somewhat tired in the conflict: you may here give vauntage to the ennemy
through discouragement, and loose the field as much as lies in you, where there
is hope of assured victory. For, be it that you feel the hability weak, and
the ennemy strong, and your own corruption upon the point to prevail, yet
consider there is a root of this virtue, whose fruit, and branches although
these stormy te^pestes may nippe and shake, yet the sap shall never be dried
up in the root, neither can any evil wind of Satan so blast, that the
immortal seed be at any time quit withered, yea though all his fiery darts be
thereto with all might and maine employed, but that the storm being blone over
by the spirit of grace, and the comfortable sun of consolation shining upon
our gloumie hearts, it will budde forth again into blossom, fruit, and
branch, as a most beautiful tree in the paradise of God. Let the comparison
of bodily sickness, and the consideration of that kind of frailty, give
comfort unto you in your case although in an other kind, yet in this respect
not unlike. We have experience how diverse times the desease prevails over
the sick persons, that actions fail and faculties seem quite to be spent,
neither hand nor foot is able to do their duty, the eye is dim, the
hearing dull, the taste altered, and the tongue distasteth all things eve of
most pleasant relish, and the weak and feeble pacient seems to attend the
time of dissolution: when yet notwithstanding there remains a secret power of
nature, and a forcible spark of life that overcomes all these infirmities,
and consumes them like dross, and rendereth to the body a greater purity, and
firmenes of health then before the sickness it did enjoy. Even so esteem of the
spiritual case, and consider that your soul is sick and not dead, and faith
is assailed but not overcome, and only have patience to attend the finishing of
this secret work which passes all conceit, and capacity of man, and you
shall see these burning feauers, of temptations to be slaked and cooled by the
mercy and grace of Christ, and that spark of faith which lies now hid, and
overwhelmed with heaps of temptation, and seems to be utterly quenched to
break forth again, and to consume these strange causes of the desease of the
soul, and as nature after a perfect crise discharges her self either by
stool, vomit, sweat, or bleeding, or such like euacuations, to the recovery
of former health, so shall you feel all these doubts, and fears, and terrors
removed, and strength of faith restored with such supply, as it shall be able
to make evident proof what secret virtue lay hid and yet not idle in all
this uncomfortable plight which offers you temptation of despair. Seeing then
that you are yet but under the conflict: and not overcome, have good cheer in
the succession which as in Christ it is victorious, over head; so are we (his
parts and members,) to look for the same crown of glory, who both overcome in
him, and through him, in our selves shall in the end be possessed of the
victory, and receiuethe crown of immortality. As for that which your own
conceit corrupted by melancholy persuades you, and wherein Satan is busy, and
omitteth no opportunity: give no credit thereunto, but as it is, so esteem it
a delusion which time will discover and lay open, as you your self shall
hereafter most planly discern. I grant you, the temptation it self though
your body were free from this infirmity, is of the greatest kind, and such as
does not skirmish only lightly upon our souls, but sets the maine battle
against our most happy estate, in so much as it forced our Savior to cry, my
God my God, why have thou forsaken me. But what then? are we therefore to be
discouraged? no, no, here appears rather the abundance of Gods grace, and
the mighty supporte of his power, which even in the midst of hell preserves
his and suffers not so much as their garments to take any smell of the flame,
but even from thence is able to raise them to his celestial kingdom and
place, them which his son in the throne of glory. And if you dewly consider
the price of our redemption how prerious it was, and how it could not be
obtained, without shedding of the most precious heartblood of the son of God,
you must think the quarrel to be no other to the end, but a matter of blood,
of strife, of sweat, of fear, of jealousy, and whatsoever affection goes
with affecting a glorious triumph in all the members of Christ, both inwardly
and outwardly, in the spirit and in the body, as our head himself could find
in dispensation though he sued unto his father therefrom with abundance of
tears: and think that it is Gods business we are in hand with, and that we are
enabled of him, and account not these small venies of Satan for deadly wou^des
which are no thing other but practices, and exercises of the spiritual
courage, and circumspection, and introductions to that use of the whole armor
of God, where against no force of the enemy shall prevail, though the attempt
seem to be full of peril, and terror. But you say you feel small strength of
faith, and no support of that hope which makes not ashamed. Beware least you
judge unjustly of the ways of God, and esteem that for small which is great,
and vile which in the sight of God is most precious. For herein the ennemy may
take encouragement to your great disadvantage. You feel not that taste thereof
you sometimes felt: and do you judge therefore you are bereued utterly thereof?
what? consider the soul is now sick, and distestaeth much wholesome meat of
consolation, and loatheth many pleasant and fragraunt cups of comfort, and
counsel, and yet the endeavors of Gods children in this behalf, and the sweet
waters of heavenly comfort are not therefore of themselves bitter or unsavory,
so you are not to measure the absence of this grace by that you presently, but
by that in times past (while the soul stood free from this disease of
temptation, and trial) you have felt of comfort in the spirit through an
acceptable measure of faith according to the dispensation of Gods grace, and
not according to our fancy, but as he shall think meet to be ministered unto us.
Neither is the trial of faith only to be taken according as the soul feels
it in it self but also and sometimes (as in such temptations as these wherein
you now travail) only by the course and trade of life which has passed
before, and those fruits which are evident to the eye of others who can judge
more sincerely then the afflicted whose understandings are somewhat altered
through Satan's terrors. But again you say the course of life past, and your
estate present has nothing answered the holiness of your vocation, and that
sincerity the Lord requires so that here also the comfort fails you. What
then? are you therefore reprobate? No, but it argues want of faith, not so,
but place for farther increase of faith and the fruits thereof. Those whom the
Lord has chosen to be his worshipers, and has redeemed, and consecrated holy
to himself, and prepared good works for them to walk in: they be his plants
and ingraffed olive branches in his son which take not their full perfection
at once, but accorglorie. And if you duly consider the price of our redemption
how precious it was, and how it could not be obtained, without shedding of the
most precious heart blood of the Son of God: you must think the quarrel to
be no other to the end, but a matter of blood, of strife, of sweat, of fear,
of jealousy, and whatsoever affection goes with affecting a glorious triumph
in all the members of Christ: both inwardly, and outwardly, in the spirit and
in the body: as our head himself could find no dispensation, though he sued
unto his Father therefore with abundance of tears: and think that it is Gods
business we are in hand with, and that we are enabled of him, moved and
carried by his spirit, increase with his increases, not to be measured with
the eye of flesh, or carnal understanding, but by the same spirit which
works in us: who as he has begun, will also make perfect his work to his
own glory: which lies in taking pity and compassion, more abundantly then in
showing vengeance. By this which hitherto has been said, it appears plainly
that no sin has yet passed you, which can seclude you from hope of
salvation; and therefore necessarily it follows that the cross you are now
under is an attempt of Satan against you, to cast you into utter despair and
if it were possible to undo that knot more surely knit then that of Gordius,
which coupleth us unto our God, and wherewith we are espoused unto Jesus
Christ: even our most glorious faith which overcomes the world: and where
against not Satan, nor all his force, or stratageme is able to prevail. I say
it is only a temptation of the ennemy purposed of him to your confusion: but
from your loving God, and merciful father, a trial of faith and patience, and
the proof of those virtues which before lay hid in secret: which he will
have now show themselves in the combat, he himself a beholder, an incourager,
a succor at need, and pressed with the crown of triumph to give reward, and
honor to the victory. Wherefore, only have patience: be not discouraged: stand
sure, and the feeblenes of Satan shall soon appear: and his weapons shall be
al broaken in pieces, and God (through faith and patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures by his spirit) shall be glorified in the weakness of his poor
afflicted servant: and you shall again (as David was) be restored to those
wo^ted joys which you have sometimes felt in the sweet mercies of the Lord.
Now the ground of all temptation is our own weakness, this is tried and proved
by Satan or the world, or both joined together as considerations of our
destruction. Besides this continual buddes of iniquity which do rise from our
original corruption, Satan sometimes plays his part upon our weakness
alone, and sometimes by outward temptations, and sometimes lays siege round
about us, and besetteth all the parts of our complete armor. We are weak in
understanding and in what so ever action rises therefrom: even in will and
affection: Our understanding is turned into blindness of error; Our will
embraces not only those things which corrupt judgment directs unto, but
even where sometime understanding stands sound, there will be^deth to
affection, and neglects the light of reason. Our affections are both
rebellious to right judgment and will: in that they rage where they should
not, and where just cause is given there they inordinately exceed. Thus
judgment, will, and affection, having degenerated, use the bodily members as
weapons and instruments of all impietye, and in justice: so that if the grace
of God did not for preservation of human society, and especially for his
Churches cause restrain this strength of iniquity, the pillars of the world
would shatter in sunder, and the vault of heaven would fall, and all things
would turn again to their former Chaos, and be consumed with the terrible
fire of Gods vengeance, and perish in his heavy displeasure. Our misery being
such, no marvel though both Satan and the world prevail against us, except
the Lord stretch forth his hand, and uphold us. This our infirmity Satan does
sometimes assaye without means: and sometimes by outward occasions of evil,
and forcible persuasion of sin, and rebellion against God. How he does it
without means, the experience is more lamentable and infallible, then the
manner how easy to find out. In corporal possession it seems there needs
no means: when Satan possesses all parts of the house, and as master
commands at his pleasure. But how without such access he is able to te^pt,
that is a matter of more difficult consideration: which, because it makes not
a little to the better laying open of your estate, I will somewhat stand upon:
referring you for the rest to the resolutions of the divines who have chief
part in this business. For my own part I do take it, and am assured you find
the experience, that Satan after a personal manner unto the soul, though not
in bodily shape to the eye, without means of outward things which (might move
our wills or affections) tempts us in the very secret thoughts of our
hearts. For being a spirit, and by creation most excellent, it is not to be
doubted but that he has a spiritual access unto our spirits, to trouble
them, and to disorder all their actions, as we see corporal creatures, with
bodily and corporal force, to annoy one an other. And as men have fellowship
one with other by corporal presence, and are delighted or displeased with the
quallities of the mind according as they like, or dislike, uttered by speech
and talk: so is it most like that the spirits have their society maintained
by a spiritual conference, whereby their wills and purposes are
entercommunicated one to an other, without corporal sound, whereof both the
spirits want the instrument, and the voice nothing affects the mind. Daily
experience makes this manifest in such as are possessed, how Satan so bears
the sway in them that their speech and phrase alters, and their discourse is
far other then before, and their whole nature at Satan's beck, and their
utterance of mind as he only suggesteth. In others whom Satan has not laid
such hold on, the same no less is to be seen: as when the false prophets did
deceive Ahab: there came forth a spirit which was sent to be a false and lying
spirit in the mouth of all his prophets, which accordingly did make promis
unto him of victory, who notwithstanding found a contrary event of overthrow,
and destruction. So entered Satan into Judas the traitor, and moved him to
betray our Savior, not by a corporal possession: but by a spiritual
impulsion whereby he works in the children of disobedience, and Peter in the
fifth of the Acts says to Ananias: why has Satan filled thine heart, etc:
and again in the second to the Ephesians the Apostle calls the Devil the
prince that rules in the air, the spirit that now works in the children
of disobedience: by which it is plain that the devil has power where God
permits him over the minds and judgments, and wills of the reprobate, and
wicked: and may also in such sort tempt the faithful servants of God. For the
Apostle says in the same place, that the Ephesians (to whom he wrote) in
times past walked according to the course of this world, and after the conduct
of that spirit. Neither do we stand thus subject unto Satan's annoyance
through the subtlenesse of his nature, being a spirit; but through that long
experience and practice of our misery from age to age, whereby he is able with
ease to work our anoyance in all respects. This gives him knowledge of our
minds more perfectly: who apprehends the same by the least show, and
inclination of our affection and will. Not that he knows our hearts, entirely
and perfectly: which is proper to God only the framer of the heart, but only
through that trial and experience which not one only particular man has
ministered unto him, but even our whole race from Adam to this present: this
makes him not to expect any outward signification of speech, or gesture, to
conceive our intents and purposes: but out of our universal corruption whereof
he has continual proof, he has laid up matter of argument to discover the
vanity of our minds, and the secret thoughts of our heart: which after he
has found, he suggesteth (as he sees occasion whereto we must incline)
instigation of sin and disobedience against God, and his holy commandments.
His temptations are properly such, as neither our natures seem to incline unto,
but in a generality to all kind of wickedness; nor the world does either allure
us, or enforce us: especially the children of god who are partakers of his
spirit find them most strange, and such as they abhor the very least
conceit of them, and find no part of their nature to incline unto them,
howsoever in other respects they complain of frailty. Of this kind are
certain blasphemies suggested of the Devil, and laying of violent hands of
them selves, or upon others neither moved there to by hate or malice: or any
occasion of revenge: of the same sort is the despair and distrust of gods
mercy, and grace, besides many other as taking away the seed of the word out
of the heart of the negligent hearers: the suggesting of errors and such like
without our natures special inclination that way, but rather contrarily
affected. And as he is a spirit, and an effectual worker in other means: so
when he applies his proper travail he attempteth the most dangerous
assaults, to our salvation: and enters so deep that (knowing the judgment is
the fountain of all virtuous action) there he makes train, and after a
spiritual manner seeks possession thereof to the utter descouraging of all
your actions that depend thereon: knowing that it once being at his devotion,
the corporal gross actions and bodily vices, need no great provocation.
Other temptations rise of our own rebellious hearts unto the holy
commandementes of God: or from the wordely allurements, which as baits entice
us from the way of obedience: or else from terrors of life which scar us with
threate of peril, if we embrace the way of piety, and of holiness: and sets
before us a greater awe of men, then we have of fear, and reverence of God.
Now among these temptations falls your present estate, and especially Satan
employeth his force to your judgment, and not against the strength of carnal
judgment only, but against that which the Spirit of God has taught and
sealed unto you in your conscience: both suggesting unto you those blasphemous
conceits which your heart utterly abhors the least thought and remembrance
of, and raises that doubt of Gods favor which now diversely distracteth you.
Remember I pray you, how the spirit of God calls him the tempter, the
deceiuer of the world: and the accuser of the faithful: the Dragon and old
serpent, a liar, and the father of lies: by which epethites, and descriptions,
you may consider his power, his malice, and his craft to deceive, and to abuse
you: never before acquainted with his practices as at this present you have
experience of: and not take all that your mind conceiueth of any manner of
impiety whatsoever, to be from you, but from Satan: who as he has power to
tempt and to try, to cast before you these stumbling blocks whereat he would
have you fall: so has he no power to fasten them upon your mind, and to give
them setteling: your own conscience bearing you witness how much repugnant they
are to your desires. The rather are you to account the^ as from him, because
they be such, as are altogether contrary to your former conversation, and
whereto you have felt your nature incline before, and such as have no
inforcement nor inticeme^t from any creature, but from him. Wherefore though
such kind of thoughts do assail the heart, that (being guilty of so great
sin) your conscience might be so much the more defiled, and the
discouragement the greater; yet answer them again by the word of God which
is the sword of the spirit: and wait the happy end of the conflict with
patience: and account not these small venies of Satan for deadly wounds, which
are nothing else but practices, and exercises of your spiritual courage, and
circumspection: and introductions to that use of the whole armor of God, where
against no force of the enemy shall prevail, though the attempt seem to be
full of peril, and terror. But you say you feel small strength of faith, and
no support of that hope which makes not ashamed. Beware least you judge
unjustly of the ways of God, and esteem that for small which is great, and
vile, which in the sight of God is most precious. For herein the enemy may
take encouragement, to your great disaduauntage. You feel not that taste
thereof you sometimes felt: and do you judge therefore you are bereued utterly
thereof? what? consider the soul is now sick, and distasteth much wholesome
meat of consolation, and loatheth many pleasant and fragrant cups of
comfort, and counsel, and yet the endeavors of Gods children in this behalf,
and the sweet waters of heavenly comfort are not therefore of themselves
bitter or unsavory, so you are not to measure the absence of this grace by that
you presently, but by that in times past (while the soul stood free from this
disease of temptation, and trial) you have felt of comfort in the spirit
through an acceptable measure of faith according to the dispensation of Gods
grace, and not according to our fancy, but as he shall think meet to be
ministered unto us. Neither is the trial of faith only to be taken according as
the soul feels it in it self but also (and sometimes as in such temptations
as these wherein you now travail only) by the course and trade of life which
has passed before, and those fruits which are evident to the eye of others
who can judge more sincerely then the afflicted whose understandings are
somewhat altered through Satan's terrors. But again you say the course of life
past, and your estate present has nothing answered the holiness of your
vocation, and that sincerity the Lord requires so that here also the comfort
fails you. What then? are you therefore reprobate? No, but it argues want of
faith; Not so; but place for farther increase of faith, and the fruits thereof.
Those whom the Lord has chosen to be his worshipers, and has redeemed, and
consecrated holy to himself, and prepared good works for them to walk in:
they be his plants and ingraffed olive branches in his son who take not
their full perfection at once (but according to the nature of a pla^t) require
daily watering and dressing, whereby by degrees they attain in the end a full
stature in Christ. So that you may not account your self void of grace,
because you are not perfect (for in this life both faith, and knowledge, and
love are all imperfect, and shall partly be furnished, and partly receive
perfection elsewhere,) but you are godly and wisely to consider the secret
work of Gods spirit, and grace, and take comfort of the smallest crumme and
drop of this heavenly sustentation and attend your time of perfect growth,
according to the good pleasure of God. You can not at all times feel and
follow with your conceir, and natural capacity the worker of this mystery:
more then you are able to discern where the wind rises; and where it
lights. You know we that are called, are borne again, and as the growth and
increase of our bodies is not perceived of us, though we do increase, and the
birth is not apprehended of the infant borne and bred, even so is it with us in
the heavenly birth, and spiritual regeneration, the spirit works without our
leave, and acquainteth us not with his marvelous working more then is expedient
at his pleasure, when, and in what measure for our comfort: much less can a
body ouercharged with melancholy, and drowned in that dark dungeon see the
comfortable beams of his daystar, and brightness of the cheerful Sun of
God abundant mercy, and a mind whose actions are hindered by means thereof,
whereby it neither conceiueth nor judges sincerely and uprightly as the case
requires: and neither so only affected, but blind folded by the humor, and
brought into this darkness of fear, is buffited also and beaten with Satan
on all sides, whereby being distracted, it obtayneth no respit, and release, of
due and just consideration, how can it discern rightly of these things?
Wherefore your case being such, yield not so much to the enemy, as to judge of
your self according to his sentence, who is a liar from the beginning, and the
father of lies; but according to those old testimonies which you have felt in
your own conscience, and have given comfortable show of to others in the
course of your life heretofore. Oh, but you feel not the testimony of Gods
spirit, which might assure you. Neither do any of Gods children at all times
feel it. David complained of the want hereof; Job complained likewise, and so
have diverse of Gods children in all times made moan hereof. Sufficient it is
if at any time that assurance be given, and if it be the will of God for a time
to withdraw it, that you may feeling your own frailty, with more earnest
desire call to him for his wonted grace: Who are you to interrupt the ways of
God, and to prevent his counselles? and for your comfort be assured that the
former grace, you have received is of that nature, that it never decays, but
remains an everlasting seed of immortality, proceeding from the Father of
eternity, and with whom there is no chaungeablenesse, nor shadow of turning:
who does nothing to repent him of, but is only wise, stable, and sure, and has
no need to correct any thing of his own workmanship. And if he with hold the
comfort of his spirit from you for a season, it is that you may with greater
appetite seek after it, and having found it, more joy therein, and praise his
mercy with thankfulness of heart, and readiness of utterance to found out the
abundance of his mercy. If the Lord withhold it not, but the frailty wherein
you stand, diminish the sense thereof, or the temptation press so far upon
you that you are not free to judge aright, or the peril which the temptation
carries with it move you to distrust, know that nothing befalls you strange
herein more then to other of Gods children before you, and that to wade through
these violent streams, patience and constancy is most needful, with a
resolute mind to abide the Lords will, who in the end will come, and will not
tarry. This is the broken and contrite heart which the Lord will not despise,
this is the poor spirit, on whom the Lord pronounces blessedness, and this
is the affliction whereof the Spirit of God is called the comforter? so that
(although before the Lord has vouchsafed you many graces,) yet were you never
meet to receive diverse other which he will now bestow upon you, before this
present: and so shall you in the end receive the cup of salvation in steed of
the bottell of vinegar and tears, and in steed of the bread of affliction the
heavenly Manna, and the bread of life from the table of God and Christ.
Wherefore suspect these thoughts to be of the enemy and not of your self,
cast into your mind of him, and not springing of incredulity: I am out of Gods
favor: I am reprobate from his kingdom, there remains no hope for me: I
have no faith. For such are his temptations of old, and daily they be the
points he labors in against Gods children, if not to wring from the^ their
hope, at the least to weary their days with heaviness, and discomfort.
Neither esteem your self, presently by that you feel; but by that you have
felt, when nothing has ouershadowed that light of knowledge, faith, and zeal,
but the full brightness of these graces has broken forth. For why have not
these doubts risen unto you before time? and where is now the ancient
assurance? They before time rose not, because the temptation was far of, and
that assurance although by tempest of temptation, and by this spiritual storm
it seem to bend, and to give back, yet is it invincible, and recouereth
thereby more strength then ever it had before. Is the soldier worse appayed
that sustaineth the combat, and stands in the face of his enemy, though the
terrible thunder of shot beat his ears, and he in peril of hitting; though he
maintain the heat of the battle against the force of his enemy with peril?
not a whit: he becomes hereby more valiant: he learneth experience, his skill
increases, and his courage doubleth upon him. So in this spiritual battle
you must not be discouraged like a milk soppe, or a fresh soldier untrained or
unacquainted with warfare: but set the victory before your eyes, which is
already attained and purchased for you: and so much the more are you to endure
with Christian valiance, in that here is no fear of overthrow: the battle
is broken, and the enemies scattered, and only the captain requires to be
followed of you for whom he has obtained the crown of victory, if the
straggling tail of the enemy annoye they may show their malice and hostility
but their force is foiled; and take heart only, and endure, and you shall see
them vanquished, and submit unto that power of Christ which inableth you. You
must consider that as in warfare the service is not always alike, neither
keeps the soldier the same degree, but is advanced of the general as he
sees cause: even so if the Lord now bestow you in a strange piece of
service in his spiritual war, and place you in the forefront, whom he has
hitherto tendered as your condition required, you must be contented, and quite
your self like a man, and know that the wisdom of the heavenly captain is
such, and his tender affection so great toward his followers, that in the
midst of peril, not one hair of them shall miscarrie whom he leads. Then
to conclude this point, seeing your case is only a temptation, and no
temptation is of it self (except that one) a sign of reprobation: cast of
these discouragementes: and learn how to behave your self herein, that you
may pass through with credit of your vocation, and honor unto God, and joy
and comfort to your faithful friends in the Lord Jesus. You have read your
self and may partly perceive by my former discourse how melancholy
persuades of misery where there is no cause, and some have imagined them
selves to have wanted their heads, some their arms, other some have thought
themselves dead men, and other some one member of their bodies as big as
three: which as it persuades in corporal things that which is not, so no less
does it in spiritual things especially, being like a weapon taken into Satan's
hand, and used to all advantages of our hurt and destruction. This makes all
more grievous, and is called of Serapio, the very seat of the devil being an
apt instrument for him, both to weaken our bodies with, and to terrify our
minds with vain, and fantastical fears, and to disturb the whole
tranquillity of our nature. Wherefore ascribe I pray you these troubles of your
mind to no other, but to the frailty of your body: I mean this excess of
distrust, and fear, otherwise the temptation may be without it: and give no
way to Satan's practice, in yielding your judgment and affection to his
suggestion; but resist as against a sickness, and as nature does with her
spirit against bodily disease, so take courage, and call together the wisdom,
and knowledge God has given you, and now put it in use against this subtle,
and forcible enemy. And through Gods blessing by due use of such natural
means as I shall hereafter declare unto you, both mind and body shall again
be restored to the former integrity, and you have greater cause then ever to
praise God for his mercy, and goodness toward you. Hitherto nothing has
befallen you, that diverse of Gods children have not passed through before you,
and although the battle has been sharp and bloody even as our Master has
sweat dropps of blood in the like combat, remember the victory is the more
glorious, and the conquest so much the more honorable and sure: as we have
experience in the person of Jesus our Savior which found no other way to his
kingdom, and has left unto us an example of like patience, constancy, and
hope, and whatsoever virtue else is requisite to this battle of the spirit,
and does furnish us in all parts with spiritual armor. He girdeth us with
truth, and buckleth on us the brestplate of righteousness: he shoeth our feet
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace: he delivers into the left hand
the shield of faith, whereby we may quench the fiery darts of the devil, and
into the right, the sword of the spirit, the word of God, and covers our
heads with the helmet of salvation. If we shall cowardly cast our armor and
weapon from us, and betake us to flight, besides there is no place of safety,
we shall dishonor our captain, give over our selves to the pleasure and
cruelty of our enemy, and finally perish for ever. Wherefore try the
strength of this armor, and the sharpness of this sword, and now occasion is
offered, march on with those shoes of peace, which is the end of war, and
whereof they are the pledge and assurance, hold out that shield of faith, and
although it be battered on all sides, yet forsake it not, for the temper is
such as no fiery darte of the wicked can pierce it: and bestow that sword of
Gods word, the word of consolation, of joy, of assurance, of spiritual and
heavenly wisdom, whereby the judgment is perfected, and the heart
established, and the whole man of God made absolute. Forsake not that
breastplate of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and that fruit of our
sanctification whereby we are in his Son acceptable unto God: and with the
helmet of salvation cover your head, that all the good means of God being to
the full employed, you may fecle the power of this heavenly furniture to your
present encouragement, and herafter to your everlasting salvation. Let not your
sins dismay you, for Christ came not to save the righteous, he supplieth all
our wantes, and has abundance to discharge our debtes. In him is God well
pleased with us, as him self has pronounced, so that being discharged in him,
let us give over all fear, and with boldness approach unto the throne of grace
that we may receive the mercy promised unto us, for if we be righteouse, then
is Christ unrighteous, and suffered for him self, and not for us: but he was
just and pure, a lamb without spot or blemish slain for the attoneme^t, that
we might thereby live, broaken that we might be healed, and humbled for our
advancement. Wherefore lay the burden upon him, who has said, come unto me
all ye that are heavy laden, and he shall ease your wearied shoulders thereof,
and give you refreshing. If there were no sin whereon should Gods mercy be
shown? and whereto tends the promise of the Gospel? But you say you are a
great sinner: what then? is not the mercy of God greater? is there any end
of his compassion? If sin do abound, who shall stint the grace of God, that
it should not also ouerflow? David was a great sinner, so was both Peter and
Paul: yet were they not refused, but received mercy. And if the grace of God
were so great, that our sins could not withholde his mercy when we were
strangers from his covenant, aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and led
with that spirit of error, and darkness, like the nations that know not God;
much more being reconciled, stand we sure, and unremovable in his favor,
though the clouds do sometimes ouercast the bright beams thereof, and our own
imbecillitie comprehends it not. Remember the trial of Job: who would have
taken him for other, then one forsaken of the Lord? what were his thoughts? let
the day perish wherein I was borne. Why died I not in the birth? wherefore is
light given unto him that is in misery, and life unto them that have heavy
hearts? And in an other place: oh that I were as in times past! when God
preserved me, when his light shined upon my head, etc. But what was the trial?
God blessed the last days of Job more the^ the first: even so, though the
present affliction be grievous unto you, and all hope fail in respect of your
feeling, yet the Lord when he has proved you and found you his pure and
sincere beloved son, the like issue are you assured of with comfort in this
life, and eternal salvation in the life to come. Thus leaving a more
plentiful consolation unto your godly friends who daily frequent you,
especially such as are preachers of the word and ministers of Gods grace, I
proceed to instruct you in that I judge your body stands in need of, that
howsoever hability fail in performance of the offices of friendships on my
part, toward you, my sincere affection and unfeigned love unto you may be at
the least testified by my endeavor: wherein if I be tedious partly it is of
forgetfulness of that consideration, being ouercaried with desire to benefit
you, and partly because in your case I also comprehend the estate of many one
at this day in like sort affected and afflicted, who if they receive any means
of comfort by this my travail, they may be more beholding unto my friend M.
and pray for his release. Thus my good M. you have the testimony of my good
will in this part of counsel. I confess I am not so meet for it, as your case
requires: but so have I discharged that office whereto the duty of friendship
binds me. If my presence may supply the defect, I will not fail you wherein
any part of mine ability may serve your wa^ts I will now proceed to the
cure of your body, whose disorder increases your heaviness, and joins hand
with this kind of temptation.

CHAP. XXXVII. The cure of melancholy, and how melancholicke persons are to
order them selves in actions of the mind, sense, and motion.
AS the ordinary cure of all diseases, and helps of infirmities are to be
begun with removing of such causes as first procured the infirmity (except
they be removed of them selves, through their nature, neither stable nor
permanent) by succession of a contrary cause of the same kind: even so the
first entry of restoring the melancholicke brain and heart, to a better state
of conceit, and cheer, is the removing of such causes as first disturbed
judgment, and affection, or are thereto apt, with inducing of causes of
contrary operation. The causes of all diseases are either breach of duty, and
some error committed in the government of our health; or such accidents as
befall us in this life against our wills, and unlooked for. From the same also
do arise the works of melancholy, whereof I entreat, and you desire to be
released. Our diet consists not only (as it is commonly taken) in meat, and
drink: but in whatsoever exercises of mind or body: whether they be studies
of the brain, or affections of the heart, or whether they be labors of the
bodies, or exercises only. Besides unto diet, house, habitation, and apparel do
belong, which are causes of maintenance, or overthrow of health, as they be
affected. To these also the order of rest, and sleep is to be added as a great
means, taken in due time, and in convenient moderation, to preserve health, or
to cause sickness, if otherwise it be taken immoderately, too scant, or
disorderly. Of the labors of the mind, studies have great force to procure
melancholy: if they be vehement, and of difficult matters, and high mysteries:
and therefore chiefly they are to be avoided, and the mind to be set free from
all such travel, that the spirits which before were partly wasted, might be
restored: and partly employed upon hard discourses, may be released, to the
comfort of the heart, and thinning of the blood. Besides, such actions
approaching nigh unto, or being the very inorganicall of the soul, cause the
mind to neglect the body: whereby easily it becmometh afterward unapt for the
action, and the humors skanted of the sweet influence thereof, and spirit,
setle into a melancholy thickness, and congele into that cold and dry
humor, which rayseth these terrors and discouragements. Wherefore above all,
abandon working of your brain by any study, or conceit: and give your mind to
liberty of recreation, from such actions, that draw too much of the spirit,
and thereby wrong the corporal members of the body. For in maintenance of
health it is specially to be observed, that the employing of the parts either
of mind or body with their spirit, is to be carried with such indifferency,
and discretion; that the force which should be common to many, be not lauishly
spent upon any one. Now, study, of all actions, both because it uses little
help of the body, in comparison of other: and because the mind chiefly
labors, which draws the whole body into sympathy, whereby it is neglected
as it were for a time, and the most subtle and purest spirits thereby are
consumed, is to be given over in the cure of this passion: or if the affection
can not be tempered wholly therefrom, then such matter of study is to be made
choice of, as requires no great contention, but with a certain mediocritie,
may unbend that stresse of the mind, through that over vehement action, and
withal carry a contentedness thereto, and joy to the affection. Now as all
contention of the mind is to be intermitted, so especially that, whereto the
melancholicke person most has given him self before the passion is chiefly
to be eschued, for the recovery of former estate, and restoring the depraved
conceit, and fearful affection. For there, if the affection of liking go
withal, both heart, and brain do over prodigally spend their spirits, and with
them the subtilest parts of the natural juice, and humors of the body. If
of mislike, and the thing be by forcible constraint laid on, the distracting of
the mind, from the promptnes of the affection breeds such an agony in our
nature, that thereon rises also great expeence of spirit, and of the most rare
and subtle humors of our bodies, which are as it were the seat of our
natural heat, the refiner of all our humors, and the purifier of our
spirits. As that kind of study, wherein the melancholicke has spent him
self is to be avoided, or intermitted, and one of a milder and softer kind to
be inferred in place thereof, so much less any strange study of
difficulty, and much travel of the brain is to be taken in hand, as it were
to turn the mind into a contrary bent. For herein the strangeness, besides
difficulty gives cause of travail and toil unto our nature: so that both
these extremities are to be eschued of you as most dangerous, and hurtful,
and the mind to be retired to such a tranquillity, as the natural heat and
spirits may have free scope to attend upon the corporal actions of preparing
the blood, and thinning of the gross juice into a moderate substance, as is
according to good disposition of the body. In study I comprehend (although
they be diverse) all action of internal senses, which are ministers and
servants of study, whether it be of learning, or of meditation, and invention:
which later kind, far more toyleth the body, then the former, and therefore
farther of is it to be removed. Of internal senses, I take fantasy to be the
greatest wast of these spirits, and most apt to thicken the blood, if it be
excessive. For that imitateth the inuentiue action of the mind, and in a lower
degree (if it be vehement and continual) makes great wast of those two
instruments, spirit, and heat, in the me lancholicke body. For as the action
is, such is the spirit, and part thereof purer, subtiler, thinner, as the
actio^ is of more excellency, and farther removed from corporal practice, and
draws nigher to the clear, and pure actions of the mind. If the
melancholicke be over much contemplative, it shall then be meet for him to
withdraw his mind to corporal actions of grosser sort: that as the mind by
speculation, after a sort disioyneth it self from the body: so the bodily
exercise may revoke it again into the former fellowship, and exercise of
bodily action. The outward senses because they consist rather in a kind of
passion, their use does not greatly hinder the thinness, which we require
against melancholy, except they be over traveled with watching, which has
great force to drink up the spirits and moisture, and so to alter the bodily
state into a melancholy disposition, tedious to mind and body. In their acts
it is to be observed, that they be not in any respect irksome, or odious. For
if they be such, the heart continually where the object is presented, now
grown tender thorough the internal passion, flies at the shadow of every
thing that carries the smallest show of coffeehouse: and reclaiming his
spirits about him self, leaves the outward parts destitute of convenient
measure, and by abundance about it self, corrupts them in time, for want of
sufficient respiration and breathing; which no less ingendreth melancholy,
then the former disorders before mentioned; and as for the fearful passion, it
increases it directly, and keeps that immoderate fear in ure. Of all
sensible obiectes, the visible, except they be pleasant, and proportional,
give greatest coffeehouse to the melancholic. If besides their
horriblenesse of shape, (or without it) they represent any significant type of
tragical calamity, or mention that, wherewith the melancholicke apprehension
faigne any fearful object: much more such spectacles are to be shunned of
the melancholickes. And because darkness is as it were a pattern of death,
it also is as much as may be to be avoided, and all cheerful sights,
agreeable to virtue and piety, and to be embraced, and sought after; which as
the other sort, close up the spirits, and gives the heart assaults of
hostility, may allure them out again, and set free the distressed affection,
and yield comfort to the amazed heart. Next to visible things, the audible
object most frighteth the melancholicke person, especialy besides the
unpleasantness, if it carries also signification of terror: and here as
pleasant pictures, and lively colors delight the melancholicke eye, and in
their measure satisfy the heart, so not only cheerful music in a
generality, but such of that kind as most rejoices is to be sounded in the
melancholicke ear: of which kind for the most part is such as carries an odd
measure, and easy to be discerned, except the melancholicke have skill in
music, and require a deeper harmony. That contrarily, which is solemn, and
still: as dumpes, and fancies, and set music, are hurtful in this case,
and serve rather for a disordered rage, and intemperate mirth, to reclaim
within mediocritie, then to allow the spirits, to stir the blood, and to
attenuate the humors, which is (if the harmony be wisely applied) effectually
wrought by music. For that which reason works by a more evident way, that
music as it were a magical charm brings to pass in the minds of men,
which being forseene of wise law giuers in times past, they have made choice of
certain kinds thereof, and have rejected the other, as hurtful to their
common wealths; which agreement betwixt concent of music, and affection of
the mind, when Aristophenes perceived, he thereby was moved to think, that the
mind was nothing else but a kind of harmony. In the other senses the obiectes
only are to be choysed, sweet in taste, pleasant in smell, and soft to be
felt, that all outward things may allure, and give courage in steed of that
cowardly timiditie wrought by the humor. Motion does much more, if it be
vehement, and draw to the nature of labor, and withal continual. For that
dries the body excessiuely. And although for the present it be hotter through
such travel: yet consuming the spirit and moisture, which are matter of this
heat: in the end it decays also, as fire without fuel, and the lamp
without oil. As these actions of body and mind being over vehement, and
excessive bereave the humor of spirit, and waste the natural heat, which
being spent, whatsoever else is of the body is more gross and earthie, and
becomes a lake of melancholy: even so if altogether these actions cease,
that neither the mind nor body bestow themselves in good studies and
exercises, then on the contrary part this works the same that the other
excess does: and even as water that stands, and is not stirred, corrupts,
and waxes gross and thick; and like as the lamp that wants air goes
out, though plenty of oil be ministered; even so without this stirring of
spirits, humors, and blood, all settle into a gross residence of
melancholy, and the whole mass of blood easily degenerateth unto that humor
and for want of exercise the natural fire being slakened, and the spirit
thereby engrossed, that which endued with both with just measure, and equality
convenient, was before a cheerful juice comfortable to all the parts, and a
sweet deawe to the earthy substance, congealeth into a grossness far
unmeet for that use, and of a quite contrary disposition.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How melancholicke persons are to order themselves in their
affectiont.
AS in studies, exercises of the brain, sense, and voluntary motion, great
moderation is to be kept of melancholy persons: even so no less regard (if
not more) is to be had of them in restrayning their affections, and guiding
them with such wise conduct, as at no time they break forth into outrage, and
shake of the gentle and light yoke which reason imposes. I will not now
dispute whether vehement study, or disorderly perturbations is more to be taken
heed of only take you no less care in the one then in the other, except you
find your self to have fallen into excess, and to have surfeted more of
this, then of that excess: If you have so unequally exceeded, and the effect
has prevailed with you: that kind, whereof you have most cause to complain,
there refrain, and employ those gifts of wisdom, and virtue wherein in
times past you have been a pattern to others: and there keep the straightest
hand, where the lists of reason are most like to be broke through. You have had
declared how the excessive travail of animal actions, or such as spring from
the brain, waist and spend that spirit which as it is in the world the only
cheerer of all things, and dispenses that life imparted of God to al other
creatures, so in man's nature, is the only comfort of the terrestrial members:
which spirit being consumed, or empaired, leaves the Massy patrs more heavy,
gross, and dull, and farther of removed from all prompt, and laudable action
of life: this effect as it is wrought by that kind of disorder, in like
manner, a perturbation whereon reason sits not, and holds not the rain, is
of the same aptnes to disturb the goodly order, disposed by just proportion in
our bodies: and putting the parts of that most consona^t, and pleasant harmony
out of tune deliver a note, to the great coffeehouse of reason, and much
against the minds will, which intends far other, then the corporal
instrument effects. If you will call to mind histories, you may remember how
some have died of sorrow, and othersome of joy, and some with fear, some with
jealousy, and othersome with love: have bin bereaved of their wits even those
most excellent in all the parts of reason, and sound understanding, and thereby
have made such perturbance of spirit in their brains that for credit of
wisdom, and in stead of reputation: of discreite men they have through these
latter kinds of unbridled affections, worthily carried the name of fools, and
men void of all discreet consideration, in the whole race of their life
following. This comes to pass in some by troubling of spirit only which
require not alone due quantity, and temper, but a calm settling, and
tranquillity, moved indifferently, as just matter of perturbation shall give
occasion. In othersome by lavish waste, and predigall expense of the spirit in
one passion, which dispensed with judgment, would suffice the execution of
many worthy actions besides. Hereto may furthermore add, that as a member of
the corporal body over vehemently forced by straining, is in peril of
luxation, and sometimes thereby becomes altogether disioynted, and the part
loses the freedom of flexible motion, even so the spirit, ouerforcible
strained to one vehement passion: carries the disposition of the part
therewith, and in giving over by too much yielding to the violence of our
passion, stands as it were crooked that way, and with an over reach of the
reigning perturbation, being past recovery, inclines wholly whereto it was
forcibly driven. Wherefore the perturbations are discreetely so to be ruled as
always there do remain sufficient power in reasons hand to restrain. Of
these some perturbations directly and immediately increase both passion and
humor, of which sort are saddenes, and fear. Other some passing measure, not
so much of themselves procure either, as they do feeble the mela^cholicke
bodies, as anger, and joy, both by excessive effusion of spirits, and sudden
alteration from the hearts contraction to such dilatation as those affections
procure. In joy if it break forth into immoderat laughter: then does it more
feeble the melancholickes, and breath out there spirits and leave a pain in
their sides and bellies which parts are greatly travailed in laughter. For
although it should seem meet in respect of the thinning of the humor by
flowing of spirit, and blood into the outward parts from the inward center,
and alteration of the passion by the contrary affection, yet the feeblenes of
their bodies, and skant of spirits their humors being unapt for plentiful
supply, respect not that consideration, but require such an expulsion of one
affection by the other, that the body it self notwithstanding sustain no
detrement: otherwise the combat would be so sore, that nature not being able
to bear the force of each passion, would be dissolved by violence of that
contention. So that as all matter of fear is to be abandonned, excessive joy
is also to be eschewed as a great feebler of melancholic persons, chiefly if
they be women, or of tender and rare habit. If the melancholy rise of any
perturbation, that especially is to be altered, and brought into a mediocrity
whereof the passion take first beginning. Among them fear, and heaviness are of
most force, and as they are procured according to the vehemence of the cause,
so the kind of heaviness and fear more or less encou^tereth reason, and
frighteth the melancholicke heart. We both fear, and are sad for the loss
of those things which with delight and pleasure in time past we enjoyed, and
are tormented with despair, and grief when (in those things which we
desire,) there is no hope to lay hold on. Among the sundry sorts of subjects
to these passions, some are of necessity, and some of pleasure. Such as are of
necessity either respect the natural maintenance of our bodies and lives, or
honest reputation amongst men. The natural maintenance of life is of such
force in this case that it moves beyond measure even the wisest and most
settled, and admits no moderation. If it be imbecillitie of body and void of
pain it is borne more tolerable. Reputation, me^ of virtuous, and courageous
disposition tender as their lives: whereby they are in a manner in like case and
sometimes more affected with hazard thereof, then if life were in danger. The
reason is because credit and estimation touches the whole person of the man,
and not either mind or body only, and has the least means (being oncelost)
to be recovered again, and besides the disgrace in this life, man (being
immortal in soul) stands in awe of the perpetual note of infamy which may
remain after his death. This passion is most hardly borne of the ambitious
and proud man in respect of that opinion he entertaineth of his own
worthiness: and next unto him it setleth deep in the mind enlarged with the
virtue called magnanimity, in respect his honor answers not his merits.
The obiectes which are pleasant, if they be natural, and not helonging to any
one part, but unto the whole nature, of which sort is that love which
vpholdeth the propagation of kind, and is the only glue to couple the joints
of this great frame of the world together: Here reason is often times failed of
the passion, and (carried captive) submits where it should have preemine^ce,
and rule. If it be of other things which nature has not so wedded together,
the loss is borne with more tolleration, and where there is peril of want in
them, despair touches more lightly. In respect of their own nature such is
the condition of the things we desire in this world. But because the diverse
qualities of men takes them sometimes otherwise: therefore that passion and
those occasions most urge as the party is therewith most passionate: some one
way, some an other, as nature bends, or education has framed. In these cases
of grief and heaviness first of all instruction out of the Scriptures of God is
to be ministered, and embraced, which offering the assurance of far better
things, then the price of all wordly treasures, may swallow up whatsoever
calamity this vale of misery presses upon us: next, precepts of moral
virtue and patience, with examples of constancy, and moderaton in like cases
ought to move, and consideration of that uncertainty of pleasure in this
world, which is only constant in inconstancy, and as the heavens them selves
stand not still, and the nature of things receive continual co^suming like a
stream that passes: even so our state is subject unto like mutabilitie, and
with no other condition is our life delivered unto us of nature, through that
original disobedience, nor is to be otherwise accepted of wise men. In this
case I refer the melancholic to the books of the Scriptures, and moral
precepts of Philosophers, to the godly instructions of the divines, and comfort
of their friends. If love not answered again with like kindness, procure
this passion, either amends is that way to be made, or the melancholic is to
be persuaded the subject of that he likes is not so lovely, and all mention,
and signification of that kind is not once to be called into mind, but
whatsoever justly may be alleged to the parties disgrace is to be objected
unto the amorous melancholicke, and other delights brought in in steed, and
more highly commended, which all I leave to the prudencie of those that attend
upon this kind of cure. And if no other persuasion will serve a vehement
passion, of another sort is to be kindeled, that may withdraw that vain and
foolish sorrow into some other extremity, as of anger, of some fear ministered
by another occasion, then that which first was author of this sadness. For
although they both breed a dislike, yet that proceeds of other cause,
rebateth the force of it which gave first occasion, and as one pin is driven
out with another, so the later may expel the former: but this is to be used in
regard of the conceit, and affection. If the body thereby be altered, and the
blood thickened into melancholy, then all kind of greeuance, is to be shunned,
and only pleasant, and delectable things to be admitted. Thus much for the
melancholicke affection, how it is to be moderated and guided: other kinds of
actions, of body, are not any causes of this passion, except in such as were
wont by periods to be purged of certain melancholic blood: which (if it fail
and minister cause, or increase of this humor,) is to be diminished by opening
a vain, that may most conveniently supply that want of nature, and disburthen
it of the superfluity, as cause shall require, and force, and strength will
permit. Ease and rest although it be alone of small power to engender, yet may
it be an helping cause to the passion, and increase of this humor, so that
here in mediocritie is to be kept, and exercise of one sort or other never to
be omitted, as the chief temper of the spirits with the humors, and
quickness of corporal actions. Fot as sleep resembles death, and rest of
the members is their kind of sleep, and does that in particulars which sleep
does in the whole, so (if it exceed) as each resemble other in nature, in
effect they will not be much unlike: but as the one cools the body, and
corrupts the blood, and extinguisheth natural heat, whose extinction is
death it self, even so the other in a degree hinder the present expressing of
that lively vigor, which they possess, and disableth them afterward to make
proof of the faculty, wherewith they are endued. And thus have you in these
two Chapters what government melancholicke persons are to observe in their
actions, and deeds that concern maintenance of health: in the next, I will
lay open unto you of the outward means of sustentation of life what choice is
to be made, and with what discretion such relief is to be used.

CHAP. XXXIX. How melancholic persons are to order the^ selves in the rest of
their diet, and what choice they are to make of air, meat, and drink, house,
and apparel.
THe rest of diet, consists in the right use of outward sustentation of life,
which is either taken inward, or is outwardly used only. The inward and such as
is to be received into our bodies: is either air, or sustenance. The air meet
for melancholicke folk, ought to be thin, pure and subtle, open, and patent
to all winds: in respect of their te^per, especially to the South, and
Southeast, except some other imbecility of their bodies dissuade therefrom,
and in the contrary part, marrish, mistie, and foggie air is to be eschued as
an increase of both humor, and passion. Sustenaunce is either meat or drink.
Their meats ought not only to be chosen such as of their own nature do
engender to pure and thin juice, but if the nature of the nourishment be
otherwise, the preparation ought to give it a correction of that fault, and
generally they should be liquide, and in form of brothes, that both by the
moist quality thereof, the dryness of the humor, and their bodies might be
reformed, and that the passage and concoction might also be more easy, and
speedy in all their parts. Nourishmentes of their own nature among meats,
wholesome and meet for melancholicke folk, and of vegetable things, are
parsnep, carret, and skerret roots. And sallet herbs, lettice, mallows, and
endive mixed with a quantity of rocket, and taragon, are not to be refused, no
more is aretch, sorell and purslane with the late twain above mentioned, or
with persley, charuell and fenell, with little vinegar, plenty of oil and
sugar. Of sorts of bread, cheat bread, is meetest for them, and if they be
charged with store of blood, and the veins full, some oats, barley, or millet
flower mingled with the wheat meele, shall abate the abundant nourishment of
the wheat. Of fruits, such as are moist, soft, and sweet are meetest for them,
as the juice, damsing, cherrie, figs, grapes, and abricots: neither are new
walnuts, and green almonds hurtful in this case. Capers washed from the salt
and vinegar, and eaten with sugar and oil are meeter for them then olives. Of
flesh, the young is fittest for their diet, and the younger the better, in
respect of their cold and dry bodies, and gross humors, which require
plentiful moystening and warming, which is supplied by the tender age of those
things whereof we feed: being fuller of vital heat, and natural moisture,
then the older of the same kind. Neither is it requisite that they be young
only, but also well liking, and of the same kind the tame, and domestical is
meet for correction of their melancholicke state, then the wild. Again of
flesh, the foul is to be preferred for their use before the beast, and that
foul rather which uses much the feet, and less the wing. Of foul these are
of especciall choice for melancholicke persons, the partridge, the godwit, the
young pigeon, the pullet, the feasant, and the young turkey, among these the goose
wing has his place, not to be refused if the melancholicke have appetite
thereto. And generally of foul the carved is better, then the other. Of
beasts the gelded have preferment above their fellows of that kind: among them
pigge is meet for melancholy, farced with sage and such like art of cookerie,
to dry up part of his superfluous humiditie: veale, especially of a cow calfe,
young wether mutton, kidde, and rabbet are of the best kind of diet among the
beasts for melancholic persons. Of the pattes of flesh: the brawnes and
muscles are the best, and next to them the tongue is of second choice. Of livers,
the pigges liver among beasts is the best, and the stones of cockerells yield
commendable nourishment. Of flesh these above mentioned are most agreeable with
the diet cure of melancholy, and such parts of the^ as I have declared: the
other either breeding a gross, or slimie nourishment hard of digestion and
slow of passage. Generally fish is not so wholesome as flesh for this use,
because they be not so well stored with natural heat and moisture, except the
imbecillitie of the melancholic stomach be such as will not bear the strength
of flesh, then is the fish to be boiled with wine, and to be eaten out of some
wholesome broth, or with good store of sweet butter, and sauoured with pepper.
If the party desire fish, these following are principal among them. And first
generally such as are of a middle bigness, not too fat, nor lean, white, and
brittle of substance, and haunt the swiftest and purest waters, are most
commendable: for such breed subtilest nourishment, and least freight with
excrements. Of salt water fish that bear shells, the oyster is only for this
diet, of those that are defended with a crust, the shrimp, and crayfish go
before the rest. Of other kind of seafish, such as haunt the rocks are
excellent food for melancholicke persons, corrected and used as I have before
showed: as the gilthead, the whiting, the sea perch etc. Of other sort the
mullet, the lucie, the haddocke, the sole, place, but, gurnard and rotchet are
to be admitted into this diet. Of fresh water fish, those of the river are to
be preferred: and the rest scarce to be touched, except they receive correction
from the kitchen. Of river fish these are of the wholsomest kind: perch,
pike, gougeon, and trout. Thus of the substance of creatures you have what I
judge meetest for you in this case. Of the other sort, nothing is to be refused
but cowmilke, all other sorts carrying a thinner, and more liquid substance,
and importing no peril of obstruction, nor windiness:especiallly taken with
sugar and a little salt, and two or three hours before any other sustenance. As
cow milk is the grossest and thickest, so mares milk (except that of camels)
is the thinnest, next of ass, goats milk is most moderate, and ewes milk
thicker then it. Of the parts of milk, whay drunk with sugar is wholesome
for melancholicke folk, neither is fresh and new butter to be refused, cheese
made altogether of cow milk is unwholesome, mixed with goats, or asses milk,
makes it not so apt to breed obstructions. Eggs are good, and wholesome
sustenance for melancholicke bodies, roasted rather then sod or potched, and
rear dressed somewhat the yelk thicker then to be supped. Of eggs, hens,
feasaunts, and turkies lay the wholesomest eggs, and are only for the
melancholickes dish. Thus much concerning the meats fit for their diet. Their
dressing ought to be such as may maintain their natural juice as much as may
be, with removing of all rawnesse. Their sawces would be the juice of an orange
or lymon, well qualified with sugar and sweet butter, especially if vinegar or
veriuyce be part in sauce, more in vinegar, and less in veriuyce. Their drink
would be of barlie malt brued with rain water, or spring water which is much
drawn of, next to these river water may take the third place of commendation.
It would be of a middle strength, and not too stale: bear rather the^ ale,
because the hops do greatly respect their liver and spleen, and scoureth the
stomach, and makes purer, and readier way for distribution of their
nourishment. It shall be very good for them to drink at meals a draught of
wine of good strength: claret rather then white, and of any kind well refined,
and full of wine. If they drink their wine with sugar, it gives greater
cheering to them, makes it to pass more easily, and mitigateth their
melancholicke sowrenesse. Drink betwixt meals, or after meat is to be
avoided, except great cause urge. Hitherto their sustenance, of what kind it
ought to be of, and among such variety of food, and so many good blessings of
God that way, what choice is to be made: as for their order of eating, and
drinking, and measure of both, as liquid meats and brothes are most convenient
for them, so I take it, they may drink largely, (except some accident of the
stomach dissuade) By reason their digestion is slow, my advise is, they eat
little, and often: little because their strength bears not much, nor such
mediocrity as other men: often, because their spirits are few, and need
repayring: besides the cold, sower, and settling humor of melancholy is to be
refreshed as much as may be, with fresh and pure nourishment, and to be
tempered, and mitigated with that sweet and gentle mixture. The outward
maintenance of life, and sustentation of our frail bodies consist in house or
habitatio^, and apparel, which both must carry these properties to be clean
and nete, and in all respects as much as may be satisfying the mind of the
melancholicke. For although meats and drinks, and air, either unwholesome,
or unpleasant bear great sway in disposing the humor, yet because they have
not such power to affect the mind and senses as these other have, in respect
of the passion, and melancholic affection, they work not so present
annoyaunce. The house except it be cheerful and lightsome, trim and neat,
seems unto the melancholicke a prison or dungeon, rather then a place of
assured repose and rest. And the apparel except it be light, clean, fit,
and well sitting, makes show of deformity, to the melancholicke, and being
ever in his eye, is a representation of his present calamity, very tedious
unto him, or if it be not so in his conceit, being now far altered: yet
agreing with the humor, it may be means of increase thereof, and augmenting
the fancy. The situation of his house, or at the least of his chamber, and
place where he is most conversant, would be such as might let in such kind of
air as I have before declared, and seated neither too low in any bottom,
nor upon hill too high, except the melancholy be out of measure, sad and
sullen, then an high, lofty, and troubled air, and such seat of house will
not be amiss. If the melan cholicke be of ability, the house would not want
ornament of picture, of gay and fresh colors, in such matter as shall be most
pleasant, and delightful, and of all ornaments of house, and home, a
pleasant gardin and hortyeard: with a lively spring, is above all
domestical call delight, and meetest for the melancholy heart and brain. His
apparel would be decent and comely, and as the purse will give leave somewhat
for the time sumptious, as also the whole household furniture belonging unto
him. Of color, light, or chaungeable, except the place, and gravity of the
melancholy person refuses colors, and here no kind of seemly ornament would
be omitted which might entice the senses to delight, and allure the enclosed
spirits to solace themselves the outward parts of their bodies: here brouches,
chains, and ringes may have good use with such like ornament of jewel as
agrees with the hability and calling of the melancholicke: and those not only
curious, and precious by art, but especially garnished with precious stones
that are said to have virtue against vain fears and baseness of courage. Of
which sort are these following: the Carbuncle for virtue the chief of stones:
The Calcedonye of power to put away fear and heaviness of heart, a cleerer of
the Spirits, and chaser away of fantastical melancholy visions. The ruby
auayleable against fearful dreams. The lacint a great cheerer of the heart,
and procurer of favor. The Turcoyse, a comforter of the Spirits. The
Chrysophars of like virtue. The Corneole a mitigater of anger and meet for
molancholickes of the furious sort. Stones of baser sort and yet of singular
virtue, are the Chalydony, or swallow stone, found in the mawes of young
swallows, against madness: and the Alectorian or Cocks stone, of a watery
color, found in the mawe of a Cock or Capon after he be nine years old,
above all commended for giving strength and courage, and wherewith (as it is
reported) the famous Milo Crotonien always stood invincible. Thus have you the
whole order of the mela^cholie diet. I do not remember any thing particular,
and peculiar unto them necessary, more the^ has been hitherto declared,
wherefore in the next chapter I will also lay open what physic help is
requisite in this case, and so recommend the success and fruit of my labor
to the blessing of God upon you, and such as are partakers of like affliction.
As for the furious melancholy, I leave it to be cured as desease and sickness,
and will not meddle therewith in this place, being impertinent to my purpose,
which respects only your estate, and such like condition of others.

CHAP. XL. The cure by medicine, meet for melancholy persons.
BEfore I enter to treat of the cure by medicine one word of admonition
touching the use of the medicines and means shall be first necessary both for
your sake, and others who may hereafter have use of this my counsel: my
meaning is not to make you a phisicien, or to give warrant by this my labor to
any rashly, and without direction of the learned phisicien, to adventure
practice upon this advise, as the common sort is to venterous to attempt what
they read of medicine delivered in their vulgar tongue, but that seeing the
manifold good means which god in his great providence, and mercy has ordained
for the relief, you may take courage in the consideration of his goodness
herein, and receive refreshing by the view of his aid though it be a far of,
which the discreet application of the wise phisicia^ (who is made of God for
the health of men) shall bring nigh unto you, and joining with this strength
of melancholy, chase it far from you, and render unto you the former good
disposition of your body, and desired tranquillity of your mind. For medicine
is like a tool and instrument of the sharpest edge, which not wisely guided,
nor handled with that cunning which thereto appertains, may bring present
peril in stead of health, and where it should be a suecour, and maintenance
of life, for want of art, may work a contrary effect, dangerous, and deadly.
To the right applying of medicine, besides the particular considerations
belonging properly to the art of physic wherein exercise makes the
phisician prompt and expert, sharp of judgment, and circu^spect in the cure,
you your self know what furniture of philosophy is necessary, even the whole
course of arts, and knowledge of nature, but only to prepare, and to give
hability, of conceiving, and learning the rules of preserving and restoring the
health of man's body, which we call physic: so that as Galen says in a book
of that title, a phisician ought to be a philosopher, the best philosopher
makes the best phisician, neither ought any to be admitted to touch so holy
things, that has not passed the whole discipline of liberal sciences, and
washed himself pure and clean in the waters of wisdom, and understanding.
The abuse at this day is great, and common, defrauding the simple forte in
their substance and hurting of their bodies under the pretense of experience,
of secrets and hid mysteries of remedies, which these masked thieves, and
murderers allege for color of their lewdnes. That (as I am persuaded) there
are not so many honest and painful men of any one trade in the land, as
their be lewd cousoning varletts, that to avoid the travail of honest
labor, feed upon the simplicity of the people, and make the pretense of
physic the cloak of their idleness. Othersome there be of a curiosity not
knowing what they do bold to attempt out of an english book the practice of
any recite, and will not stick to encounter the judgment of the wisest and
best practiced phisician. These are unthankful, and presumpteous.
Unthankful in that they acknowledge not from whom they have received these
wholesome means: presumpteous, in hazarding the health of an other, and
aduenturing their own credit upon the receite of a medicine with peril of
life where it is bestowed, which of it self is but an instrument only, and
works good or hurt, as it is applied and guided: to the application whereof
the long studies the knowledge of so many parts of philosophy and learning,
the peregrinations, and conferences of learned men make proof, and give
sufficient testimony both what is requisite, and how far of they be from
modesty and honesty that being unfurnished altogether, of every part of these
necessary helps, dare attempt the application of medicine whose nature they
know not and of what disposition the body or part is whereto it is to be
applied, they are utterly ignorant. But one will say they do sometimes good:
they do so, but oftentimes hurt, and more hurt the^ presently appears, and
with that good they in one respect do, in diverse besides they leave the body
crased, and make it afterward subject to greater infirmity: there cure being
imperfect, accidental, uncertain, void of rule and reason. wherefore although
you have for your part passed your course in philosophy and good learning and
are not altogether ignorant of the precepts of phisicians whereby this warning
might seem less to appertain unto you, yet considering your present
infirmity, and upon what grains and moments, and points of time this practice
stands: I counsel you and all other except the direction of diet that has
binbefore declared, and use of those familiar things wc every one daily putts
in practice, without the advice of the phisician, (whose present eye may behold
every necessity,) you utterly abstain, and take my labor herein as a poynting
of the finger to that which I judge meet for you being in a place far distant,
and where necessity may compel you to use what means of counsel you ca^ get:
and not such as you would: and upon the view of these manifold means of bodily
health: consider how much more the Lords providence is ready at all need, to
comfort our souls, in so much as the one is far more excellent then the other.
Thus having given this warning I proceed to deliver the natural helps and
ordinary remedies we do use in this case wherein your bodily health now
stands. Hitherto you understand what outward causes are to be removed, and
what to be brought in stead of them, contrary in operation, and breeders of a
better tempered humor. The next consideration (according to the method of
curing) is to be had of such inward cause as rests in the body, and has been
the effect of the outward annoyance: that is here the melancholic humor, and
complexion of the body now degenerated thereby. The humor requires
euacuation, and emptying: and because your body is not only melancholicke under
the ribs but the whole mass of your blood is changed therewith: it shall be
first necessary to open a vain: that both thereby you may be disburthened in
part of that heavy load, and nature having less of that kind to deal
withal, may alter the remnant into a more mild and pleasant juice: thin it
in substance, and temper it with natural heat and moisture: in quality.
Before any vain be opened a clister is first to be received that may cleanse
the entrails and diminish some part of the humor seated in those parts, it
would be made of marshmallowes, holyhockes, pelletory of the wale, mercury,
beetes, aretch, violet leaves, polipody, borrage, buglosse, chammomile, hoppes,
dill, and melilote, annise seeds, and fennel, decocted in ale or beer: and
the decoction being made, an ounce of Confectio hamech with a drame of Hiera
pichra added thereto. Honey wherein rosemarye flowers have been steeped, and
oil of dill of each an ownce and a half, this or such like according to the
discretion of the learned phisicia^. The morning following the veins are to be
emptied the necessity of the passion compared with the force and strength which
moderateth all kind of euacuatio^, though the desease require large emp tying.
And because melandcholy blood is thick and gross, and therefore easily flows
not though the vain be opened, it shall help the bleeding to exercise your
body a while before with such moderation that it be equally warmed, and the
spirit, and blood stirred up. The Orifice would be somewhat large that no let
be to the issue, and the grossenes of the blood may have the free passage: yet
so that it be no larger then is requisite, for wasting of spirits whereof
mela^choly persons have no store to spare. In the body the middle vain of the
left arm is fittest to be opened, which, respects, both head, liver, and
spleen: that betwixt the little finger and the next is of small use. In such as
have the addust melancholy seated in their brains, the head vain is more
direct for reuulsion, and those about the head it self for euacuating and
deriuing. The tokens of seating there only, are with altered fancy and
imagination, the body else carrying no melancholicke signs, no sower belching
after meat, nor heat with windiness, which all rise of the melancholy humor
stopping the mesaraicke veins, and so procuring that unnatural and
suffocating heat, which many melancholic persons complain of. The quantity
which I would have you spare, let it be no less then nine or ten ownces,
except the present action of opening minister other consideration. Now because
you have had in times past the benefit of bleeding hemorhods, which now a long
time are stopped at such seasons as they were wont to open, or now when they
give any sign of fullness, swelling or pain, they would also be opened by
applying a red onion to the place, or anointing it with the juice of
garlic, or with bulls gall, or rubbing it with a fig leaf, or with
horsleeches well purged, and prepared, and so applied the easiest way: by
opening the inward veins of the ankle and such like remedies as may provoke
the blood his usual way, and bring nature in mind of her wonted discharge of
that humor, which being stopped breeds (as Hipocrates says, and experience
makes proof) frensies, melancholies, pleurisies, hard milts, and dropsies:
and contrarily opened, and flowing moderatly, delivers from them all. If this
melancholy falls unto maidens, or women, and their ordinary course fail
them, the veins of the hammes or ancles are to be cut, and drinks of opening
roots, fenell, persly, butchers brom, madder, and such like, with germander,
goolds, herb grace, mugwort and nep are to be much used, with sittinges and
bathinges in mallows, chammomile and nep, peniroyall, bay leaves, fetherfew
(and such like, which have virtue in that case) decocted in water, wherein so
much honey has been dissolved, as will give it a taste of sweetness: if
greater force be required then a dram of the troches of myrre in the former
decoction are most forcible, the opening of vain before mentioned would be
procured at the accustomed time, at the full moan in the elder sort, and the
change in the younger. The thicker the blood is, the more the melancholic may
spare, and the thinner, the less. Thus much I judge necessary for one kind of
euacuation, which although it lets out good blood withal (as in all
bleeding) yet here lies the benefit, that nature is partly disburthened, and
so more easily governs the rest, and by virtue of her natural heat, and
spirit, corrects with smaller help that which therein is farther to be
reformed, the spirits have free liberty, and great scope is given to the
hearts dilating, the action peculiar to a cheerful disposition. The other kind
of euacation is by purging: which leaves the blood entry, only it cleanses
the body of that gross and thick settelinge, and is more peculiar, and
directly singleth out the melancholy from the other humors: and because this
humor is thick, and hardly moves, and the passages, and veins of the body
closer then whereby it may easily pass, (according to Hipocrates rule) both
body and humor are to receive a preparation, and the parts of the body to be
loosened, and enlarged, and the humor made more flowing and thin, both which
may be brought to pass with one means at once: by choice of such natures as
have virtue of attenuating, opening, and cleansing: and because the cure is not
only intended against the melancholicke humor, and that complexion of body,
but also against the fancy, and affection, which we call in physic symptoms,
always choice would be made of such as carry with them propriety to
strengthen the altered brain, and to cheer the comfortless heart: or if that
cannot be found in one simple, it is to be supplied by mixture. Their temper
would be moderate in heat, except the natural temper of the body, time of
year, sex etc. (and such like considerations) persuade on either side any
declination. The simples meet for this preparation of body, and humor are
these which follow: borrage, buglosse, endive, fumitory, hops, betony, the
sorts of maide^ hair, ceterach, hearts tongue, polypody, doddar of thime,
agrimony, cich pease, ash barks, caper barks, tamarisk, to which would be added
opening roots, fenell, persley, smallage, butchers broom, asparagus, and such
like. Of these simples decoctions should be made, and mixed with syrops of like
virtue, as with syrope of borrage, of apples, simple, or compound, as that of
King Sabor, syrope of fumitory, syrope of violets, of ceterach, syrope of
epithymus or doddar of thime: all openers of spleen and liver, cleansers of the
blood, and great preparers to the purging both of body, and humor: the use of
them would be much, and often fasting that they may have their full force.
Moreover to this use a kind of bear, brued with the simples before mentioned,
and some small relish of cloves and cynamon given unto it: and so used as
ordinary drink would be very wholesome for melancholic persons: and now and
then if the stomach be raw and rheumatick, a draught of hippocras, or some
aromaticall wine gives great comfort, increases the spirits, and makes the
blood thin. But here heed must be given that it be not too strong of spice,
least through too much heat, by euaporatinge the thin part, the rest of the
blood remain more thick, and harder to be purged. Besides these inward
preparations, and opening and thinning potions, the liver, and the spleen, and
the parts under the ribs would be suppled with convenient fomentations and
oyntmentes, to soften to open, and to loosen those parts where the purging
medicin has most to do: this may be done with fomentations made of mallows,
chammomile, melilot, figs, lineseede, fetherfew, rewe, and rose leaves, red
and damask, and the part being a while supplied therewith, some mollfying and
warming ointment is to be rubbed and chafed in gently, with a soft hand: as
that which is called commonly resumptiuu^, the ointment of briony, the ointment
of swines bread called cyclamen, upon which if need be a plaster of like
effect may have very good use, as diachylum magnum, the emplaister of melilote
for the spleen: ceroneum, diamelilotum of Andramachus etc. to these
preparatio^s, and disposings of body, and humor to the purging. If it seem
good unto the phisitia^s, and for variety, baths would be used of mollifying
and moderatly warming simples, as of mallows, marsh mallows, holihock,
chammomile, melilot, peniroyall, lineseed, roses, etc. In which decoction
lukewarm, the body is to be kept half an hour at a time (or as present
occasion shall direct) fasting, and in the while the parts under the short
ribs suppled and exercised with a soft hand, anointed with oil of capers:
oil of bitter alomonds, and a few drops of petroleum mixed therewith. After
the body has bin thus prepared and the humor somewhat more loose, and easy to
move: purgation is next to be attempted: by stool rather then by vomit, except
the party be very apt thereunto, and the melancholy be chiefly seated
therabout. The simples proper to purge melancholy are these following: Sena,
polypodie, black hellebore, and white, the azure stone, and more gentle then
it, the Armenian stone, all which diligently prepared and corrected, and
ministered in quantity meet for the patients strength enter combat with this
humor, and with such force chaseth it out of the body, that it follows it
even into the stool. The compounds are diasena confectio hamech:
hieralogadion: pills of fumitory, Inde of the azure, and Armenian stone, in
which the simples before mentioned receive their correction, and due
preservation, far more safe to be used then the simple alone, all which
purgers are to be received and mingled with some moysting decoction, as of
barley, with borrage, buglosse, violet leaves, and syrope of violetets,
borrage, buglosse etc. if they be electuaries, or powders, and if they be pills,
a thin broth, drunk immediately after them, that both the liquid substance may
give a speedy conueyance, and the dry humor soked with that form of medicine,
may more gently yield, and give place to the purge. When the medicine is felt
now to have passed the stomach which is perceived that it yields no
medicinable taste to the mouth, by belching or breath, then some broth may be
taken, made of such kind of flesh and herbs as have been before mentioned, and
so (till the working cease) the whole action of the medicine to be endured.
Thus much for purging by stool: if vomit be thought more necessary, (as I
judge it very necessary in you) whatsoever emptieth the stomach by provoking
nature that way (except the matter be very hard to move, and deep settled) shall
suffice for that sort of euacuation. Vomit is very necessary when the stomach
is moist and watery, and makes show thereof by much spitting, when the patient
is troubled with sour belching, and when the meat is perceived (in moving of
the body) to be loose, and iogge in the stomach: then I say all other
circu^sta^ces co^curring together, vomit is to be used: first of the gentle
sort: of which kind are radish roots, and seeds, pompeon root, netle seed,
astrabacka root or leaf etc. if the cause and strength of the melancholic
require a greater force of medicine, Stibium, and white hellebore are singular
in this case: which both would be ministered in fat broth: the substance of
Stibium, and the infusion of neesing powder or white helleborus: being in
substance most dangerous. This kind of hellebore more helps the fancy, and
corrects the brain, and the other more deals with the humor, and both
discretly used perform a most wholesome euacuation. If the melancholicke do
labor much in vomiting, minister drink or thin broth, so shall the vomit be
with more ease discharged. All perturbation of the body being ended, and the
medicine having wrought the desired effect, the face is to be refreshed with
some mixture of rosewater, and vinegar, and rose water is to be smelled unto,
the mouth to be washed and some conserve of red roses, with a quarter so much
of quince preserved, and one drop of oil of cloves, or cynamon, would be
received to strengthen the stomach again, to settle it quiet, and if any
quality of the medicine remain to correct and alter it, what soever thereby the
stomach should feel of coffeehouse. This emptying of stool and vomit, is
so often to be repeated, and by such distance of time, as need requires: the
strength of the melancholic will bear, and the humor admits of
preparation: especially the spring and fall crave this emptying at large.

CHAP. XLI. The manner of strengthening mela^cholick persons after purging: with
correction of some of their accidents.
BEtwixt the spaces of purging regard is always to be had of strengthening the
stomach liver, and spleen, with some ointment and fomentatio^ outwardly, of a
moderate astrictiue virtue, and some inward medicine compounded of such simples
as are accounted familiar, and simpatheticall to those parts: as of inward
things, to the stomach mintes, betony wormwood, sugar roses, maslites,
gala^ga, mace, cloves, cinnamon, amber ginger. etc, of which, potions, powders,
and electuaries would be made, and used for the stomach. Of the same matter
fomentations would also be made, especially of Cammomill, roses, wormwood, and
agrimony. Of compoundes conserve of wormwood, of sage flowers, of Enula
campana, of mintes are singular comforters of the stomach and bowels: the same
virtue have green walenuts preserved, embliske, myrobolans, and green ginger:
loze^ges of Aromaticum rosatum, Dianisi. The ointementes are to be made of red
roses, corrall, masticke, mintes, cloves, cinnamon, gum, aloes, with oil of
wormwood, masticke, quinces. etc, and here the emplaister of a crust of bread,
described of montagnana greatly strengthens the stomach, as also the stomach
plaster of mesue. For the liver these are meetest strengtheners: liuerwoorte,
maiden hear, agrimony, fumitory hoppes, asparagus, wormwood, horehound,
germander, saunders, yuorie roses, raysinges, runcus odoratus, Calamus
aromaticus. etc, of which stuff potions, powders, electuaries are to be
received inwardly, and fomentations, oils, ointments, and plasters to be
applied outwardly. Of compoundes conserve of fumitory conserve of wormwood,
conserve of maiden hear, Dialacca, Diacurcuma, Diacostum, open obstructions,
and leave a strengthening virtue in the part: of the spleen, hoppes, doddar,
ceteracoke, heath, caper barks, tamariske, acorus, gum lacca, centaurie be
peculiar comforters. Of inward compoundes: diacosthum: diacalamentum,
diacappairis, conserve of ceterach Of outward means, oil of capers, oil of
spike, and oil of lillies compounded with maslich, cloves, cinnamon, saffrone,
coftus, and Calamus aromaticus are openers and comforters of the spleen: and of
oyntmentes, martiatum magnum: of plasters, Diaphenicon, etc. These wholesome
medicines after the purges have satisfied the phisicians intention, would be
used and much applied both in respect of the parties disposition through the
melancholicke humor, and also by reason these do sustain the greatest force
of purgations, and preparations before said: and whose natures are easily
dissolved, and always require a strengthening simple mixed with the rest:
though they be of contrary operation. In the mean while of this preparation,
and purging: both in respect of the fancy, of the brain, and affection of the
heart, and the complexion of both, put out of frame by the humor, these two
are chiefly to be respected, with cordialls, and medicines appropriate.
Cordial, simplesare these: borrage, buglosse, the juice of pippins and
parmaines, balm, Carduus benedictus, scabions, basil seed, vincois horad,
beasar stone, yuorie, pearl saphyre, iacint, coral, amber, limon, and citron
pile, cinnamon cloves, wine, suffran, angellica, marygooldes, with a number of
like nature, the great providence of God being such that this noble part of the
heart has more helps and comforts peculiar thereunto, then any part of our
body besides. The compoundes usual are these: conserve of borrage, and
buglosse flowers, of ora^ge flowers, of gilly flowers, and carnations,
diamagarito^ calidum, the electuary of precious stones, letificans Galeni
mithridate dianthos, etc. Of the decoction of which herbs before mentioned,
epithemes may be made, and quilts of the powder of them, besprinckled with
malmsey and vinegar. Which form of outward medicine made of simples agreeable
to the stomach is good thereto also to be applied: whose mouth does greatly
agree with the heart, and easily drives into passion. As the hearts affection
is to be corrected, by amending the instrument: so the brains conceit
requires no less regard: for which these medicines, following are yielded to
our comfort: sage, betony, sweet mariorume, rosemary, cha^momil, myrtle, rue,
peony, spite, storax, benoyne cloves musk, amber greece. Of compoundes:
co^serue of rosemary flowers, of acorns of betony, of stechas, sage, peony, and
primerose Dambra, Diamoschum dulce, and amarum. Neither is the brain and heart
only cheered, and comforted by the inward receiving of these simples only, but
whatsoever of them is of pleasant and fragraunt smell, that agrees with each,
and gives recreation and increase to the spirits of both. So that sweet smells
are both in respect of heart and brain most comfortable to the melancholicks.
Thus the mela^cholick body, dieted, prepared, purged, and strengthened, what is
there more to be done of natural means only this: After all this course
taken, and diligently observed so long as it shall seem expedient and
necessary to the learned phisicia^ for the health of this mela^cholick patient,
(among whom I account you the subject of this my counsel) nature must have a
time and respit given, to try her own strength, according to the counsel of
Ruphus, and not to be tiered with medicine, the diet notwithstanding being kept
diligently which has bin prescribed and all kind of honest exercise, and
recreation practiced and procured. If the mela^choly be adust, (which it is not
in you) then breeds it a kind of fury, and madness, and requires a cooling:
and particular consideration: whereof (because it is very rare in respect of
the other kind, and enters into the rank of evident desease) I mind not
here to discourse being only willing thus far to satisfy your desire, wherein
your case (and such as are in like co^ditio^ with you,) require it. If any
accidents befall you through this infirmity, of hardness of body you may use
the clister before mentioned without the purging medicines, with three ownces
of oil, and as much of honey: or you may take an handefull of mallows,
holylock, violet leaves, beete, and fetherfew, annise seeds, or fennel seeds
half an ounce beaten with an handful of course where branne tied in a linne^
cloth and boiled in thin whay: to a pint of which being strained, add oil,
and honey, with half a spoonefull of salt: and receive it for a clister: or
drink fasting a spoonefull or twain of sweet sallet oil in a draught of
whaye: or eat a quarter of an ownce of conserve of damask roses, with xxx.
grains of the purest salt peter, and drink it: and especially let your
broathes always have some soluble herbs, that may give you that benefit, as
mallows, violettes, mercury, aretch, beetes and such like. If your sleep
fail you through vehemence of cogitation, and fear: let your hands and feet
be washed with the decoction of dill, chammomill, lettice, poppie mallows, and
willowe leaves: and annointe them with oil of poppie seeds made by
expression: or take a dram of Mithridate, five grains of Opium three of
saffron, with a spoonefull of malmesey, and a grain or two of Camphire: put
all into a limon pill emptied of the juice, and smell to it often about your
ordinary hour of sleep: which means if they bring not the desired effect,
swallow twenty grains of the piles of Cynoglosse, or take half a dram of
Philomum going to bed for other some other wholesome opiats medicine well
corrected. If your body be much troubled with wind (as it is for the most part
a companion of this kind of melancholy:) ye must use a fomentation to your
stomach belly and parts about the short ribs with oil and malmesey wherein
rue, fennel, cu^mine, and anise seeds, and herbs have been boiled, and
inwardly you are to take fasting Deatrion piptrion, diaciminu^, or diagalanga
the quantity of a nutmegge at a time: and now and then cerecloath of gummes,
with oil of mints, and rue, worn upon those parts, shall be of great force
to wast the wind, to warm them, and to give them strength. Thus my friend M.
have you my whole counsel, what I judge meet for you in this case, my
philosophical discourses to pass your time with, who has always delighted
in philosophy: my consolation in respect of that Christian duty which I owe
you, wherein if I have so busied my self, that my care that way has exceeded
my power, and hability, so esteem it, and so measure that discharge. My
physic, cure: of diet, of preparation of your body, of euacuation, of
strengthening, of correcting, and cutting of certain troublesome accide^ts
that fall to this humor, it is not so copious, and absolute as peradventure
may fit your estate, and leave no question of doubt, but (if I mistake not
the case very much) for substance and ground of the cure you shall nor need
to make farther inquiry Although I remember your travail in philosophy, and
study of physic, to which both you have had a natural disposition, and take
pleasure in reading our writings of precept and rule take advise of some
learned, and virtuous phisician about you, and adventure not upon any part of
euacuation without his direction: Otherwise you have this as a touchstone to
prove the skill of such lewd people as at this day are impudently bold with
the hurt of others, to deceive boasting, and lying, and covering the poverty
of their understanding, with gorgeous words, and rich pomp of phrase:
otherwise being as empty of knowledge as they be quite void of all virtue and
honesty. I say let it be a rule to square and try them by: and if such
knowledge (whereof here you may have the taste) be necessary in an infirmity of
no peril of life (though it make it tedious, and irksome) what aduisement and
care is to be had whom to call for, and what phisician to make choice of in
deseases full of danger, sharp, and swift, and whose cure (if art be not in
all points performed) is not without leaving such scar, that no rebating, no
detersiue medicine is able to pare and wipe away the blemish: not an eye sore,
but a maime, and fixed imbecillitie in stomach, in brain, in heart, or liver,
nor that by natures error, or by an ordinary breach of diet which are more
gentle, but through an outward violence and force, against which nature has no
skill to help it self, nor power to resist. As I give you this warning to
beware, so whosoever shall reap any fruit of my labor taken in hand for your
sake, let them also take this admonition from me, rather then to attend with
their own hurt, and expense, the instruction and discipline which experience
brings. Thus my good M. with this caveat, I commend the blessing and success
of my labor to the Almighty, who restore you if it be his will sound in body,
cheerful in mind, and assured in faith of his sweet mercy and favor.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing, wherein the first number signifies the page,
the 2. the line.
For material, natural. 4.2. for any an. 6.30. for was, were 8.10. for
assimulate, assimilate. 10.11. for in of. 12.33. for enjoys, enjoy. 17.19.
for and, an. 20 27. for fitteth, fitteth therewith. 21.8. for our, other.
21.27. for then the. 21.29. for to, of. 20.11. for act, art. 20.13. by an
accidental, put out by. 24.23. for recovery, may. 26.1. or and from their, or
from. 27.18. for have the pooles, haunt the. 29.7. for miflie, misty. 30.21.
for in that, that. 39 4. for being, beginning. 51.9. If you will descend etc.
54.19 should follow decays. l. 13. for then, the. 57.27. put out it. 68.11.
for whereof thereof. 74.13. for depending, depend 77.4. for lightly, rightly.
79.13. for is, it. 86.5. so is ouermatched, and is ouermatched. 86.5. put out
by 103.25. be offered. 104.21. impossible, as I take it. 118.18. put out by
121.23. ouercharged. 131.19. this greediness. 131.3. pronenesse of nature.
134.10. benummet. 139, 5. distractio^ 140 1. our most dear. 140.13. one and
the other. 14^.8. cords. 157.27. both laughing. 161.15. put out the first and.
163.11. own heat. 165.19. the body. 165.20. either in doing. 168.4.
exspiration. 169.30. near neighborhood, 175 17. vehement revenge of him self
for the offense. 167.8. barbarous. 193.14. success. 222 17. put out of. 124.29
put out the. 158. vlt. for destruction, distraction. 140.1. put out hinder.
144. vlt. put out large. 160 vlt less for her. 180.32 with for mith. 194.16.
sinues for sinners. 198.21. for enters seems. 204.1. for which, with. 222.
last. read found you pure and sincere in his beloved Son. 241.9 for duty,
diet. 242.21. for allow, allure. 248.3 for Aristophanes, Aristoxenes. 248.14.
put out the first with. 249.15. for may, read may ye. 251.23. for soiled read
sailed. 254.14. for to, a. 258.1. for of, and. 258.13. for juice read svveete.
258.25.


