A TREATISE MADE IN DEFENSE of the lauful power and authority of Pr^esthod to
remitte sins: Of the peoples duty for confession of their sins to Gods
ministers: And of the Churches meaning concerning Indulgences, commonly called
the Popes Pardons.

By William Allen M. of Art, and Student in Divinity.

Iudae. 1. Vae illis qui perierunt in contradictione Core. Woe be unto them that
perished in the disobedience and contradictio^ of Cores. LOVANII, Apud Ioannem
Foulerum, Anno D. 1567.

To the Christian Reader.
I have been asked earnestly at sundry times and places (as most me^ now a
days be either studious to know, or curious to controlle) whether a priest,
being but a mortal man, might without derogation to Gods soueraigntye, and
without high presumption, take upon him to remitte sins: the^, whether there
^e any necessity to confess and distinctly utter al secrette grievous crimes,
as well of deed, as word and will, unto him that should be proved to have
power to remitte sins. And lastly, whether there were any good meaning or
sufficient ground, in Scriptures, Councelles Doctors, or reason of the usual
Indulgences that be limited by remission of years, and days. Therefore fully
to satisfy such as moved me first herein, to whom I am for ^ust causes
merueilously much beholden, and to help other, whom, by the law of Christian
love, in such cases, I will charge my self continuallye to serve. I have put
in writing the Catholic Churches meaning touching the same matters and made it
my last Lentes work. I have not do on it in deed so brieflye, a^ was
required at my hands, because I cannot with safty from the Adversaries of
truth co^ueygh my self in so little room, when the cause is so large, and yet
though i^ seem long, perchance it shall not seem tediouse, because I have not
only divided i^ into chapters, where the readers, at every turnynge and joint
of the cause may rest them selves, but also severed the treatise of pardons
from the rest, that who so ever doubt not of the other articles before, may if
they list read it alone, though, for the better understanding of every
piece, the wholl might more profytably be perused to gether, whereby the
necessary sequel and depende^ce of truth may fully be seen as in the slight
coursinge over matters it can not well b^ done. Fare well, Gentle reader, and
submit thy judgment to the Catholic Church, as most humbly in all points I
do mine

Faults in the printing.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 19. 20. to the given. to be given. put out and
in the next line. 71. 21. Grerie. Gregory. 75. 12. cafes. cases. 170. 12. none
these. none of these. 174. 16. when was. when any was. 175. 11. forgeuen
is. forgiveness. 214. 5. publist. publik. 221. 3. gra. grace. 266. 9. in this
base. in this case. 295. 13. he vva. he was.

Margent. 48. ontempt. Contempt.

REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio concessum est Guilielmo Alano Anglo Magistro
Artiu^, vt librum inscriptu^, A necessary Doctrine of the office of a Priest.
etc.

Per Typographum aliquem iuratum imprimere, ac impune distrahere liceat.

Datum Bruxellis 26. April. 1567. Subsig. Prats.

THE PREFACE, CONTEININGE A just complaint of the disobedience that now is
toward the spiritual governors, and of the pitiful lack of such necessary
relief of our souls, as by them we should have, with the argument of the
treatise folowinge.
BEcause ye unjust claim and challenge of any power not given does highly
displease God, from who^ only al pre-eminence of man proceeds, no doubt al
priests and Bishopes, who have so long practiced pardoning and punishing of
sin, if they hold not ye right of yt excellent function by Gods own grant,
they have buyld this many hundredth years toward hell, and can neither avoid
the heavy indignation of God, in whose office and prerogative they have
unjustly intermedled, not yet marvel at their disdain amongst men, seeing it
is said, Eccl. 20.
that the usurper of power is woorthely hated: Qui potestate^ sibi
^umitiniuste, odietur. But if that most high and holy order do by good right
and reason, and by ye son of God Christ Jesus his own warrant and special
commission, occupy ye seat of judgment erected in ye Church for ye gouerme^t
of our souls and neadful search of our secret sins the^ it stands lame^tably
with ye disobedient captayns of this co^te^pt, through whose continual call to
sedition, so many have be^ carried away, from yt obeysa^ce yt is due to ye
soueraing power given to gods a^noited.

They remember well (such is their exercise in ye word) how ye disdain of
Moses and Aarons prelacy over ye people yt the^ God chose to be his peculiar,
moved his majesty to so great indignation, yt he drove down Core and al his
co^federacie to ye depth of hell both body and soul the^ selves a live, and all the people looking on their fall so fearful. The example had be^ of less
respect, if his heavy hand had stayed upon ye principal of that proud sort, but
it did not. for there perished, by strange fire of ye accessaries to that
Schism, two hundredth and fifty more. And the grudge, alas, of the people not
ceassing so, God sent fire from heaven, and wasted xiiij m. and vij c. of the^
at o^ce. And all this says Moses: Vt sciatis quia blasphemauerint Dominum,
that you may be well assured, Iosepus says that Datha^ and Abyron perished at
the openinge of the earth and Cores by the fire afterward amongst those that
offered incense. Lib. 4. c. 2 Antiq.
that they blasphemed our Lord God. So nere does the contempt of Gods
ministers, touch his own person, that in disdain of the one, there is
account made of most horrible blasphemy of the other. This Cores, as Io^ephus
writes, was a man that had a cast in talk to please the people, as the
seditious often have: and this was a great flower of his persuasion of ye
people to sedition and disobedience, as holy writ reports: Cur eleuamini, sup
populu^ Domini? It is sufficcie^t for our purpose, that the whole multitude is
sanctified, and the Lord is in the^, why do you exalt your selves above the
people of God? Thus said ye seditious against Gods priests the^: and now
truly, both ye people and ye preacher do pipe Cores note, of our eleuamini in
every play and pulpit, never having in mind their lamentable fall, whose steps
they like so well to follow.

Mary I ca^ not tell well, whether ye cases be co^parable, though I nothing doubt
but ours is much worse: De sacer. lib. ^.
For. S. Chrysostom says, that the disobedience of Dathon and the rest of
that confederacy, rose rather upon the affectation of so high a function, with
admiration of their dignity, then upon any contempt of that power, in which
the priests of God were placed: but the dishonor and the derogation that now
is done to the much more excellent office, stands upon unfaithfulness,
mistrust of Gods promise, love of sin, liking of liberty, lothsommes of
truth, and vnmyndfulnes of salvation. In which case though neither the heavens
yield fire for there present punishment, nor ye earth open for their spedie
passage to eternal pain, yet the perpetual fight which they keep against
Gods ordinance, there disordered life, and disobedience, there darkness of
understanding in such light of approved truth, and the continual course of
the Church which in marueylouse myserie they do willingly susteyn, does, me
think, fully resemble the lamentable state of ye damned and forsaken sort,
and therefore being yet a live, in good lykinge, and liberty, I fear they
wyttingly and willullie perish.

And yet I am not so void of al hope of their recovery, that I would refuse to
confer with them, touching that authority of remission of sins or other
pre-eminence, which the Priests of Christ's Church do claim, and they so
earnestly control. Though the rather I would do it, for the help of the
more humble sort, which in these days of disobedience, be rather driven out
of the way by force of the common tempest, then by malice or misbehauiour
toward the ministry, whom in Christ's name I must advertise to consider
carefully, in what doubt and danger they and all there dearest do stand, in
this pitiful vacation and long lack of the practice of priesthood for the
remission of their sins and other nedeful succor of there souls. For if
Christ, Contempt of man's ministeri for remission of sins brings da^natio^.
by whose blood we obtain pardon of our offenses, have by his ordinance made
man ye minister of our reco^ciliation to God and the bestower of his mercy in
remission of sins, then doubtless who so ever neglects, to walk the
known way of salvation, and refuses the ordinary means of mercy, which
Christ means to be applied to our use none otherwise, but by the office of
mortal men, he lives in sin perpetually, he dies in sin without hope of
recovery, and for sin without doubt shall perish everlastingly.

Therefore the matter of so great importance, standing on so doubtful terms,
it were no wisdom to sleep so soundly in such present peril, nor to continue
without care and singular respect of most dredful state, In which, if we pass
our days wthout hope or possibility of Gods mercy, by cause we refuse man's
ministry, then all our life and studies, all our pains or pleasures, all our
works and ways do nothing else, but drive us in disobedience to extreme
death and desperation.

I make the more matter hereof, for that not only such as be led into folly
and falshode by the persuasion of some, to whose teachinge and lykinge they
have unadvisedly addicted them selves, but also diverse even of the faithful,
that be not fallen (thanks be geauen to God) so far, as to contemn the
Church, and Christ's appointed ordinance, are not yet so touched, as in such
case of extreme misery, Christen men should be. Heresy ^nfecteth daungerously
eue^ vvher she Kills not.
For heresy is such a creeping and contagiouse canker, that, albeit she
utterly (through mercy and Gods grace) kill not all, yet she dulleth the
conscience, dries up the zeal, and enfecteth the minds of most.

The like lack of Christian comfort has been often else amongst the people
in such storms of the Church: but so little care and consideration thereof, I
do not lightly remember.

In the persecution of the Vandalles and Arian Goths in Affrike the people of
God were severed from their pastors, and thereby wanted succoure of their
souls as we now do, but thereof they conceived such grief and heaviness, that
it is surely lamentable to remember: Li. 2. de persecut. Vandal.
The story is recorded by Victor and the words of the sorrowful people
uttered in the ways, as their holy Bishopes did pass toward their
banishment, be reported thus: A marvelous preasse of faithful people, that ye
high ways could not receive, came down the hills with tapers in their
hands, and laid their dear children at the Martyrs feet (so they termed the
witnesses of Gods truth then) and pitifully complained thus. The sorrow of
the Christian people for their Bishopes bannishment.
Alas too whom do you leave us so desolate, whiles your selfs go to the
croune of martyrdom? who shall now baptize these poor babes, in the fountes
of lively water? who shall loose us tied in the bands of our offenc^es, by
pardon and reconciliation? who shall prescribe to us the due of penance for our
sins past? For to you it was surely said: what so ever you loose in earth, it
shall likewise be loosed in heaven. Such you see was the carefulnes of ye people
tha^, in that little lack of so necessary a thing: where now in so long
desolatio^ of most holy things, and our greatest comfort, few there be that
take any grief of so much misery at al, and that heartily lament the case,
almost none. If we assuredly believed (as it is surely true) that al which
pass this present life in ye bo^ds of mortal sin, should everlastingly perish
without al hope of mercy, and the^ to be undoubtedly bound in their offenses,
whom the priests of the holy Church had not loosed in this life (excepting
only the case of extrem necessity where by no means possible man's ministry can
be obtained) then truly, besides the fear of our own dangerous state, our
hearts would bleed for pity and compassion of so many that depart this present
world, in the det of eternal damnation, not only of our Christian brethren
commonly, but of our dearest and best beloved peculiarly. It is not my timorous
conscience, nor scrupulous cogitation, that rayseth this fear: but it is the
grave sentence of Gods ordinance, it is S. Augustines own judgment that
moves me of pity to move, and of duty to admonish my brethren and friends,
of a thing yt pertains to them all so near. S. Augustine, co^ceiuing ye
manifold miseries of ye Christian people in thabsence of their true Pastors in
times of persecution, does lively set forth ye godly endeavors of faithful folks
in these words: Do we not consider, when the matter is brought to such a^
extreme ishue, and where it can not be by flight avoided, what a wonderful
cu^curse of christian me^ of every kind, state, and age, is unto the Church?
where some cry out for baptim, some for reco^ciliatio^ or absolutio^ (for so I
interpret, ipsius poenitentiae actione^, which also may mean a request to
have penance appointed of ye priest) and al generally call for comfort,
confession, and bestowing of the holy sacraments? In which extremity, if there
lack such as should minister these things unto the^. Quantu^ exitiu^ sequetur
eos, quod de isto seculo vel no^ regenerati exeu^t, vel ligati? qua^tus
estetia^ luctus fideliu^ suoru^, quod eos secu^ in vitae aeternae requie no^
habebu^t? What utter destruction shall fall on the^, yt must pass this life,
either not christened or else fast bound in sin? And what passing sorrow
will it be for their faithful friends, Of old the pastors did in times of
heresy often for a sake their flock, but now the flo^k has for^aken their
pastors.
which shall not have their company in eternal rest and joy? Thus far, said he
for proof that the Pastoures should not forsake their flock, and thus say we
now, where ye flock have forsaken their pastors: ye lack is like in both.
But ours is so much worse, because it was procuted willingly, and theirs the
more of excusable, because it was both born necessity, and lamented christianly.

Neither may we think our selves here much to be relieved, by them, yt pretend
ye like practice of such things as now we lack. Note.
For ye ever augmented ye sorrow (...) just dolor of the faithful. Much it is,
God knows, to want their Pastors and priests so dear, and with them for
most part all the due of Christianity: but to sustain in stead thereof, a kind
of apishe imitation of such holy functions, which in deed, by what pretense of
holiness so ever it be used, is and always has been accounted most detestable,
that is the great calamity which wastes most in all tempesteous times of Gods
religion. For the only use, acquaintance, and familiarity of this false face or
resemblance of truth and holy actions of the Church, drives many into a kind
of conte^tacio^ and rest in such things, as themselves, other wise do abhor, or
at least, turns away their earnest appetite and desire of those matters, There
is no necessity that should drive any man to take any sacrament at an he
retikes hand, saving only the sacraments of baptism and penance and that not
without necessity, vhhich only is in present peril of death.
which no man ca^ without peril of damnation miss. It is not yet meant hereby,
that every sacrament is frustrat always that be by such made, or ministered,
although for most they be so profaned, that they be not only nothing
beneficial, but also damnable both to ye geuer and receiver: but my meaning is,
yt eue^ those sacraments, which be of necessity, that by Gods special mercy
they may be received of such as be not otherwise co^petent ministers, where ye
present peril of any man's life forces thereunto, yt eue^ then when they may be
beneficial to other yt without schism call for the sacraments, yet they shall be
damnable unto themselves. For hereof let every man be bold, yt takes upon him
any ministry in scism and disorder, yt so often as he has practiced it, so
often has he provoked Gods ire toward himself, and procured, as much ^s in
him lies, his indignation to al yt ^re partakers thereof. S. Basil the great
^omplaineth hereof very much in his ^ayes, by these words: Epist. 70.
in the doctrine of impiety and wickedness the churches babes be now brought up.
For how ca^ ^t be otherwise? Baptism is ministered ^y heretics, they help
forth, such as pass hence, they keep visitation of the sick they have
comfortinge of the so^owful, they take on them the ease of such as be burdeyned
in all cases, and to be short, The hurt of heresy to youth.
they minister the mysteries of holy communion: so that, in time though the
liberty of Christ's religion be restored again, the youth shall take such
likinge in heretics practices, to whom by love and custom, they are so fast
knit, that it will be hard to reduce the^ home to truth again. Thus far
spoke S. Basil of his days: and right good cause have we no less to compain
of ours. They were tha^ encumbered with Arians, and we with a legio^ of new
devises and bold practisioners of such high and heavenly functio^s, as neither
by God nor man, they are rightly and orderly called unto. The benefit that we
receive by our new ministers
By these now only our souls seem to live, but by these alone we surely dye
everlastingly. In all which great desolation of Christian comfort and all
spiritual functio^s this were some solace, if either ye older sort could
consider what they have lost, or ye poor children, which are nurced in these
novelties, might learn what they lacked.

The Author, intent in this book^.
My meaning is therefore, to move al parties to ye necessary care and heed of
the matter, by ye treatise following: trusting that some one or other of my good
brethren, who all be to me most dear, will awake at my earnest call: and
consider of the matter deapely, how it fares with him and other, touching
their souls, since the sacrament of penance has been banished and the
priesthood of Gods Church spoiled of iuridictio^ and right in remission of
sins, and to help him in so necessary and fructeful advise of him self, and
other, who^ in such cases I mean always to serve, I will seek out ye ground of
this authority, yt has been so long practiced of the priest, and honored of
the people, to the singular glory of God, ye notorious increase of virtue, and
weal publik of ye whole Christian world, that both ye good catholic may have
reasonable prouf of ye which to his immortal weal he has so long both loved
and reuere^ced in Christ's ministers, and also ye co^te^ners of so heavenly
power may learn in hu^blenes of heart to like and fear yt excellent function,
which by pride they did before unadvisedly disprove. If it may please any man,
yt is doubtful of this article, which is so necessari to be known, to
consider, and give good atte^dance to ye whole course of my talk, I promise him
as before God (who will sharpli judge al sinister endeavors in causes of his
honor) yt I will deal sincerly in all points and faithfully: I will not cover my
self nor ye light of ye cause in cloud of words, neither by any artificial
slight (as new doctors now a days often do) circu^ue^t ye sense of him yt
is most simple, such indiffere^cy shall be used every where in trial of ye truth,
yt I will seem for his sak, to doubt of ye matter my self, Though in deed (so
God save me in my common sense, and so god spear me for my sins) I can never
mistrust any point of that faith in which I was new borne and baptized. But
that notwith, standing I will not spare to rippe up that, which men most
reprove in Gods Church and ministers, that all the disobedient children may
see, how free they be from falsehood, and far from ye beguiling ye flock of
Christ to them co^mited to keep, we will call ye high magistrates (though yt be
exceeding unseemly for subjects to account of their government) ye principal
pastor must give a reason of his pardons, and awnswer for ye limitatio^ of his
indulgences by years, days and times, both he and all other Bishops shall be
accomptable for such grave censures exercised upon men's souls, with them all
inferiors priests must be posed for searchinge the secrets of our
consciences, for releassing ma^s misdedes, e^ioyning penance, and requiring
satisfaction for syns. Thus bold will we be with truth, ye rather thereby to
deface falshod.

And all this in that order, yt may in lest room conteyne most matter, with
both breuity and light, so much, as so deep and large a cause ca^ bear, from
al co^tentio^ I will so far refrayn, yt eue^ ye adversaries them selves of
Christ's truth and doctrine, albeit they be persons infamous, by law, and
consent of all nat^o^s, shall not yet without mean and reasonable moderation be
touched or talked of, requiring of them this courtesy again, yt they reprehend
nothing in this discourse pryuilie, which they can not, nor dare not awnswer to
openly. A reasonable request.
And of my loving brethren yt be Catholic I must farther require one thing (the
suit is for the^ selves) that, when in a manner they sensibly feel ye truth,
they would not refuse to follow the same: yt by outeward work they may declare
their inward will. Hereof I am now more careful, for yt I see heresy and
falsehood to be of ye cou^tena^ce and color, yt it is often liked, before yt be
believed: where gods truth, for terror and bitterness yt it bears, is not
always followed, where it is well known and trusted. But surely truth is not
profitably understood, til it be willingly practiced.

Therefore who soever acknowledged in his conscience the power of Gods Church
and ministry for the remission of sins, and uses not humbly confession of
his sins, that that power may redound to his salvation, he is so much farther
from God, by how much more he knows ye right way to come to God. Man's will
must in all such cases of terror and difficulty, give over to Gods ordinance,
whose co^ma^dementes, though they seem to ye worldly burdenous, yet to the good
and ghostly, De doctrina Christiana Cap. 41.
and paucis ama^ti^us (says. S. Augustine) they are sweet and exceeding
pleasant. And this let every man assuredly know, yt who soever co^pteth
confession so heavy, he neither feels ye weight of sin, nor yet
sufficiently fears ye appointed pain for ye same. Al these untowardly
affections, ye sin and the world have planted in us all, let us seek by
love and zeal of Gods truth and ordinance, to amend: and join with me (gentle
Reader) I beseech thee in prayers, that our endeavors may please God, and
profit his people.

THE FIRST part of this Treatise of the lauful power and authority of
Priesthode to remit sins, and of the distinct confession of sins to a
Priest.
That Christ did forgive sins not only by proper power and nature as he was
God, but also by ministry, as he was a man, and as he was a Priest, and head
of the Church, and that upon that ground the Priests power in remitting sins
in the Church does stand. The first Chapter.
CHrist Jesus the Son of the living God, being everlastingly of the same
substance, power, and nature, that his Father and ^he holy Ghost be of, as
being truly ^quall and one God with them both, woorketh mightelie al things
in heaven and in earth jointly with them both: and therefore by excellency of
power, property of nature, and by full and perfect dominion over his own
creature, he remitteth man's sins by the same sovereign right that they do.
Who being thus in all excellency equal with God, has notwithstanding
vouchsafed of his singular bountifulness, joined with marvelous humility, Ad
Philip. 2.
to abase him self to the receiving of our nature: in which now he has
wrought the same things in earth, by service, suit, and commission, which
before he only did by might and majesty of his own power, procure. Even the
self same God, that by will and commandment might most justly both have
punisshed and pardoned who^ he list, of love and wisdom infinite (continuing
always in like excellency as before) became the minister of our reconcilement
to God. In which state he offers sacrifice as a Priest for sin, he uses
sacraments for the remission of sin, he prayed to God his Father for the
sinful, he is made the head of the Church, the governor of the Church, and
the judge of the Church. Al which functions perteine to our Savior, in respect
and consideration of his human nature: according unto which, power is given
him of the Father, through the holy Ghost, to practice the same.

And what so ever in holy scripture is red to be exercised of him through the
might of Gods Spirit, by the virtue of his anointing, by the finger of God, by
the sending of the Father, by power received from above, by priesthod, prayers
or sacrifice, by the name of the Son of man, of the head of the Church, or
judge of the living and dead: what so ever is in this sort said to be done, it
is not otherwise lightly meant, but in respect of Christ's humanity, by which
and in which he woorketh the same, not as by the propre and natural power or
force thereof, but as by jurisdiction received of the blessed Trinity, and
employed upon the son of man, for the procuring of salvation to his people,
whereof he is become in our very nature the head.

Therefore no Christian man may doubt, Note well the ground of the cause.
but as our Savior by the omnipotent power of his Godhead, might and did
forgive sins to the penitent: so likewise, that, as he was Priest, and the
son of man, he might by the right of his office, unction, and ministry, in
the virtue of the holy Ghost, remitte sins also. And for that cause
principally in the Prophet Esaias it is said: Cap. 61.
Spiritus Domini super me, eo quod vnxerit me, ad annunciandum mansuetis misit
me, vt mederer contritis cord, and praedicare^ captiuis indulgentiam, and
clausis apertionem: The Spirit of the Lord upon me, because he has anointed
me, and sent me to signify unto the meek, that I should heal the co^trite
in heart, to preach pardon to the prisoners, and freedom to ye closed. Luc. 4.
The which place of the prophet our Savior applied unto himself in the Church
of Nazareth: and is to be understood only of preaching, Cap 11. and 12. li.
1. de Trinit.
and pardoning, by the holy unction of the Spirit of God, and his Fathers
calling. And therefore, it must needs, according to S. Augustines judgment,
concern the shape of his service and manhod taken on him, in which he preached
so, yt yet it pleased him to affirm, yt his doctrine was not his own, but his
Fathers that sent him: and healed the co^trite in heart, which is nothing else
but to forgive sins to the penitent, after such a sort, yt it might well
appear to be receued and practiced by the unction of the Spirit of God, and
sending of his Father, whereby the Son of man might do that as Gods minister in
his manhood in earth, which both he, and his eternal Father, with the holy
Spirit of them both, do work, by their own, one and equal authority in heaven
everlastingly.

And though God has ever since man's fall, God has ever used man's ministeri
in reconciliation.
used the means and service of man, to his restore again, and to ^he relief
of his lackes, and therefore ^ath given authority by his holy Spi^ite and
unction, to diverse of the ^lde Law to offer sacrifice, pray, and procure
remission to the people of all their offenses: and no less as occa^ion served,
and the matter required, ^o correct their misdeedes by judgment and
jurisdiction geauen unto them, for which sovereign calling they were called
the anointed of God, an external ceremony of anoyling being solemnly annexed
thereunto: yet our Lord and master, whether you consider his high priesthode,
by which in most ample manner through commission received, he may procure our
pardon, or his calling to be the head of the church, by which he rules and
keeps all the body in due subjection and order, or his ministry of
preaching, whereby, far above all the prophets and preachers of the old law,
he opens to his flock the Church, the secret mysteries of Gods truth: Christ,
I say, in all these respects being man, is yet much more abundantly blessed,
and anointed without comparison, Psalm. 44.
above all his fellows and coparteners, as the holy Prophet David does
testify. Upon whose words touching that matter, S. Hilarie writes thus: De
Trinit. 10.
Vnxit te Deus, Deus tuus oleo exultationis prae participibus tuis: non
secundum sacramentu^ aliud, quam secu^du^ dispensatione^ assumpti corporis.
Vnctio eni^ illa, no^ beatae illi and incorruptae and in natura dei mane^ti
natiuitati profecit, sed sanctificationi hoi^s assumpti. Namet in Actis ait
Petrus, vnxit illu^ Deus in spiritu sancto and virtute. Thus he means in
English: God, even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of joy, far above
thy coparteners, not in any other meaning, but according to ye dispensatio^ of
a body received. For that unction could not be beneficial to the holy
unspotted, and everlasting nativity in the nature of his Godhead, but only it
was agreeable to the mystery of his manhod and flesh assumpted in his temporal
nativity: whereof S. Peter speaks in the Acts, that God has anointed him
in the holy Ghost and in power.

The holy Father also S. Cyril agre^th hereunto, De recta fide ad Reginas,
confessing that all this honor, power, and authority, which the Prophets have
signified so long before ^y the annoynting of the son of God, ^ame unto
Christ in consideration of his manhood: thus he says, Quod vnctio sit ^ecundum
humanitatem, nemo qui recte sapere ^^let, dubitabit, quia absque omni
controuersia ^inus a maiore benedicitur. That the an^ointing of Christ should
be meant of his humanity, no man doubts, that is of any right understanding.
For without al controversy the inferior and less ever receives blessing of
the superior and greater. There can be no question then, but al sovereignty
and supreme jurisdiction, which he exercised over the Church being his body
and spouse, in that respect that he was either Priest and Bishop of our
souls, 1. Pet. 2.
as S. Peter calls him, or else as he was our head and pastor: it is certain,
that all this came unto him by his Fathers sending, and the unction of the holy
Ghost, and the benediction of the holy Trinity, to which he was inferior
according to his manhood.

If thou doubt of this Priesthode in this case, hear Theodoretus: Christus
autem, quod ad humanitatem quidem attinet, Dialog. 1.
Sacerdos appellatus est, non aliam autem hostiam quam suu^ corpus obtulit:
Christ (says he) touching his humanity, was called a Priest, and he offered no
other host but his own body. But we may have more forcible testimony hereof
in S. Paul him self, who in sundry other places that are known, Heb. 5. and
9.
professes every Bishop to be elected and chosen out among an number of men,
to offer sacrifice for sin.

And that he is made the supreme gouernoure and head of the Church in his
humanity, yea and in respect thereof, is appointed to be the high minister of
God the Father in pardoning or judging the world, it is an assured ground of
our faith, approved not only by the consent of all Doctors, but also by the
Scriptures, every where protesting, that al power in heaven and earth is given
to Christ: in so much, that the Apostle calls him, the man, Act. 7.
in quo viro statuit iudicare orbem terrarum: In which, or by which appointed
man he will judge the world. Al these things, though they may seem to the
simple to be far from the matter, yet they be both near our purpose, and
necessary to be laid up in memory for the further establisshing of our
faith in the Article proposed, and diverse other profitable points of
Christian belief now impugned. For as the due consideration of Christ's
authority and excellent office touching his manhod, will help up the decayed
honor and jurisdiction, that the guides of Gods Church, by the right of his
high calling, do justly challenge: so it shall repress the boldness of
certain miscreants of this age: who, to further their sundry evil entents,
and detestable doctrines, have dishonored Christ's dignity touching his
incarnation and office of his redemption, exceeding much, both in him self, and
in the persons of his Priests and substitutes Some of them fearing (as I take
it) least the honor and office of Christ's Priesthod might, by participation,
descend to the Apostles and Priests of the Church, let not to hold, that
Christ was his Fathers Priest according to his divine nature: of which
blasphemy John Calvin was justly noted, Vide Oricouij Chimer.
wherein the wicked man, whiles he went about to disgrace the dignity of
mortal men, became exceeding injurious to the second person in Trinity. One
other of that schole, and of his own neast, denied that Christ in his manhood
should judge the world, least there might seem ^o be some force of punishment
and cor^ection of wickedness practiced by ma^s ministry in this life, for the
resembla^ce of Christ's judgment to come. And so ^aught one Richerus, of a
Carmelite a Caluinist. Vide Villegag. contra articulos Caluini. Ita Hartop.
Mo^hem and alij. Heb. 7.
Other deny Christ being now in heaven, to make prayer for us according to his
manhood: because it ^endeth toward the intercession of Saints, though S.
Paul in express words records of him: Quod salua^e in perpetuum potest,
accedens ad Deum persemetipsum, semper viuens ad interpellandum ^ro nobis. That
for ever he is of power to give salvation, having access to God by him self,
and always living to make intercession for us. Yea most of the Sacramentaries,
for thaduantage of their ungodly assertion, that Christ in his own person as
he is God and man should not be present in the sacrament, Vide Ciril in Joan.
lib. 4. Cap. 14.
do covertly blaspheme the blessed and highly sanctified flesh of our savior,
auouching it to be unprofitable: whereby they unadvisedly dishonor the
dreedful incarnation of Christ, and all the works wrought by the mean of his
flesh and blood, and ministry of his manhood, for the remission of our
sins, and purchasing salvation to his Church.

Let us therefore Christianly confess with the Scripture and with the Church
of Christ, that our Savior not only by power equal to his Father concerning
his divine nature, but also by the sending and grant of his Father, and
unction of the holy Spirit, being far under them both in his human nature,
does remitte sins. Whereupon it orderly follows, that, whosoever ever denies
man to have authority, or that he may have power granted him by God to
forgive sins, he is highly iniuriouse to our Saviors own person, and the
dispensation of his flesh, and mystery of his holy incarnation. For though
there be great diversity betwixt his state and others, because in one person
both God and man be perfectly united in him, and therefore much more
prerogative might be, and doubtless was given to his humanity, as to him that
was both God and man, in respect of his baser nature, then to any other of
his brethren being but mere men: yet this is assuredly to be believed, that he
which could without derogation to his Godhead, communicate with the son of
man, and grant him, in consideration of his assumpted nature, the rule and
redemption of his people, the government of our souls, the assoyling of our
sins, and to work all wonders in the power, finger and force of the holy
Ghost: the same God, without all doubt, through his Son and our Savior, may
at his pleasure without all vnseemelines or derogation to his eternal honor
(and so it shall be proved that he does) give power to the governors of his
Church and houshoulde, to pardonne and give penance, to judge and rule the
people in the right of our said Savior, to the edifieng of his body and making
perfect his Saints.

Neither must we here make any great account of such as shall object to the
Priests of Gods Church, as the Scribes did unto Christ himself, when they saw
him in express words absolve many of their sins, conceiving in their hearts,
as it is recorded by S. Matthew in ye history of ye healing of the man that had
the paulsie, Cap. 9.
that Christ did injury to God, and committed blasphemy in taking upon him to
remit man's offenses: whose malitiouse minds and cogitations, Christ did so
reprehend, that they might well perceive by his sight of their inward secrets,
that he was very God, who only by nature looks into man's heart, and
therefore, did thereby well insinuate yt they could not justly reprehend his
doing, seeing he was God in deed, and might as God pardon man's offenses. Yet
that notwithstanding, he stood not with them then upon the right of his Godhead
for the doing of this excellent function, which in deed by nature and
propretie is only perteining to him, but he gave this reason of his doing:
that the Son of man had power to remitte sins in earth, whereby me seems
(wherein yet I submit my judgment to the more learned) that he plainly
professed, that by power received he might in respect of his manhod and calling
forgive sins, and that in earth, as meaning thereby to institute an order and
way how to remitte sins here in the world, either by himself or by his
ministers, at whose sentence past in earth, the penitent should be free by
judgment of God in heaven. For so our Savior two or three times talking of
ma^s ministry in the remission of sins terms it: loosing in earth, and the
contrary, binding in earth, Matt. 16. and 18.
as also he calls Gods high sentence in the same causes, loosing and binding
in heaven. Neither does the interpretation of S. Hilarie any whit hinder my
meaning, In expla^. Mat. Can. 18.
who upon that place affirms Christ to have remitted this man's sins by the
might of his Godhead: for it stands well, that one work should be wrought by
the principal cause, and yet by the office and ministry of some secondary
cause appointed by the ordinance of God for the same use, as we see in
Baptism to the remission of the childs sin, both the might of God and the
ministry of man to concur at once, whereof we shall have, I trust, better
occasion to speak anon.

But to return back to our cause: when Christ had declared that the Son of man
had in earth power to remitte sins, he then by this farther proof and
argument ouerturneth the whole cause of their disdain and inward murmur
against him for the same: whether is it more easy to say, thy sins be
forgeuen thee, or to say to the incurable person, take up thy bed and walk: I
do the one in all your sightes, and he is cured at my word: why then mistrust
you the other? It was no less the proprety of God alone, Note.
to heal him suddenly of his corporal infirmity, that had been desperately sick
so long, then to forgeaue sins: but the one power though by nature it was
propre to him self, yet be gave it in the sight of you al to the Son of man
in earth: why the^ mistruste you but he might well give the other? This reason
proceeding from the wisdom of Gods own son, shall help our faith much
towchinge this article, and shall not a litte further ye dignity of the
Apostles, who also after their masters example, may prove the force of their
authority upon men's souls, which can not be open to our bodily eyes, by the
apparent power that their words shall be seen openly to work on men's
bodies, especially if it be well weighed, that Christ wrought miracles aso, not
only by the excellent dominion and force of his Godhead, but also, as. S.
Augustine proves, by ye Spirit of God in respect of his man^ode: De Trin.
lib. 1. c. 11.
In quo spiritu sancto (says he) operatus ^st virtutes, dicens: Si ego in
spiritu Dei eijcio ^aemonia, certe superuemet in vos regnum Dei: ^n the power
of which holy ghost Christ wrought miracles, according ^o his own saying in
these words: ^f I expel out deuilles by the spirit ^f God, then surely the
kingdom of God will come on you. The Jews therefore seeing them selves thus
overcome in their vayn cogitations, waxed affrayed and glorified God who gave
such power to men. For though no man ever had equal authority or like power
to Christ, who was both God and man, yet of this plentiful spirit and vnctio^,
many of his brethren have through his ordinance received part, as shortly now
it shall be proved. In ye mean time arm thy self against falshode with this
approved and certain truth, yt not only God by his passing prerogative, may
forgive sins, but yt he has so souerainglye anointed Christ our high
priest and head, that as he is man and occupies the said functions in earth
he may remitte by the virtue of the holy Ghost, our offenses also.

Let the proud cogitations of men here attend, that so highly do disdain
the ministry of mortal men in the remission of their sins: let the^
controlle the wonderful wisdom of God, which would no otherwise salve the
pityfull sores of our souls, but by the servile form of our own nature,
joined merueilously in one person, to the word and eternal Son of God the
Father: let them reprehende the unsearchable secret counsel of the holy
Trinity, which being of power infinite to work their will in all creatures,
yet would not repayr ye world nor remitte our sins any otherwise, but by the
service of the Son of man: let them mislike, that flesh, blood, and the
soul of our blessed Savior being all creatures, should join with the only
almighty creator of all things, in the remission of our offenses: let the
presumptuose thus do: and let us humbly reverence Gods ordinance and
gloryfie him in his Sons high calling in our kind, through whose singular
prerogative we shall undoubtedly find exceeding power to the given to his and
body and brethren in earth, to his most dear spouse the Church.

Here it is declared by scripture, that the same power of remittinge sins,
which God the father by commission gave unto his son as he was man, was also
by Christ bestowed on the Apostles after his resurrection. The second Chapter.
IN what high reputation man has ever been with God his maker, it is not mi^
purpose now to treat of: neither will I make any tediouse talk, though it be
somewhat more near the matter, how his estimation is increased by the
honorable and most merueylous matchinge of Gods only everlasting Son with
our nature and kind: wheerof whosoever has any worthy consideration, he
shall nothing wonder, I warrant him, at ye soueraingtye of such, as be placed
in the seat of judgment and government, for ye rule of that commonwealth,
whereof Christ is the head. These things, though they be well worthy our
labor and deep remembrance, and not very far from our matter, yet so will I
charge my self with continuance in my cause, that I will only seek out ye
dignity of priesthood touching the right, that the order claims in
remission and reteining of man's sins. In all which cause, I take this a
ground, that our Masters messenger stood upon, when his disciples grudged
that Christ had his folowers, and practiced Baptism no less the^ him self
did, which is: That no man can rightly receive any thing, that is not given
him from above. Johan. 3.
Therefore if it may be sufficiently declared, that the order holds by good
warrant this their pre-eminence of pardoninge or punishinge the peoples
offenses, and that by commission from him, who without all controversy is the
Head of the Church, then the matter is good in it self, and the contrary
must learn to leave their contentions reasoninge, and unjust contempt of that
order, which is honored by power and prerogative proceeding from Christ Jesus.

And of two or three places in holy scripture perteininge to this purpose, that
shall be first proposed, which with most force dryueth down falsehood, and
most properly perteynethe to the pithe and principal state of the cause
which we have in hand. Thus then we find of Christ's words, will, and
behauioure concerning the commission granted out to his holy Apostles for the
remission and punishment of our sins, in the xx. chapter of the gospel of
S. I. where the Euangeliste thus reports: Cap. 20.
that Christ after his glorious resurrection, came into a secret chamber where
his disciples were togeother, the doer being shut for fear of the Jews,
and there after he had given them, as his custom was his peace and blessinge,
and showed him self to their infinite comfor^ ye ^he was perfectly risen again
in the same body yt so lately was buried, he then straight afterward, to make
woorthye entrance to so high a purpose, gave them his peace again, in manner
of a solemn benediction: and there with said: Sicut misit me parer, and ego
mitto vos. Even as the Father has sent me, so I do send you. And when he had
so spoken, he breathed on them and said. Accipite spiritum sanctum: quorum
remiserit is peccata, remittuntur eis: and quorum retinueritis retenta sunt.
Receyne you the holy ghost: whose sins soever you shall forgive, they are
forgiven them: and whose sins you shall retein, they be retained. This is ye
place, lo, in which the judgment and rule of our souls with all authority in
correcting our sins, in most express and effectual terms, and in most
ample manner is given to the Apostles and their successors. Christ him self
does communicate unto them the jurisdiction that he received of his Father, he
gives them in a solemn ceremony ye same spirit of God, by which in earth
him self did remitte sins: he makes them an assured promise, that
whatsoever they pardoned or corrected in man's life, the same should stand in
force before God.

What dignity could ever be given more? in what terms more plain? by what
order more honorable? for surely if either Christ could remitte sins, as we
have at large proved yt he could, by the commission and sending of his Father,
or if the holy spirit of God may remitte sins, or if Christ's word may
procure man any power to remitte sins, then undoubtedly may ye Apostles
remitte sins: For they have the express warrant of them all. Much said
Paul, 2. Cor. 5.
when he affirmed in the Apostles name and person of al Priests. Quod Deus
erat in Christo mundum reconcilians sibi, and posuit in nobis verbum
reconciliationis. Pro Christo ergo legatione fungimur: That God was in Christ
reconciling the world to him self, and has put in us the word of
reconcilement: therefore our calling is to serve as in Embasie in Christ's own
stead. These words be of great weight, and excedingly set forth the vocation
of ye spiritual governors, as of those, that hold by the warrant of Gods
sending, and thereby occupy Christ's own rowme. Mary the place for all that
apperteineth to their calling generally, as well to preach as otherwise to
guide the people of God in the behalf of their Master, to whom we all be
subject: but this present text whereupon we now treat, does properly
concern the commission given to the Apostles for the sacrament of penance and
remission of sins. For it does in most clear and vndoured sense give to them
the like right in that case, that Christ him self had by the sending of God
the Father: that is to say, the very same authority, that he had in respect
of his mediation and manhood: Aequalem pa^ri filium nou^mus (says S. Augustine)
sed hic verba mediatoris agno^cimus: Super (...) locu^.
medium quippe se ostendi^ dicendo, ille me: and ego vos. we know the Son to
be aequall with the Father, but here we must acknowledge the words of a
mediator. For he showed him self to be as a mean, when he said: He sent me,
and I send you. In Ioannem. c. 20
That is to say (as Theophilacte expounds it) Take upon you mie work and
function, and do it with confidence: For as my Father did send me, so I send
you again, and I will be with you to the end of the world.

And excellently well to our purpose wrote the holy Father Cyrill, as well for
the dignity of the Apostolic vocation, as for the charge of their honorable
legacy, Supe^ 20 Cap. Ioannis.
in these words. Ad gloriosum Apostolatum Dominus noster Jesus Christus
Discipulos suos vocauit, qui commotum orbem firmarunt, sustentacula eius facti:
vnde per Psalmistam de terra and de Apostolis dicit, quia ego firmaui columnas
eius. columnae enim and robu^ veritatis discipuli sunt, quos ita dicit se
mittere, sicut a patre ipse missus est, vt Apostolatus dignitate^ oste^deret,
and magnitudinem potestatis eorum aperiret. These words and the residue
folowinge concerning the same purpose go thus in engishe. Our lord and
master Christ Jesus promoted his disciples to a glorious Apostleship: who
being made the proppes and stays of all the earth, have established the
wavering world: where upon the Psalmist says thus of the earth and the
Apostles: I have surely and firmly set the pillars thereof. For the Disciples
no doubt be the very pillars, strength, and stay of truth: whom, Christ
says that he does send, even as his father did send him, that thereby he might
declare to the world as well the dignity of their Apostleship, as open to all
men the excellency and the might of their power: and no less signify unto
them, what way they had to take in all their life and studies. For if they be
so sent as Christ him self was sent of the Father, it is requisite to
Consider, for what work and purpose ye Father everlasting sent his Son in
flesh to ye world. And yt him self eyes where declares: saying: Math. ^.
No^ veni vocare iustos, sed peccatores ad poenite^tia^: I came not to call the
just, Joan. 3.
but sinners to repentance: and in another place it is said. God sent not his
Son into the world to judge the world, but that the world should be saved
by him: all these things and other he touched briefly in these few words:
Sicut misit me pater, et ego mit^o vos: vt hinc intelliga^t vo. a^dos esse
peccatores ad poenitentiam, curandos corpore simul and spiritu male habentes.
Like as mie Father sent me, so I send you: that they might hereby understand
that sinners should be called to repentance and be healed both in body and
soul. Thus far spoke, S. Cyril of the excellent calling of ye disciples and
of the cause of their large commission, not restricted by any straighter
terms, then Christ's own commission was, which he received from his
everlasting Father.

And truly it was the singular providence of God, that before the grant of
the government of men's souls to his Disciples being but mortal men, mention
should be made of his own right therein, that the wicked should never have
face to disgrace the authority of them, that depends so fully of the
sovereign calling, and commission of gods own Son. This high wisdom was
practiced also, to the utter confusion of the wicked and wilful persons, at
their calling to the office of preachinge and baptising.

The which function least any contemptuous person should in such base men
disdain, Christ alleges his own power and pre-eminence, to which the
dignity of priesthood is so near, Matt. 28.
and so everlastingly joined, that every dishonor and neglecting of the one,
is great deroga^ion to the other. and therefore he says: Omnis potestas data
est mihi in coelo and in terra: All power in heaven and in earth is given to my
hands. Therefore go you forward and teach all nations, baptisinge them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Thus before the
institution of sacraments, Sermon. de baptis. Christ.
whereof God him self must only be the author (as says S. Cyprian) Christ
voutchsafed for the quiet and instruction of the world, to declare his
authority and prerogative, that all men might farther understand thereby, that
the ministry and excellent function in the use of the same, did orderlye
proceed of that authorititie and supreme power, that Christ has received over
all man kind.

And this sequel of Christ's reason has merueilous efficacy and force, if we
well consider thereof: All power is given to me both in heaven and earth,
therefore go you and preach, and baptize, and remitte sins. If a man would
ask the priest or Apostle, how he dare be so bold to exercise any of these
high functions? he might upon Christ's word be so bold to make him this
awnswer: Mary sir, I baptize because all power is given to Christ: I preach
because al power is Christ's: I remitte sins, because al power was given to
Christ. For in my ministry he practyseth daily all these functions: in his
power I am become the lawful woorker of all these actions, yt are so proper to
Christ him self. Super tract. 4, 5. and 6.
Therefore it was Christ (says. S. Augustine) that baptized and had more
Disciples then John: and yet Christ baptized not, but his Disciples only. So
say you to all contemners of Gods ordinance: it is Christ that pardons and
enioyneth penance for man's sins, and yet the does it not him self as in his
own person, but Christ does yt daily by the power which he established after
his resurrection, and which continues for ever in the high ministry and
service of the Church. Thus (I say) does he remitte sines: Act. 5^
Hunc principem and Saluatorem exaltauit dextra sua ad dan^am poenitentiam
Israeli and remissionem peccatorum. This our prince and Savior has God
exalted with his right hand, to give penance and remission to Israel of al
their sins.

This power has our high priest deserved for his obedience, and therefore as
he received it, so he has left it in his Church: his own holy words do
protest ye same. For upon his power and sendinge which he did receive of his
Father, all the priests do everlastingly hold the right of all holy
f^nctio^s, which else, but by Christ's own commission and sending, they could
never, nor never durst have practiced so long.

And whosoever sees not how ye power and jurisdiction of so excellent actions
passes from God ye Father to his only Son, and from him again to such as he
has sent, and made the messengers of his blessed mind, and disposers of
mysteries: he has no feelinge at all of the ways that he wrought for man's
redemption: he can not atteyne to the intelligence of Christ's unction, whereby
he is made our head and priest: he, in the midst of the glorious light of
the Church can not heholde the practice of so heavenly ministeries, In Epist.
sua Cano^^ca.
and therefore, such things as he knows not he blasphemeth, says S. Jude.
But to woo^k all in light and order, I will build upon the forsaid, the intended
conclusion, that the Adversaries may see and behold the force of our faith,
and the singular weakness of their assertions. I thus join with them in
arguments barely and plainly without covert.

That power and Commission which was given to Christ by his heavenly Father,
concerning remission or reteining of sins, was given to the Apostles at his
departure hence: but Christ him self did truly, effectually and in proper
form of speech by his Fathers sending and commission, remitte sins: Ergo,
the ministers of Christ may, and do truly and perfectly remitte sins. Or
thus more briefly: As Christ was sent of his Father, so are the Apostles sent
by Christ: but Christ was sent to forgive sins, Ergo, the Apostles be sent to
forgive sins also. The second part of the reasons, which is, that Christ had
power of his Father to remit sins, and was sent for ye same purpose, is
sufficiently proved in ye chapter before. The first part of ye argument
stands upon the sure ground of Christ's own words, which be these: Like as
my Father sent me, so I do send you. Which words were so plain and so
deeply noted for this intent, of S. Chrysostom, that with admiration of the
dignity and excellent calling of priesthod, he thus trimly difcourseth upon
them. I will report his saying in Latin, De sacerdot. lib. 3.
as Germanus Brixius has translated it: all that he speaks for that purpose
hereafter shall be reci^ed, but now no more but this: Quid hoc aliud esse
dicas, nisi omnium rerum coelestiu^ potestatem illis a Deo esse concessam? Ait
enim quoru^cunque peccata retinueritis, retentae sunt. Quaenam obsecro potestas
hac vna mayor esse queat? Pater omnifariam filio potestatem dedit, caterum
video ipsam candem omnifariam potestate^ a Deo filio illis traditam. Nam quasi
iam in coelu^ translati, ac supra humanam naturam positi atque nostris ab
affectibus exe^pti, sic illi ad principatum istum perducti sunt. And in English
thus it is: What else can thou make of this, or what less, then yt ye power
and jurisdiction of al heavenly things is by God granted unto them? For it is
said: Whose sins so ever you do hold or retain, they be retained. For Gods
love, what power can be given in ye world so great? the Father bestowed al
manner of power upon his Son, and I find ye very self same power of al things,
to be delivered to ye Apostles by God the Son. For now as though they were
already translated out of this life to heaven, and there promoted above man's
nature, and discharged of al our feeble affections, they are advanced to the
princely sovereignty whereof we now have said. Thus far Chrysostom. So does
this worthy Father help our cause, and so does he think of the excellent
authority given by the Father to his Son, and derived from him to the
ministers of his holy will and testament in earth. Whose jurisdiction so
highly holden, so truly obtained, so nerelie joined unto Christ's honor, and
so daily practiced no otherwise but in his right and name, whosoever shall
comtrolle or contemn, they not only irreuerentlie touch Gods anointed, but
they sacrilegiouslie lay hands on ipsum Christum Domini, even on him that is
anointed above all his fellows. Lib. 1. de Poenite^t. Cap. 7.
Well, I conclude up this matter with these few words of S. Ambrose: Vult
Dominus plurimum posse discipulos suos: vult a seruis suis ea fieri in nomine
suo, quae faciebat ipse positus in terris: Our Lords pleasure is, that his
disciples should have great prerogative: he will have the same things wrought
by his servants in his name, that him self did in his own person, when he was
in earth.

The power of priesthod touching remission of sins is proved by the solemn
action of Christ, in breathing upon his Apostles, and giving them thereby the
holy Ghost. The third Chap.
THE commission and power that our master Christ received of his everlasting
Father, being in most ample manner communicated with the Apostles, made great
proof and evidence for the right that they claim in remission of sins: but
the present power of Gods Spirit breathed by Christ upon them, and given unto
them for the ministry and execution of that function, helps our matter so
much, that who so ever now denies this authority of the Apostles concerning
the pardoning of our offenses, does not so much sin against the Son of man,
which of it self is grievous inoughe, as he does control the work of the
spirit of Christ, which is the holy Ghost, in whom both he and his Church
does remitte sins. The more plain and more exact our master Christ was in
the bestowing of that power to remitte and retain sins, the more is our
contempt in the disobedience and denial thereof. He sends them forth with
his own authority in this case: he gives them the very spirit of God, by
whose divine power they may execute the function to which he called them: he
gives them the express warrant of his own word that sins they might pardon
and punish: and yet we make doubt of their usurpation. But how they might
forgive sins by Christ's sending, we have already said.

Now for the holy Ghostes power and prerogative in the same action, which was
breathed on the Apostles, we must further confer with such as call in
question matters so plain. And first I am in good hope, that no man will
deny, but Christ gave them the holy Ghost for no other purpose so much, as to
remitte sins: secondly I doubt not of their faith and belief in this point,
but they will confess the holy Ghost to be of power by nature and propriety to
forgive sins: Thirdly I claim of their sincerity thus much more, that
Christ being as well God as man, was well able for the furniture of their
calling, to give them the holy Ghost: all which being confessed of al men, and
denied of no Christian alive, how the conclusion, so besette with all proof on
every side, stands not upright, let the Adversaries tell me. In the Apostles
there can be no lack touching that office, for the execution whereof they
received both Christ's commission first, and the holy Spirit of God afterward:
In Christ there can be no default, who was well able to give, and in deed did
give the holy Ghost: In the holy Ghost there can be no let nor lack,
whose power is infinite, and his very propriety to remitte sins.

Al things then standing on so safe and sure grounds, the giver, the gift, and
the receiver competent, and fully answerable each to other on every side, let
ye disconte^ted join in argument, let him allege why ye Priest so authorized
by Christ, and so assured of the holy Ghost, may not either pardon or give
penance. Never man avouched that he exercised ye high actio^ upon his own
authority: but, that he may not as a minister and servant practice it upon
the warrant of Christ, and present power of the holy Ghost, that no faithful
person can affirm, nor any reasonable man stand in.

Some holy writers upon this text of S. John in which the order of Christ's
authorishing his Apostles for the remission of sins is described, do dispute
of the difference of giving the holy ghost then to his Disciples, and
afterward on whitsonday: some note the external ceremony that our Master
used, when he gave them the holy Spirit, which was by breathing on them, that
such outward actions might both be an evidence to them of that excellent
gift which they inwardly then receued, Grace joined to external elements, and
why.
and should further be an everlasting instruction to the Church, that Gods
grace and gifts be often joined to external elements for the solace of our
nature, that deliteth to have our outward man schooled, as well as the inward
man nourished. These and many things more be of profitable remembrance and
consideration, but not so much to our purpose. Therefore let us see, whether the
judgment of the holy Fathers do not wholly help our present cause, by proving
ye Priests ministry, through the holy Ghostes authority, that our
declaration standing on the plain words of scripture with their undoubted
sense, may obtein invincible force against the adversaries, and worthy credit
of the true beleuers.

How Priests being but men m^ie remitte sins committed against God
We will make our entrance first with S. Cyril, who debating with himself upon
the incomparable authority and power given to the Apostles for remission of
sins, stands first as in contention with him self, and with Christ's
words, how it may be, that they being but me^, should forgive the sins of our
souls, being sure of this, yt it is the proprety only of the true and living
God to assoile us of our sins, against whom only al sins be proprely
committed. And therefore being not of stomach, as men be now a days, to deny
that, which Christ's words so plainly do import, he made answer, that the
Apostles were in deed deified, and made, as you would say, partakers of Gods
nature, to work Gods own office in the world. Cap. 5^. lib 12. In Joan.
interpre Trapezu^.
Qua igitur ratione (says he) diuinae naturae dignitatem ac potestatem
discipulis suis saluator largitus est? Quia certe absurdum non est pec^ata
remitti posse ab illis, qui spiritum Sanctum in seipsis habeant. Nam cum ipsi
remmittunt aut detinent, spiritus qui habitat in eis, remittit and detinet. By
what means did our Savior give unto ye Apostles the pre-eminence and power of
Gods own nature? Surely because it agrees very well, that they should remit
man's sins, that have in them selves the holy Ghost. For when they assoyle or
retain sins, it is the holy Spirit that dwells in them, which by their
ministry does remitte or retain sins. Thus he. I marueil not now, Lib. 6.
cont. Iul.
why this same Father terms the Apostles sometimes Protectores and curatores
animaru^ and corporu^, Titles given to priesthod
the protectours and curers both of bodies and souls: it is not strange why S.
Ambrose should call ye whole order of priesthod Ordine^ deificu^. De Sacerdot.
Neither yt he should term officiu^ Sacerdotis munus spiritus Sancti: The
Priests office, to be the function of the holy Ghost. No, I do not wonder at
some of our forefathers, that, in the admiration of Gods Majesty, which they
saw to be so present in ye execution of so high an office, they did simply and
plainly term the principal Pastors of the Church, half Gods, and not mere
men: not having respect to their persons, which be compassed with in firmities
as other the sinful sort of people in the world be, but casting eye upward
to the holy and excellent functions, which they practiced by the spirit of
God which dwells in them, and deifieth their persons, to make them of
ability to exercise ye works of God.

But S. Ambrose helps our matter with a long discourse: al I will not now
report: for the present purpose, thus he says, disputing against ye Nouatia^s,
for ye assertion of priestlie dignity inassoyling our sins: Qui Spiritu^
sanctu^ accipit, and sol uedi pec^a^a potestate^, et ligandi accipit, Cap. 2.
li. 1 De Poen.
sic eni^ scriptu^ est: Accipite Spiritum sanctu^, quoru^ remiseritis peccata,
remittu^tur eis and quoru^ retinueritis rete^ta sunt. Ergo quod soluere
peccatu^ non potest, non habet Spiritu^ sanctu^. Munus spiritus sancti est
officium sacerdotis, ius autem spiritus sancti in soluendis ligandisque
criminibus est. He that receives the holy Ghost (h^^ meaning is in the taking
of orders) receives therewith the power to bind and loose. For so is it
written. Receive you ye holy Ghost, whose sins you do forgive, they are
forgiven them, whose sins you do retain, they are retained. Therefore they
which can not forgive men's offenses, they have not ye holy ghost (yt is to say,
they have not the gift of the holy ghost, which is given to the officers for
thexecutio^ of their function in Christ's behalf) for the gift of ye holy
Ghost is the office of the Priest: and the proper right of remission of sins
stands in ye holy Ghost. Thus wrote S. Ambrose against the heretics of his
time, and both touches and overcomes all ye falshode of our days, against
the ministry of man, which so joins with Gods Spirit in all these divine
functions, that it can not without blasphemy and special contempt of God be
contemned.

Contra Pelagianos, Manichaeos, and Donatistas, passim.
But I remember S. Augustine the Churches great Captain against her
adversaries of those days, did ever in disputation against the Pelagians and
other like ennemies of faith, make the greatest account of victory, and their
overthrow, when they were driven to deny that which ever before had been not
only acknowledged of al men for truth, but also had been used as a granted
truth, ground, and principle, for the notable evidence thereof, to the
impugning of other falsehodes. For there can be no doubt, but that which our
holy Fathers did use without controling and contradiction even of their
adversaries, to impugn their Adversaries withal, there is no doubt, but that
it has in it self exceeding much light and force of truth, as a thing having
so little need of proof, that it may be made and taken for a probation of other
matters that be doubtefull and uncertain. Practice of priesthod in remitting
sin used for a ground of faith in argument.
The matter which we have now in hand is of that sort. For the authority and
power practiced of Priests in the virtue of the holy Ghost, has ever ben in
it self both so plain and so firm, that the holy Fathers have used it, as a
ground, to prove against heretics of Eunomius, and Macedonius sect, the
Godhead of the holy Ghost, the third person in Trinity.

S. Bernard is to young, good man, to name amongst these old fathers of our new
Church, else, perdie, with the virtuous, his words sound full sweetly. Thus says
he to prove the equality of the holy Ghost with the Father and Son: Sicut
in nobis interpellat pro nobis, Sermon. 1. Pentec.
it a in patre delicta donat cum ipso patre: and vt omnino scias, quod
remissionem peccatoru^ spiritus sanctus operatur: Audi quod aliquando audierunt
Apostoli: Accipite spiritum sanctum quorum remiseritis peccata remittuntur eis.
In English thus: Like as in us he makes sure for us, so in the Father he
pardons sins with the Father: and that thou may understand, that the
holy Ghost works remission of sins, hear that which ye Apostles once heard
receive you the holy Ghost, whose sins you do forgive, they are forgeuen.
Thus he.

And S. Ambrose his ancient, to prove ye holy Ghost to be God, allegeth that
he remitteth sins by the Priests ministry, which he could not in any wise
do, if he were not in all points equal and omnipote^t God with the Father and
Son: Let us see (says he) whether the holy Ghost does pardon sins, and he
answers himself thus: Sed hinc dubitari non potest: Lib. 3. de Spirit. S.
Cap. 19.
cum ipse Dominus dixerit, accipite spiritum sanctum, quorum remiseritis
peccata, remittuntur: ecce quia per spiritum sanctum peccata donantur, homines
autem in remissionem peccatoris ministerium suum exhibent, non ius alicuius
potestatis exercent. It is thus much to say: There can be no doubt hereof,
seeing our Lord said, receive you the holy Ghost, whose sins you do forgive,
they shall be forgeuen: look ye, that by the holy Ghost sins be forgeuen, men
do but exercise their service and ministry, and claim not the right of
power and principality therein.

And S. Basil upon this assured ground frames in full form against Eunomius
this argument: Lib. 5.
Dominus sanctis Apostolis insufflans, inquit, accipite spiritum sanctum,
quorumcunque dimittetis peccata, dimittentur eis: si ergo nullius est peccata
dimittere, nisi solius Dei, dimittit autem spiritus sanctus per Apostolos: Deus
ergo spiritus sanctus: Our Lord breathing on the Apostles, said, take ye the
holy Ghost: for whose sins so ever you shall pardon, they be pardoned:
therefore if it be the only property of God to forgive sins, and the holy
Ghost so does by the Apostles: Ergo, the holy Ghost is truly God.

Thus you perceive that the ground of this our faith and assertion was of old
accounted so sure, that it was a singular aid and fortress of faith against
the unfaithful attemptes of most wicked persons in diverse ages. The only
practice that Priests did use, by the Sacrament of penance to pardonne
sins, was a full proof that the holy Ghost was God, by whose authority and
propre power, they did always since Christ's word was spoken, remitte the
same. The which being true (as it can not be false, that is so agreeable both
to scriptures and to all our Fathers faith) the Heresy of our time must needs
directly impugn the virtue and power of Gods own spirit. For as the proof of
man's ministry in this foresaid function induces the true and everlasting
Godhead of the holy Ghost, by whom they practice that power: so the denial
thereof, and robery of Priesthood of this their most just claim, does
directly spoil God of his honor, and of the everlasting right that he has in
remission of sins. o^temp of man's ministeri is contempt of Gods authority.
So whiles these good men seek to abase man unjustly, they blaspheame God
highly, and together with man's ministry, they bring unto utter contempt Gods
own authority.

But for the Readers case, and more light of our cause, I join thus in
argument with them again, upon the second part of Christ's own words and
action had in the authorizing of his Apostles: what soever the holy Ghost may
do in this case by the proper power of his Godhead, that may ye Apostles and
priests do by service and ministry through the power of the holy Ghost:
but the holy Ghost properly and rightly does remitt sins, therefore the
Apostles do rightly and truly remitt sins by their ministry in the said
holy Ghost. All parts of this conclusion stand vppright, and fear no
falshod: they be guarded on every side by Christ's action, by words of
scripture, by the doctors plain warrant, and by all reason. with all which
whosoever is not contented, but will needs extinguere spiritum, extinguish
Gods spirit, 1. These. 5.
and violently take from the Church the greatest comfort of all man's life,
that, in this infirmity of our flesh, stands in most hope by his gift in
remission of sins, for which especial cause the said spirit was mercifully
breathed upon the Apostles peculiarly, before the more common sending of the
same from heaven above: if all this reason and just demonstration of truth will
not serve them, I will chardge them with this grave co^clusio^ of S. Augustine
uttered partly against the Nouatians and especially against the desperate, yt
would not seek for Gods mercy by ye Churches ministry in the sacrament of
penance. To be brief I will speak it in English. Cap. ^3. Enchir.
who so ever he be that believes not man's sins to be remitted in Gods
Church, and therefore despises the bou^tifullnes of God in so mighty a work,
if he in that obstinat mind continue til his lives end he is guilty of sin
against the holy Ghost, in which holy Ghost Christ remitteth sins.

The power to remitte sins is further proved to be given to the Apostles by
these words of Christ: Whose sins you do forgive etcet. by the doctors
exposition of the same, and by conference of other words of scripture of the
like sense. The Fourh Chap.
How the priests of Christ's Church have defended their right and calling
for remission of sins, as well by ye commission that Christ first received
of his Father, and afterward bestowed upon them, as by the assured receiving of
ye spirit of God from Christ's blessed breath to the same end and purpose, I
have hithertoo declared at large. Now the third part of ye place before
alleged out of S. John's Gospel, concerns ye words of Christ's promise
and warrant made unto his Apostles out of which plain words distinctly
uttered we must see what force may be further added unto our Cacholike
assertion, for ye priests authority to remitte and retain sins. And surely
if none of ye former words of Co^missio^, nor any other mean or mention had been made of the holy Ghostes assistaunce herein, these only words upon ye
credit that al faithful men owe to Christ, had been sufficient to have assured
the world of the authority of priesthod, and of the whole cause that now is
called in controversy. For what ca^ be said either of God or man more properly
or more plainly then this: whose sins you shall forgive, they be forgiven,
Joan. 20.
whose sins you shall retain, they be retained?

I must needs here complain of these unfaithful and unhappy times, yt in the
continual lothsom bragges of the scripture, Scripture maliciously perverted in
the words of sacraments
and Gods word, in perpetual tossing and tumbling of ye books of the Bible,
in endless contention and disputation of most high mysteries in them
contained, have yet wholly perverted the cleerest and only undoubted meaning of
such places specially, as most touch the very life and salvation of al man
kind, and which be of al other things in terms of scripture most open and
evident, full foolishly and vnlernedly have both the simple sort handled Gods
word, as in such gross ignorance of all things they needs must, and their
new procured masters also, in not much more knowledge and far pa^ssing
pride can not otherwise do, but whilst they play them selves in things of
smaller importance, they are to be laughed at rather then lamented: but if the
Devil drive them farther, as he lightly does where he so quietly possesses, and
cause them to dallye, and delude the places of scripture that principally
concern the state and salvation of us al, there we must with all force resist,
least we leefe the fruit and good of our Christianity. What can be of
higher importance in ye world, or touch our souls and salvation so nere, as
the holy sacraments of Christ's Church, by which grace and mercy through
Gods appointment be procured? and yet these blessed fountaynes especially
eue^ these waters springing everlastingly to our life and comfort, have these
men most infected.

In the institution of Sacraments Christ's words were ever plain without
color or figure, as words that work with singular efficacy, grace and
virtue, and therewith give to the ministers just authority for the execution of
Christ's meaning: which could not be done in figurative speeches and parables
without infinite error. Did God speak parables when he instituted the
solemnity of so many sacrifices in the old law, when he signified unto
Moses and Aaron every several sort of beast or creature with their sex and
kind and all the ceremony thereunto belonging? Exodus 12.
Did he speak parables when the sacrament of the lamb was to be instituted?
Did he speak by figure to Abraham, Genes. 17. Exodus 35.
when he commanded him to circumcise the male of every of his people? Did he
speak by figure, when he instituted the Sabbath? Did he, to be brief, ever in
the old law speak one thing, and mean an other, when any external work by
ye charge of his word was to be practiced for ever amongst the people? In
common speech, in prophecieng, in preaching, in similitudes, in Examples
uttered for the declaration of many things, A necessary note for to Know
where the speeches be figurative.
and for grace and variety of talk, to stir up man's industry in
searchinge the secrets of truth there figures of al sorts be used: but
where, by external words and actions force of inward grace must be procured,
or perpetual vsages in the Church are in outeward signs and elements to be
instituted, or co^missio^ of great matters granted, or charge of singular
weight given to servants in absense of their masters, in all such cases
plain speaking by Gods providence was ever used, and by all reason must be
used: or else man falling into error in the execution of his commission, is
sufficiently to be excused, because he could not atteine to the meaning of his
masters words. And yet the wicked of these days, have found suck light in
scripture, that they have made our Master Christ to speak one thing and
mean the contrary, in the very institution of ye S^cramentes, and have
found figures to delude and defeat yt world of ye necessary fruicte of the^
all.

There were some of old yt drove the mysteries of Christ's incarnation and
speeches that proved his equality with his Father in godhead, to figurative
phrases, and sought for the defense of their folly the like phrases in other of
Christ's talk: but never none were comparable in this kind to our new
deuisers. For by the face and crake of Gods word they have brought to pass
amongste fools, that no one text of scripture which pertains to any of the
Sacraments can have his meaning, and such sense as the very word bears,
The B. Sacr. of the Altar.
and the world has ever taken and co^strued of it. The blessed and most
sovereign sacrament of the altar, instituted in a solemn actio^, in most
careful manner, amongst his most secret servants, the last almost of al his
works in earth, Matt. 26.
in most evident terms, with fore charge given to the Apostles of the
continuance of his everlasting memory in ye same, yet must mean nothing
less, then yt which our Master made it, and must by a thousand figures be
wrasted and wrythen to what you list and like, so that it be not to importe yt,
which our Master said it did, and the Church has ever believed of the same.
Baptism
words of the like solennitie were used for the ordering of the holy use of
Baptyme, to be done, as the word does also importe, necessariely in the
external element of water, with certain most holy prescribed words, under
pain and peril of everlasting perishing to ye neglecters thereof: yet in such
playnesse figures are found out by these pernicious conueiers that neither
water is compted so much necessary, nor ye words of such strength, but that
one of these malapert fellows was bold to write, Brentius co^tra Petru^ a Solo
that it was much superstition to bind the Church to the same, as to the
prescribed words of art Magike, sorcerie and witchcrafte. Of the honorable
act and sacrament of extrem vnctio^, Extreme Vnctio^.
what can be said with more evidence of words then is spoken of the holy
Apostle S. James? If any man be sick amongst you, Cap. 5.
let him call for the priests of the Church, and let them annoint him with
oil: and yet so little matter these men make of the Apostles spirit, word
and writing, that they have condemned the whole use thereof as superstitious,
Holy Orders.
not helping the^ selfs by figures, but by open force. Grace is given to
Timothy as in a sacrament when he took orders of Paul: 1. Tim. 4
ye Apostle says so much in express terms: yet this grace and the whole
sacrament of Orders, these holy men reiecte. Matrimony Matrimony.
to S. Paul is a great sacrament, and of our ministers not misliked, so far
as concerns their fleshly coniunctio^, which they only lust after, Ephesians. 5.
but grace they list not receive thereby, least it should be a sacrament,
whereby ye unity of Christ and his spouse the Church, which in no sauce they
can abide, might be fully represented and signified.

These fellows therefore that dare be so bold to disturb all the orders and
sacraments of Gods Church, and to maintain their fantasies, dare brast the
sacred bands of express scriptures in such points as do directly touch the
whole policy of our Christian common wealth and ordered ways of our
salvation, even in those which Christ most carefully left to be practiced for
the use of his louinge flock, by the warrant of words most plain, what
shall we say to such bold and impudent faces, that thus dare do, and yet
which I more merueyl at, in this their vncurtesie, and most dishonest dealing,
will not stick to cry and call upon Gods word, as though they did that
by scripture, the contrary whereof they expressly find in scripture. And
truly where they be not helped by the very words, vain it shallbe for them
to stand with us, and with all our Fathers, and with the practice of al
nations, and with the very express judgment of the Church of God, it shall not
boot them, I say, in their dark ignorance and infinity pride to stand with us
having so many helps for the true meaning, and the express text of ye word
for our selves and side.

Sometimes where it may appear that the words and outward face of
scripture serve not our assertions so plainly as the holy traditions of
Christ's Church do, there they call upon us with infinite clamoures to abide ye
judgment of ye word, which they would be thought to esteem above al man's
meaning. But whither will they now run think you, where al our sacraments
stand upon evident words, and more the^ words, upon ye very express and
notorious actio^ of Christ him self? all instituted sincerly to be practiced
of ye Churce after his departure hence: al commended in known terms of
greatest and most efficacy yt could be, not by way of preaching, in which he
used sometime figures, not at such time as he used other then common known
speech, but after his resurrection when he now uttered no more parables as he
did before, Matt. 13. Marc. 4.
that such as saw, should not see, and such as were of understanding, might
not understand, but did open unto his dearest their senses, that they might
understand scriptures, and more carefully expressed his meaning for the
instruction of his holy Disciples, to the better bearing of that charge which
he meant to leave them in, after his departure: whither will these men (I say)
where they see al things so environed with truth, whither will they fly? The
scriptures be plainly ours, the doctors they dare not claim, reason is
against them, there is then no way to bear it out, but with boldness and
exercised audacitie. Yet here we will assaye, by ye notorious evidence of this
one cause that we now have in hand, to break their stony hearts to the
obedience of Christ's Church and word, for whose faith, if they have seen
great light and force of argument already, and shall yet see much more, I
trust they will not still withstand the known truth.

Al words then of institution of sacraments, being literaly to be taken, and
things of so great charge not otherwise to be understood, then are both by
act and word of Christ sincerely uttered, we need not doubt but the form
of Christ's sentence, in which he gives the Apostles power to remitt sins,
is plainly to be taken in that common sense, as the same by words imports,
and therefore that by force thereof, they may remitte sins. And yet to make
more proof to satisfy all men, I will join to these words of our Savior
that most properly concern the sacrament of penance, other his words
touching our principal conclusion not unlike, whereby in co^fere^ce of the
like sainges together (which our Adversaries do always as they would seem
well to allow) truth may try it self. Therefore as our Master here says
unto them: whose sins you shall forgive, they be forgiven: And whose sins
you retain, they be also retained: even so said he twice before unto ye
Apostles, expressing in other words almost the same meaning and sense: once
to them altogether in the xviij. of S. Matthew, and an other time before that,
in the xvi. of the same Gospel, to S. Pecer alone.

To them in general thus says Christ: If thy brother have committed any
offense toward thee, go to him and admonish him privately betwixt him and thy
self. If he take it well, thou have then won thy brother: if he regard thee
not, take one or two with thee, that in the mouths of two or three witnesses
every word may stand: if he regard not them neither, then make complainte
of him to the Church (that is to say, as S. Chrysostom expounds it, Super
hu^c locu^.
to the Governors of the Church) and if he will not obey the Church, the^
take him for no better the^ a Heathen, and a Publica^. And straight upon these
words, De fide and operib cap. 3.
least any man should set light by ye Church, or rulers thereof, Christ
added (says S. Augustine) a wonderful terror of her severe authority,
saing: Amen dico vobis, quaecunque alligaueritis super terram, erunt ligata and
in coelo: and quaecunque solueritis super terram, erunt soluta and in coelo:
surely I say unto you, what things soever you bind in earth, it shall be
bound in heaven: And what soever you loose in earth, it shall be loosed in
heaven. This text is clear for the Churches claim in remission of sins,
though it properly perteine rather to the outward power iudiciarie and
court of external judgment for open crimes and notorious contemptes, then for
the sins of the people that be secrette, and only subject to power practiced
in the sacrament of penance, which now lightly is closse, and only uttered
in secret to him that has charge of his soul. Never the less if the priests
of God have received power to loose and bind, which is to pardon and punish,
open notorious crimes and contemptes, which towchinge the giltinesse of the
fault, does no less perteine to the proper power of God, then the absoluinge
of secrette sins, does: then, without question they may pardon or retain
man's sins of all sorts, as well in the sacrament of penance, all that be
confessed: as in public judgment, what soever is by witness proved. And as in
this, they may at their pleasure, where justice requires, correct the open
offender by most grave censures of Gods Church: so may the priests give due
penance in ye sacrament, for the chastisment of such sins as be to them
confessed, and for the satisfying of Gods justice by sin violated.

The other text of holy scripture: co^teining Christ's words to S. Peter
severally, A more peculiar prerogative given to S. Peter than to other Apostles.
by certain notable circumstances of the letter, and by words of great
grant spok^n singularly to him, gives the chief of all his Apostles in more
ample terms and beneficial clauses this power and prerogative also. To him it
was only said, thou a^t Pete^ (which is as much to say as a rock: for our
Master gave him that name new at his first calling, Joan. 1.
in signification of further intent and purpose which he here uttered) and upon
this rock will I set my Church: and hell gates shall not prevail against
it. That so said, he thus spoke in plain terms: Et tibi dabo claues regni
coelorum. Et quodcunque ligaueris super terram, erit ligatum and in coelis, and
quodcunque solueris super terram, erit solutum et in coelis: And to the will I
give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and what soever thou shall bind in
earth it shall be bound in the heavens, And what thou loosest in earth, it
shall be loosed in the heavens. Ibid. 21.
This promise made unto Peter and performed no doubt after his resurrection,
when he committed to him the feeding and government of all his dear flock
both young and old, does excedingly importe a wonderful incomparable
soueraygntie and jurisdiction over men's souls. For a mortal man to receive
the keys of Christ's kingdom, and by them to bind and loose, to lock out and
let in, Keys of heaven what they be.
before our master Christ who had the full jurisdiction therein, it was never
heard of. And when the holy Propheces do mean to set out the great and
passing power given by God the Father to his only Son in earth, they use to
express the same often by the terms, of keys, as when the prophet Esaie
says: I will lay the keys of the house of David upon his shoulder, he shall
shut, and there can none be hable to open, and he shall open so, that none can
shut again. And Christ him self speaking to his beloved John in the
Apocalipse says: Cap. 22.
I am the first and the last. I am alive, and was dead before, Apocal. 1. and 3.
and I have the keys of death and hell. The keys therefore, ever signifyng
power and government of ye household, was given to Christ, as to whom, being ye
principal and most excellent rectour of his own Church yt he bought so dearly,
they most duly belong. But he communicated unto Peter, as to his special
steward yt use of ye same, for ye government of our souls, with exceeding much
pre-eminence both in binding and loosing. Yet I do not remember yt any of the
old writers do put any great difference betwixt ye authorities of Peter and
the rest of the Apostles, concerning the remitting of sins, which is a thing
perteining indifferently to ye whole order of priestod, and therefore no more
proper to ye Pope or Peter, then to priests and Apostles: though Origin noted
well, yt the jurisdiction of Peter seemed by those words to be enlarged above
the residue, by yt that our Savior said to him, yt, what soever he bound or
loosed in earth, it should be loosed or bound in ye heavens: where to the rest
he spoke of heaven only in ye singular number. I speak only of this latter
clause of binding and loosing with ye keys thereunto belonging. For there is no
doubt, but great pre-eminence of rule and jurisdiction is promised before in
the same text now recited, and else where actually given unto him, more then
to ye rest of his brethern. Nevertheless eue^ this power of bindig and loosing
common to all ye holy order was in him first severally planted for ye
co^me^datio^ of unity and order, De simplicitat^ prelatorum.
as S. Cyprian says, and so the same authority given to other, might yet
after a sort be derived from his fullnes of power and prerogative, as from a
founteyne.

But we will not stand hereon now, nor yet to put difference betwixt these
words and terms: loosing or remitting, binding or reteining, nor to dispute
whether these two textes more proprely signify the authority and iurisdction
given to the spiritual Magistrates, for punishing by temporal pain enjoined,
and releasing by mercy, as they see occasion, the same appointed penance
again, or else it proprely concerns the very release of sin it self, or
reteining the sin, which they upon just causes will not forgive. These things
would grow to over tediouse a tale, and over curiouse for the simple, who^ I
would most help in these matters: and I shall briefly touch so much hereof as
is necessary, hereafter when I shall dispute of pardons. For in deed these two
textes of binding and losing, as well spoken to Peter as to the residue
afterward, shall be the ground of our whole discourse there, and therefore til
then, we must touch these textes no farther, but as in common pertains to
remitting or reteining sins. For they are brought indifferently of the holy
Fathers with yt foresaid words of S. John, in which, as I have declared, the
very institution of penance and Priests judgment of our souls and sins, be
most proprely grounded.

Therefore that by all these words, so often uttered by our Savior, you may
well perceive the very litteral and undoubted meaning to be, that Priests have
authority by Christ's warraunt effectually to remit and retain sins, I will
recite one or two notable places of most ancient Fathers, that they joining
with such plain words of sundry places of scripture, may make all most
sure, to such as can by any reason be satisfied. First I allege the saing of
S. Maximus, an old author and a blessed saint. Homil. In natali Petri and Pauli.
He does by conference couple together these textes whero^ we now stand, thus
he speaks very pithely, therefore you shall hear his own words: Ne qua vos,
fratres, de creditis Petro clauibus regni, more no straru^ clauiu^ cogitatio
terrena permoueat, clauis caeli lingua est Petri, quam singulorum merita
censendo Apostolus vnicuique regnum caelorum aut claudit, aut aperit: Non est
ergo clauis ista mortalis artificis aptata manu, sed data a Christo potestas
est iudicandi. Denique ait eis: qnorum remiseritis peccata, remissa erunt, and
quorum detinueritis, detenta erunt. Thus he says in our tung: Least any
earthly cogitation move you to think of any succh material keys as we
occupy in earth, when you hear of committing the keys of ye kingdom to
Peter, Keie of heaven what yt is.
you must thus understand, yt the key of heaven is Peter's word or tunge,
because the Apostle weighing well every of our deserts, opens or shuts
to every man the kingdom of Christ. This key therefore is not made by mortal
man's hand, but it is the power of judgment given by Christ. To be brief, he
says to them all: whose sins you shall forgive, they shall be forgiven, etc.

Thus says Maximus, joining together fittly two textes for one purpose, and
out of both makes a most forcible argument, that the judgment of our souls
which is a passing authority, and yt very letting in and keeping out of heaven
is addicted by ye keys to Peter's, and the Apostles ministry. For which cause
also S. Gregory calls all Christ's Apostles and the just occupiers of their
rooms ye doors by which me^ must enter into heaven, or everlastingly bide our,
which is a fearful saing to all such as contemn their authority. His
words be these: Quid cuncti Apostoli nisi sancta ecclesiae ostia existunt,
cum eis dicitur: Cap. 16. lib 28. in Job.
Accipite spiritu^ sanctu^, quoru^ remiseritis pecc. etc. ac si illis aperte
diceretur: per vos ingrediu^tur ad mehi quibus vos ipsi pa^ditis, et
repelle^tur quibus obseratis. what are all ye Apostles else but the doors of
holy Church: seeing it is said to the^, take you ye holy ghost, whose sins
you do forgive, they be forgiven: eue^ as though in plainer terms it had be^
spoken thus: by you all must enter yt will come unto me, those, I say, to who^
you open ye door by loosing of their sins, and those shall be put back, yt
you lock out. Hyherto S. Grerie. This wonderful authority caused S. Hilarie
thus to make exclamatio^: O holy and most happy men for the desert of your
faith you have obtained the keys of heaven, De Trin. lib. 6.
and now the whole right both of bindi^g and loosing in heaven and earth is
assuredly in you. But that you may fully behold their right herein, consider
his notable words upon the alleged place of S. Matthew: Super Math. 18.
Ad terrorem metus maximi qu^ in praesens omnes continerentur, immobile
seueritatis Apostolicae iudicium praemisit, vt qu^s in terra ligauerint, id
est, peccatorum nodis innexos reliquerint, Some read Co^fessione for co^cessione.
and quos soluerint, concessione scilicet veniae, receperint in salutem, in
Apostolicae condition sententiae, in caelis quoque aut soluti sint aut ligati.
That is to say: To the terror and fear of al men and necessary keeping of
them in awe and discipline, Christ premised the immouable judgment of the
Apostles severity, yt whom so ever they bound in earth, that is to say, left
fast tied in the bands of sins, and whom they loosed, that is to wit, by
mercy receive to the benefit of pardon, that the same person so bound or so
released, in the same case that the Apostles left them, should be in the
heavens, either loose or fast. Thus far S. Hilarie, by whom we evidently may
learn, in what careful case all men be that pass this life not loosed by
them whose sentence in earth is so surely ratified in heaven above, and no
less how the words of Christ uttered sometimes in terms of binding and
loosing, other times in remitting and reteining, do literally signify.

But I will add S. Chrysostomes testimony thereunto, the rather because our
Adversaries do abuse his words sometimes against confession, which
necessarily hangs on the authority of Priesthode in remission and reteining
sins, as anon I shall declare. That I be not over tediouse, I will report his
saying in English only: Those (says he) that dwell in earth and are
conversant amongst men, Lib. 3. de Sacer.
have received power and commission to dispose and dispense such things as be
in heaven: A power given to Priests, that was never given to Angels.
yea these me^ have receued power such as neither God either gave to Angels,
nor yet Archangels, for it was never said to the^, what so ever you bind in
earth it shall be bound in heaven, and what soever you loose in earth, it shall
be loosed in heaven. Earthly Princes in deed have power to bind, but that
pertains to the bodies of their subjects only: but the bond which I now
talk of, that is proper to the power of priests, touches the very soul it
self, and is so ample, that it reaches to the heavens above. yea and that so
largely, that what so ever the priests do beneth, the very self same God will
allow and ratify in heaven above, and so the Lord will confirm the judgment
and sentence of the servants. Thus far spaeketh Chrysostom. His words be
so plain, that to stand long on them for farther proof of my matter, then ye
very face of ye sentence does importe, it were vain. For man may here rather
merueyle to see such strange power upon Christ's words given to ye holy
order, and yet yt to be so litce esteemed of wicked men, and so little regarded
even of ye honester sort of simple folks, that few either seek after their
judgment in causes of their souls, or duly honor that power in them which
passes all other prelacie, yt ever either man or Angel receued: in this
great contempt (I say) of most holy things, wickedness is rather to be
wo^dered at, and lamented, then by long reasoning to be confuted. The sequel
of true things is so plain in it self, ye diverse places of scripture so
answer justly each to other, yt Fathers so co^sonantly confirm yt known
meaning of ye same and the very terms of so many scriptures written at diverse
times by sundry of ye Evangelists, so fall upon one undoubted sense, yt we may
rightly conclude ye power to be in all cafes given to ye Apostles of remission
of sin. And upon such known terms I make this argument against ye
adversaries. They treuly and properly do remitte sins, upon whose sentence
in earth the pardon of God immediately ensues in heaven: but Gods pardon
undoubtedly follows ye priests pardon in remission in earth (Claue non
errante) ergo they assuredly remitte sins. The mayor is manifest, ye minor
hangs upon plain scripture thrice told: which first appointed man to loose
in earth, and then yt God shall in ye same instant forgive in heaven. God shall
confirm the se^te^ce of his servants, says. S. Chrysostom, man's judgment
(says Hilarie) shall be as a sentence prejudicial to God in heaven. And thus
far for ye words of Christ at this present, and farther streingth shall
more and more be gathered unto them, by diverse parts of all the process
following.

That the same power of remitting and reteining sins, which was given to the
Apostles, was not bestowed on the^ in respect of their private persons, but as
they were public officers: and that therefore the like authority is common by
Christ's grant to all priests of Christ's Church, who in this matter are the
Apostles successors. The fifth Chap.
IF I had here to do only with the learned, it were enough that is already
proved for the power and preeminence given to the Apostles in remission of
sins, thereupon to ground most assuredly the like right in the same cause to
perteine to all Bishops and priests of Christ's Church. But we study to
help such as can not by this so far consider, that the power given to his
Apostles or to any of them is one eternal power, not ceasing in their persons,
An ignorante reason of the simple manteined by heretics against priesthod
but during in their succession to the worlds end. For I have my self met
with many suthe as could be content as they said to acknowledge upon so plain
scripture the singular privilege given to the Apostles, and thereupon if they
might have had av Apostle they would not have sticked to have made their
confession and suit to him for the remission of their sins, but because I
had not the like words of Christ spoken to all priests particularlye, they
thought it was no reason that any such chaleng should be made for the^: nor
any such charge to be given to others to confess their sins unto them. This
simplicity of the common sort, or rather this rude frowardness risinge upon
contempt and disobedience to Gods Church, is mainteyned even of ye more
learned sort, who have charged them selves in all behavior to be so populare
and so plausible, that even against known order of things they will draw
back from the light of truth with the common, rude and unlearned reasons of
the people. For John Calvin Calvin.
a man borne to sedition and the Churches calamity, mainteineth the madness
of the multitude by this reason: The Apostles (says he) had the holy Ghost,
whereof our priests have no vvarrant. But enquire of them, whether they have
the holy Ghost, if they sae yea, demand of them further, whether ye holy
Ghost may err: if they confess, that the holy Ghost can not err, then they
prove them selves not to have the holy Ghost, because it is well seen that
they may err, and do err both in loosing and binding many, otherwise then
Gods sentence will allow. But briefly to satisfy all sides in this case, I
shall declare the like power to be left by Christ's meaning to all Bishopes and
priests, no less then to ye Apostles them selves, to whom Christ then
presently spoke: yt both ye peoples lack of understanding may be corrected,
and the false and crafty conueiance of their captain may be, to his shame and
the Devils, plainly disclosed.

First this is plain, that what so ever Christ after his resurrection or
before did institute for ye commodity of ye people and weal of ye whole
Church, The power given to the Apostles ceased not by their death, but
continues still in the Church.
yt did not decay in the persons of them to whom Christ presently spoke ye
words, for else all sacraments had been ended, and all government ceased at
the death of them to whom in person ye charge was first given by Christ. For
example: Christ in his institution of the holy Sacrament of the altar spoke
only to his twelve, and to those present persons he only said presently hoc
facite, 1. Cor. 11.
do this: yet in their persons, ye Church was so instructed and all priests
so authorized, that the same some reign work has upon that warrant ben
truly practiced of the Church, and by vain imitation followed by their
Adversaries even till this day. And in deed, the very words of the
institution did importe no less, for it is said: Mortem Domini annunciabitis
donec veniat. You shall set forth Christ's death till his coming: which
could not be, if the ministry had decayed with their persons, to whom
Christ spoke. So ye charge both of preaching and baptising was given to a few
chosen men then present, but that all the world might perceive, that of his
wisdom and careful providence the charge and authority perteined to the
governors of the Church for ever no less the^ to them, whom he then called to
that function, he added: I will be with you to the end of the world, Meaning
that they should exercise that office in his name and assistance to the day of
judgment. Math. vlt
Which in their own persons was not true, but in their successors. And for
this cause, it is no doubt, but what authority so ever Peter had alone above
the residewe of his fellow Apostles, that the same is by all reason to be
derived from him to al his successors, and that caused Chrysostom to say
that Christ shed his blood to win the sheep, which he committed to Peter
and his sucessours to feed: where Christ in person presently spoke but to
Peter alone, and yet because he knew the like government was both necessary
after Peter's death, as well as in his time, and no less by Christ's
appointment to be continued in the Church after, as before, the Doctors
doubted not to enlarge Christ's word uttered to Peter alone, to all them that
succeeded in the same room.

Upon these most strong grounds every man plainly may argue, the like power
yet to be in the Church of God in every case, even as Christ did institute at
the beginning, Reasons for the continuance of the ministry of Priests.
when he gave the Charge to the Apostles first. For look what form of
government and order of the Church was thought unto his wisdom to be best
then, the same must needs be best now (I speak for the substance of things:
for by diversities of time and person some alteration may rise in the
circumstances) therefore if it were good at that time that one should be the
general Vicare of Christ, and pastor of all the sheep, for which he shed his
blessed blood, it is good yet also: if some had authority then to consecrate
Christ's body, some have the same power till this time: if some then must
needs baptize and preach, other some must now also do the same: finally if
certain then had commission by Christ, and the holy Ghost given them to
remitte sins, and therewith power by his word both to pardon and punnish,
to bind and to loose, it must by force of the foresaid argument necessarily be
induced, that some at this day must have the like office. For else Christ could
not continue the same power and offices in the Church which he for the
Churches sake did first institute: and which he compted of his heavenly
wisdom most necessary for the Churches government. Christ mainteineth all
the functions by him instituted, eue^ til this da^ in his Church.
But I think no man has yet so shaken of shame and fear of God, that he dare
hold that Christ was not hable to maintain all power, rule and jurisdiction,
with all kind of functions which he instituted for the benefit of the people
till the worlds end, both him self and the holy Ghost promised to be present
for that purpose til the general judgment. And that those functions were
necessary for his everlasting commonwealth, his solemn institution and careful
provision of them do declare: yt he meneth no less to establish ye same which
he the^ instituted, not only ye foresaid reasons, but ye saing of S. Paul does
prove: Ephesians. 4.
He gave unto the Church some to be Apostles, some to be prophets some to be
Evangelists, some to be pastors and Doctors: and all this to the work and
maintenance of the ministry for the perfiting of the Saints, and upholding
of Christ's body, til the time of the acknowledging of Gods Son. Thus does
Christ provide for his dear Church in all manner of service and office even til
ye last day. Whereby it is most clear, yt the power of remission of sins
being once given to ye Church ca^ never cease, whiles man of his continual
frailty ceasseth not to sin. That which was then co^pted a necessary refuge
and remedy for sins committed, can not now perish in the world, where sin
is a great deal more rife, and the remedy more needful.

But to convince them plainly that think contrary, Joan. 20. Thomas had like
power to other, though he were absent when Christ spoke to them.
let them tell me whether Thomas being not the^ present, as the Evangelist
says, and therefore the words not uttered to him in person, let them show
me whether he had not afterward, by force of that institution power also to
remitte sins. If he had as by reason I am sure they can not deny, as full
pre-eminence and power to do al things, that then Christ charged his ten
Disciples, which were present, to do in his name: then the power of remission
of sins was not so streightlie limited, as the words might seem to be
uttered, by which no doubt a Sacrament was instituted to take force in the
Church both then and afterward to the worlds end, not that any man may of his
own head, upon force only of Christ's commission given at ye time to his
Apostles, take that high function upon him: but that he which ordinarily shall
be called by receiving of grace and the holy Ghost in external Sacrament by
laying on of hands of Priesthood, may likewise upon his own flock and cure
exercise that office, no less then those holy men might after Christ's
calling thereunto, occupy the same work of binding and loosing of such
sheep of Christ's, fold as to them were committed. And so did S. Thomas, who
then was not there, so did S. Mathie who then was no Apostle, so did Barnabas,
so did Timothy and Titus who were ordered by S. Paul, Lib 1. de Poenit. Cap.
16.
and so did Paul him self, of whom S. Ambrose says, that he did remitte
sins without al derogation to Christ.

The good studiouse Reader must mark well then, that al these holy functions or
passing preheminencies, are not given to the private persons, in respect of
them selves, neither of Peter, nor of Paul, nor any other, but they are
bestowed upon them for the use of the Church which dies not in their persons,
and therefore must be honored with the same offices by other, after they be
dead, by perpetual succession yt shall never cease. De doct. Christ. lib. 1. c.
18.
And that caused S. Augustine, and other holy Fathers to say the keys were
given to ye Church and authority to remitte sins, to baptize and to enioyn
penance: not because the whole Church, by gathering al her Children together, A
fond reason.
must give sentence upon every sinner, or else the Priests judgment to be
nothing, as some foolish seditiouse heads have now to the disturbance of the
world devised, but because it is our common wealth and house of faith, which
is so bewtified in her ministers, with all kind of Sacraments and good orders
for the government of her children, and because al me^ may see, it was the
earnest love and careful providence for this his spouse, and not the persons of
the Apostles in respect of them selves, which moved his wisdom to the
iustitution of such perpetual offices in the Church.

Hereupon therefore, and in consideration that the keys of opening and
shutting heaven, by binding and loosing man's sins, shall ever remain for the
use and honor of the Church, the said holy S. Augustine has these words:
Li. 1. c. 18. De doct. Christ.
Claues dedit Ecclesiae save, vt quae soluerit in terrae, soluta essent and in
coelo: quae ligauerit in terra, ligata essent and in coelo. Christ delivered
the keys to the Church, that who so ever she loosed in earth, should be
loosed in heaven: and what so ever she bound in earth, should be bound
likewise in heaven. Li. 1 and 2. cont. Donatist.
And Optatus his equal striving with the Donatistes for all holy gifts which
Christ bestowed upon his Church, chalengeth all other Sacraments, and namely
the keys for the Catholic and universal Church, from the part of Donatus
the heretic, as in the right of Peter. He says exceeding pithelie: Claues
datae sunt Petro,
and non haereticis: and afterward: Cathedram Petri, quae nostra est, per ipsam
and caeteras dotes apud nos esse probamus: etiam sacerdotium. The keys are
given to Peter, and not to heretics: by the chair of Peter which is ours: we
prove all other gifts of the church to be ours: yea eue^ priest hode. This he
has in sense in diverse places, by which we see, ye jurisdiction and power
given to ye principal Apostle, yet to remain, and by it all other ye Churches
notable preheminences, which he calls Ecclesiae dotes, The douries of the
Church, through his whole discourse against the Donatists.

So does Epiphanius attribute the power of penance and pardon to the Church
likewise, not only in baptism, which he calls the most perfect penance,
but also afterward upon the parties relapse, in which case the heretics
called Cathari, Cathari.
affirmed that the Church had no authority to pardon them any more. Against
which pernicious sect he says, if any man fall after his baptism, the Church
will not be unmerciful to him: Lib. 2 To^. 1 haeres. 59.
Dat enim reuersionem, and post poenitentiam, poenitentiam. For she gives him
leave to return, and has penance after penance. By which he notes, that the
Church has two Sacraments for remission of sin, the one is baptism, which
he terms perfect penance, Cap. 6.
with S. Paul to the Hebrews: And S. Augustine does call it in his Enchiridion,
Cap. 64.
Magnam indulgentiam, a grau^d pardon, and afterward the Church has an other
kind of remission, which Epiphanius calls poenitentiam post poenitentiam:
But of these two, more shall be said anon.

After this sort, Lib. 4. de Sap. ca. 30
does Lactantius ascribe to the true Church, confession, penance, and
profitable healing of our wounds, and such sores as be found in our souls.
By all which, every man may conceive casely, that this honor and commission of
priesthod, for the remission of our sins, did not decay with the Apostles
appointed by Christ, nor shall cease till Christ's coming to judge the world.

But he that lists to see in what office, and by whom she holds this
singular honor of remission of sins, he shall find, not only the Apostles,
who were called by Christ, but al other Bishops also, that succeed them in
the Church, to be her ministers herein. Gregorius.
whereof let him read the xxvj. Homely of S. Gregory, perteininge almost
wholly to that purpose. I will repeat a few words only out of it, committing
the rest to the diligence of the Reader. Libet intueri (says he) illi
Discipuli ad tanta over a humilitatis vocati, ad quantu^ culmen gloriae sint
perducti. Ecce, non solum de semetipsis securi fiunt, sed etiam alienae
obligationis, and relaxationis potestatem accipiunt: principatumque superni
iudicij sortiuntur, vt vice Dei quibusdam peccata retineant, quibusdam
relaxent. Ecce, qui districtum iudicium Dei metuunt, animarum iudices siunt et
alios damnant, vel liberant, qui semet ipsos damnari metuebant, Horum profecto
nunc in Ecclesia Dei, Episcopi locum tenent, ligandi atque soluendi
authoritatem sumunt. Grandis honor, sed grave pondus est istud honoris. It is
my meaning now, to behold to what marueilouse honor, the Disciples of
Christ be exalted, which before were called in their base state, to great
burden and troubles. For now, they be not only in assurance of their own
state, but they have obtained power of binding and releasing other, and the
very sovereignty of heavenly judgment, that in Gods own steed, they
may some man's sins release, and other offenses retain. Lo, those that once
feared the straict sentence of Gods own judgment, are made the judges of
other men's souls, to condemn or deliver where they list, Bishops are in the
rooms of the Apostles.
that before doubted of them selves. And now tru^lie in these men's rooms, are
the Bishops of Gods Church, and receive the authority of binding and
loosing, and their own state of regimente. High surely is their Chair, but
greater is their charge. S. Gregory said so far.

But Saint Augustine shall make up this matter, with words of such
weight, that I trust every man shall see the truth, and almost feel the
grossness of falsehoode thereby. He writes thus upon this verse of the
Psalm Eructauit, Psalm. 44. The Catholic Church has continual succession in
lauful ministry.
which is the xliiij. in number with him: Pro patribus ^uis nati sunt tibi
filij, constitues eos Principes super omnem terram: In place of thy Parents
thou have children born thee, them thou may make the Princes of the whole
earth. The Apostles did begette thee, they were sent them selves, they
preached in their own persons, and finally they were thy Fathers.

But could they always corporally abide here? And though one of them said,
Phil. 1.
I would gladly be dissolved and be with Christ, yet for your sake I counted it
more necessary to tarry in flesh. Thus he said: But how long could his life
last? He might not remain til this day, much less for the time to come.
What then is the Church desolate after the departure of her parents? God
forbid. In steed of thy parents, thou have sons, says the text: What is
that to say? Marie the Apostles sent by Christ are as Fathers, and for them God
has raised up childern or sons, which be the holy Bishops of ye world. For
at this day the Bishops that be throughout al Christendom, how rose they to
that room? The Church calls them Fathers, and yet she did begette them, and
she placed them in ye room of their Fathers: Non ergo te putes desertam, quia
non vides Petrum, quod non vides Paulum, quod non vides illos per quos nata es:
de prole tua tibi creuit paeternitas: pro patribus tuis nati sunt tibi filij,
constitues eos principes super omnem terram. Do not therefore think thy self
desolate, because thou see not Peter, because thou have not Paul,
because thou have them not now present, by whom thou wast borne: of thy own
issue, Fatherhode is grown to thee: and for thy Fathers thou have brought
forth sons, them shall thou make the rulers over al ye earth. Thus much out
of S. Augustine. By whom you may perceive the great providence of God that
everlastingly vpholdeth ye ordinance of his Son Christ Jesus, as well now by
the children borne from time to time in the Churches lap, as before in the
spring of our faith by the Apostles sent and appointed in person, by Christ him
self.

And here you must note, Note.
that not only Bishops, who succeed the Apostles in all kind of power and
regiment, but also all other inferior Priests to be compted with them, as
successors in ministering diverse sacraments, as baptism, penance, the
reverend Sacrament of the Altar, and such like: but look what power either
Apostle or Bishop has in remission of sins, in consecrating Christ's body,
in baptising, ye same has ye whole order of holy priesthod, by ye right of
their order, and may practice ye same upon such as be subject unto them in all
cases not exempted for reasonable causes, by such as have further jurisdiction
over ye people. Whereof I will not now talk particularly, ye learned of ye
order, know the limits of their charge and commission, better then I ca^
instruct the^, and the simpler sort must seek for knowledge of their duty, by
the holy Canons of Councils and decrees of Bishops made for yt purpose. I can
not now stand thereon: meaning at this present, only to defend ye holy Order,
and challenge for it such right, as the scripture and Christ's own word gives,
which in this contempt of virtue and religion is most necessary for all men to
consider. Therefore upon our large discourse for this last point, I now deducte
the particulars to this sum, which may stand for a certain mark, as well for
ye good to discern ye truth, as for ye Adversaries to shoot at whiles they
live. Al power and every jurisdiction or right of Christ's church, remains as
amply, and in as full force and strength at this day, and shall til ye worlds end
so continue, as they were by Christ granted first in ye persons of ye Apostles
or other, instituted. But ye power of remission of sins, was given proprely
and in express terms to ye Apostles: Ergo ye same remains still in Gods
church. Whereupon it is clear yt the Priests at this day have as full power to
forgive sins, as ye Apostles had. And this Argument of ye continuance of al
offices and rights of ye Church, is ye most plainest and rediest way, not only
to help our cause now taken in hand, but utterly to improve al false doctrines,
and detestable practices of heretics. A certain truth to ouercom falsehod by.
For they must here be examined diligently what common wealth yt is or what
church yt is, in which Christ does preserve ye government given to ye Apostles?
Where it is yt the power not only of making, but also of practicing al
Sacraments has continued still? What company of Christian people that is,
wherein, the Apostles, Doctors, preachers, ministers, through the perpetual
assistance of Gods Spirit, be continued, for the building up of Christ's body,
which is the number of faithful people? What Church that is, which brings
forth from time to time sons to occupy the rooms of their fathers before
them? It is not (good Reader) the pelting pack of Protestants. It is not, I
say, and they know it is not their petie congregations, that has till this
day continued the succession of Bishops by whom the world, as S. Augustine
says, is ruled, as by the Apostles, and first Fathers of our Religion. Surely
our Mother the Church has been long baren, if for her Fathers ye Apostles who
died so long since, she never brought forth children til now to occupy their
rooms, and great lack of rulers if she have made her only contemners, to be
her own governors. No, no, these fellows hold not by her, but they hold
against her: Esai. 1. Heretics vsurp unlawfully Catholics rooms.
these sit in no seat Apostolic, but they by all force dishonor the seat
Apostolic: these are not they, qui pro patribus nati sunt tibi filij: but
these are the sons quos enutriuisti and genuisti, ipsi spreuerunt te If you
ask of these men how they hold, they seek no Fathers after whom they may
rightly rule: they seek no large rue of predecessors in whose places they may
sit: they ask no counsel of Gods Church, by whose calling they should govern:
but they make a long discourse of statutes and temporal laws, to cover their
ambitious vsurpatio^: that in great lack of Christ's calling, their unjust
honor may be approved by man's favor. Thereby let them hold their temporal
dignities, their lands, their lyuelyhodes, their wives also, if they can
obtain so much at the common wealths hands: but their spiritual functions,
their ministering of sacraments, their governance of our souls, and what
else so ever they usurp without the warrant of Gods Church, the longer they
exercise them, the farther they be from salvation, and the nerer to eternal
woe and misery. But to come to our purpose, it is our Church Catholic, in
which, all holy functions have been practiced after Christ's institution ever
since his Asce^sion up to heaven. And therefore this principal power of
remitting and reteining sins, must needs be continued in the Church by her
ministers and priests as it was begone in the Apostles before.

An answer to such as deny this power to pass from the Apostles to all other
priests, because many of them being euel men, may be thought not to have the
holy Ghost, whereby they should effectually remit sins. The Sixth Chap.
AND to Calvin or other of his sect, that require ye like virtue and force of
the holy Ghostes assistaunce in all men that take upon them to remitte sins,
as was given to the Apostles, who first received that power, I answer: that
the same gift of the holy Ghost is yet in ye ministers of the same Sacrament,
no less then in the Apostles. For, though they had more plentiful
sanctification whereby they were in all their life more holy, and more
virtuous, then lightly any other, either priests or lay men, were after them:
yet the gifts of the holy Ghost touching the ministry and service of Gods
Church, which were not so much given them for their own sakes, as for the use
of the common wealth, and for the right of practicing certain holy functions
requisite for the peoples sanctification, as they were employed upon them: so
they were also given to diverse that were neither good nor virtuous, and
therefore lacked that, which properly is that grace of the holy Ghost, that is
called of our school men, gratia gratum facie^s, such a grace as makes man
acceptable to God. Therefore, the holy Ghost breathed upon the Apostles then by
Christ, and given yet to priests in their ordering by Bishopes, is a gift of
God, and a grace of the holy Ghost, not whereby every man is made virtuous,
Grace given in the sacrament of Order what ye is.
or conning, or happy before God, but it is a gift only of God, whereby man
is called above his own nature and dignity, to have power and authority, to
do and exercise any function in Gods Church to the spiritual benefit of the
people, which is not only, not always joined to virtue and holy knowledge,
but is full often, by calling, due to them which are most wicked persons,
without any impair of their authority. And these kind of gifts and graces of
the holy Ghost, be called gra^iae gratis datae, certain gifts given to men
for no deserts of their persons, but freely, for the use of other men, to
whom they be beneficial, even there, where they be hurteful to the bestowers.
In which sense S. Paul numbreth a great sort, the fourth to the Ephesians:
Ephesians. 4. Cap. 12.
and the first Epistle to the Corinthians: and he calls the^, not only the
graces of the spirit, but also, the diuisio^s of functions, and ministratio^s:
as, the gift of working miracles, the gift of tunges, the gift of
prophecie^g, the gift of preaching, and so forth: all which being the gifts
and graces of ye spirit for the Churches edifiyng, Cap. 2.
and of S. Peter being called the holy Ghost, in the Acts, yet they were given
to evil men often, as well as to good, without al impairing of Gods honor:
yea with the great increase of Gods glory that even by the wicked is able to
work his will and holy purpose for ye benifite of his elect. And in this
sense, the spirit of God breathed upon the Apostles, was a gift of the holy
Ghost, whereby man should remitte by lauful power of God the sins of the
people. Whereupon Theophilact says, that, In 20. Cap. Ioa^.
potestatem quandam and donum spirituale dedit Apostolis, vt remittant peccata,
ostendens quod genus spiritualium donorum eis dederit, inquit: quorum
remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis: that is to say: Christ gave to his
Apostles a certain power and spiritual gift, vvherby they might remitte
sins: For he shevved what power of the spirit it was that he breathed on
them, when he said: whose sins you do forgive, they be forgiven.

If our Adversaries be ignorant of these things, which be so common in
schools of divinity, yet me think they should remember, that S. Paul did
not dissalowe the authority nor power of preaching, in such as were evil men,
Philip 1.
and taught for emulatio^ and not of sincere zeal of the Gospel, and that
Christ him self stopped not such as cast out diuelles in his name, and
therefore were not without the gift of woorkinge miracles, Matt. 7.
though he professed that many of them at the day of judgment, chalenging some
right of heaven upon that act, should not be received to glory: and how the
gift of prophecy was common in the old testament, not only to the wicked,
but to such as willingly would deceive ye people: Joan. 11.
And Caiphas he prophesied by the Spirit of God, as by force of his office,
being yet in purpose to work wickedness against Christ him self, for whose
truth, he then, by force of the spirit prophesied. But of the Sacraments of
Gods Church every one, that they may be ministered beneficially to the
receiving in much wickedness of the giver, God works the good effect of
sacraments even by evil me^.
there is no man can be ignorant. For it is a rule and a principle most
certain, that God woorketh his will in them by the ministry of men, be they
never so evil. For else they were man's sacraments, and not Gods. And we
could not be certain neither of our Baptism, neither of right receiving of
Christ's body in the holy Sacrament of his altar, nor of any other spiritual
benefit that we now by man's ministry receive in the Church. Much comfort
it were for all Christian people, to have such governors over their souls,
and such dispos^rs of Gods mysteries, as would and could in all sincerity
and faithfulness woorcke Gods woorcke, and that would always use the high
power given unto them, to edify, and never to destroy, and that they so
would do, 1. Petri 4.
both S. Peter and S. Paul do often exhort them. But neither the misery of
man's sinful nature can suffer that, nor our wickedness can deserve so much.
Galat. 2.
S. Peter him self was reprehensible in his government: therefore let us
not marvel that other which be not of so full spirit as he was, either may
commit things worthy of reprehension amongst the good, or subject to ye
malicious slander of the evil.

And surely for our matter, being of such importance, Priests had need to be
careful in their office.
priests had need most carefully to study how to practice so high a
function which is so proper to Gods own judgment and heavenly court. For
though by Christ they have undoubtedly recieued commission and power in the
virtue of ye holy Ghost, when they took holy orders, to forgive and remit
sins: yet cursed be they by Gods own mouth, if they do it either
negligently, because it is ye work of our Lord, or with affectation of pride
and Pharisaical dominion, as though they were Lords of the Sacraments and
Christian religion, Ierom. in ^6, Matt.
and not ministers or seruitours of Christ in his Church. Whereof it seemed
that S. Jerome in his days, had some cause to compain, nothing reproving
their authority, but correcting the abuse of their authority. Penance in
those days was given greater then the fault required, or remission of sins
was so hardly obtained that it seemed to S. Iereme, that their austeritie grew
to some spice of Pharisaical regiment, Matt. 23.
that would lay importable burdens on other men's necks. and not touch any at
al them selves. Whereupon he takes occasion to advertise them, that every power
of remission, and the office of absolutio^ was properly Gods, and theirs but by
ministry. And therefore that their mercy and judgment ought to be tried and
measured by his sentence, and not his, by theirs.

These things were to be admonished and reprehended then, but now the disease
lies on the other side, and they offend rather in over much lenity. For as
both be contemned of the wicked, so there is almost amongst the good none left
but loosing now a days, when me^ had rather be bound in sin, the^ bound in
penance for sin. Therefore the office of binding and loosing requires truly
good knowledge, much discretion, zeal and stowtnesse in Gods quarrel. For as
it is most high, so surely it is most hard and burdenous. It pitieth my
heart to see it so little esteemed, but much more, that it should be less
esteemed through their ignorance or evil life, to whom the keys of remission
be committed. The keye of remission and reteining sins, they had of God in
their Orders, but discretion, knowledge, virtue with other qualities mere for
the exercise of that office, they must by prayer and industry obtain, lest
whilst they profit other men to salvation, they become reprobate them selves,
1. Cor. 9.
as S. Paul said of him self in case of preaching.

But in deed, it is not so commendable for us, as the case stands now, nor
so needful to pry into the priests bosoms, or to vewe their lackes in
ministering of this sacrament of penance, which, if any be, do lightly
redounde to their own harms, and not so much to mine, or to any other which
use their office to our own salvation. For though for council, and comfort,
and such other respects, a discrete and learned man were rather to be wished
for then a worse, yet being assured that the party is called by Gods Church
to the function, and has jurisdiction ordinary or granted extraordinarily by
the appointment of lawful superiors, and if by schism and excommunication,
or otherwise he be not suspended from the practice of the said functions, I
need nothing to doubt for his other lackes, but much more for mine own
insufficiency, by default of just examination of my conscience, or lack of
contrition, or some other like want in my self, why the fru^te of the priests
absolution can not be surely derived unto me, as else, if it were not my own
default, it should by force of the sacrament undoubtedly be.

For this I dare be bold to say, ^ack of the fruict of any sacrament is for
most in the r^ceauer, not in the minister.
that the lack of the appointed fructe of any Sacrament, aryseth a thousand
times oftener, by the unworthiness of the subject, and him that receives the
Sacrament, then upon any lack of the giver and minister thereof, and namely
in this Sacrament, of the Churches discipline it chances more often. For as S.
Basile says: Questione ^5. regul contract.
Potestas remittendi peccata non est absolute data, sed in recipientis
obedientia, and in consensu cum eo qui animae ipsius curam gerit, sitaest. The
power of remitting sins is not absolutely, without condition, given: but it
stands in the obedience of the penitent, and in his agreement with him that
has the charge of his soul. Therefore, for Christ's love, let us cast peril
oftener of our own case then upon other men's states: for we are not so assured
of the holy Spirit, or his grace to qualify us for the worthy receiving, as
they are out of doubt for the right power of ministry.

And to conclude against Calvin, and al other, that think the power of
priests either to be less for lack of good life, or want of much lerning, I
allege S. Cyprian thus: Remissio peccatorum sieve per baptismum, sieve per alia
sacrame^ta donetur, proprie spiritus sancti est: et ipsi soli huius
efficientiae priuilegium manet. Thus in English: Effect of sacraments is the
vv^rck of the holy Ghost,
Remission of sins, whether it be by Baptyme or by other sacraments given, it
properly pertains to the holy Ghost, and the prehemine^ce of ye forceable
effect is only his: the solennitie of words, ye invocation of Gods name,
and the external signs prescribed to the priests ministeries, by the
Apostles to make up the visible sacrament: but the thing it self, and
effect of the sacrament, the holy Ghost works: and the author of al
goodness puts his hand invisible, to the external and visible consecration
of the priests.

So says S. Cyprian, Sermon. de Baptis. Christi.
and makes a far longer discourse how the diversity of the ministers
deserts do nothing alter the sacraments or theffecte thereof, but being alike
to al receivers of fit capacite and condition, Vide August. li. 5. co^tra
Donatistas Cap. 20. Act. 1.
by whom so ever they be served and dispensed with just authority and calling
thereunto. The Baptism of Judas Iscarioth, was no worse the^ Simon Peter's. For
S. Peter says, co^unmeratus erat in nobis and sortitus est sortem ministerij
huius: He was counted as one of our number, and had the lotte of this
ministry: Nor the ministry of Nicolas of less acceptance in it self,
then the function of Stephen, being me^ of one office, but of unlike
deseruinges. The prophecy of Esaias no more true the^ the prophecy of Caiphas:
nor the prophecy of Balam less true, then the prophecy of Baruc. If we were
either absolved, or baptized in the names of Peter, or Paul, or Judas, or
Apollo, then we might brag, who were best baptized, or suerliest loosed from
sin, and every one might so either crake, or be ashamed of his minister,
whereof, S. Paul earnestly checked the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 1.
But now every one being both baptized, and loosed, and houseled, and
anointed, and honored in all other spiritual acts, in no other name, but in
the name of Jesus, his Father everlasting, and the holy Ghost proceeding from
them both, all must needs receive the like benefit that be like qualified
thereunto, of whom so ever the office is exercised, if he be lawfully called,
that is to say, have by the hands of priesthode, received the gift and grace
of the holy Ghost for his lawful authorishing in that case, the which gift of
the holy Ghost, being the self same that the Apostles received of Christ for
the like functions, continues with them still, though their life and deserts
be never so evil, and their ignorance never so much: yea though they be by
just occasion, as for Heresy, Schism, or notorious life, through the
censures of the Church imbarred from the use and exercise of that office of
remitting sins, and such other the like spiritual functions.

But to make an end of this matter, I turn Caluins reason against him self.
He and his flock be of that fond and blind iudgmente, that the whole text of
the twentieth of S. John wherein Christ gives authority to the Apostles to
remitte sins, is mea^t only of preaching the Gospel, for which function
Christ gave them the holy Ghost: Now Sir upon this I urge him with his own
reason: I ask him first, whether the ministers, that by him are sent to
preach the word have the holy Ghost, as for example Beza Beza.
yt he sent into France first, or Richerus, Richerus
whom he sent to Coligninia, or Herman Herman
yt came by ye holy Ghostes sending unto Fla^ders and Braba^t: had these the
holy Ghost, or no? If they say yea, as I thinck they will (they be so bold in
an othermans house) then demand of them further, whether the said Spirit of
God may err. If they say no, as possibly they will, the^ conclude against them
thus: The holy Ghost can not err, but you my masters may err, ergo, you have
not the holy Ghost, and consequently you have then no better right in
preachinge, then poor priests have in remitting or absoluing. Therefore I
leave Calvin wrestling with his own shadow, and will follow on my purpose and
course of matter, which I have in hand.

That it stands well with Gods honor that mortal men should remitte sins,
and that Nouatus the heretic was of old condemned for denieng the same, and
that he was the father of this heresy which denies the p^iests authority. The
Seventh Chap.
NOW by all our former discourse, the right of remission of sins
sufficiently proved to perteine to priesthood, some will perhaps compte it
vain labor, to make more declaration of that which is so plain, or further
to establishe yt by reason, which stands so fast on scriptures. But if any so
think, they see not the wide ways of Heresy, nor the manifold shifts that
she attempteth, even there, who be in the danger of heresy most.
where she may seem to be fully beaten. The simple and the sinful stand most
in her danger, that can not in their lack of intelligence, compare reason to
reason, nor gather one truth of an other, and therefore to their mouths we
must chewe all meats very small, else there could be no great need of their
further informatio^, how this claim of remission of sins or ye usual
practice thereof, could stand with Gods glory. For being aunswerable to his
ordinance, it ca^ not but be agreeable with his honor. But because in
desperate cases our Adversaries have taught their fellows there to wrangle
vncurtesly, where they can not maynteine reason pithely, I will not only serve
my cause, but somtymes poursue their folly, though I doubt not but the wisdom
of God shall more and more appear, touching his meaning in our matter, not
alonely by our defense, but a great deal the rather by their discontentation.

Now therefore intending to declare, that this prehemine^ce of priesthod, does
nothing abase, or derogate to Gods dignity, I thinck it not amiss to match
our new doctors, of whom I hear often this complaynt, with other their
forefathers, yt at once both truth may fully be served, and a yoke of
Adversaries jointly drawing against ye Church and our salvation, may be almost
with one breath refuted. Our young masters may be glad, to grow so high
in Gods Church, as to be reproved with the^ who were condemned thirtene
hundredth years since: and though they be so modeste, Heretics never list to
brag of their auncetours.
that lightly they list not crake of their ancestors, yet we will not defraude
them of that glory, nor help our cause by dissimulatio^ of their great
antiquity. It is their pusillanimitie, I know, yt they will not often in
distress of their doctrine, call for aid of their forefathers, who were
doubtless very ancient, and many of them within the first six hundred
years. In other causes vigila^tius, Vigilantius.
might help: in some Iouinian Iouinianus.
would atte^d upon the^: Manes Manes.
might do them often high pleasure. Iulianus Iulianus.
thapostata, a prince for their purpose. Simon Magus, Simon Magus.
one of the Apostles age, would stand by them: surely if our Adversaries had
heart, they would well nere win of us by antiquity.

And truly I can not dissemble with the^ in this cause, that now is in hand:
they have one patron against us, of years very ancient, and of reason much
like unto them selves: Nouatus Nouatus
is his name, of whom the folowers were called of the Church Nouatians, Epipha.
in haere.
but them selves liked to be called Cathari, Cathar.
that is to say, clean and undefiled persons. Their opinion was, that such as
did fall into any mortal sin after Baptime, could not by any man or means
be affoiled thereof: and for that they disalowed the Churches whole practice of
mercy and remission of sins in the Sacrament of penance, nothing disagreing
from Calvin that condemns the saing of S. Jerome, In Institut. In cap. 3.
Esaias.
as sacrilegious, where he writes yt penance is as a second board of refuge,
whereby after shipwrake a man may be saved. Neither did Nouatus deny, but him
self might have mercy, and give pardon after man's fall, but the Church could
not therein meddle, as he thought, without singular injury to Christ, and his
only prerogative.

And that he joins in this matter fully with our me^, that they may take
more comfort on him, you shall perceive by Socrates one of the writers of the
Tripartite history, Vide Cassiod. li. 8. hist. tri^p^rt. ca. 9 The Caluinists
agree with Nouatus against the sacrament of penance.
who says thus: Nouatus scribebat Ecclesiis ne eos qui Daemonibus
immolauerant, ad Sacramenta susciperent, sed inuitarent quidem ad poenitentiam,
remissione^ vero Dei relinquerent potestati, cuius solius est peccata
remittere. Nouatus wrote his letters to diverse Churches, that they should not
admit any man to the Sacraments, that had done sacrifice to Diuelles, but
that they should only move them to do Penance, and commit to God the
remission of their sin, who only can forgive man's offenses. And therefore
though in some other point Nouatus did ouerpricke his Children, yet herein they
fully mete in one. Epiphanius writes, that he denied salvation to those that
did fall to grievous crimes after their Christendom, and therewith did hold,
that there was but one penance, Ita Caluinus.
which was done in Baptime, and after that the Church to have none. How
ha^dsomly he defended this error, and unmerciful heresy, ye shall see anon
by S. Ambrose who lernedly followed and chased him or his folowers in an whole
work written for that purpose. In the mean time it were good for the more
credit of the man and his cause, to note with the ancient doctors of his
days, his conditions, his coming up, his proceeding, and practices. Nouatus
described Epist. 8. lib. 2.


S. Cyprian, who was most molested with him, and knew him best, gives him
this praise: Nouatus was a man that delighted much in novelties and news, of
insatiable avarice, a furrious rauin, with pride and intolerable arrogancy
almost puffed past him self, known and taken of al Bishops for a noughtie
pack, condemned by the common judgment of al good priests for a faithless
heretic, curious and inquisitiue them to betraie, for to deceive, allwaies
ready to flatter, in love never faithful nor trusty, A fit fellow to be a
minister.
a match ever fired to kindle sedition, a whirle wind and storm to procure
the shipwrake of faith, and to be short, an adversary to tranquillity, and
an enemy of peace. These were his conditions then.

Epist. ad Fabianu^ ex en.
Mary long before that his fall to heresy, S. Cornelius writes, yt he was
possessed in his youth with an evil spirit, for which he had to do great
while with coniurours, and that he lacked all the holy solemnity of Baptism
and confirmation, and consequently the Spirit of God, which by them he
should have received, and therefore took orders against the law upon
sinister favor, and afterward by unlawful arts attempted to get a
bishopric, with great oaths protesting that he would not be a Bishop if
he might. But when in deed he could not atteine to that holy dignity, which
he so inwardly and intolerablie gaped for, he fell in despite of Gods Church
to heresy, that he might get that without order, which he could not obtain,
in the right manner of the Churches making. And for that purpose, he procured
three base Bysshoppes out of a strange and remote part of Italy, who neither
knew the case, the man, nor his manners, and them through ignorance he
beguiled, and by force caused them to consecrate him Bishop, by the color
whereof (for true imposition of hands was it none) sodeynlie he appeared as a
new creature, and a Bishop of a strange stamp, apparuit Episcopus, velut
nouum Plasma, says Cornelius: And for this attempt one of the poor Bishops
did great penance, the other two were deposed. In ye mean time this mock
Bishope vendicabat sibi euangeliu^: calle^ged ye word of the Lord for him
self. Lib. 3. haereticaru^ Fabularu^ Cap de Nouat
denied him self to be a priest, because he would not give to the people (as
Theodoritus says) in their extremity, the remedy for their sins, which is
nothing else, but to give them absolution, which work he could never abide.
To be short, he was so ince^sed against his laufull pastor and superior ye
holy Bishop of Rome, An oath for a nevve visitation.
that in the deliuerye of the blessed Sacrament to the people, he would force
the^ to take an oath by ye blessed body which they had in their hands ready to
receive, yt they should stick to him, and forsake the Bishop of Rome, Cornelius.

Lib. 6. cap. 33.
All these things in sense has Eusebius of Nouatus, the first patron of the
Protestants doctrine concerning the impugning of the Churches title in
remission of sins, of which her right he would have robbed her in pretense of
maintenance of Gods honor. Whereby he also abrogated the whole Sacrament
of penance. Vide August. de haeres. her. 3^.
This falshod though it were straight with the author condemned in a great
Council holden at Rome, and afterward in diverse Provincial Synodes, and by
the holy council of Nice it self repressed also, yet it spread very sore,
Delapsis. De Poenitentia. De reparatione lapsi.
and continued long, and was not only by S. Cyprian, but also by Dionysius
Alexandrinus, S. Ambrose, and S C^rysostome refuted in sundry works written
against the Nouatians. By whom and other, though the course of that false
assertion, was often broken in Gods Church, yet in some parts they did knit
again, In haeresi. Tessares. what heretik^s de ^ed the sacr. of penance with
Nouatus
sometimes by certain heretics of Nouatus days called Tessarescedecatitae,
qui a auersabantur poenitentiam. (...) says Theodoritus, who did abhor
penance: and sometimes, by a sort called Iacobitae, other whiles, by wiclif
and his, else, by the waldenses, now and than, by the Anabaptists, and lately
by ye Lutherans, and most of ye Protesta^tes, and by the Caluinists, eueryone.

All which black band, though they agree not at every pinch of Nouatus
heresy (for it is not possible, that such should ever fully consent) yet all
these knit tails together in this, that there is no Sacrament of penance
after Baptism, in which the priest may forgive sins, and that it stands
not with Gods honor, so to remitte the peoples offenses. Of other the like
heresies which he lent our men, as of forbidding holy Chrisme and
anointing of such as were by him baptized, in so much that the holy Fathers
were glad, to make up the lack thereof, in all such as came from their
heresy to the unity of Christ's Church, I will not here speak: purposing
only, because that only concerns our matter, to refute that old heresy
raised so long since against the prerogative of Gods priests, and only
help of our sins, that at once both the author, and the offspring may be
fully overthrown.

And first because generally, all the foresaid join together against ye
truth in this argument, that it is dishonor to God, and great presumption in
a mortal man, to claim the power so proper to God: let the studious Reader
well consider, that no function, power, ne dignity, be it never so peculiar to
God him self by natural excellency, That, which is only proper to God, may
be executed by the mynisterye of man without Gods dishonor.
but the same may be occupied of man secondarily, as by the way of service,
ministry, or participation, so that man challenge nor usurp yt not as of him
self, or when it is not lawfully received, nor orderly given. All the works
that extraordinarily and miraculous^y were wrought, either by Christ in his
humanity, or by the Prophets or Apostles words, or by their garments, or
by what other instrument so ever they were done, be the worckes of God no less
then to remitte sins: yet all these things and other the like brought to
pass by man, through the power of of God that woorketh by man's ministry the
same, nothing derogateth to Gods glory, but infinitely augmenteth his
honor: even so the power of pardoning man's sins, being employed by God the
Father upon Christ his Son, and by Christ upon his Church and ministers,
and practiced by them not of their own might and heads, but in the virtue of
the holy Ghost, which by the Son of God was breathed upon them: this
authority (I say) is no derogation, but an evident sign of his mighty power
of salvation left for the faithfulls sake in the Church.

When the person that was lame from his birth begged of Peter and John somewhat
for his relief at the temple door, as his manner was, Act. 3.
Peter answered him, that gold and silver he had none to give, but yt which
he had he would willingly bestow, which was power to heal him of his incurable
malady, for proof whereof, he bad him rise and walk, and so he did at his
word, in the sight of all that there were gathered: which being done, and the
people wo^dering thereat, the Apostle thus instructed them: Brethern (says he)
why wonder you at us, as though we had brought this strange worck to pass by
our own streingth and power: it is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that
has glorified his son Jesus whom you refused, and betrayed to Pontius
Pilatus to be crucified: in his name and faith this poor man is recovered.

Mark well, that ye same thing which Peter said, him self had to give, quod
habeo, tibi do, the same yet he professes yt he houldeth not as of his own
right, or might, but as of Christ Jesus, in whose name he willed ye lame to
walk: eue^ so the power of pardoning sins is truly and properly in the
priests, as the power of woorking miracles is properly in Peter's hands,
neither the one yet nor the other holden as of their own might and power,
but both practiced for the glory of God in the name of Jesus of Nazareth,
Remission of sins is more certain, and more to Gods honor then voorking of
miracles.
by their appointed ministry. And as truly as Peter might say to ye feeble in
body, that which I have, I give thee: rise and walk in the name of Jesus of
Nazareth: so surely may ye priest say to the sick in soul, that which I have
I give thee, in ye name of Jesus thy sins (my son) be forgeuen thee. No
less is the one the peculiar work of God, then ye other: no more does one
dishonor god the^ ye other. And this work of remitting sins is much more
certain, then ye miraculous healing of ye body, being joined by Gods promise to
a sacrament yt shall never cease in ye church, where miracles for most part
ceased long since: yea ye name and majesty of God is a thousand parts more
honored, not ye only God, in his own person, but in the fraylty of his
ministers he is able to aco^plish such mighty miracles, both in ye cure of body
and soul. But ye fondnes of this heresy is so great, yt it makes those
things to tend to Gods disgracing, which he has appointed properly and only
in a manner, for yt purpose, to set forth ye name of his Son Jesus. For if
both sins of ma^s soul, and sores of his body could not visibli by external
means be healed in ye glorious invocation of Gods name, it would surely be
forgotten in ye church of Christ, yt such power is given by God ye father to
his only son, and ma^s mind would not reach to yt inwardly, whereof he had no
proof nor assurance outwardly. I beseech you Sir, were ye working of strange
miracles given to some as well of ye Prophets as of ye Apostles of Christ, were
they any whit prejudicial to Gods honor, or they were given to man above his
natural power, for the setting forth of Gods honor, yt the Prophets should
see so long before, things yt afterward did fall, which is the propriety of
God alone, and theirs only by gift and grant of him to who^ only it does
belong, do they dishonor God, or else was it not always granted to some me^,
for ye glory of God? That Eliseus could see ye heart and inward thoughts of
Giezi his servant, which is Gods only property, 4. Reg. Cap. 5.
did it dishonor God, or rather wonderfully augme^t his glory? The passing
preemine^ce yt Peter and ye rest received when they were hable by laying on of
hands to give the holy ghost, ca^ it not be practiced without the dishonor
of God, Act. 8.
or else was it not principally given to them to set forth ye glory of God?
This was so great power yt it was much more astonished at of ye beholders, the^
either working of miracles or remitting sins: in so much yt Simo^ the
sorcerer, who was so gloriouse before, yt he called him self the power of God,
would have given the Apostles money largely, that upon whom so ever he had
practiced the like laying on of hands, he might receive the holy Ghost also.

Then if the power of giving the holy Ghost, or power of giving grace, which
both Peter and Paul practiced in a visible Sacrament, 2. Tim. 4
by a solemn Ceremony, in the sight of all the world, by laying on of their
hands, if th^s passing work, and most proper to God, I dare say, of al
other acts that be exercised in Christ's name in the Church, does not only no
whit abase Gods excellency, but was purposely instituted to honor ye majesty
of God in the face of all people, and to set out the glory of his house, how
dare any man for fear of Gods high indignation, controlle ye work of Christ
in remitting man's sins, by such a visible sacrament, as to ye honor of God
is most convenient, and to our salvation most necessary? If they will not let
priests remit sins for fear of offe^ding god, and dishonoring his name, the^
let them not baptize, not preach, not teach, not do miracles, not give the
holy Ghost, not correct faults, not give orders, nor do any other functions.
For these every one be no less proper to God, then remission of sins.

O heresy most shameful that then goes about to dishonor God most, when she
most pretends Gods honor, whereof she is so tender and so careful, that
she has barred his own spouse, of his blessed body, Heresy under pretense of
Gods honor has robbed his spouse of her treasurs.
of remission of sins, of the Spirit of God, of all sacraments, of all holy
Ceremonies, of memories, of miracles, of holy functions, and to be short, of
al gifts and graces: and all this for Gods honor, so honorable it is for
Christ to be the King of so beggarlie a common wealth, as they make of ye
Church: such glory it is for Christ to have his only spouse robbed of the
treasures of his gifts and graces: so comely it is for Christ, to have such
sacraments, as neither contain him self, nor his grace: so worthy a thing
it is, for Christ to have ministers, that upon his own warrant can neither
pardon nor punish man's misdeedes. Psalm. 8^.
Gloriosa dicta sunt de te Ciuitas Dei. Glorious things have been reported of
thee thou City of God, and how art thou now so barraine and so contemptible,
yt thy honor must needs redound to the dishonor of him, by whom al thy honor
only stands?

But I cease to pursue the Churches ennemies now in mine own words, I will
rather join with the holy Fathers, for their overthrow, whose, not only
reason and sufficient answer to this their vain Reply founded on the pretense
of Gods honor, but also, their only name and authority shall sufficiently
beat down these men's boldness. Ambros. de poen. lib. 1. ca. 2.
S. Ambrose in this case is most plain, and stands with the Nouatians, as I
do now with the Zuinglians. even in the very same Argument in these words:
Sed aiun^, se Domino defer reuerentiam, cui soli remitte^dorum criminum
potestatem reseruent: imo nulli maiorem iniuriam faciunt, quam qui eius volunt
mandata rescindere, I read rather refindere, then refundere, or co^fundere:
for he reproves Nouatus that he did divide the gift of christ, vvhiles he
granted power to bind, and not to loose.
commissum munus refindere: nam cum ipse in Euangelio suo dixerit Dominus
Jesus: accipite Spiritum sanctum, quoru^ remiseritis peccata, etc quis est ergo
qui magis honorat? Vtru^ qui mandatis atte^perat an qui resistit? Ecclesia in
vtroque seruat obedie^tiam, vt peccatu^ and alliget, and laxet. that is to
say: These Nouatians say that they deny penance or power to remitte sins in
earth, in respect of the maintenance of such honor as is due to god, to whom
only they will reserve the pardoning of man's sins. But in deed none do so
much injury to Gods glory, as those which break his commandments, and make
a division of that charge and commission, which he gives. For seeing our Lord
Jesus his own mouth spoke these words: Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins
you do forgive, they be forgiven, and whose sins you hold, they be holden:
Who in this case more honors God? He that obeys his commandment, or he
that resists ye same? The Church obeys in both, as well in binding as in
loosing. Thus there. And a little after: Look to whom this charge was given,
and that person may laufully and with Gods good leave use the same. And
therefore the Church may laufully both bind and loose:
heresy and her attendants can rightly do neither. This right is only
committed to Priests, and therefore the Church rightly chalengeth that
authority, because she has lauful Priests: and so heresy can not do,
because she has not the Priests of God in her cursed congregation. Thus said
S. Ambrose for the answer of the Nouatians in his days, and so say I now in
ye Churches behalf against the like affected ennemies of Christ's honor, which
whiles they in face of scripture and Gods word would seem to defend, they are
become sworn adversaries of his honor, and open contemners of his
commandments and holy ordinance.

Mark well S. Ambrose his reasons against the Nouatia^s to serve for our time.
S. Ambrose here takes it for a ground, that it is Gods ordinance, that Priests
should remit sins, he is bold to call the contrary doctrine, heresy, he
makes a principle of this, that it never dishonors God, that man should do
that, which God gives him either commandment or commission to do in his
behalf, he takes it for a known truth, that, as the Church of God has true
and laufull Priests, so she may by them, upon Christ's warrant, both loose
and bind: and contrariwise, that heresy may well enough give over that right of
remission of sins, because she has lightly no lauful Priests, by whom she
may practice the same.

And surely, it is a merueilouse force of truth or rather the might of Gods
providence, that drives Heretics to disdain, destroy, and dissanul the
graces and manifold gifts of Christ's Church, that impugning them, where the
very right of such holy acts do lie, they may plainly confess, and to their
shame acknowledge, yt they have none such them selves, nor ca^ by Gods warrant
challenge any such gifts, which with all their might they would wholly if they
could, together with Gods spirit and Church, extinguish.

Alas into what misery has this forsaken flock wilfully cast them selves and
their adherentes, which can forsake Gods house, vbi mandauit Dominus
benedictionem, upon which God has bestovved his blessing, The nevve
congregation is barrain of al Gods gifts.
and abide there, where, by their own confession, there is no Priesthode, no
Penance, no host, no sacrifice, no remission (where they can let) of sins, no
grace in Sacraments, nor no gift of the holy Ghost. Al other heresies lightly
by force of the Fathers doctrine and judgment, lost either their Priesthod,
because they had no way out of the Church to make Priests, Aduersus
Luciferianos.
as S. Hierome writes of Hilarie the Deacon, or else the use and function of
Priesthode, by reason, ye works of God can not be orderly nor benificially
used out of the house of God: and yet, they ever claimed to them selves, not
only the order, but for most part all other functions that by Christ and his
Church were annexed to that order: but ours (wherein they pass all their
forefathers) in a manner willingly give over the whole profession freely and
without compulsio^, deny them selves, with Nouatus, to be Priests, deny to
sacrifice, deny to enjoin penance, deny to give the holy Ghost either by
imposition of hands, or by Chrisme, Protestants do of them sel^es renounce the
right of al holy actions of Christian religion.
or by any other solemn right of Gods Church. To be short, take nothing from
these fellows that belongs to Christianity, for they will give al over them
selves.

But briefly to conclude up the answer to their reason founded upon Nouatus
his principle touching Gods honor, thus I say: That never derogateth to Gods
honor, which is agreeable to Gods ordinance: but yt Priests should remitte
sins is the ordinance of god, as is declared: therefore the use thereof does
not derogate any whit to gods honor. Again: as great works and as propre to
god as remission of sins was practiced by the Apostles, and yet is used by
the Bishops of holy Church without al dishonor of God? giving the holy
ghost, and gods grace, by laying on of hands: Ergo Remission of sins may be
also practiced of Priests, without al injury to god and his only right
therein.

For further prouf of the foresaid matter, it is declared, that neither
Christ, nor his everlasting Father, nor the holy Ghost, do give over unto
man or resign the power of remission, or any other holy function of the
Church, but do themselves continually work al those graces by man's
ministry and service. The eighth Chap.
FVrthermore, we must here consider, that what work so ever God appoints
man to exercise in his Church, either in remission of sins, or giving grace
of Gods Spirit, or what other holy actio^ so ever may in his name be don, for
the benefit of the people, by the ministry and service of man: either by ye
means and meditation of any other instrumental cause, No man does succeed God
in any divine function.
we must learn, that in these works so wrought either by man, or through
other creatures, God does not resign his right to the ways and and woorkers
thereof, and give over the whole title that is due to himself in the said
divine acts. For then in deed man's practice should derogat to Gods power, and
he should as it were succeed God in the right of his propre power, and
everlasting inheritance: which only to surmise, as Heretics do, were mere
folly.

Christ is by everlasting right made the head of the Church, Christ resigned
his room but not his right.
and he resigneth not this office to any mortal man. For if he did, then the
party that should by his grant occupy for a season the same dignity, were
his successor, and should hold in like right the same office as he did before.
But that notwithstanding, he has made his substitute and vicegerent, by whom
in his corporal absence he rules now the Church, as he did before in his own
person, not giving over his pre-eminence and supreme power therein, but now
practicing that by an other, which before he exercised him self in his own
person. It had been a great derogation to Christ that Peter should have been
Christ's heir and successor: for then Christ had lost the perpetuity, an
other man governing after him in like right and pre-eminence as he had before.
But, for Peter to rule the Church under him, in his steed, and as by his
everlasting right, with commission from him that holds that sovereignty for
ever, by whom so ever the Church shall be ruled til the worlds end in earth,
this (I say) is no derogation to God, nor his Son Christ Jesus at al, but it
much proves that Christ according to his manhood is the head of the
Church for ever, because by man in earth he rules the same til his coming
again, the which man, though he be his Vicar and Vicegerent, yet he is not his
Successor.

Psalm. 44.
S. Augustine did trimly allude to the use of the old Law, co^paring the
ministers of Gods Church to ye younger brethern who were charged to marie the
elder brothers wife, when he died without isshue, in whose name they did
practice the work of marriage, and therefore could not call their children by
their own names, but by ye name of their elder brethren. For as they raised
seed to their brother, and for their brothers honor: so the Priests yt have
taken upon them (as it were in marriage) to govern Christ his Church and to
bring forth children, not in their own names but in ye name of their elder
brother, and her departed husband. As when they bring forth children in
Baptism, as through ye womb of the Church, they bring them not forth as for
them selves, and in their own names, but in the name of Jesus Christ, being
their elder brother: even so it is in remission of sins also, in which case
Christ resigneth not his authority, Yet the Protestants bring forth in their
several congregations children not for Christ but for Calvin caluinists and
for L^ther, Luthera^s.
as though he lacked that power him self, but practices that mighty work
by the ministry of man, which before he excercised in his own person. And as
the baptising not in the name of Peter, nor Paul, nor Apollo, but in the name
of Christ the first husband of the Church, after whom the Children be called
Christians, not Petrians, or Paulians, does much set forth the honor of
the eldest spouse: so it proves and augmenteth Christ's everlasting honor and
most just title in remission of sins, that til this day, no less now in
absence, by the service of his Priests, then before when he was present, by his
own word and will, sins be in his name and faith, fully remitted: yea even
the very function of preaching the Gospel, which they say, is meante by
remitting of sins (although they say most foolishly therein, and against the
common sense of all the Fathers) yet even that function, is Christ's still,
though it be used of man in earth.

And they that are most tender in outward words of Gods honor, will yet seem
to occupy that his proper function without al derogatio^ to his right therein.
But in deed, their preaching, which is their remission of sin, is not ye
power of God to salvation, but it is his permission for our great punishment.
The lauful doctrine of Christ's church, is truly no less the propre work of
Christ, then is forgiveness of sins, and yet it is without controling of
Nouatians and Heretics, exercised by man's ministry in earth. S. Augustine
says hereof, thus: Christus est qui docet, De discipli. Christiana ca. vlt.
Cathedram in coelo habet, schola ipsius in terra est, and schola ipsius Corpus
ipsius est. It is Christ which teaches, and he has his pulpit in heaven, and
his schole in earth, and his schole is his body the church. Christ does not
then resign up his office of preaching, no more the^ he does his authority
of pardoning: no man succeeding him in either of the rooms, but occupies both
under him in his Church, It is proved that it dishonors God no more that
man should remitte sins in penance, then it does to forgive sins in
Baptism and extrem unction.
which is his inheritance for ever, the which Church holds by him as a
schole to teach truth in, as a court and judgment seat to pardon or punnish
sins in. Thus he.

But to bear down the Adversaries of truth fully, we will join with them
touching the sacrament of extreme unction, the sacrament of Baptism, and such
other: in which they can not, nor do not deny, concerning one of them, but
man without al derogatio^ to Gods honor, remitteth sins. And how can it here
seem strange, that in the sacrament of penance God should by man's office
remit mortal crimes, seeing it can not be denied, but God uses, not only man's
ministry, but also the external service of bare and base water, which is much
inferior by nature and dignity to a Priest or any other man, to take away
sins both original and actual, in the sacrament of Baptism, in which
sacrament, seeing as well ye Priest is the minister, as the water an instrument
whereby God remitteth al sins, be they never so many and grieuouse, whether
they be committed by our own act, or by our Fathers offspring: why does it
dishonor God any more, that the Priest should be the minister of remission
in the Sacrament of Penance, then it does by as great an office almost, in
remitting of sins in the Sacrament of Baptism? Again, Cap. vlt.
read the Epistle of S. James, and you shall find the Priest made a Minister,
the oil an instrument in the extremity of sickness, to forgive sins: how
much more then is the Priest without any imparing of Gods power, the woorker
under him of our reconciliation, and pardoning in the Sacrament of Penance: in
which especially the grace of God is given above all other Sacraments, to
that only end and purpose.

I may be more bold to use this comparing of sundry Sacraments together,
because not only Saint Ambrose refuteth the Father of this fond heresy by
the same reason, but also because most of the Doctors of ye Church do
confess, that she ever had these ways to remitte man's sins by, without all
derogation to Christ's sovereignty herein, of whom only she holds her
right, as well in the Sacrament of Penance, as in Baptism or extreme Unction.
S. Chrysostom says: Neque enim solum cum nos regenerant, De Sace^ lib. 3.
sed postea etiam condonandorum nobis peccatoru^ potestatem obtine^t:
infirmatur (inquit) inter vos aliquis? Accersat presbyteros ecclesiae: Neither
have Priests power in baptism only, but afterward also they have good authority
to forgive our sins: Is any man feeble amongst you, says he? Call for the
Priests of the Church, let them say prayers over him, and annoynte him with
oil: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and if he be in sins, they
shall be forgeuen him. But this sacrament instituted by gods word and Christ's
authority, used of old, and well known to all the Fathers, is now become
nothing in our building. Sin is now a days so favored, that no sacrament may
be abide^ for the release thereof. The very express words of scripture can take
no place, where flattering of wickedness and fantasy rules to the contrary.

There be some that affirm, this annoylinge to have been a miraculouse
practice to take away the diseases of the sick, and therefore that it did decay
with the working of other the like miracles, which after the spring of our
religion were not usual. Ita Caluinus. The Protestants gloss against extrem
unction dissolved.
But that is a fo^d gloss. For I ask of them whether the people then
christianed, were instructed or rather commanded, to call for the Apostles or
others, to heal them miraculouslie of their diseases? Or whether all Priests
had the gift of woorking miracles in the Primitive Church? If they say, yea,
touching the first point, then as well were they charged to send for them to
revive them, after theye were dead, because the Apostles so could do when
they saw occasion, and so did by some. But that is plain absurd and false,
that ever Apostle gave in charge to any man, much less to make a general
precepte (as S. James here does) to seek after miracles: for that were to
tempte God.

And for the setconde, they are not so unreasonable to answer me, that all
priests could work miracles, which is a several gift of the Holy ghost,
from the power of their ministry, and therefore S. James would not have
charged the sick persons to have called indifferently for priests, to heal
them miraculously, the gift of miracles being not common to them all, nor
perpetually promised to any one of them al.

Again I would know of them, whether there was any miraculous healing that had
the remission of sins joined unto it, or to the external creature by which
they healed any person? If they say yea, then it follows, that the priests
might by the office of that creature, heal a man of his sins, which they
affirm to be blasphemy, and dishonor to God. But to what absurdity so ever
you bring them, they will not confess mortal men in external sacraments to
remitte sins.

In the sacrament of Baptism they will not stand with me openly: for they will
seem to acknowledge ye forgeuenes of sins thereby, and I think by the
ministry of man to, though in their private schools, yea and in their open
blasphemous books, the whole pack of Protestauntes and Zuinglians deny that
sacrament also to remitte sins, The protestants injurious to the power of
remission of sins in Baptism also.
both acknowledging that children may be saved and be received to heaven with
out it, and auouching that sin remains still in the children after their
Christendom, though God will not impute the same unto them for the
hinderaunce of their salvation. Which false doctrine is the ground of their
more subtle opinions touching only faith, and imputed justice, and other their
pelting paradoxes concerning man's justification, which I can not now stand
upon. Would God the ignorant sort of their folowers could see through the
dunghill of this confuse doctrine. Protestants profess openly, otherwise the^
they teach secretly as Epicurus did.
For these have ever besides the florishe of their faith that they make abroad
amongst fools, a^ other more improbable which they keep for the strong ones
at home, that will no more be offended to hear the Turkishe, then the
Christian faith. And so had the Epicure, as Tullie teaches. For pleasure of ye
mind gatherd by contentation and contemplation of heavenly things was his
chief God and extreme end of his endeuoures abroad, but his dearlings at home
had the pleasure of the bodily lusts, and wantonness for the end of all
goodness.

Well, but I will reason with the^ upon ye ground of their owtward and public
profession, yt Baptism is a sacrament, in which truly sins be remitted by ye
ministry of men, and without al dishonor of God, seeing it was Gods own
ordinance and apoyntme^t. But hear S. Ambrose again, I pray you, encontering
in this matter with our men's masters: Ibidem
Cur baptisatis (says he) si per hominem peccata dimitti non licet? in
baptismo vtique remissio peccatorum omnium est. Quid interest, vtrum per
poenitentiam, an per lauacrum hoc ius sibi datum sacerdotes vendicent. vnumin
vtro que ministerium est: sed dices: quia in lauacro operatur mysterioru^
gratia. Quid in poenitentia, The mynistery for remission of sins al one in
Baptism and penance.
non Dei nomen operatur? Why do they baptize, if man may not remit sins? for
surely in baptism all sins be remitted: and what difference (I beseech you)
whether priests challenge this gift to be theirs in baptism, or in penance?
The ministry of man is like in both. But you will reply perchance, that in
baptism the grace of the ministeries woorketh: And what woorketh I pray you,
in penance? Does not Gods name bring all to pass there also? Thus he.

But here, good Reader, mark diligently in this doctors words, as also in
other the like of al ancient fathers, that penance is not here taken for any
virtue either moral or theological, which is in a private man when he
ame^deth or changes his purpose, Sacramental penance and repentance is not
all one.
or former evil life to the better: whereof there was some shade amongst the
heathen, and is now both commended in scripture and given man by Christ's
grace, not only before the receiving of the sacrament of Baptism, if the
party were in case of actual dedly sin, but also goes always as a
necessary preparatiue before sacramental confession: and is called in our
tongue properly repentance: this doctor therefore speaks not of this kind of
penite^ce, but of a publik act of the Church, touching the reconciliation or
reparing of man's state defiled after his baptism by grievous crimes, in which
by the priests judgment the sins committed be either pardoned, or punished.
And this must not be called repentance only, or the amendment of life, as
Heretics do term it, to confound the distinct doctrine of Gods truth and
Sacraments, but it is an external and visible action appointed by Christ in
the xx. of S. John, to reconcile sinners by the form of absoluing, which the
Church uses in the name and invocation of God for that purpose. What
sacramental penance is.
And therefore, having the grace of God and remission of sins joined unto it
by Christ's promise, it must needs be a sacrament, as Baptyme is: which all
the fathers do insinuate, when they make penance to be one prescribed
ordinance of Christ, to forgive sins by no less then Baptine is. Neither
was it the preaching of the gospel, nor the inward sorowfullnesse or
repentance of former sins, Nouatus denied not repe^ta^ce, but the sacrament
of penance, and so do the protestants.
that Nouatus did condemn: but it was the sacrament of penance, and act of
absolution, by the priests ministry, which he so much abhorred, and meant
wickedly to remove. For which cause as he was justly condemned of heresy by
the Romain and Nice Cou^cells, so were you, master Protestauntes, both then in
them, and since in your masters, wiclif, Luther, Calvin and the like,
accursed by Gods Church and councels.

The doctors therefore, as I have said, join lightly in talking of remission
of sins, Baptism, and penance, and sometime extreme unction also, that you
need not doubt but they took them all three for sacraments working remission
of sins. For they do not talk of inward repentance, but of an action
sole^ly exercised in Gods Church, whereof ye priest, as you hear by S. Ambrose
and S. Chrysosto^, is the minister. And therefore Epiphanius, says, that ye
Church has two penau^ces, one after another, insinuating thereby, the duble act
of the Church and sacrament, Here Is. 38 Lib. 4.
whereby sins be remitted. As S. Augustine also says by the Nouatians, quod
poenitentiam denegant, that they deny penance. By which penance, ^ap. 30. de
Sap.
Lactantius teaches us also a way to discern ye true Church from the false, as
in which, there is both confession and penance for the healing of man's
frayltie. Whereby it is evident, that this penance which they speak of, was
an usual ceremony and holy sacrament of the Church, whereby sins were
remitted.

Which truth. S. Cyril utters most plainly for our purpose, In 20. Io.
treating thus upon the words of institution of this sacrament: Cum ipsi
remittunt aut detinent, spiritus qui habitat in eis, per ipsos remittit aut
detinet, fit autem id duobus modis: primum, Baptismo, deinde Poenitentia. When
the priests remit sins, or retain them, the holy Ghost which dwells in
them does remit or retain by them, which is done two manner of ways: first in
Baptism, and then afterward in penance. Sermon. de Baptis. Christi.
S. Cyprian also said, that the holy Ghost woorketh remission of sins,
whether it be in baptism, or by other sacraments. Whereby he clearly utters
his meaning, that there should be more sacraments then one, instituted by
Christ for that purpose. In all which congruity of Gods holy woorking, by
diverse sacraments, the remission of sins, we conclude against Heresy, that
the priests power herein, derogateth no more to God nor our Savior, in the
sacrament of penance, then it does before by baptism, or after by extreme
Vnctio^: in none of al which as I have proved before, Christ vvoorketh the
effect in all sacraments, though man minister them.
Christ does resign his power and proper jurisdiction to the priests, but
continuing everlastingly in like pre-eminence and power as before, woorketh his
grace and remission of sins, in all these Sacraments, by the priests service
and ministry, that it may be yet as truly, as in his life time said, and so
shall be to the worlds end, Christ baptiseth, Christ shriueth, assoileth and
a^nointeth sinners for remission of their offenses: although Jesus does none
of these now, nor much did in his life time, but his Disciples then, and his
Disciples now, do the same holy actions in his name.

To conclude this matter, I argue thus: It is no dishonor to God, for ye
priest to remitte sins, as well original as actual, of al sorts and
gravity in the sacrament of Baptism, by the Protestants own confession, nor
by extreme unction, by the warrant both of scriptures and doctors: ergo,
remission of sins is not unlawful, nor dishonorable to God, to be given by
the priest in the solemn sacrament of Penance. And further, I join with them
thus: The word of God is much more plain and express for the priests
warrant to remit sins in Penance, then in baptism: but they may lawfully
do it in Baptism, ergo they may do it no less lawfully in Penance.
Compare the words of institution of them both, and judge your selves of your
indifferency and sincerity, by what right you may remove the one, and retain
the other.

Nouatus and the Protestants of our time compared.
I pray God, you seek not shortly to baptize us only by your preaching, as you
now will only absolve us by the same. But truly, I think you be in the case
that S. Ambrose took Nouatus your forefather to have been in, not only for
that, that he says, Nouatus where he listed would admit power to priests of
remission: Vbi supra
But where he listed not, there the grace given to them must be dishonor to
God. So that of things equally commended by scripture, and commuanded by God,
the good man must have choice for his toothe, not only in this point, I now
compare our choice men, but much more in that which follows in the said S.
Ambrose of all Nouatians, whom he trippeth pretily with this term, delicati
mei: my delicate gentlemen (says he) with their lusty looks, and swelling
hearts, ca^ not abide in their bruaery to look upon a poor caitiffe weping for
his sins abundantly, apparelled mourningly, in sad and sorrowful company,
and so furthe.

And this surely is the disease of our days, The disease of this time.
which has not only infected the unfaithful, but also has made these holy
things lothsom even to the better sort of Gods people. So much is man's will
and pleasure pampered, where Gods word and writing should be only
followed. For the necessary bearing with such frayltie, even of the good,
almost generally, the Church of God has sought and allowed much more gentle
remedies, then the world had wont full gladly to bear for their grievous
sins.

And therefore the manner and order of Penance has been diverse in sundry Ages
and countries: Diverse vvayes of sacramental poenite^ce.
sometimes solemn which could be but once taken in all a man's life: somtymes
not solemn, but yet open and public, which might be iterated, as often as
man's mortal sins so required: other times private only betwixt the priest
and the penitent: Which is now used, and long has been, in a manner generally
through the whole world. Of al which diversities we will not now entreat, nor
for our matter the consideration of them is very needful, seeing that in all
sorts and in every of the sundry forms of doing penance, this is a most
firm principle, that the penitent had remission of sins, for which he did
penance, no otherwise but by the ministry of the priests. Therefore the
substance of the matter being one, of the diversity of use, and circumstances
which may be according to the time and manners of men altered, we need not much
to care. Baptism was once used with solemnity, at two or three principal
feasts of the year, for the time so required then, and the condition of the
people, yet the same sacrament of Baptism ministered now privately as occasion
serves by the birth of every child, is of the same force and grace now, that
it was then. Wherein to reprehende the wisdom of Gods Church, that is
assuredly ruled by the Spiritte of God, is over much wantonness of will, and
sedition not tolerable.

That remission of man's sins, has been joined often both in the law of
nature and Moses, to some external ceremomonies and sacrifices, whereof in the
old law Priests were the appointed ministers. The Ninth Chap.
LET no man, External sacraments ordained and ma^s ministry used for good
causes.
upon consideration of these things, either reprehend, or marvel at the
counsel and ordinance of God, that he being ha^ie to govern his creatures,
and amend or correct, pardon or punish every man's misdeedes by him self,
without all help and service of any other his subject natures, that it
pleases his wisdom for all that, to forgive sins no otherwise in his Church
but by external orders joined to man's ministry in sundry sacraments. In
sober consideration of these things, man's reason may well be satisfied, if he
can conceive, that it is the honor and estimation of our kind with almighty
God our maker, that he governs not our affairs only by him self in his
own person, but also that we be ruled and led in the ways of Gods will, by
one an other: that the majesty of God, which most appears in regiment, and
in remitting of sins, in correcting of vice and judgment, might be clearly
seen in our kind amongst our selves, to our comfort, and Gods no
disgracing nor dishonor at all. And therefore S. Augustine says of ye like
doubt of some in his days which would not be taught by man, In prefa. de
doct. Christ.
but by Gods own Spirit: Abiecta esset humana co^ditio si per homines
hominibus verbum suu^ Deus ministrare nolle videretur, Quomodo enim veru^
esset, quod dictum est: Templum enim Dei sanctum est, quod estis vos: si de
humano templo Deus responsa non redderet? Man's state were to base, if God would
not, that his word should be ministered by one man to an other. For how
should this truly be spoken: the temple of God is holy; the which temple you
are, if God gave not answers by man's temple? This is one great respect
surely, especially since the second person in Trinite took upon him our
nature, by whom the worthiness of mankind is much increased, and more fit then
ever before to serve each other, as in ye works yt be divine and properly by
nature belonging to God him self. Note well this.
An other respect why we should by external sacraments and man's ministry
receive grace and remission of sins, is ye singular respect had by God of
our infirmity, as well of mind as body. For the mind requires in her
assured deserving of damnation some external token, by which she may have good
cause to hope of mercy and grace. For wh^^ I know and assure my self that
original sin is remitted by Baptism, when I have once received the same,
then I am in no further doubt of my self nor any damnation for that sin,
which by the promise of God I have learned, shall be washed away thereby, as by
an external instrument in which he conueieth that henefite to my soul, if my
self by indispotion and unaptness do not hinder the assured fruct thereof. So
where after Baptism man's life is often defiled by grievous sins, The
comfort received by the sacrament of penance.
and God highly displeased therefore what an infinite treasure is it, and how
great a comfort to have an assured help thereof wrought so by ma^s ministry
in a visible action, that I may know (saving for mine own lack of convenient
disposition) my sins to be forgiven, and Gods mercy and favor to be
obtained again. We may conceive easly what a passing comfort it was to the
parties that heard sensibly, by the outward words of Christ's own mouth,
thy sins be forgiven thee. For though the said persons believing in Christ,
and lame^ting for their sins past, might have had some hope of remission by
Christ, though he had said no such thing unto them: yet he that perceives
not, what comfort of conscience, what inward joy of mind, what reioising of
the spirit they must needs have, that had Christ's testimony and blessing in
plain term, for the same purpose, he sees nothing at al.

As for my self, good Christian Reader, I am not so free from sin, woe is me
therefore, nor so void of man's affection, but as often I hear in the
sacrament of penance the priest, who to me then is Christ in full power of
pardoning, saing the words of absolution over me, me think truly I hear
the sweet voice of Christ saing with authority: thy sins be forgiven thee.
Whereof no mortal man shall ever forbid me to take hope and singular trust of
remission of sins with the passing comfort that thereon ensues. All these
that are without Christ's fold, seek not to hear this voice, for all their
load of sin, from the heavenly and inteare joy whereof they be as far, as
from the conceiving of the felicity to come in heaven it self. But let them
assure them selfs, that Christ writes with his holy finger al their sins,
though to Christ they will not now confess them, The euels which will grovve
in vva^t of sacramental penance.
whiles they refuse the power of remission that he both had, and has in earth
to the worlds end: without which outward solemn act of penance, man
should either despair of Gods mercy, and live in fear intolerable of
everlasting perishing, which often fall to timorous consciences, or else, which
is now of days more common, men would live in such passing presumption, and
vain security of heaven, that they would never till the very last breath of
their euel time, either be sorry for sin, or seek to do any good work at al.

This time shall testify with me herin, and the very diversity that is between
these our corrupt conditions, and the holy studies and endeavors of our
forefathers shall testify: but the days that yet are to come, must needs
most feel the smarte of it, when these that now have the direction of other
men's steps shall be gone, A great liklyhod of the lamentable state to come.
by whom for old discipline wherein they were brought up, some signs and
remnantes of virtue be continued in the world. For when they be spent, and
our yonkers that never heard of the Churches discipline, but have had their
full swinge in sin, with the instruction of a most wanton doctrine, shall be
the principal of the people, if this division so long continue (which God
forbid) into what terms shall truth and virtue be then brought? Me think I
see before hand, the lamentable state of things, and in a manner behold the
fructe of our only faith, of this bold presumption of Gods mercy, of
removing the discipline of penance, of refusing the only ordinance of God,
for remission of our mortal sins. Euel are we now, but a thousand parts
worse shall they be then, which in long nouseling in this naughty learning of
liberty shall be in perpetual woe, and have no feel nor sense thereof. And
all this must needs follow upon the lack of these outewarde acts and
external ways of pardoning and punishing offenses, appointed either for
man's present comfort and solace, or else to keep in awe the wantons of the
world by the rod of outeward discipline, which in the Church has ever
especially been observed in the sacrament of penance.

It were to tedious, further to declare how these external means of woorking
inward grace and remission of sins, be necessary for ye outewarde man,
External sacraments meet for the outevvard man.
which is sometimes refreshed, other whiles bridled, by things answerable as
well outewardly to the body, as inwardly to the mind. It is needless also to
treat at large, how it is necessary for the one and visible commonwealth of
Christ's Church, to agree together in all parts thereof, and be notoriously
known from all other sects and sorts of peoples, that do not profess
Christ's name, by the outewarde practice of all holy functions, by which God
has promised to give grace, remission and sanctification to all his faithful
subjects. All these considerations with many the like, may serve and satisfy
the quiet peaceable children of Christ's Church, that have learned to rest in
Christ's ordinance, though the causes thereof be not to them opened.

As for other that are ever doubting, and never setteled in their faith: that
always be learning, and yet never attein to knowledge: 2. Tim. 3.
that had rather understand much, then believe a little: such fellows, I must not
so much instruct, as by the scriptures and examples of allages, controlle and
confound if I may. Let them therefore be charged, Sacraments alvvaies used for
remission of sins.
that God has not only used from ye creation of man to bring up al people
that served him, in some especial ways of outward woorshipping, but has also,
these many worlds, delivered man from original and actual sins, by external
sacraments and sacrifices, Aug li. 6. co^tra Iul. cap. 3. Sacraments in the
law of nature.
not without the priests especial procurement and ministry therein. What did
circumcision instituted by God in the law of nature commanded to Abraham and
his seed and continued so many ages, even til Christ's law took place? Did
it not after a sort remitte sins? Was it any other thing, but an external
work in the face of the world? Was it not ministered by man? Did it derogate
any thing to the honor of God, which by him self, for his own glory and
name sake was ordained? And afterward in the law of Moses, which did draw
nerer unto Christian vsages, by many actions of sacrifices and solemn rites
instituted purposely to represent and foreshew ye state of our present Church:
Sacraments in the law of Moses.
there we have plain proof of certain outward orders instituted for procuring
remission and pardon of sins: not without especial mention of the priests
ministry in every of the said actions. Whereof S. Paul speaks to ye
Hebrews, in these words: Cap. 9.
Omnia pene in sanguine mundari, ac sine sanguinis effusione non esse
remissionem. That all things were in a manner cle^sed by blood, and that no
remission could be had without blood. Leuit. 17.
For so in the xvij. of Leuiticus, they were charged to abstain from drinking
of blood: because, sanguis animalium pro piaculo est, the blood of beasts
stood for an expiation and cleansing of sins. And therefore, Cap. 4.
amongst the diverse orders of sacrifice, mentioned in the said book of their
ceremonies, there be diverse express ways by sacrifice to purge men's sins:
some for ye priests sins, other for ye Princes, and the third for the common
peoples offenses. And one way for their sins committed of ignorance an, other
for crimes wittingly done. Finally some for thoughts, and other some for evil
deeds, with many more diversities, as you may see in the said book. In all
which it is ever expressed, that the priest is not only the minister in the
said sacrifice (as needs he must be) but also, with offering of the said
oblations for sin, that he must make prayer especially for the offenders,
and every of them severally, that God may pardon them of that sin, for which
they offer their sacrifice. For always after the form and manner of offering
be prescribed, according to the diversity of the peoples offenses, it is added:
Rogabitque pro eo sacerdos and pro peccato eius, and dimittetur ei. And the
priest shall pray for him, and for his sin, and it shall be forgiven him. And
again, Agat poenitentiam pro pec^ato, and offerat de gregibus agnam sieve
capram, orabit que pro ea sacerdos, and pro peccatis eius. Let the soul do
penance, and offer a kidde of the flock, or an ewe lamb, and so the priest
shall pray for that soul and the sins thereof.

All which, does not only convince, that Gods will was, that remission of
sins should be had, by external sacrifices, penance and oblatio^, and that
not otherwise but by the priests mediation, Confession used to the priest even
in the old law.
but also that there was an order even then often in the old law, that man
should utter his sins, with the greuousnesse thereof and circumstances: that
according to the difference of the faults the diversity of sacrifices and
expiation might be used, and that the priest severally might pray for the
remission thereof. In all which doing, I will not now dispute, whether a
carnal Jew that then had no further respect, but to the present observation
of those commanded Ceremonies and sacrifices, did obtain thereby remission of
sins, by which the soul is reconciled to God: or else only a fredo^ from
some temporal punishment due to the same by law amongst the people, or
otherwise by Gods appointment, but most sure it is, that the spiritual
sort, which from those sacrifices did not separate but include Christ's blood,
August. super Nu. 25. et Leo sermon. 3. de nati. Domini.
in respect whereof, all their sacrifices had their force, though not so full as
ours now have, nor with so ample promise of Gods grace: yet sure it is, yt
they by faith in Christ, and yet not without those obseruatio^s, which it was
necessary that they should then keep, were sanctified and purged verily from
their sins, External elements be not taken a way by the new law, but more
grace is put to them.
nor without the ministry of the priest, whose prayer and sacrifice was
requisite for the same purpose.

Neither were all external ways of Gods worship and remission of sins,
abrogated by the Gospel, as some do falsely feign, but, to the external
elements, that now eue^ in the new law be instituted for grace and remission
of sins, Gods favor is given and granted a great deal more fully, and
sanctification more plentifully. For else, let us with penance reject
baptism, and al other ways of Gods service, yt be not only internal and
separated wholly from outward elements of water, bread, wine, impositio^ of
hands, oil and such like: which, if they dare not do, how ca^ they avouch that
God remitted not sins by external sacraments? or, not by the hands of
priesthod? seeing without ye order, none these holy acts ca^ be duly
ministered. Seeing then yt almighty god of his passing wisdom and careful
providence toward man, has remitted sins in all ages, as by ye ministry of
man in outewarde solemn ceremonies, as by circu^cisio^ in the law of nature,
and by ye same in Moses government, besides many other sacrifices used and
commanded for diverse sins actual both greater and less: how ca^ it be
otherwise, but there should be sacraments ordained in ye new law: first for
remitting of original sins, and other of al sorts at our first entrance
into Christ's house, and the^ an other, for more grievous actual offenses
co^mited by relapse after Baptism. For else ye law should not fully in figure
foreshew ye truth, and great grace of our sacraments to come, whereof
lightly, by Gods appointment it did bear a plain and express rese^bla^ce.

But besides these foresaid sacrifices, Iudiciarie power for remission of
sins prefigured in the old law.
in which sins were after their manner remitted, there was an other usual
act practiced by ye priests, which did more properly prefigurate and
represe^t our sacrament of penance, and ye priests authority in ye new law,
concerning ye judgment of our souls, and ye exact discussing of our
misdeades. For neither circu^cisio^, nor sacrifice of old had any face of
power iudiciarie, and therefore could not exactly represent, our priests
power given the^ by Christ, for ye judgment of our sins. But ye authority
given the^ in ye law to discern, shut up and separate ye leprous and unclean
persons, from other ye clean of ye people, did plainly represent our sacrament
of penance: whereunto by ye doctors it is often rese^bled, wherein order is
taken, ye xiij. and xiiij of Leuiticus, Leuit. 13. and 14.
ye authority and practice thereof being often allowed by our master
Christ, who observed the laws so hu^blie therein, yt he always, after he had
healed any suth separated persons, sent them for all that to the priests
afterward, to offer their oblations prescribed by the law for the same.

And that this power of pronouncing the leapers to be sound or sore, to be
separated or admitted to the company of faithful, did represent the power of
priesthode, Supra Epist. Iacobi.
concerning the leprosy of our souls not only S. Bid, but S. Chrysostom
also does declare. For he talking of confession of sins to the priest,
writes thus: Quamuis leprae immu^ditiam iuxta lege^ sacerdoti pandamus, atque
ad eius arbitrium qualiter and quanto tempore insserit purificari curemus. The
uncleanness of the more grievous leprosy (he means deadly sin) let us open
to the priest, and according to his arbitreme^t, how so ever he bids us, and
how long so ever he commands us, let us seek to purify our selves. In
Math. ^^
And S. Jerome: Quomodo ergo tibi, le prosum sacerdos, mundum vel immundum
fecit, sic and hic alligat, vel soluit Episcopus and presbyter, no^ eos qui
insontes sunt vel noxij, sed pro officio suo cu^ peccatorum audierit
varietates, scit qui ligandus sit, quiue soluendus. Look therefore (says he)
how the priest makes there in the old low a person clean or unclean, so
here does the Bishop or Priest bind or loose, not binding the innocent, nor
loosing the guilty, but when he has heard the variety and diversity of the
sins, then he knows, whom to loose, and whom to bind.

This place is very plain for confession and distinct rekening of every of
our mortal sins. Distinct. confession of mortal sins proved to be
necessary.
The which the holy doctor proves to be necessary, because else the priest of
God could not do justice in punishing and pardoning, but should of ignorance
either bind the good or loose the wicked. In which case Almighty God that
knows exactlie the woorthines and unworthiness of all persons, will not allow
the priests sentence that did proceed of ignorance, but will him self give
judgment according to the parties deserving. For ye priest is but a minister of
his sacrament, and not ye lord and instituter thereof, he must therefore co^form
him self to Gods, will whose place he there occupies. For as ye priest in ye
old law could not make ye clea^ person to be unclean, no more ca^ ye priest of
ye new law bind ye innocent, or absolve ye person yt continues in sin.
Never ye less ye priest works more properly under God touching ye remission
of sins, because he is here appointed ye minister of grace and reco^ciliatio^,
then ye priest in the old law. For there in ye making of any man hole of ye
leprosy, or other uncleanness, the priest had not to do at al, Note the
difference betvvi^t the prist office of of the old law, and the priests est
the nevve for this matter.
but only when was made hole by God, it was ye priests office to discern ye
same, to show it unto yt peoole, and to admit him again into ye fellowship
of ye residewe, after oblatio^ made for ye purpos^. For to them it was not
said, who^ so ever you punish whith leprosy or make unclean, he shall have a
leprosy, or who^ soever you heal and make clean, he shall be whole: no such
promise was made unto the^. for it was enough, yt it might represe^t and have
some rese^blau^ce of our Sacrament of penance, and of ye maruelouse authority
given in ye new law to our priests concerning ye remission of sins. For to
ours it was not said, you shall discern who^ I have loosed alredie in heaven,
and show to the world who^ I have retained bound, or not fo^giue^ in heaven:
but, as S. Hilarie says, ye priests sentence is made prejudicial to God in
heaven, not yt the priests forgiven is first and them Gods afterward as two
distinct actions in time, but because ye pristes, is prius quo ad nos, as ye
Philosophers do term such things, and by ye pristes worck which is plain to
us we straight com to ye knowledge of Gods like work of remission in heaven,
which is prius natura, because Gods actio^ is ye principal and ma^s must
necessarily depend thereon. Consider well how the vvorck of God and man join
together is all sacraments
But else both Gods work and man's run jointly together in remission of sins,
as al instrume^tal and seco^dary causes never make a several actio^ from ye
principal, but they co^cur jointly to every effect, as it is most plain in all
sacraments whereby God works grace, ye which grace, as it proceeds from God,
so it comes by ma^s service, not by distinct operation of the principal, and
the serving and secondarie causes, but in one work and undivided operation of
them both. For in baptism God woorketh not the remission of original or
actual sins first, and then sends the party to the fount afterward, that
the priest therein may declare what God has wrought before, or to work the
same again, that so the party might have a double grace of remission, first
by God, and then by the priest: for that were foolish to surmise. But God by
the priests ministry and the sacrament does remit sins so, that the action
hereof, at once fitly may fall upon them both.

And so it is in penance, where God the principal, and the priest the
secondarie or seruisable cause jointly forgive to gether. For so the words of
institution of this sacrament, do most plainly convince: whose sins you
shall forgive, they be forgiven: he speaks in ye present tense, as though he
would say, as you forgive them, or retein the^, ipso facto I forgive them, or
retein them. And therefore, saving the honor of the Master of Sentences, The
Master of the Sentences his error.
he had not good consideration when he did hold (as some other did after him)
that first ma^s sins be remitted by God in his contrition and purpose to come
to the Sacrament: and afterward, the same remission to be declared by the
Priest, and as it were confirm^d by his approbation in confession: being
therein partly deceived by the saying of S. Hierom before alleged, whom he
took, perchance, to have compared in all respects, the office of the old
Priests, for the view of the unclean, and ours of the new law, in the
judgment used upon man's sins: and partly, as I take it, by a sentence of
S. Augustine, which compared together the receiving of Lazarus by Christ, and
the Disciples loosing his bands, to Christ's pardoning of our sins first,
and then the Priests loosing the same afterward in the face of the Church.

This, to be short, De verbis Dimini. ser. 8.
is a piece of S. Augustines sentence: Qu^d ergo facit ecclesia, cui dictum
est: Quae solueritis in terra, erunt soluta: nisi quod ait Dominus, soluite
illum, and sinite abire: what does the Church then, to whom it was said: what
so ever you loose, it shall be loosed? Marie, she does that which our Lord
said, loose him and let him go. Wherein S. Augustine means nothing else, but
that Christ is the principal agent, and that he proprelie does give life to
the soul, the Priest for all that, being his servant and minister therein, and
therefore by nature is a later age^t, in the same work, which else, as I have
proved jointly pertains to them both, for that the effect of a Sacrament
comes not to any man til it be received, except it be in certain cases of
necessity, where the parties can not obtain the external use of the appointed
elemente, though they earnestly desire the same.

But how the old Priests office touching the Lepers of the law, represents
our Sacrament of the Priests ministry in the new Testament, and how far
ours, which is the truth, excels that which was but a shadow of ours,
Saint Chrysostom does excellently declare: and therewith fully may put out
of doubt all men, that our Priests proprelie work remission of sins, as
Ministers in the same Divine action, and not as declarers or approuers of that
effect. which before was wrought by God him self. Thus he says: De Sacer.
Lib. 3.
Corporis lepram purgare, seu verius dicam, haud purgare quidem, sed purgatos
probare, Iudaeorum sacerdotibus solis licebat: at vero nostris sacerdotibus,
non corporis lepram, verum animae sordes non dico purgatas probare, sed purgare
prorsus concessum est: Quamobrem meo iudicio, Priests of the old law, did but
discern the lepre of the body, Priests of the new law purge the filth of the
soul.
qui istos despiciunt contemnuntque, multo sceleratiores ac maiori supplicio
digni fuerint, quam fuerit Dathan vna cum suis omnibus. That is to say: To
purge the leprosy of the body, or else to say as it was in deed, not to
purge, but to discern who were clean, was granted only to the Priests of
the old law: but it is fully granted to our Priests not to purge the bodily
leprosy, nor to show who are cleaner purged, but verelie to purge the very
filth of man's soul. Therefore by my judgment, who so ever do contemn or
despise them, they are much more wicked and more worthy punnishme^t, then the
disobedient Dathan with all his company. Thus says this holy Father, with many
words more, which were worthy al consideration, and remembrance in this case,
if the matter were not so abundant, that it may not suffer over long abode in
one place, least injury be done to other branches of the cause, no less
necessary to be known for full upholding the truth thereof.

Now upon all this foresaid declaration, it may be well understood, that our
Adversaries have small reason in reprehending the ordinance of God, who is
proved in all ages and diversities of laws, to have given grace and remission
of sins, not only by external elements, and actions of diverse ceremonies,
Sacraments, and sacrifices: but also ever to have dispensed the said
benefits, by man's service and ministry, without al dishonor of his
personage, or diminishing his own propre interest and right therein. And so
much more has he used in the new law of the Gospel, the ministry of ye
Priests and external sacraments, to the procuring of the said benefits, by
how much more, our law, our sacraments, our sacrifices, and our Priests, be
glorified and preferred in respect of ye old, Chrisost. ibidem.
and have the more abundant blessing of the spirit, and Christ's blood, which
by these conduites, most largely flow to al men's souls, that despise not the
blessed benefit thereof.

Yet if they will not be satisfied herewith, Spiritual contemners of man's
ministry.
because they surmise our new law to be so spiritual, that man may look for
nothing at man's hands, but al immediately of God and his spirit, for by him
they will be taught the meaning of the scripture, by him they will be baptized,
by him they must have remission and absolution, and at length they are become
Anabaptists, and refuse to obey Prelates of the Church, and Princes of the
world, because by God they will only be ruled and punnished for their
offenses. In Prolog. li 1. de doct. Christ.
Against such proud cogitations, as S. Augustine terms them, God has
purposely, to teach humility and obedience one to an other, both in temporal
causes, and especially in spiritual matters perteining to men's sins and
souls, he has (say) for the nonst, not only instituted these ways of baser
creatures used in ye sacraments, to atteine his grace by, but also has made
man, the master almost and executor of his meaning in ye same, whose service
he uses so much for our salvation yt he sticked not to se^d his most chosen
and dearest even of those days of grace and plentifulnesse of the spirit, to
be instructed by man, and made ready for his ministry no otherwise but by man.

A strange thing surely, and to be well noted for this purpose, Note the
practice of God, for the confirmation of man's ministry.
not only of our Adversaries for their confusion, but of the good studiouse
Readers for their instruction: how that Paul being prostrate, and
miraculoussie called by Jesus Christ's own voice, was yet sent by Christ him
self, to confirm the authority of his Priests, to Ananias, of him to receive
as well instructions, as the Sacraments of the Church, for his incorporation
to the faithful, Act. 9.
and remission of all his sins past. And again, that Cornelius, Ibid. 10.
though his prayers were heard, and his alms acceptable to God, and an Angel
sent unto him to declare the same, which was a sign of high reputation, was
yet charged to go to Peter, of him not only to receive the Sacraments, but
also by his instruction to learn, what to believe, what to hope, and what to
love, says Saint Augustine. The Eunuche, Ibid 8.
might by God him self in his own country, have been schooled or sanctified,
and yet it pleased his Majesty so to use the matter, that by Philip both the
sense of scripture, and the Sacrament of Baptism should be understood and
received at once.

So has God in all ages confirmed the authority of his holy Priests and
Ministers, and so has he ever checked by his own holy examples the
presumptuous temptation of man, who ever has disdained man's office and
ministry for his own salvation. Therefore let no man marueil, why Christ has
given authority to man to forgive sins, seeing he has from the beginning,
not remitted ordinarily otherwise then by man's service, nor any way else, for
ye most part, but by external acts of ceremonies, sacraments, and sacrifices,
that we may learn thereby humility, and obedience to Gods ordinance, by the
warrante whereof they al (as I have proved) challenge al manner of interest in ye
government of our souls.

Much more might be said out of diverse holy Fathers, much out of the decrees
as well of Bishops as Councils: the authority whereof no Christian Catholic
did ever reject. In Lateran, in Florence, Can. 21. Tract de Sacra. De Poen.
and in Trent Councels, Penance is decreed to be a sacrament: and of necessity
to al such as fall into deadly sin after Baptism. The minister thereof by
their holy determination, is a Priest laufully ordered: the remission of sins
is in them al, challenged to be his right, not only by declaration that God has
or will pardon them, nor by the preaching of the Gospel, nor any other ways
newely devised by the Devil to delude Christ's ordinance, and misconstrue his
plain words: But proprely is the Priest proved, to be the minister under God
of reconciliation, and therefore, may by his words, absolve men, in the said
sacrament, of their sins, as in Christ's own steed, whose honorable
judgment seat, by his commission, and the holy Ghostes assistance, he does
laufully possess.

And so surely, does Gods ministers hold this power and prehemine^ce, that no
power or dignity of man could ever be so well warranted and approved by Gods
own word, and practice of all ages and nations christened, as this is. The
spiritual me^ hold by more clear evidence the^ any temporal Prince.
All the Princes in earth, though they reign full righteously, can not yet show
the tenth part of the evidence, yt Gods Priests can do, for their title of
remission of sins: and it booteth not me in this my base state to admonish
them though I heartily wish they would consider it, that the contempt of
spiritual jurisdiction and the dignity of Priesthode, falls at length to
the disobedience to all temporal power, and wicked contempt of civil
government also: The issue of heresy.
as in those disordered days, we may to our great grief behold, when, under
pretense of religion and Gods word, whereof they have no more respect surely
then the Devil him self has, they have disobeyed not only Peter's keys, but
also Cesars sword. Neither let any man think, that, where the bands of
conscience, the awe of Gods majesty, the fear of Hell and damnation, the hope
of heaven and salvation is removed, that there can be any civil obedience
long. Fear of man is much, flattery of man is more, but bond of conscience
passes them both. Thus therefore have Gods Priests made account of their
calling, and long practiced power of remitting and reteining the peoples
offenses.

Here it is proved, that by the right of the Priest in remitting sins, the
duty of all Christian people does necessarily rise for the confession of
every of their mortal sins unto him: as the same is also proved by the
doctrine of all holy Fathers of Christ's Church. The tenth Chap.
AND now I must advertise my loving brethren of the necessary sequel hereof,
which to some I know, seems so hard and unpleasant, that the very
consideration thereof has driven many, that have not felt the sweetness of
Gods Spirit, by which every of his co^maundeme^ts be they never so rough in
appearance, are made easy and delectable, to the fear, misliking, and
lothsomnesse of the Sacrament of Penance. Which, as it is, for other causes
many, much abhorred of the wa^tons lately departed out of the Church and of
some worldly Catholics to, that be not so zelouse in following truth, as they be
disirouse to know truth: Why confession is counted so burdenous to many.
so it is most lothed and feared, for that in it, there is required a
distinct, simple, sincere and plain confession to be made of every sin that
is known or suspected so be mortal, unto a Priest, which is the lauful
minister of the same Sacrament, with such diligent and exact examination of our
consciences, as a matter of such importance does of reason require. That is the
great offense and stay, that the weaklinges of Christ's Church do so
earnestly respect: and so long they shall be vexed and molested in mind with
the sour remembrance thereof, as they do not prove the sweet, gracious, and
incomparable effect ensuing most assuredly thereon: Considerations to be had
for remoui^g the impediments of confession.
so long shall they stumble at so small a straw, as they do not feel the
burden of sin, fear the pains of hell, follow the quiet of conscience,
foresee the dreadful day of judgment: so long shall they be bashful to submit
them selves, to one man's most close, secreat, meek and merciful judgment, as
they fear not the infinite shame, open horrible confusion, and everlasting
rebuke before God, Angel, Man, and Devil, at the seat and sentence that shall be
pronounced in the face of al creatures, which must fall to them, that close up
under cover and compass of their conscience, such a number of manifold
sins, whereof in that day both account and confession must be made to their
uttermost confusion. Finally, so long shall ma^s will and corrupted nature
disobey Gods ordinance herein, as he earnestly and humbly seeks not by prayer
at Christ's hands, the grace and gift of obedience and repentance: for as ye
fulfilling of every of Gods commaundeme^ts, can not otherwise be had, but by
his special favor, so says S. Augustine, De fide ad Petru^. Cap. 31.
or as some think rather Fulgentius: Firmissime ^ene, and nullarenus duhites,
neminem his posse hominem poenitentiam agere, nisi que^ Deus illuminauerit, and
gratuita sua miseratione conuertit: Hold this for an assurance, that no man can
here do penance, except he be illumined and converted theavnto by his singular
mercy. Neither does this Doctor mean of any other way of repentance then is
used for mortal sins after baptism in ye sacrament of ye church, putting
there, in a manner by expres words a doble sacrament, one for original sin, yt
is in children only and yt he calls Sacramentu^ fidei, ye other ^or sins
afterward committed, which he terms, Poenitentiam, Penance.

And let no man think ye true repentance can be in any or effectual for the
remission of sins, if he follow not the appointed ordinance of God for
remission of sins. For I dare be bold to say, that, as since the time that
our Saviors words took place: Nisi quis renatus fuerit, Except a man be borne
again of water and the holy Ghost, he can not enter into the kingdom of
heaven that since these words, no man can be saved about Baptism: so likewise
since Christ spak these words, whose sins you do forgive, they be forgiven
I dare say never man was saved, nor can be saved, yt either co^teinneth or
neglects confession, or earnestly seeks not for it, if he fall in relapse of
deadly crimes after his baptism. I will speak it plainly, because I would
have it thought on earnestly. As no man ordinarily ca^ be saved without
baptism: so can no man yt ever after Baptism, commits deadly sin, be
saved without sacrame^tal confession, or ye earnest desire and seeking for ye
same. This may seem sharp to some, but this will prove true to al co^temners of
Gods ordinance. For when so ever God works his gifts and grace among me^, by
any ordinary means appointed for yt purpose, it is great sin to seek for ye
same either without it, or to presume to have it at Gods hands otherwise the^
he has prescribed: But ye sacrament of penance, and confession made to ye
priest, is ye appointed means yt God uses in his Church for remission of
mortal sins: therefore who so ever thinks to have remission immediately at Gods
hand, he shall first be void of his purpose, and then further be charged of
high presu^ption and contempt of his will and ordinance. The remission of
original sins as proprely pertains to God, as of mortal sins, yet because
Christ has instituted a Sacrament as an instrument and means to convey that
singular benefit to man, he that would now claim the same immediately at
Gods own hand, and therefore neglects the Sacrament of Baptism, or would
minister it to himself, without the Priests office, he should never obtain
remission of his original sin, but add to that, high presumption and
disobedience of Gods commandment, which of it self without original sin
were damnable.

And yet me think, I hear already the sound of the deceitful voices of our
Preachers: It is Christ's blood that remitteth sins: Matthew. 11.
Come to me all ye that be heavy loade^, and I shall refresh you. Esai. 43.
I am he, says the Lord, that puts away thy sins, with a thousand such
like: as though Christ's blood did not stand with Christ's ordininances and
Sacraments, as though they came not to Christ that keep the way of his will and
sacraments to come unto him: as though, God did not remitte those simes which
in his name, and in his sacraments, and by his appointed minister, be
remitted. Protestant, say plainly, will thou refuse baptism, because Christ's
blood washes away original sins? If thou dare not openly so preach,
although covertly thou may chance so inte^de, If remission of sins in
baptism may stand with Gods honor, to may ye in the sacr. of penance. Math.
ix.
how dare thou deceive the people, and draw the^ from penance and
confession, because Christ's blood does remitte sins? For if the one
sacrament, may stand with the honor of God, and with all those places that
thou bring so deceitfullie out of scripture, why may not ye other, seeing
both are proved alike to be instituded of Christ? For the same self savior
which said: Come to me ye that be laden, and I shall refreshe you: he and no
other said, except you be borne of water and the holy ghost, Joan. ^.
ye can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. The same God that said: Esai. 43.
I am he tha^ puts away thy sins: says now to the Apostles and
priests, whose sins you do forgive, forgiven be they. Io^n. 20. Psalm. 105.
The same Spirit of God that said in the prophet, Confess your selves to the
Lord, Iaco. 5.
for he is good, said now again in the Apostle, confess your sins one to
another, Origin. himil. 2. super per leui. Beda soper hunc locum.
that you may be saved. By which he means not, as Origin, venerable Bede, and
other do declare, so much brotherly acknowledging, for counsel or other
causes, the grief of mind each man to his fellow, as he does the order of
sacramental confession, to be made unto Gods priests, as it may well appear
by the circumsta^ce of the letter. For there he had willed them to send for
the priests of the church to annoile them, and straight after adds this
alleged text of confession and prayng over the sick.

The heretics practice in misvsing Gods word.
The which place the Heretics saw to sound so many ways, as well, toward the
sacrament of extreme Unction, as the sacrament of confession, both which they
have unworthily abandoned, that they thought it not amiss, either to deny
the Apostles authority and the whole epistle, as no peace of holy scripture,
as Luther and other did, or else which was after thought more handsome
conueiance, to corrupt the text, and write in stead of, send for the priests
of the Church: thus, call the elders of the congregation. For they thought it
might sound euel, to have in one sentence, priests, Church, consession,
remission of sins, realease of pains sor sin, a^noiling, prayng over the
sik, and so forth.

But that thou may see, The necessity of Confession stands not on positive
laws, but by Christ's institution.
good Christian Reader, the necessity of confession the better, and yt it is
not growe^ to such a general practice and opinion of necessity, upon any
charge given by man or positive laws mark well with me: that it depends
directly upon Christ's own words, whose sins you do forgive, they be
forgiven, and whose sins you do retain, they be retained: And therefore
sacramental confession to be of Christ's institution. For if Christ gave power
to priests to forgive, or to retain men's sins: then there must needs be
some subject to their power and judgment: else in vain were so large a
co^missio^ of binding and loosing men's sins, if the right of ye power did not
necessarily charg al men that have such sins, to be subject to their binding
and loosing. Therefore this is a clear cause, that in the very same words,
that the power was delivered to them, the bond of obedience was also
prescribed to us. So that after that day, no sins mortal could ordinarily
be loosed, but by them, and that sacrament, which in their ministry he then
did institute.

And that is yet more evident by the second part of Christ's sentence, where
he says: whose sins you do retain, they be retained. The which word
retinere, Hilar. super hunc locum.
by S. Hilarie signifies, no^ soluere, or no^ remittere: to retain is as much
as not loose, or not to forgive. Whereupon, by Christ's express words it
ensues, yt whose sins the priest does not forgive, they be not forgiven, and
therefore, that every man being guilty of deadly sin in his conscience, is
subject to ye priests judgment, by ye plain terms of Christ's own words.

Mary we must well note, yt the priest has in other sacraments, and namely in
Baptism, a right in remitting sins both original and actual, but there, in
ye graund pardon of all that is past, he is not made a judge, or a correcter:
Mark the difference betvvixte the priests office in remitting sins by
baptism and penance.
because the Church can not practice judgment or exercise discipline upon the
penitentes, for any things done before they came into the household, and
therefore can appoint the party no penance nor punishment, nor bind him
according to the diversity and number of his faults, nor can make search
exactlie of al his secret sins by him committed, that the sentence may
proceed according to ye parties deserts, but only upon his seking that
sacrament to minister it unto him, according to Christ's institution: Council
trident Cap. 2. sess. 14.
whereupon without any sentence of remission given by the priest, as I absolve
thee, or such like, a pardon general of all his sins, committed, if he come
thither qualified, most assuredly ensues. Damas. de ortha fide li. 4. Ca. 9


But now, in the other sacrament, of penance, not only pardon of sins, but
punishment for sins, is put in ye Apostles and priests hands, which can not
be don without iudiciarie power. and exact examination of the penitent: because
Christ would, that, if any did grievously sin after Baptsim, he should, as it
were, be conue^ted before his judgment seat in earth, in which as in his room
he has placed the Apostles and Priests, as is already proved. And therefore,
men's sins must in this case be known, with diversity of their kinds, and
increase, by diversity of place, time, person, number and intent. For without
this particular intelligence, can neither the appointed judges of our souls
do justice, nor the penitent receive justice for his offenses. Therefore it is
evident, that seeing this holy order is authorished not only to remit sins
generally, as in Baptism, but also placed with all power over us as ye judges
of our sins we must needs by force of Christ's institution be driven to
acknowledge and confess al our sins to ye priest so sitting in judgment upon
the examination of our co^scie^ces. For no man ever took upon him, not in
civil causes to determing and give sentence in the matter, whereof he has not
by some means or other, perfect and particular instruction, and in causes
criminal much less, because the importance of the matter is much more. Then
in Gods causes and cases of our conscience, and in things belonging directly
to man's everlasting wealth or woe, which is ye life or death perpetual of our
souls, there, if either negligence in ye judge in searching our sins, or
contempt in us in declaration, opening, confessing, or clear vttera^ce of
the^, do hinder ye righteousness of Gods iudgme^tes executed by the Priests
office, or driving the^ to give wrong sentence of delivery and remission, there
the peril is exceeding great, and ye da^nger well nere da^natio^ perpetual.

Neither may we think, yt this authority and approved power of Priests,
concerns only the open offenses, which by witness and proof may be
convinced, and deferred to the public Magistrates of the Church, as some
Protestants, confounding al places of like words and terms in Scripture,
do. Wherein they consider not, that the perfectness of the Gospel teaches
man willingly to accuse, 1. Cor. 11.
condemn, and judge him self, that he be not judged of our Lord. Neither
do they weigh, that this judgment of our sins, though it be ministered by
man, is yet the feat and court of Christ, to whom it no less pertains, to
bind or loose our secret sins, then our open offenses. And he without
exception, committed remission of all manner of sins unto the Apostles and
priests, saing: Like as my Father sent me, so do I send you: But Christ was
sent to heal the contrite and sorrowful of all sins, private and public:
therefore al manner of offenses, be they never so secret, belong to the priests
not only pardon, but also correction and punishment, whereof, because they be
men, they can not iustelie discern or determine, to remitte or retain, give
pardon or give penance, Marc. 10.
except they be confessed by the parties penitent. Christ him self, Note well.
perfectly seeing all diseases both of body and soul, and the inward sorrow
and suit of every man's heart, yet said to the sick man and blind: Quid vis
faciam tibi? what would thou have at my hands? And shall the priest being a
mortal man take upon him to give sentence of ye diseases of our souls, before
he know them, or pardon him that will not show unto him, wherein and for what
sin he asks a pardon? Furthermore the sins of manns cogitation, that ca^
not be discerned by the priest, without the confession of the party, be often
no less grievous and damnable before God, then the open offenses: therefore there
may be no doubt, but Christ has ordained mercy, as well for them, as other that
be actually committed, and subject to the light of the world, but yet no
otherwise but by the sacrament of penance, in which, without exception, the
priests have power to remitte or retain sins as well private as public.
Therefore ye same secrette sins being subject to ye Churches judgment no
less the^ ye open, they must needs be uttered and confessed, or else they ca^
not be released, much less have any enjoined penance for them

But it is mere wra^gling of our Adversaries in so plain a case, and folly in all other to doubt, whether secret offenses, even committed in thought only
against the two last commandementes forbidding unlawful coveting and desires
of the mind, be properly subject to the priests judgment, seeing they ca^ be
no otherwise released, but in the sacrament of penance, and sincere confession
of them. For here is practiced a judgment, Note well the difference between
the ciui^e judgment and the sacrame^tal.
not of civil Magistrates, which only punish by laws of all nations
actually committed faults against the weal Public, but of soul and
conscience, which properly perteine to the cure of priests, as they properly
occupy Christ's own room, to whose pardon or punnishement, not only open
sins, but also private offenses, either in deed or thought committed, do in
like perteine. For external Penance, or public, is rather used to satisfy
the Church of her right, in which sins can not openly be committed, but to
the great offense of her children, and therefore must in her, by public
Penance be corrected, for the example of discipline, and prouiso of the like
sins to come.

Moreover the sacrifices of the old Law were in many cases done by the
priests, as well for private sins as open, which could not be without the
confession of the penitent: ergo, much more the secrettes of our souls be
subject to our priests, to whom Christ has given al judgment. Yet all this
notwithstanding, there be some that keep them selves by vain excuse of sin,
from ye very principal point and pith of this sacrament, which is the
particular examination of a man's sins committed by thought, word, or
work, and will yet draw back, and hold, yt a general confession is enough with
terms universal, acknowledging a man's self to have sins by mind, word,
and deed, though he express not the several points thereof. But this opinion
is confuted, both by all the foresaid reasons, and other, as a most absurd and
wilful maintenance of sin. For by this rule, he that killed and murdered
thousands, should confess no more after his wicked acts then before,
Confession by a general clause is not sufficient to salvation not aunsvverable
to Christ's meaning.
nor no more then the innocentest man that lives. David's weeping and
confession should have been one after his dooble deadly sin committed, as
before in his innocence. Peter should not have more bitterly wept after his
forsaking of his master, then before. Neither should our confession then
pertein more to ourselves then to other, who by like general clauses may truly
make the like and the same confession: as it is now in the Church of England.
But the holy King David confessed not sins common to himself and other men,
but my sin, my wickedness, my impiety, says he, and this in confessing to
God that knew already his sins: How much more now, where Gods judgment is
exercised by man, that cannot discern our faults him self, must we confess
our sins, that he may rightly judge thereof?

Penance must be done for every of our sins. So Peter prescribed Simon the
sorcerer, when he attempted to have bought the gift of Gods Spirit, that he
should do penance for that especial grievous crime: Poenitentiam age, says
he, ab hac nequitia tua. Do penance for this thy wicked attempt, if perchance
God will forgive thee this abominable intent, Act. ^.
The man was baptized not long before, and then no such Penance was
prescribed for his most grievous and blasphemous practices of Nicromancie and
witch craft long exercised before. But now after he was of ye howsholde,
every sin that is grievous must severally be cured. Wherein this noughty pack
Simo^ Magus, is a thousand parts more religious the^ our new masters. For he
desired the Apostles to pray to God for him yt this sin might be forgiven
him, where these care no more for ye priest or Apostle concerning their sins,
then they do for dogs.

Again S. Paul did not only confess his sins by a general clause, but
acknowledged his own sins, 1. Tim. ^
wherein he in his own person had offended, he confessed he was of all sinners
greatest, that he had persecuted the Church of Christ, that he had obtained
commission to attache them that believed in Christ's name, and so forth. Such
as were faithful also at Ephesus, Act. 1^.
as we read in the xix. of the Acts, came to the Apostles, Et confiteban^ur
actus suos, and confessed their own proper acts and misdeades, In so much,
that certain which had followed unlawful arts, as Magike, Nicromancie, and
such like curiosity, confessed their faults, and burned their books before
all the people.

If the priests had nothing else to do with our sins, but as they had in
the old law to do with the leprous persons, that is to say, should only
discern, which were by God remitted or not remitted, they could not that do,
expcepte they saw the variety of the said sins, by man's confession. But now
seeing they have further interest in our matters, and must properly both pardon
and give just penance for sin, The benefit of a general Confession
how is it possible, they should do this without exact knowledge of every of
our grievous offenses? In deed a general confession, such as is often made in
divine service to God or his priests, such as be Catholic, does some times,
take away the common infirmities of our sinful life, that our light
trespaces be not imputed to us, or such, as we have so forgotten, that we can
not by any convenient search, call again to our remembrance: But other
greatter crimes and deadly sins, for which the sacrament of discipline was
instituted, and the priests judgment seat erected in the Church, are not
discharged before God, without several contrition, and distinct confession,
with ready intent of the penitent to accomplish such fructes of penance, as by
the priest shall be appointed for the satisfiyng for his sins.

And what a merueilouse disorde^ is brought into Christ's Church, by plain
flattery of our selves herein, whiles we hold that this general confession
is sufficient, we see by experience of these our evil days, The fructe of
this new doctrine.
where there is now put no difference betwixt small offenders and most
greuouse sinners, no diversity of penance, no more sorrow in one then in
other, no confession of the most wicked, no more then of the smallest sinner,
or most honest liver. A common murderer, a filty hooremunger, a daily
drunkerd, a false robber, a gredy extorcioner, confess as little, do as little
penance, lament as little, yea a great deal less, the^ ye honest sort of
people do, for much more small and fewer faults. All me^ repose them selfs
now of days, so much in Christ's passion, and their only no faith, that they
will neither confess to God nor man, neither sigh nor sorrow, nor do
satisfaction for their sins. Well, There must be in penance some
representation of Gods judgment to come.
let al men be assured, that God in the next world will not go by general
chapters, but will have an account of all our proper works and misdedes,
till it come to our idle words and vain thoughts. The which judgment,
because Gods Churches and Ministers sentence, to whom Christ gave all judgment
of our sins in earth, does most clearly resemble, we may be out of doubt,
that the like particular discussing and examination of our own selves, here
before his ministers, must needs be had, that we be not judged of owre Lotde
in the life to come.

And this particular discussing S. Paul meant by, 1. Cor. 12.
when he commended unto the Corinthians, and by them commanded all Christian
me^ to prove, try, and judge them selves, especially before the receipte of the
blessed Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, which requires most purity of
life in the receiver, that can be. For to attempt to receive the holy body of
Christ before we have in contrite manner confessed our selfs, Confession is
necessary before the receiue^g of the sacrament for such as be in deadly
sin.
and purged our consciences, by ye judgment of Christ's Church, of the gilt of
deadly sin, is exceeding damnable to us, and much dishonor to Christ's
own person. Which proving and judging of man's self, to be meant by the
diligent discussing of our consciences, sins, and misdedes, by contrition
and confession of them to our ghostly father, the practice of the Church does
most plainly prove, which never suffered any grievous sinner to communicate,
before he had called him self to a reckning of his sins, before the minister
of God, and so judged him self, that he receive not to his damnation, that,
which to every worthy person is his life and salvation. De Ecclesiast. dog cap.
53.
Whereof S. Augustine, or the author of the book de Ecclesiasticis
dogmatibus, set forth with his name, gives us good notice for his time. Quem
mortalia crimina post Baptismum commissa premunt, hortor prius publica
poenitentia satisfacere, and ita sacer^otis iudicio reconciliatum, communioni
sociari, si vult non ad iudicium and condemnationem sui, Eucharistiam
percipere, sed and secreta satisfactione solui mortalia crimina non negamus. I
exhort every man (says this holy doctor) that is burdened after his
baptism with mortal sin, to satisfy for the same by public penance, and
to be reconciled by the priests judgment, and to be restored to the communion
of Saints, if he mean to receive the holy Sacrament, not to his judgment
and condemnation. And I deny not in this case, but deadly sins may be
remitted by secrette satisfaction. Thus he:

By whose words you see, in what a damnable state most men now of days
stand seeing that who so ever receives the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood, besore he be reconciled by a priests sentence, and assoiled of his
sins, he does receive it to his everlasting damnation. Unto whose judgment I
join S. Cypria^ in this same matter, complaining very earnestly upon certain
Conuersies in his days, that would adventure upon Christ's body and blood,
Sermon. de lapsis.
aute exomologesim factam criminis, ante purgatam conscientiam sacrificio and
manu sacerdotis: Besore their sins be confessed, and their consciences purged
by sacrifice, and the Priests hand.

Al these things might be at large declared, and confirmed further by the
judgment of most ancient Fathers, but because I have been very long, and
enough already may seem to be said for such as by reason will be satisfied,
and a great deal more then any Protestant will answer unto: and also the
scriptures the^ selves, giving the priest so plainl power of binding and
reteining, as we^ as of remitting and loosing, will do more with these that
have charged them selves with the belief of nothing that is not in express
writing of Gods word, then ye uniform consent of al ages, and the most
notable persons in the same. In respect of their humor therefore, I will not say
much more for this point, then I have said: only my meaning now is, for the
Catholics comfort, to repete a few such evident sentences out of most
authentic authors, by whom we may take a taste not only of their meaninges,
which is much for the matter, but especially, of the Churches practice in all
ages and most countries christened, since the Apostles time, which I account
the most surest way to touch and try truth by, that by the example of al our
forefathers, every man may willingly learn to submit him self to the sentence
of such, as God has made the judges of his soul, and sins.

That confession has ever been used, of al mortal sins, in all countries and
ages since ^hristes time, it is proved by the witness of most learned
fathers, with an answer to such things as out of the fathers be sometimes
objected to the contrary. The eleventh Chap.
I am the longer in this approved truth, because I remember what S. Chrisostom
says: D^ sacerli. 2.
And I see by these days, that it is very true which he writes, Multa art
opus esse, vt qui laborant Christiani, vltro sibiipsis persuadeant, sacerdotum
curationibus sese submittere: That it is a point of high wisdom and conning,
to bring to pass that Christian men which are sick in soul, would persuade
them selves to submit in all causes them selves, to the priests curing. For
in deed, in Nectarius his predecessors days there was such an offense arose
to the simple sort, and such a Trageady in Constantinople Church, by the
noughty fact of a Deacon there, An answer to a certain story, alleged by
the adversaries against Confession.
that their Bishop was glad, to make the state of penance, which then was
often publiste even for private sins, to be a great deal more free then
before. Whervppon, the people took occasion of such liberty and licentious
life, that when their common Penitenciarie by the commandment of Nectarius was
removed, they were exceeding loath to confess, or do just Penance for their
sins at all.

Thughe that good man condescending to the peoples weakness, meant never to take
away that whole order, wherein he had no authority, because it is no politic
provision, but Christ's institution: but only that the penance should not be
public, except the party listed, of those sins which were to the said
Penitenciarie, confessed in secrette.

Which fact of his, though perchance it was necessary for that time, yet it
was not allowed of the Writers of the same History: Lib. 9. ca. 35 tripar.
histor.
as a thing, (says Sozomenus) that brought much dissolute life, and
alteration of the peoples manners in to the Church.

Yet our adversaries are in such distress, for the maintenance of their
contrary assertion, against holy Confession, that they be not ashamed to
allege this man's doubtful example. Which if it were good and to be followed:
yet made yt nothing against private shrifte, which they call now auricular
confession, or if it did make against the whole Sacrament every way
ministered, yet it could not of reason be followed, being but one Bishops
compelled act, and that disalowed even of the reporters them selves, and
proved to be euel, by the practice of all Churches christened to the contrary.

And sure it is, that S. Chrysostom, who succeeded Nectarius, had much a do to
bring the people, made more licencious, by the foresaid grant to the distinct
numbering of all their sins to the priest, Sermon. de paenit. and co^fess.
again, which he knew to be necessary by Christ's institution, and therefore
in exhorting them to confession he speaks much of bashfullnes, which the
people had in uttering their sins, and of fear of vpbraiding of such
things as they had confessed to the priests, and of coming forth, as it
were, to a public stage to open their offenses, as the use was in his
predecessors days. Of al which things and other impedime^tes of confession,
this doctor does discharge the penitents, by awarranting them, that private
confession, which is made without witness, and to him that shall no lay any
thing confessed to their chardge, or open it to the world, is enough, though
the open order used before, he counts the more perfect, and better, wherein he
says, that Job was not a shamed to confess his faults before the world,
much less Christen men should be abashed to open them selves to God, not
meaning so by confession made to God, as thoug^e he discharged them of opening
their sins in the close consistory of the priests judgment, which he in
deed did not, but he means, Magister qua^to se^tentiaru^.
as the Master first answered, and other schole men of great and exact
judgment after him, that in steed of public confession, made in the face of
the Church, secrette opening to the priest (who occupies there the seat of
God, and therefore would never shame him a fore men) would serve.

Mary the truth is, that the late liberty that his people was set in
through the disordered demeanoure of the foresaid Deacon, made this conning
shepherd and expert preacher, so to use his words, as they might win most
of the woorste, and be least offense to the weak. And therefore he speaks so
warelye and indifferently, that sometimes he bids them confess to God, and
yet with several numberinge of every of their sins, and otherwhiles in the
very same sermon, he says, atque oportebat maxim apud homines ea dicere,
and yet they should be opened to men, that so they might understand his
meaning, and yet not be hable to reprehend his words. Who were so weak, as I
said, and so used to liberty, by the loo^ing of the law in Nectarius days,
that S. Chrysostom had much a do to make them submit them selves, and their
sins, to the pastors of their souls. Wherein, not only his great
obtestations in the beginning of his sermon, but also his continual bearing on
this string, that they should not be confounded nor abashed to utter their
sins, proves plainly, that his only purpose was, to bring the^ to
confession and penance sacramental, done by the priests ministry. For
there he charge them, that they did not weep nor lament, nor confess their
sins, which he could not do rightly, if those things were only inwardly
in cogitation and heart to be done. For how could he know, that they did not
make confession to man, as we now know that no heretic makes confession,
neither lamenteth, neither does penance for his sins, because they have
removed the way of Gods Church, whereby such things had wont to be done,
And by which Christ has appointed it to be done: Otherwise they will say they
confess them selfs daily to God, and so did S. Chrysostomes flock, I
warrantyon, but he compted that no sacramental confessing, except they did it
to God by the priests ministry, which is the way of confession, which God
has appointed.

But who so ever list see the most assured and undoubted meaning of this holy
Father touching confession to a priest, whereon I stand the longer, because our
adversaries would pick quarells with Gods Church upon certain particles of
his sentence, let him read the second and third book of the dignity of
prieshod, where he does not only attribute more dignity to that order, the^
to any other creature under God, but also makes ye priests to be as well the
judges as surgeons of our souls as to whom the serching, Lib. 2. de sacerdotio.
the cutting, the burning, the hard griping, the opening or the closing of
every of our wounds, and sores of conscience does aperteine. In all which
cases he says. Qui igitur phramacum ei morbo adhibere quis possit, cuius genus
nequaqua^ intelligat? how should a man salve that sore, the nature and kind
whereof he knows not? and to know it without confession of the party is not
possible. Epist. 188
For the things within a man none knows, but the spirit, which is in man.
And truly said the County Bonifacius to S. Augustine: Ipse sibi denegat
curam, qui suam medico non publicat causam: He hinders his own health, that
will not utter his disease and the cause thereof to his Physician.

And further if you will be assured of the said Chrysosto^s mind, touching
confession, read his exposition upon the words of the institution of this
sacrament, super 20. Ioannis.
and of Christ's breathing ye holy Ghost upon his Disciples, for their power to
remit sins. Where he declares, that these holy things committed to the
priests charge, do properly apperteine to God, by whose special gra^ we
obtain remission, even then, when the priest does absolve us: where he also
expresses the very manner of the Church, in giving absolution, till this day,
saing: that the priest does but, as you would say, lend his voice, and his
hand: Signifieng, that the manner was then, at it is yet, to speak ye words
of absolution, and lay the hand upon the penitents head, in the sacrament of
penance. So in sense says S. Chrysostom.

But to leave him, and fall to other of great antiquity and lerning, whose
judgments also will prove, not only for the truth of this doctrine, but also
(which is much more) for the uniformity of this open Ceremony, which the
Church of old used, and therefore in ye like truth of things, yet keeps:
Diuinoru^ decret epist. cap de poeni ten.
Theodoritus therefore, a Greek author also, does plainly insinuate not only
the whole sacrament, but eue^ this Ceremony of layng on hands in ye act of
absolution, Sunt medicabilia (saiht he) etiam quae post baptismum fiunt
vulnera: medicabilia autem, non vt olim per solam fidem data remissione, sed
per multas lachrymas, and fletus, et ieiunium, and orationem, and laborem facti
peccati quantitate moderatum. Qui enim non si^ affecti sunt, eos nec admittere
quidem didicimus, nec diuina sunt manu impertienda. Nolite inquit, dare sanctum
canibus, nec margaritas porcis: The wounds whith are made eue^ after Baptism,
be to be healed: mary they ca^ not be remedied as before in Baptism by
remission obtained by only faith, Remedies for sins ofter baptism.
but they must now be cured by tears and weeping, by fasting and praing, and
by penance measured after the quantity and nature of the fault. For who so
ever be not so qualified, we have not learned to receive the^ to grace, neither
be the holy gifts to be bestowed wpo^ the^, by our hand. Give not, says he,
holy things to dogs, nor precious stones to swine.

Thus does Theodoritus allude also to our manner yet used in the sacrament
where remission is given by the priests word, and hand. For which cause S
Augustine calls this sacrament of reco^ciliatio^, sometimes, De baptis. contra
dona tistas li. 8. Cap. 20.
Imposition of hand, as he does other sacraments more also, where ye priests
by this external Ceremony of laying on of hands, use to give grace.

But to go forward in our matter, Quaest. 288. regul contra.
S. Basil a Greek writer also, does euide^ly show, both his meaning, and his
Churches practice touching confession both often else, and namely where he
says, upon ye occasion of a question moved touching ye matter, thus:
necessariu^ est, vt ijs fiat co^fessio peccatoru^, quibus dispe^sa^io
mysterioru^ Dei credita est. Nam and hoc pacto qui olim inter sanctos
poenite^tiam egeru^t, fecisse reperiu^tur. It is necessary (says he) that
our confession should be made to them, to whom god has credited the
disposing, and bestowing of his holy mysteries. For so the Saints of old did
penance, as we read. And he allegeth more, ye penance was used, and special
sorowfulnes for sins with some kind of confession of sins in baptim: how much
more the^ must we now use the same, where it is more required, and where Christ
has instituted a Sacrament to that end, to remit sins committed by relapse
after Baptism.

Mat. 3. and Mar, 1.
And in deed the custom of John the Baptist proves that there was a kind of
confession necessary, or at the least convenient before the institution of
this Sacrament. For ye Eua^gelistes do say: Baptizabantur ab eo in Iordane,
confi^entes peccata sua, men were baptized of him in Jordan, and made
confession of their sins. So that John may seem to have prepared the way to
Christ's doctrine and Sacraments, not only by his baptism, but also by the
using of the people to confess their faults: and yet it is not necessary
that his usage of penance should be of like force, or should conteyne an exact
confession of every sin, as the institution of Christ afterward did include,
no more the^ this batism may be thought to be fully answerable either in manner
of usage or force and efficacy, to ye holy sacrament of Baptism by Christ
instituted for the office of the new law And in an other place the said S.
Basil treats how young Nons and holy sacred Virgens should confess
Questione 100.
them selves. And in an other place he admonishes all men to be circu^spect in
choice of their ghostly father, by whose sentence, sins ought with singular
discretion to be judged or examined. Whereby it is most manifest, that
confession to the priests was used, and compted necessary in his days.

Nicephorus later then he, Niceph, cartophilax ad Theodos.
but a learned Greek writer, declares also unto Theodosius a moncke, that the
power of binding and loosing sins was committed to Bishopes, by our merciful
Lord Christ Jesus, in so much (says he) that once all men came and confessed
their secret sins to them, by whom they either received pardon, or were put
back. But now through the increase of Christian people, and great tediousnes
of the work, they have committed this business much what to religious persons,
such as he of tried conditions, for to be most profitable to others. Thus says
he in sense.

These therefore and many other do testify for their Church, in what solemn use
sacramental Confession has ever ben. wherein we have the less need to stand
long, seeing ye same History yt our Adversaries do sometime allege, plainly
reports, that not only in the Church of Constantinople, but also in the west
Churches, Penitentiaries appointed to hear Confessions.
and namely at Rome, always since Nouatus the Heretics false opinion touching
penance rose, a virtuous Priest, sad, secreat, and wise, was appointed to
hear the sins of al men, and was called the Penitentiarie then, as he and
the like of that office be called yet. We call them Confessors, and of old in
Greece, they were named Spiritual masters or Fathers, as we now term them in
our Mother tongue, Ghostly Fathers also. Qui secundum vnius cuiusque culpam
indicebant and mulctam. Who (says Sozomenus) according to every man's fault,
prescribed due penance. Which penance though it were often openly done by the
confessors appointment: yet the sins were not known, for which the penance
was prescribed. For the confession was secreat or auricular, as we call it now,
as is plain by the History: else the Priest of that office, should not have
been charged with secrecy and silence, though the confession sometimes was
also open, where the penitents devotion or desire so required, as it may be
yet. For it is no matter for the substance of the Sacrament, whether it be
public, or private. And it is the condiscending to ye peoples weakness, that,
that should be so secreat generally, which often in old time has been open. And
yet I think no man was ever compelled by any precept of ye Church, to confess
in ye publik face of the Church, his sins that were committed secretly. Epist
ad Episc. Piceni and Campaniae. See this place at large by and by following,
hereafter
Though in Leo ye great his days, there was a custom not allowable, that men
were forced to give up a libell openly of all their sins. Which rigorous
custom, the said holy Father afterward abrogated. Never the less the penance
was of old often public, the form whereof appears in S. Ambrose, in
Tertullian, who both have written several books De Poenitentia, Poenite^tes.
in S. Augustine in sundry places, and in this present History of Sozomenus.
And long after their days there were some yt were called Poenitentes,
Penite^ts: which were barred from ye holy Communion, and the secrets and sone
reign holy of ye blessed mysteries of ye Mass, so long as their prescribed
penance endured, besides fasting, almose, and other like penalties enjoined.
And especially in Le^t time, there were of these devout publik Penitents, as
appears by diverse orders of the service in the Church, appointed and agreeing
to the^, who lightly were separated till ye celebrating of Christ's supper and
passion, in ye holy days next before Easter. Whereof yet in most Churches there
remains a small sign, by discipline given to ye people with rods on ye same
days. But now these many years, the peoples feablenes considered, there is no
public Penance given nor received in ye Sacrament, much less open Confession
made of any secret crimes, the Church being well assured, that this Auricular
Confession fully answers Christ's institution, and agrees also with the
often practice of the Primitive Church herein, though the Heretics, and some
of their faultours, as Beatus Rhenanus, B. Rhenanus.
or who else so ever wrote the Preface, that commonly is annexed to Tertullian,
deny the same. And truly, seeing their wanton pleasure is, not to bear secreat
Confession, I dare sai, they ca^ much less away with public Penance or
Confession, which is a thousand times more burdenous.

But now if you would co^ferre with the Fathers of al ages and of every notable
Church, touching this Confession to Gods Priests, you may begin if you list,
even at this day, and drive up both the truth of the doctrine, and the
perpetual practice thereof, even to the Apostles time. Sess. 14. Cap. 5. de
Confess. Ca. 3. and ^.
In the late holy Council holden at Trent, both the doctrine is confirmed
and declared with all gravity, and also the Adversaries of that Sacrament, and
the misconstruers of Christ's words of remission, to pertain to preaching of
the Gospel, and not to the very act of absolution, De Sacrament. Poeniten.
be by the consent of al Catholic states of the Christian world, accursed and
excommunicated. It was at Florence also decreed in a most notable general
assembly of both the Latin and Greek Church, that as well the whole Sacrament
of Penance as that especial part which is called Confession, was of Christ's
institution. In the great Council holden at Lateran, Can. 21. Omnis vtriusque
sexus.
there is so plain charge given to every Christian to confess his sins,
either to his own ordinary Parochian, or to some other Priest, that has by
him, or otherwise authority and jurisdiction over the Penitent, that
Protestants affirm, albeit very falsely, that Confession was first instituted
in ye said Council: and this was more then three hundredth years since. And
four hundred years before that in a Prouincial Council kept at Vormacia, Can.
7.
there is a Canon made concerning the qualities of the Priests, that are
constituted to be Co^fessours and Penitentiaries, where it is commanded, that
they be such, Qui possunt singulorum causas, originem quoque, and modum
culparum sigillatim considerare and examinare, that can particularly try out
and examine the causes of every offe^der, the manner and ground of their
faults.

Which decree is borrowed word for word almost, Can. 102.
out of the last Canon of Constantinople Council, called the sixth general,
which was long before all the foresaid Synodes. Their discourse is long upon
the Priests duty, which should si^te on confessions, who^ they instruct by
these words: Oportet, qui facultate^ absoluendi et ligandi a Deo receperunt,
peccati qualitatem speculentur, et peccatoris promptitudinem ad reuersionem, vt
sic medicamentum admoueant aegritudini aptum, ne si de peccato sine discrimine
sta^uant, aberrent a salute aegrotantis Those that have received of our Lord,
power to loose and bind, must try out the quality of every fault, and the
readiness of the offender to return to virtue, that they may provide a
medicine meet for the malady, least if they should without distinct knowledge
of their sin, give judgment, they should err in providing health for the
sick person.

By which Council ke^t in Constantinople, you may easelie gather, that neither
Confession was ever omitted by law, nor the common Penitenciarie long
abrogated out of Constantinople Church. And when I name these decrees of so
many general Councels in diverse ages, I do not only call them generally to
witness for my cause, which were enough, seeing every determination there,
passes as by the sentence of the holy Ghost and Christ's own judgment, of
whose presence such holy assemblance is assured, but I appeal to every holy
Bishop, What it is to allege a general Council.
Priest, and Prince of the world, that agreed to the same, and were there
assembled, every of which was of more experience, learning, and virtue, or at
the least of more humility, then all our Adversaries alive. But now if you go
to try other the learned writers of all times for ye practice of this point:
then our labor shall be infinite, but our cause more strong, and our Adversaries
sooner confounded. I need not for that practice, name the learned Schoolmen, of
excellent capacity in deep mysteries, because they were so late, and because
Heretics can not deny, but they are al undoubtedly against them, and every
one for us, Thomas Aquinas is ours, Dionysius is ours, I mean the
Carthusian. If any man doubt of S. Bernard, let him read the life of
Malachie (whom he praises for bringing into ure the most profitable use of
Confession, In vitam Malach.
in the rude parts of Ireland. S. Bid is proved before, Super 5. ca. Jacob.
not only to have allowed confession to the Priest, but to have expounded S.
James words of Confession for the sacrament of Penance, and uttering our
sins to Gods Ministers. And he records that in our Country of England,
before his days, S. Bid shows examples of Confession to a Priest, used in
England. Cap. 25.
Confession was used to a Priest. Whereof, as also of Penance and satisfaction,
there is an example or two in the fourth book of his Ecclesiastical History
of our Church.

Before him, S. Gregory, so well likes and knows this practice of
sacramental Confession, In Prasprali Gregorij.
that in his Pastoral, he prescribes the Priests of Gods Church, many ways
how to seek out the diseases of their peoples souls, and according to the
variety of the same, to admit or put back, to pardon or to punnish: De ^oen.
did. 6. Cap. de Sacer. S.
yea so plain he is in this matter, that he charge the Priest to be exceeding
grievously punnished, that in, any case shall utter the Penitentes confession,
or any part thereof. Again far above these, holy Leo and Great amending
the hard custom that in some places of Italy and Campania, Epist. 80.
was used, touching publik confession of private sins, he says: Reatus
conscientiarum sufficiat solis sacerdotibus indicari, confessione secreta.
Quamuis enim plenitudo fidei videtur esse laudabilis, Vide eu^dem ad Theodor.
Iuli. ^orens.
qua propter Dei timorem apud homines erubescere non veretur: tamen quia non
omnium huiusmodi sunt peccata, vt velint in poenitentiam ea publicari,
remoueatur tam improbabilis consuetudo, ne multi a poenitentiae remedijs
arceantur, dum aut erubescunt, aut metuunt mimicis suis facta sua reserare,
quibus possint legum constitutione percelli. Sufficit enim illa confessio, quae
primum Deo offertur, tunc etiam sacerdoti, qui pro debitis confitentium
precator accedit. Tunc enim demum plures ad poenitentiam potuerunt prouocari,
si populi auribus non publicetur conscientia confitentis. Yt is enough, Mark
the reasons of this holy Father for auricular confession.
that the gilt and offenses of man's conscience, be opened to ye Priests alone
in secreat Confession. For though the feruoure of faith be very laudable,
which is content for Gods sake to be ashamed before man: yet because the
sins of every man be not such, that the penitent would gladly utter
openly, let so reprobable custom be abolished, least many be holde^ from the
remedies of penance, whiles either they are ashamed, or fear to open their
deeds to their ennemies, by whom they might by order of law be punnished.
For that confession is sufficient, which is made first to God, and then to the
Priest also, who will be an intercessour for the sins of them that confess.
For then might more be provoked to penance, if the secreat conscience of the
confessed, be not published to the ears of the people. Thus says S. Leo, a
man of that time and credit, as our Adversaries would wish.

Let them say now, that private confession began in Lateran Council, Confession
used before Laterane Council, as well as the receiving of the B. Sacrament.
because that thing which ever was counted and used as necessary, was there
decreed for the ame^ding of the peoples sloth, to be done every year once at
the least, before they received the blessed Sacrament. As truly may they say,
that the Euchariste and receiving thereof, was begone in the same Council, and
by the very same Canon. For as there is charge, that every man should be
confessed: so there is commandment given, that every man shall receive once a
year the blessed Sacrament.

So little care they have, what they say, so that they say enough to begile
them, that can skill of nothing.

But to hold on upward, holy Prosper gives good evidence for his time, De
vita contempt.
touching the practice of Confession, and needful recourse to Priests for the
release of their sins. Sundry remedies he shows for every sore of man's
soul, and much he moves al christians to confess their sins, aduertising
the^ of ye danger thereof, if they keep them close, thus he says: Illi, quoru^
peccata humanam notitiam late^t, nec ab ipsis co^fessa, nec ab alijs publicata,
si ea confiteri aut emendare noluerit, Deu^ que^ habe^t teste^, ipsum habituri
sunt et vltore^. Et quid eis prodest, humanu^ vitare iudiciu^, cum si in malo
suo permanserint, ituri sunt in aeternu^ Deo retribue^te suppliciu^? lib. 2. c.
7. Note well these words of Prosper.
That is to say, Those men, whose sins be secret, and be not confessed of the^
selves, nor published by other men, if they will not confess them or correct
them, they shall have God their just reue^ger, who^ they have now a record of
their wickedness. And what are they the better to escape man's verdict, when, if
they continue in wickedness, by the just judgment of God they shall go into
everlasting punishment?

And afterward in ye same Chapter, which is exceeding much to be considered, he
gives al Priests careful admonition, that if any of them having committed
deadly sin, do notwithstanding without confession and uttering of ye same hold
on his ministry of the B. Sacrament, because he would not in ye sight of men
be noted unworthy, that in this case he damneth him self before God, whose
heavy indignation he can not avoid, whiles he is ashamed to utter his sins
unto men. All this meaning has S. Prosper, De visit. infirmorum lib. 2 cap. 4.
and his equal in age S. Augustine touches the disease of our days very
sharply saying thus: There be some which think that it is enough for their
salvation, if they confess their faults to Godde alone, to whom nothing is
hid, and from whom no man's conscience is close. For they will not, or they be
ashamed, or at the least they disdain to submit themselves to the Priests,
whom God has given power unto, to discearne the clean from the unclean. But I
would thou should not beguile thy self by false persuasion, or some respect
of shame that thou have to confess unto the Priest, who is Gods Vicare. For I
tell thee, thou must under his judgment, whom God does not disdain, to
constitute his Vicegerent.

But this Doctor made a whole work of penance, and the ways of recovery of
Christian men's fall after Baptism by the Priests judgment, and sacrament of
Confession. Of which books if any man list doubt, yet let him be assured,
that they be both ancient, catholic, learned, and agreeable to the doctrine
of S. Augustines days, who so ever made them. And our cause is so much more
helped, because not only S. Augustine, who is plain in these matters, upon S.
Matthewes Gospel, and else where, as is declared already, but also other of
great antiquity, confirm the same, and plainly confound the pride of our
days, in which men are not so much ashamed of their sins, as they be
disdainefull to confess their sins unto a poor Priest, though he justly
occupy the very judgment seat of God.

And S. Ambrose, Ambrosius ex Paulino.
these men's ancient somewhat, did know this practice so well, and allow it,
that he did sit in his own person on confession, as Paulinus does record,
whose behavior in that divine office, S. Ambrose sat on Confessions him self.
that all Priests may perceive, and all the people note, I will report:
Quotiescunque illi aliquis ob percipiendam poenitentiam lapsus suos confessus
esset, ita flebat, vt illum flere co^pellerat. Causas autem criminum, quas illi
confitebantur, nulli nisi Domino soli apud que^ intercedebat, loquebatur, bonum
relinquens exemplum posteris sacerdotibus, vt intercessores apud Deum sint,
magis quam accusatores apud homines. That is to say: So often as any man came
unto him to confess his faults and receive penance, he so wept, that he made
the Penitente to weep also. But the faults themselves which they confessed, he
uttered to no man but to God alone, to whom for their sins he made suit,
leaninge a blessed example to al Priests of the posterity, to account
themselves rather as intercessours to God for sins, then accusers of me^ before
the world for their sins. This says Paulinus of S. Ambrose, whereby at once
we see the judgment of the^ both for our matter.

But go forward. S. Cyprians meaning is so plain for confession of sins, that
he prescribes the very thoughts of man that be sinful and damnable, to be
uttered unto the Priests, praising them, that upon only intent and purpose of
committing idolatry, hoc ipsum apud ^acerdotes Dei dolenter and simpliciter
co^fitebantur did simply and sorowfully make confession thereof to the priests
of God. Sermon de lapsis.
And now that we are for the practice and proof hereof, at S. Cypria^, which
is high in Gods Church, we need not stay here, though we be far enoughe
paste our Adversaries account in such cases, that lay it down at Lateran
Council, a whole thousand years short of those days. Tertul. de poenit.
I will not I much speak of Tertullian, whom S. Cyprian calls Master, his
whole book written of penance, does make altogether for this sacrament, and
for confession to be made to Gods priests, which he calls exomologesin,
and prosternendi atque humiliandi hominis disciplinam: and emongst other things
perteining to yt act of confession and penance which then was much more
public and severe then it is now, he rekeneth this to be one, Presbiteris
aduolui, to be humyly laid at the priests foot, where he also resembles a man
that is loathe to confess his inward faults, to him, yt having a filthy
botche in the secret parts of his body, had rather let it rotte up the
member, then for foolish shame fastnes, utter ye grief to his surgeant.

Li. 3. periarcho^.
But of all other Origin is most plain. In one place he says thus: Qui non
prius animae suae vitia, et peccatorum suorum cognouerit mala, et proprij oris
confessione prodiderit, purgari atque absolui non poterit. He that knows not
perfetly the sins of his own soul and the noughtines of his offenses, that
he may utter them by the confession of his own mouth, he ca^ not be cleansed
nor absolved of his sin. super Leuit. ho^^ill. 2.
And in an other place thus: there is after Baptism one painful way of
remission of sins, Cum lauat peccator in lachrymis stratu^ suum and non
erubescit sacerdoti Domini indicare and quaerere medicinam, sicut scriptum est,
Iniquitate^ meam pronunciab^, when the sinner waters his couche with tears,
and is not ashamed to utter al his sins to the priest of God, and to seek
remedy as it is write: I will confess mine iniquity. S. Dionyse, also an
Apostolik man, does inuincibly prove unto us, that confession to a priest, and
the sacrament of penance was in use in his days, that is to say, in ye
Apostles time, Epist. ad Demophilum.
for he was S. Pauels scholar. He checketh very earnestly one Demophilus a
noughtie Monk, Monks in S. Dionyse time.
that you may see Monks be old, when there was an evil one in S. Dionyse
days, and yet there was an euel Apostle before there was an evil Monk, yt you
may see both orders be ancient, though, A poeni^te^t thrust back from
confession, and the priest reviled by a lewd Monk.
be they never so holy they can not be always void of evil. But this
Demophilus I say, bare a great rebuke of Dionysius, yt he usurped once a
priests place and function, and yt on a time he thrust back from ye priest,
and rebuked co^te^ptuously a poor penitent yt came to confession, and called
ye priest sitting on confession a wretch and a miser, yt he durst take upon him
to make a sinner a just man. Which words were very fit for Luthers mouth, an
other religious man of like humor and honesty. So soon was confession hated of
ye wicked, and so spedily was it defended of the faithful, as of S. Dionisie,
who here calls the orders and divine acts of penance, the decrees and
institutions of God.

I can not stand upon every point, which greueth me much, my matter is so
passing fructfull, and one worthy witness is yet behind, Epist. ad fratrem
Domini.
S. Clement (I mean him that S. Peter made his successor. Si forte (says he)
in alicuius cor vel liuor vel infidelitas, vel aliquod malum labenter
erepserit, non erubescat, qui animae suae curam gerit, confiteri ei qui
praeest, vt ab ipso per verbum and concilium salubre curetur, quo possit fide
integra and bonis operibus, poenas eterni ignis ^uadere, et ad perpetuae vitae
praemia peruenire If either envy, or infidelity, or any other greuouse sore
privily possess man's soul, let not him yt has any care of his salvation, be
ashamed to confess it to him that is his Prelate, that through his word and
counsel, he may be healed of his sins and that in true faith and good
works he may escape hell, and atteine to everlasting life T. hus S. Clement.

The conclusion of this treatise, removing, the impedimentes of confession.
THus far in despite of heresy and all her abbettours has truth brought it
self. By Christ power was given to the Apostles and priests, to remitte
sins: by Christ confession was instituted: by the Apostles it was commended
unto all Christians: by their example all nations faithful afterward have used
it: by general Counsels, which be of most sovereign authority, it has been
both confirmed and commanded: by all learned doctors liked and allowed: by all
christian people frequented reverently, as the only refuge after their
relapse. Therefore who so ever shall see this case so clear, and so consonant
to all reason, to al learning, to all the practice of Christian people, to all the examples of antiquity, and to Christ's own institution, let him school
his conscience as he thinks good. For if upon consideration of this practice
so approved by all means possible, he can not charge him self with obedience
to the truth, and the exercise of that in his life and works, whcih he sees
to be most sure and certain, as well by the Churches usage, Never any earthly
power could have established or bego^ any such burdenous thing as Confession
is, had not the force of Christ's institution, driven the world theru^to.
as Gods own writing and will, more words will not weigh with him, nor ye
persuasion of man shall ever much move him to that, which the continual terror
of conscience, always acknowledging that truth in mind, the practice whereof
in outewarde fact he abhors, can not effectually force him unto. Hard it
seems, I know, to the worldlinges and to the weak, (and so hard, yt never
man could have brought it into the Church, much less to have continued it so
long, if it had not proceeded from the precept of Christ's own mouth) to open
the whole heart and mind to man. And it can not but be joined with some
natural bashefullnesse, in this our frailty, to utter that to an other,
which in it self, of what sort of sin so ever it be, is most filthy and
loathsome. But knowing and feeling undoubtedly, that the continual close keeping
thereof in the covert of our conscience, is much more great and grievous
tormente, and therewith conceiving Christ's ordinance to be such, that no
consideration of our imbecillitie, nor contrary liking of our pha^tasie, may
or ought to withdraw us from that thing, which for us all, is accounted most
convenient, and necessary, let us never by our disobedient wills, strive
against Gods wisdom.

If the burden therefore, of confession seem to any man intolerable, as in
deed it is not, but very pleasant to all such as have tasted how sweet
Christ is, let him ease it with earnest consideration, that it is exceeding
commodious to break the pride of man's heart, and to make him know him self.
And, if that any burden of shamfastnesse appear in ye uttering of his sins,
he may learn to take it gladly as some worthy pain for his offenses, and
some piece of recompense and satisfaction for the same. Shame is joined by Gods
ordinance to sin, for a punishment, and it was sustained of Christ him self
amongst other pains for our sins.
It pleased God at the first fall of our fathers, to join shame and some
confusion to sin, by which they were bashful at the voice of God, and of
their own nakedness. Seeing that of his infinite wisdom, it pleased him to make
yt the first punishment for sin, and to lay it upon his own Sons most
innocent person, in his contemptible death and manifold rebukes sufferred for
our sins and sakes, let us not disdain to bear some portion thereof in
this sacrament of confession, for the release of our own sins. That very
shamefastnes so much abhorred and so much respected shall often preserve man
from further offending, whereof he knows after, he must again so soon
before God and his minister be rebuked.

But what should we talk of so small a let, where the comfort of opening our
sores and wounds to a man, yt by nature is a like sinner, and by use of
hearing man^e faults, can not much marvel at ours, and by office there is
most secret, tender, and careful over us, The comfort of man's conscience
had by confession
what should we talk of other impedimentes, where this comfortable motion is
so great? What comfort can be more, the^ to have such a friend, who, for that
I join with him, yea even my own soul to his, after the dearest manner and
most secret sort, must needs be to me as a full stay in all doubts of
conscience, a witness of my sorrowful heart, an intercessour for my sins, a
suerty before God for my amending, a minister in my reconciliation, and one
that under Christ (as S. Clement also says) shall both bear my sins upon
him self, Clemens li. 2. co^sti. cap. 23.
and take charge of me to salvation? In which case me think surely, man is
after a sort set in merueilous quietness, and almost discharged even of him
self, and his own custody, whiles he gives over his own advise and
judgment, and wholly hangs in earth upon him, whom God has appointed to be
his pastor, and gouernoure of his soul. Therefore, good Reader, call upon
Christ for increase of says, and believe only this ordinance of God was of
infinite wisdom and high providence provided for thy sake, and it ca^ not be
burdenous unto thee. Christ shall give thee courage and heart to withstand the
contrary temptations, and so serve him, though thou forsake thy self. To us
therefore confusion of face for our sinful life, and to him honor and glory
everlasting.

AMEN.
THE SECOND PART OF THE TREATISE, concerning the Popes Pardons.
The author by just causes was moved to believe the truth of this doctrine of
Pardons, before he knew the meaning of them: and afterward found them to be
of greater importance, then he took them before to be. The first Chapter.
OF the high power of remission and pardoning of sins, given by Christ to
his only spouse the Church, in the persons of her holy Bishopes and priests,
as a thing annexed to the whole order, and to be exercised in the sacrament of
penance, upon al men that be of their several jurisdictions, and humbly shall
submit themselves by confession of their faults to their judgments, I have
already spoken so much, as may suffice for the satisfiyng of the sober, and
just reproufe of the contentious. And now because, as well the course of my
former matter, as the special need of these days drives me thereunto, I will
make further search and trial of the right of that challenge, The argument of
the treatise following.
which as well the high Priest, as other principal Pastors and Bishops
make, by the force of their prelacie and keye of jurisdiction, over and above
the power of orders, touching Pardons and Indulge^cies. Whereof whiles I do
entreat, the more attention and head I require of thee (gentle Reader) because
here all the lamentable Tragedy and toil of this time first did begin, and here
have al those that perished in the late contradiction of Core principally
fallen.

And in no article of Christian faith ever more offense has been received of
all sorts almost even of the wise, then in this one of the Popes pardons. And
to be plain in the matter, Two causes moved the Author to think^ pardons good.
where sincerity is most required, two causes moved me to believe, like, and
allow the said power of Pardons and indulgencies, long before I either knew
the commodity of them, or had sought out the ground and meaning of them. First
was the Churches authority, which I credited in all other articles long before I
knew any of them, or could by reason or scripture maintain them. Whose
judgment to follow by my Christian profession in all other points, and to
forsake in this one of the Popes Pardons, had been mere folly, and a sign of
pha^tasticall choice of things indifferent, which is the proper passion of
heresy. Neither did I the^ know, that ye Church of Ch^i^^ had allowed such
things, because I had red the determination of any general Councels, or the
Decrees of some chife governors of the said Church touching such Pardons, or
because I had by histories and note of diverse ages see^ the practice of the
faithful people herein, by which ways her meaning of doubtful things is
most assuredly known, but only I deemed that the Church allowed them, and
misliked the contrary, because such as bare the name of christian folk and
catholic men did approve them, and sometimes lamented the lack of them. A
good rule for, the unlearned.
And surely for an unlearned man, I count it the briefest rule in the world,
to keep him self both in faith and conversation ever with that company, which
by the general and common calling of the people, be named Catholics. For that
name kept S. Augustine him self in the truth and true Church, Contra epistolam
Manichaei quam vocant fundamenti cap. 4.
much more it may do the simple sort, who is not hable to stand with an
Heretic, that will challenge the Church to him self, by Sophistical reasons,
from the Christians, that for lack of learning, can not answer him. Well,
this company of Catholics brought me to know the Church, and my Creed caused
me to believe the Church no less concerning the Popes Pardons, then any other
arcicle of our Christian profession, which though it were not of like weight,
yet it was to me of like truth, and al in like unknown at ye time.

The second cause that moved me to reverence the power of pardoning in the
high Bishope, The second cause that moved the writer hereof to believe that
pardons vve^ good.
and to like his Indulgencies, was the very persons of them which first
reproved the same. In who^ because I saw ye world to note and wonder at other
many most blasphemouse and inexcusale heresies, I verily deemed (though I was
then for my age almost ignorant of al things) that this opinion and
impugnation of Pardons, could neither be of God nor of good motion, that first
began in them, and begatte such a number of most wicked and contentious
opinions, as straight upon the costrolling of the Churches power herein did
ensue, not only against Christ's officers in earth, but against his Saints in
heaven, and against him self in the blessed Sacrament. This extreme and
intolerable issue methought verily could have no holy entrance, and therefore,
with the other named cause stayed me in the Churches faith, even the^ when I
had no feeling nor sense in the meaning of these matters.

But afterward, reading the history of the pitiful fall of our time, and there
considering the finister intent and occasion of the first improufe of Pardons,
and al ye strange endeavors of Luther (whose name is cursed to all good men)
who first in all man's memory, saving one wicleffe, who was condemned in
Constance Council for the same, was so bold only upon contention and
covetousness to condemn that, which him self in conscience knew to be true and
lawful, I could not but much be confirmed in my faith thereby. And yet all this
while though the matter of Pardons seemed to me to be more and more sound in
it self, and as true as the Spirit of God is true, who was the author
thereof in the Church: yet I did not then consider of it, as a thing of any
great importance, but I conceived it to be a small matter subject to a certain
iugling in reason, such as wicked me^ lightly make their closse and crafty
entrance by, to more mischief, and further attemptes against the common faith
of the Church. I could not then conceive, which I afterward so plainly, and
now more and more by the better suruiewe of the cause do perceive, that in
this one falshod there was covertly contained the very pith of falshod, and
improufe of the greatest matters which life and faith do stand upon. Thou
would not think, I dare say, into what a sum and abridgment, The matter
of pardons is of greater importance then it seems.
heresy has by the Devils devise and Luthers service drawn her self into.
For by this one false conclusion, and for maintenance thereof, this man and his
posterity have taken away al penance and satisfaction for sin, have spoiled
the Church of her just and most necessary discipline, have controlled Gods own
holy usage in correction of his children, have entered into his secrets of the
next world, and there abandoned the place of his justice and judgment for
sins that be remitted, but not enough to his wisdom and will corrected,
have robbed the holy Saints of al their merits, that is to say, Christ of
his gifts and grace, whereby only they be so sovereign and satisfactorie,
have imbarred the body mystical of Christ, of the benefit which ye whole and
every member thereof should receive by the satisfaction and holy works of ye
common head, which is Christ, have broken ye communion of Saints, and the sweet
fellowship of all the holy members of Gods Church, and the benefit which rises
from each to other, by mutual participation of their good works and
deserts, and to be short, have by this one falshod preached against pardons,
done injury to Christ, to his Church, to his Saints, and to his Sacraments,
and have myghtelie shaken the whole frame of Christian Religion and doctrine.

I do not here riot in words to ouerrunne my adversaries in talk, or to make
more of the matter then it is: but assuredly without the destruction of all
these so necessary articles of our faith, there can no man defend Luthers
doctrine against Indulgences. How Luter fumbled at the first about disgracing
of pardons
I know he fumbled at the beginning otherwise then his fellows and folowers to
disgrace the same, sometimes by holding the pardons to be lawful, but not
profitable: other whiles, to be deceites, but yet invented for holy purposes,
now by auouching they could not stand with Gods justice, if they should remit
any part of the appointed pain for sins, and else when that there was no
pain for remitted sins at all, whereupon the indulgencies should not be
needful, but vain and frivolous: with such other inco^stant sta^mering, as
lightly is common to the^ yt seek to uphold falshod against their own skill
and consciences.

But his folowers, How far other protestants proceeded since.
as well of the Protestants as Zuinglia^s and Caluinistes, to make ye way of
wickedness more easy and plain, have boldly denied all penance and temporal pain
for sin remitted, whether it be by Christ's or ye Churches enioyning, have
taken away Purgatory, have bereued Priesthod of all power, and ye Church of
all her treasure of Christ's copious and abunda^t rede^ptio^. Whereupon I ca^
not otherwise judge, but ye doctrine which else ca^ not be refelled, but by the
waste of so many undoubted articles, should stand exceeding fast, and be
grounded most surely upon all these foresaid truethes, without ye destruction
whereof it ca^ not be of any force ouerturned.

Therefore, least any man by making smaller account of so little a branche of the
Churches faith, then he should do, fall further unto ye mistrusting of other
many of known importance, I thought it good, to debate the question of
Iudulgencies, which be now commonly called the Popes Pardons, though not only
he, but also other Prelates of Christendom have their several right, each one
according to the measure of the Churches grant, and his jurisdiction therein.
In which matter, because most men of smaller trauail have erred, rather by
misconstruing ye case, and mistaking the state of the cause, the^ for any lack
of sufficient proof of the matter after it were well understood: I will study
first, clearly to open the meaning of that, whereon we stand, and then to go
through the whole question with as much light and brevity as I can: tempering
my self, as much as I may, from al such subteltie, as the depth of so grounded
a conclusion, and the learned disputatio^s of Schoolmen might drive me unto.
Wherein, I am content, rather to follow the desire and contentation of the
Reader, then to satisfy my own appetite, which I feel in my self, to be
somewhat more greedy of matter sometimes, then ye common people, whom I study
most to help, can well bear, and yet if they think it any vantage to know
truth, and the necessary doctrine of their faith, they must learn to abide the
orderly method, and cumpasse of the cause, and further I shall not charge them.

For the true meaning of Pardons, and to remove some untrue surmises touching
the same, it is declared that the Pope never took upon him by pardon to
remitte deadlye sin, much less to give any man license to sin. The second
Chapter.
FOR the understanding therefore of the term, Pardon, grace, or indulge^ce
what they signify.
Pardon, or grace, or Indulgence, let it be considered, ye proprely they import
not the remission of any deadly crime considered in them selves, and as
separated from the sacrament of penance, nor yet signify any release of
eternal damnation or everlasting punishment, which only always is remitted
when the deadly sin, for which it was due, is forgiven. For there can no
power in earth be so great, nor any man's jurisdiction so ample, that he may
forgive mortal offenses, since the institution of the Sacrament of penance,
except he use the confession of the party with his contrition and sure intent
never to commit the like again, yea and with purpose to satisfy the justice
of God, by Christ's grace as he may, according to the enioyning of his judge
therein. For God him self, because he is righteous and true, can not forgive
any man his sins, either by this sacrament of penance, or otherwise, being
of years and time of discretion, except he be penitent for the same: that is
to say, except he be both contrite, and at the least willing to confess his
offenses, if it be after relapse, and to suffer due correction therefore.
Deadly sin after Baptism can not ordinarily be pardoned b^t b^ the S^cra. of
penance.
And seeing God ca^ not pardon any man of his deadly sins, except he be thus
qualified: much less may a mortal man, be he never so great in dignittie or
calling in the Church, take upon him to forgive or pardon him yt is gylty of
deadly syn and damnation, without the confession and submission of ye penitent,
as is premised. All this truth hangs orderly upon the necessity of the
sacrament of penance, and Christ's ordinance therein, whereby he has made
dedly sins only remissible in ye sacrament, by the confession of ye party to
a priest, who has in his order received power to remit them, as is
sufficiently proved in the former part of this treatise, and it is only, a
priest whether he be of base state or of high dignity, that ca^ laufully loose
man's sins, as by the keye of his order as they term it, with sufficient
jurisdiction over the penitent for the secret discussing of his conscience in
this sacrament of confession.

Upon which ground you may well perceive, Mark well.
that the Popes remission and Pardon, being a public act of the keye of his
high jurisdiction and rule over the flock of Christ, and not an exercise of
his (...) judgment of his ghostly father, the^ can not ye pope or any other
power in earth, forgive him by any grace or indulge^ce, which takes only place
upon such as be already loosed from their mortal crimes.

Then hereupon the Reader must learn, and diligently consider, that we
attribute a great deal more power to any simple and base priest, in this
base, and by force of the sacrament, then we do to the highest Pope or
Patriarch in the world, out of the sacrament, woorking only by the right of
his jurisdiction and governance of the people. The cause is, that the effect
of remission of sins proceeds from Christ more abu^dantly in the grace of
sacraments, which be ministered by the priest, principally by his power of
orders, Keys in the Church be of two sorts. Mat. 16. Esai. 22. Apoc. 3. Keie
of Order.
the^ it does by the high jurisdiction and key of government of any man with
out ye sacrament. I trust every man understands, yt there is in the Church a
dooble Key (for so the doctors and schools follow Christ in that Metaphore,
and him self ye Prophets) the one of Order, which is the power annexed or
given in the order to work any holy function, by ministering of sacraments,
or other things to them belonging: as to consecrate the Sacrament of ye Altar,
to absolve in penance, and so forth in the rest, to work in every of them
according to their institution.

There is an other Keye of regiment and rule of the Church or some principal
portion thereof, Keie of iurisdition.
which is called the Key or power of jurisdiction. Now by this power of
regiment and rule, as no man can take upon him to consecrate, so no man out of
the sacrament of penance, can take upon him to absolve any man of deadly
sins and damnation due therefore. For though, some do think, yt S. Paul did
absolve the incestuous Corinthian both of his sin and damnation, with all
temporal punishment due therefore after assured repentance of the party, out
of the sacrament of penance: yet I can not agree in any case thereunto, because
the sacrament of Confession has ever ben of necessity since Christ's
institution thereof, and because ye remission of sins is so proper a work
unto God, that no creature could ever woork the same absolutely without
sacrament, saving only the humanity of Christ, to which the acts of Divinity,
as being united to the Godhead, were communicated, upon which it is certain,
that Christ our Savior might remitte sins absolutely out of al external
sacraments, Christ might absolutely, without sacraments remitte sins.
by his word and will only, which being the power of excellency, was, as
Divines do think, communicated to no other creatur, in what jurisdiction or
pre-eminence so ever he should be placed. And in the act of absolutio^ and
remission of sins we must not in Christ our Savior, put any such separation
of his double natures, that we need to doubt, but remission of sins
proceeds jointly from that one excellent person being both God and man.
Neither is it to be thought yt S. Paul did pardon the foresaid Penitent any
other ways then by ye hands of the ministers and Priests of the Corinthian
Church. For though the confession and penance of the party were public, as ye
sin it self was open, yet ye usage of the Apostle, and open practice of ye
Corinthia^ Church toward him, was no less a sacrament then, than it is now
being secret. Therefore I doubt not, but S. Paul spoke especially to ye
Priests of the Corinthians, when he willed the^ to co^firm their charity
toward ye sinner, and to forgive him by their ministry, who^ he thought in
absence worthy to receue ye grace and pardon at their hands, whereof we shall
speak more hereafter in place convenient. We do not the^ exalt ye Pope or
Bishops in this case any thing so far as heresy seems, or the simplicity of
many me^ co^ceiueth whereas they may well understand, yt we give more authority
to ye most simple Priest alive in respect of his Order and because of the
satrame^t by which he works, then to the Pope, or highest Potentate in ye
world, considering but only his jurisdiction. And therefore S. Peter him self,
who received both the keys, as also other Apostles and Bishops, having as
well the keye or power of Orders, as the keie of jurisdiction, and regiment of
their subjects, may do ye acts of both the keys, that is to say, may as well
laufully minister sacraments of al sorts, as also exercise jurisdiction upon
their subjects in such things as we hereafter shall declare. But out of ye
sacraments only by ye virtue of their jurisdiction, to absolve me^ of mortal
sins, though they be subject unto them, they can not, nor as I think ever Pope
or Prelate took upon him any such prehemine^ce. And therefore let this be ye
first point of our consideration: yt the Popes Pardons or Indulge^ce which he
gives in respect of his jurisdiction, Popes pardons without the Sacr. of
confession forgive not deadlye sins.
which also, as most men do think, he might give when he were once elected,
before he were a priest or any other bishop in like case according to ye
compass of his regiment: let it be first noted, I say, yt such pardons, how
so ever they be given, out of ye sacraments do not forgive sins yt he deadly.
And if any man thought before yt the Pope might or did use to give such liebral
grau^ts or pardons, whereby without ye sacrament of penance or confession any man
might claim full remission of all his deadly sins, let him correct ye
misco^struing the matter in him self, and assuredly know, yt it is not so
thought of Gods Church, nor so meant by the geuer, nor so expressed in any
pardon.

Notwithstanding, the power of Jurisdiction sometimes joins with the sacrament
of penance and the power of Orders: as when any Indulgence is given forth by ye
Pope, in which is expressed, yt who so ever shall be partaker thereof, must
confess him self, and be co^trite for his sins past, and therewith receive
ye holy sacrament of ye Altar, and such like, Sometimes a pardon joins with
the Sacrament of Confession.
by this pardon so joining with ye sacrament of remission, or in a manner
includi^g ye same, a full forgiveness is had of al sins and pain therefore, which
in yt case may be called, as it is, a plenary remission, or a pardon a poena
and culpa, from both ye fault, and ye pain due therefore.

There be also certain grievous crimes which every curat or priest Parochia^ ca^
not remit, Of causes reserved.
because they be reserved to ye audience of ye higher pastors. For in the
sacrament of Penance there is a power judiciary, and therefore can not be
practiced laufully, but upon subject persons, and causes not exe^pted from
their judgment, and excepted from their audience. In which cases the persons of
higher jurisdiction, to whom by right and law the cognition of those reserved
sins belong, do sometimes upon occasion given, communicate their power to ye
said simple Priests, and do license them to exercise their jurisdiction upon
persons and causes not proprely perteining unto them: as when the Popes
Indulge^ce geaueth the sinner leave to choose his Ghostly Father, and by him yt
he may be assoiled even from such sins as be reserved to the supreme power
of the Church. In this matter also, the Indulgence joins with the ordinary
sacrament of penance, and the Minister receives jurisdiction by the
Indulgence, to hear and assoile the Penitent of such sins, as before were
not subject to his peculiar regiment: and therefore this is also called a
pardon from sin, and the pain for sin, and a full remission.

That thou be not deceived herein, understand, good Reader, that every Priest
in his taking Orders, and by Christ's grant, has full power to remitte al
sins, and al men of their sins that be penitent, and yet that this power
can not be practiced by the law of nature indifferently upon all, because this
sacrament and none other is judicial, and therefore profitably can be extended
no further, but to them that be of their subjection and regiment. Where so ever
the priest consecrateth, it is effectual: whom so ever be baptiseth, he is
lawfully Christianed: whom so ever the Bishop orders, he stands truly
ordered, and so forth, though they should not herein meddle in other men's cures,
without special license, No Bishop nor prist can absolve the^ which be not
their subjects.
sufferance or necessity. But no man can assoile any person at al, that is not
subject unto him, either ordinarily or otherwise, because it is an act of
Jurisdiction, and therefore, though his power of orders be in it self
sufficient, yet by that only he can not absolve any man, but in necessity,
except he have withal authority over the person, and in that case wherein the
penitent requires his sentence, which Jurisdiction he may have, either
ordinarily, as upon all those that be of his charge, or else extraordinarily by
some special grant of the superior, as Bishope or Pope, as we may see in the
forms and course of Indulgencies diverse times. And thus considering of the
matter, you see that the Popes Pardons, as they be only proper to the act of
Jurisdiction, separated from the power of priesthod, and sacramental
confession, can not remitte the sins them selves, neither damnation due for
their reward, though, because license comes and proceeds by the^, to the
inferioure priests, to remitte sins in all cases, they may be called, as I
said, plenary and most liberal graces and grauntes to assoile man both from
sin and the punishment that is due therefore.

Venial sins may be remitted by pardons and many other ways without
confession.
The Popes Pardons also, may well reach so far, as to take away venial and
daily infirmities, which be of their nature punishable, but by some temporal
pain and correction, because they be remissible many ways out of the
sacrament, both here in this life, and in the next. For the merits of Christ
may be applied sufficiently to the offenders in such light manner of trespaces,
without the especial grace of a sacrament: as by saing our Lords prayer
(says S. Augustine) and by almose, and by the holy Sacrament of the Altar
either received or deuoutelie adored, by sacrifice now of the holy Mass, much
more then in old time in the sacrifices of the law, and by the holy peace or
blessings of Christ and his Apostles and Bishopes after them, and by their
Pardons.

Therefore to him that is free from grievous sins or pardoned of the same, al
these things shall be commodious toward the remission of his lesser
infirmities: but if he be in state of damnation, and out of Gods favor,
which grace must be procured only by the Sacraments of Baptism or Penance,
he can not obtain any Pardon at the Pop^s hands neither alive nor dead, nor
none was ever meant unto him.

That the Popes pardons properly perteine to the remission of temporal pain
due for mortal sins remitted before in the Sacrament of penance, whereupon
the full meaning of pardons is opened. The Third Chapter.
THE Popes Holiness then, being disburdened by most just mea^s from all causes
of envy, rising upon ye surmise or open sclander, that he would forgive men's
sins even before they were committed, as though he should grant forth a
license, for men to conmit notorious crimes, yea, being proved to be so far
from that fact, that he takes not upon him by his Pardons, so much as to
release any mortal sin at al, and therefore, that he never arrogated so much
unto him self in these matters, in respect of his iurisdicion only, as is
must justly granted to the simplest priest alive, that is lawfully ordered:
the case standing then before God and all the world so clear with him, let
us see what he claims by his jurisdiction, and in what sense his Pardons do
remitte or release any thing to man, seeing in matters of mortal sin,
otherwise then by joining with the Sacrament of Penance, he does not
intermeddle with remission at al.

Truly, to be plain and brief, The true meaning of the Popes Pardons.
they that be ye governors of Gods Church do challenge nothing else, nor mean
nothing else by their Pardons, but the release and pardoning of such
punishment as is often due after the sins be remitted in the sacrament of
Confession, that is to say, they pardon the Penance enjoined by the ghostly
Father, or that should have been enjoined by the rigor of their Canons, and by
the law, according to the quantity of the sin confessed: And what less can
they, being the appointed pastors of our souls and governors of the Church,
what less can they challenge, then to forgive that punishment or some part
thereof, which the laws did provide, whereof they were the makers or
executours themselves, and consequently to remitte such punishment as might
ensue for the lack of fulfilling thereof? There is no temporal Prince, but he
may by his Princely Prerogative pardon any several fault committed either
against his own person, or ye common wealth, yt is to say, discharge the
offe^der, of ye pain, which by law he should suffer. And why should we think
it strange, yt those me^, to whom by express words of Christ more
pre-eminence is given for their jurisdiction spiritual, then to any Prince
alive is given by law or nature for their civil Regiment, why should we think
it strange, that they should pardon or release the pains and penalty
appointed by the Ghostly Father, or prescribed by the law, or due to the sin
it self by Gods justice, if there were no law for the case, or order taken
of the Church past?

And that it is the temporal punishment only, which they mean to pardon by
their Indulgencies, it may be evident both by that we have said before, and
also by the words of course in most Indulgencies, in which lightly you see
this clause: De poenit entijs iniunciis, we assoile them from their enjoined
penance, or from the penance of so many days or years, as may be seen
plainly in the holy Council of Lateran, and in the Decrees hoth of innocentius
the third and fourth. The sin it self is not measurable by times and
years, Can. 62. De peniten. and remission cap. quod au^em.
for it is a simple and indivisible act or affection of mind or man, as our
schools speak in such matters, and therefore a man can not be assoiled from
part of his sin, and bound in the other part, but he that forgiueth the
gilte and fault of sin, which the Prophet calls iniquitate^ peccati, he
releaseth no days nor years, Psalm. 31.
but he forgiueth the very fault it self. Neither is there any eternal
punishment, which can be eased by any number of days, were they never so many.
Take you from an infinite and endless thing, how much you list, and it shall be
eternal still.

Then it is only temporal punishment, which before God and the world is
limited by certain proportion of the wickedness comm^tted, and of that
satisfaction which Gods justice requires at the hands of the party
penitente, which can be released by days or years, Pardoning for days and
years is only meant of the punisheme^t for sins.
in part or in whole. And therefore the Popes or Bishopes Pardons only
forgive temporal punishment enjoined, or at the least due for answer of
Gods righteousness to be enjoined. Wherein also the Magistrates of the Church
have such care and consideration, that they remitte not so much as any one
day of enjoined penance or deserved punishment, but by recompense of the
lack of man's satisfiyng, with some portion of Christ's abundant deserts
applied by the use of their Keys, to the relief of such as do lack, and
for their zeal and devotion, are not unworthy to receive benefit by the
singular treasure of the common wealth to help them in their private need.
But for this matter look for more toward the end of this Book.

And now upon the foresaid declaration, let this be as it were agreed upon,
and let the Adversaries well understand, this to be the meaning of the Catholic
Church, that an Indulgence or pardon is nothing else but a remission in part
or in whole of ye bond of that punishment which is enyoned or deserved, What
a pardon is.
after the mortal sins be remitted, Gods justice being otherwise for the
said sins recompensed by the common treasure of Christ and his Sanctes
satisfaction, which is applied unto the parties use by the Keys of
jurisdiction granted to such as Christ made the Stewards of his household, ye
disposers of his mysteries. For the Church of God and her Pastors, though they
be merciful and inclined to remission, rather then rigor, yet they take not
upon them, neither in the sacrament of Penance to remit sin and damnation,
neither out of the sacrament to release any pain or part of punishment
enjoined, without recompense thereof by Christ's copious redemption, and the
communion of holy works, that is betwext the head and members of this
mystical body of Christ.

Pain due for sin may remayn, after the sin be forgiven.
Perchance some Protestant will here call us back, and require proof, that
there should be any pain or temporal correction remaining for those persons
which have their sins forgiven by God in the sacrament of Penance, or
otherwise by the only faith of the party penitent, as he may perhapps
surmise. If he list to be satisfied in this case, let him turn back and take
a short view of the works of God since the beginning, and there consider
well, whether God him self, has not commonly visited his children received to
mercy, with some correction aunswerable in respect of his justice to the
greuousnes of the crime forgiven.

Who is so froward or so rude, but he may well discern betwixt the fault of
our first Father, and the punishment of everlasting damnation deserved there
by? His sin was one thing, his deserved punishment an other thing: his sin
was disobedience, his punishment correspondent to that, was everlasting death.
Yet when so ever one of these two is forgiven the other must needs be forgiven
also, be cause he can neither be subject to damnation, whose sin, for which
damnation was ordained, is forgiven, neither his fault be forgotten, whose
everlasting perishing is provided, which is the reward of sin. But now, Cap. 10.
both these being at once through Christ remitted to Adam, as we read in ye
book of wisdom, who perceives not, yt he was for all that long afterward
subject to temporal death and many other miseries both of this life and ye
next, being only punishments appointed by God for ye full satisfyng even of
those sins, which were forgiven him.

Look at the Prophet David, 2. Reg. 12
whether God corrected him not with temporal scourge, after he had expresselie
forgeuen him by the warrant of the Prophet Nathan, his greuouse sins. Exodus
32
Consider the case of all Gods elect people, how sharply they were visited
for sin, Number. 12.
after it was in them pardoned. Marcke whether Marie Moses his sister was not
punished and separated seven days, as it were for penance after her brethern
had procured her pardon at Gods hands. Thus has God of respect not only to
mercy, but also partly to justice, so always pardoned, that he has had
consideration of judgment and righteousness. Now whom should the Church follow
in remitting of sins, but him by whose power and warrant she does remitte
sins?

Seeing God then him self after he has by his own means and absolute power
pardoned manens faults, and discharged him of the sentence of death and
damnation, has yet enjoined penance, as when he said to Adam: In the swear
of thy brows thou shalt p^ouide for thy living: Genesis 3.
And to Ewe. Thou shall in pain bring forth thy children: And to them both:
that they should die the temporal death, though they might escape by his
mercy everlasting misery: seeing this, we need not to doubt, but temporal
punishment often remains after the sins be remitted, and that the Church of
God does unitate most conveniently the said mercy joined with justice, in all
her most righteous practice of pardoning and punishing sin in Christ's
behalf, by whose iurisdection she herein holds. But for the further proof
of this matter. I have said much in the def^nse of Purgatory, and this
question properly pertains to that place.

That Christ gave by his express word authority to the pastors of Gods
Church, to bind and loose not only the sins them selves, but also that
te^porall pain or penance remaining after the sins be ^orgiuen. The Fourth
Chapter.
BUT now for the great jurisdiction that Gods Church has in releasing ye
same punishment which remains after the ^a^^e be forgiven, it standethe, no
doubt, upon that high commission which Christ received of this Father, and
did communicate most amply to ye Apostles, and by them to all Bishopes for
ever. For the Father did not only honor Christ his Son according to his
humanity with the power of priesthod, or with other sovereignty for the
institution of Sacraments, or such like, but with all regiment of that body,
whereof he is the head, as he is man. By which key of jurisdiction he corrected
sinners with great Majesty, and pardoned the^ at his pleasure, not only of
sin and everlasting pain, where ye penite^ce of ye party did so require, but
also of such correction as ye law had prescribed for sin, or Gods justice
had enjoined for ye same.

Math. 16. and 18.
And this jurisdiction and power of regiment he gave to Peter principally when
he bestowed on him the Keys of heaven and upon the rest of the Apostles with
him ye power of binding and loosing which is most principally and properly
meant of enioyning penance or punnishing by sharp discipline ye sinners euel
life, either before they forgive his sins, or afterward. For as ye place of
ye xx. of S. John properly concerns ye power of pardoning, reteining or
giving penance for satisfaction in ye sacrament by ye right of priesthod
received in their orders, though it may somewhat concern ye Jurisdiction of
the high Magistrates also: so ye place of S. Matthew rather perteyneth to ye
chastisme^t of ye wicked by open discipline as they have ye regiment of al our
affairs the^ it does to ye sacrame^tal remission or satisfaction enjoined.
Cap. 18. binding vvaht vt means
For ligare there does signify some bond of punishment, wherewith ye party is
tied and charged for his correction, and not only bo^de of sin, wherewith ye
Church binds no man, no more the^ God him self does, but every man only
binds him self in his own sins. And the Church or her ministers do
properly then bind, when they punish by their Jurisdiction the sins
committed, not for the damnation of them that did fall, but for their
correction and ame^dme^t. And ye plain me^cio^ of excommunication, which there
is expressed to be given to the Apostles for ye chastisme^t of such as by more
gentle admonition will not amend nor obeie the Church, does prove that to
bind in that place, namely imports power of punishment, to be executed on
the offenders, which way of chastisment is an open exercise of discipline given
to the Apostles, to be used at their discretio^s for ye edifung of Christ's
Church. Therefore as to bind there is as well an act of the proper power of
jurisdiction, Loosing what yt signifies.
as it is a function of priesthode, to be exercised in the sacrament of
penance, so to loose soluere in ye place, though it may signify to remitte
sins in way of sacramental Confession, yet it is more aptly correspondent to
the word that went before, of binding, which was not sin, but the pain or
punishment for sin whereby it must needs follow, that as to bind, does
signify to charge ye penitent person with some temporal pain: so to loose must
also mean, to dissolve ye ba^de, which before was laid on him for present
correction.

For this is a rule most certain, that all the bands which the Church lays
upon any offender be medicinable, if the party list so take them, and may be
loosed by the same power of the Church, by which they were bound before. And
therefore ever as mention is made in scripture, of binding, or which is all
one, punishing of sins, there is also mention of the like power of loosing:
for Christ would not give power to the Church to bind or correct sins, but
much more he would have the Church resemble him self being her head in
mercy, and therefore gave her always power, to loose that kind of
punishment, which she by her ministers had bound or enjoined before. For these
two acts being aunswerable in conference and co^trarietie, must necessarily
follow each other, and properly perteyne to the like power and prerogative. Then
the one being given to the Apostles even out of the sacrament of penance, ye
other must needs also by the like right be received. Lib. 1. de poenit. Cap. 2.


S. Ambrose rebukes much Nouatia^s, because they would have ye Church enjoin
penance, but they liked not yt she should mercifully release the same
against, nor ye penitents sins neither. Dominus (says he) parius soluendi
esse voluit and ligandi, qui v^rumque pari condition permisi^ ergo, qui
soluendi ius non habet, nec ligandi habet. Our Lord would have the right of
loosing and binding to be like: for equally he gave the power of both.
Therefore who so ever has not right to loose, he has no power to bind. If
any man then list follow the Nouatians, he may hold at his pleasure, that it
pertains to the Churches jurisdiction to bind that, which the ca^ not loose
again, contrary to Christ's express grant made unto her, first in the person
of Peter, and then in ye right of all the Apostles, to whom when he had
promised as well the keys of Order, as jurisdiction, he said unto them: what
so ever you shall bind in earth, it shall be bound in heaven: and what so ever
you loose in earth it shall be loosed in heaven: first giving the^ thereby
authority to punish, and the^ to pardon. And therefore as ye Sacrament of
Penance, wherein sins be released or retained, was grounded upon the words
of Christ spoken to ye Apostles after his resurrection, whereof we talked so
much in ye former treatise, so ye power of giving pardon or punishing out of ye
sacrament, by ye virtue of their Jurisdiction, as the Pope and other Bishopes
now do, and always have done, is founded most fast upon this place of S.
Matthew, spoken first and principally to S. Peter, Cap. 16.^^ Cap. 18.
and the^ to other Apostles universally.

Now, if any list be assured by ye doctors interpretation, that the words of
our Savior of binding and loosing do directly give power to the pastors of
his Church, to punish ye offenders, and release their sentence of severity
again, let them read. Ad Auxiliu^ Epischop^^
S. Augustines 75. Epistle, where they shall find much of this matter, and
thus amongst other things: spirit alis poena, de qua scriptum est: Quae
ligaueritis in terra erunt ligata and in coelo, ipsas animas obligat. The
spiritual punishment, whereof Christ spoke when he said, what so ever you
bind in earth it shall be bound in heaven does fast bind the souls them
selves. And S. Chrisosto^ disputing excellently upon these words of binding
or loosing, compares the jurisdiction of Princes temporal unto the spiritual
power herein, and makes this to excelle that, as far as heaven passes the
earth, and the soul in dignity surmounteth ye body. If any king (says
Chrysostom) should give unto some subject such authority under him, Lib. 3.
de sacerdot.
that whom so ever he would he might cast into prison, and again release him
when he list, all men would account that subject most happy. But he that
has received, not of an earthly King, but of God him self a power that
passes that other, as far as heaven is from the earth, and the soul
excels the body, I trow him every man must both wonder at, and highly
reverence. Thus far said the Doctor acknowledging, that as some by princes
grauntes may prison or pardon the bodies: so ye priests may punish men's
souls, and loose or pardon the^ again. For ye proof whereof, he applies fitly
both the words of Christ spoken to S. Peter, and ye like afterward to al ye
Apostles, concerning binding and loosing.

Again S. Cypria^ and other holy Bishopes of Affrike, Epist. 2. lib. 1.
which had enjoined long penance to certain that had fallen in time of
persecution from their faith, for flattery or fear of ye world, and had
thought not to have given the^ any Indulgence, peace or pardon (for yt the^
they called, dare pacem, which we now term, to give a pardon) till the hour
of death came: Statueramus (say they) vt agere^t diu plena^ poenitentiam: we
had verily determined, that they should have done out, all their full enjoined
penance, but now upon other great respects we do agree to give peace or
pardon to those, that have earnestlye done some penance already, and lamented
bitterly their former fall. But mark well here, by what authority they challenge
this power, and what they do chale^g. They chale^g, pardy, power to give
penance to ye offenders, and they claim by right the release thereof. Again
they clearly take upon the^ in consideration of ye fault, to enjoin what they
list, and how long they list, and upon like just respect by their wisdo^s, to
pardon some piece of the same again, either after death, or else if good matter
move them long before.

But by what scripture do they claim such jurisdiction, yt they may give
discipline to offenders, even without ye sacrament of penance, only by their
jurisdiction and right of regiment, and then by their only letters to give the^
in abse^ce peace and pardon of their enjoined penance again?

By what scripture the Bishopes challenge Jurisdiction.
S. Cyprian and al his honorable fellows shall answer you in ye same place: for
there they give a reason of that their proper right: Quia ipse permisit qui
lege^ dedit, vt ligata in terris etiam in coelo ligata essent. Solui autem
possent illic, qui hic prius in ecclesia soluerentur. that is to say, he does
permit us, who made this law, that what soever we bound in earth, should be
bound in heaven, and those things should be loosed in heaven above, which the
Church her beneth, releaseth before.

what the pope forgeueth by pardons.
Let us therefore be bold also, to answer our Adversaries with ye said holy
fathers, if they ask us by what right the Pope or Bishope does give pardon, or
what it is that he does forgive by his pardon let us answer for the^, and for
our Mother the Church, that they pardon only the penance enjoined, or other
pain due for grievous sins after they be remitted in the sacrament of
penance. And yt they may so do by good authority, we allege Christ's own
words with the named holy Fathers: what so ever you bind in earth, it shall be
bound in heaven, and if you loose in it earth before, it shall also be released
in heaven. But upon this practice of Gods Church I will charge them further
hereafter.

And now to make up this matter for ye true meaning of the said text which we
now prove to perteine to the establishing of the true title of giving pardons,
I will recite the saing of S. Clement him self, in time the Apostles equal,
expert in their regiment, and privy to all their dooinges. He lively
expresses the dignity of the chief pastors and power of their government,
unto which he applies ye power of binding and loosing in such sort as we
have said But hear his own words, as Carolus Bouius has translated them:
Cap. 11. li. 2. de co^st.
O Episcope, stude munditie operum excellere, cognoscens locum tuum ac
dignitatem, tanquam locum Dei obtinens, eo quod praees omnibus Dominis,
Sacerdotibus, Regibus, Principibus, patribus, filijs, magistris, atque subditis
simul omnibus, sicque in ecclesia sede, cum sermonem facies, vt potestatem
habe^s iudicandi eos qui peccauerunt: quoniam vobis Episcopis dictum est:
quodcunque ligaueritis super terram, erit ligatu^ in coelo, and quodcunque
solueritis super terram erit solutum in coelo, ^udica igitur (o Episcope) cum
potestate, tanquam Deus, sed poenitentes recipe. In English. O thou that art
a Bishope, study and endeavor to excel other in the bewty of good works, in
respect of thy place and dignity: and consider thou sit in Gods own
room, being promoted above al Lords, Pristes, Kings, Princes, parents,
children, masters and servant every one. The high state of Bishops.
Therefore so sit in ye Church when thou do speak, as one that has power
to judge al those that have sinned. For to you Bishops it was said: what so
ever you bind in earth, it shall be bound in heaven, and what so ever you shall
loose in earth, it shall be loosed in heaven. Judge then (o Bishop) with power
and majesty, as God, but yet have mercy on the penitent. Thus says S. Clement.
By whose words you may perceive, Gods right to be in a manner conferred upon
his ministers by the terms of binding and loosing, not only given for the
remitting or reteining sins in the sacrament of penance, but also, for the
correcting or giving pardon by supreme Jurisdiction out of the said
Sacrament.

Now then let Calvin, or his ancient Luter come forth, and deny all spiritual
Jurisdiction of holy Bishops couching temporal punishment, or release of
pains appointed for sin: let them writhe the plain place both of binding and
loosing, to ye preaching of the Gospel, as their fashion is, rather then they
would grant this sovereignty to the Church of Christ: let them say, Marci.
1^.
that Christ, when he whipped out the unlawful occupiers of merchandies in ye
temple did nothing else but preach the Gospel: let them hold yt this was a
sermon, and not a^ act of jurisdiction, Lucae 5.
when he said to diverse thy sins be forgiven thee, or when he with power and
terror gave to Judas ye sop, Joan. 13.
by which it is thought, yt he excommunicated him, and gave him up wholly to ye
deuel, and separated him from ye company of ye Apostles and from his Church.
For the^ the devil e^tred into him, and he went out, as ye gospel says.

But (say master Luther) was this the power of preaching only, or an exercise
of most high Jurisdiction given him of his Father everlasting, as he wa the
head of the Church? No, no, vain fellows, this is no preaching which you
would have only to be the Churches property, that you might, being void of al
other authority in Gods Church, compare with his Apostles, in your prating,
because your glory amongst ye people stands on your glase tunges. Cores had a
tikling tung, and Moses tung was tied, yet God gave sentence on his servants
side, and reue^ged the disobedience of ye contrary. No, no, I tell you if all the
Bishopes and priests of ye Christian world were as rude and simple in their
preaching, as you think your selves eloque^t: yet their only Jurisdiction and
Majesty of their power assisted by Christ perpetually, by whom it was given
the^, shall bear you down, and your vain name of preaching ye word. And God
be thanked, beside ye right of ye cause there be in ye Church many yt are
honourred with ye gift of true preaching, to who^ God gives ye word in deed with
great and unspeakable force and e^crease of ye truth, and daily decay of your
vain shade of preaching. His name be blessed for ever, yt has given such a
guard to his Church, yt Hell g^tes, nor ye eloquence neither of man nor Angel
shall prevail against her.

The Appstles and Bishopes have ever, besides the preching of the Gospel,
punished men's sins and practiced judgment upon men's souls, both in binding and
loosing. The fyth Chapter.
CHrist the^ having not only ye preaching of yt Gospel to punish and pardon by,
but jurisdiction also to give discipline and to release ye same, in yt he was
made ye supreme governor of all Christian people, did communicate both these
functions at once, and gave the Magistrates of the Church not only by
preaching to threaten or exhort me^ to virtue, or promise them release of
their sins by only faith, as men have now plained the way to heaven, but
also by force of their regiment to give great penance, as we have proved, and
great pardon again, as to their wisdoms, and for the Churches edifiyng may
seem most convenient.

Of this great power of Christ communicated to his Apostles, we have practice
as well for punishing sinners, as pardoning them: For upon this sovereign
jurisdiction it rose, that the Apostles mightily ministered justice upon
offenders, as well by afflicting their bodies with enjoined long fastes and
large almoses, as by excommunication and other means. Which thing who so ever
well weigeth in the manifold examples of Gods word, they shall not wonder,
that the holy Bishops of Christ's Church may give a pardon of penance
enjoined. For by this authority did S. Peter, who first received the keys of
Iurisdiccion and power over the Church, Act. 5.
kill both Ananias and Saphira his wife, which is as great a bodily
punishment for sin, as may be: By this authority did he excommunicate Simon
the Sorcerer. By this power did S. Paul offer to revenge disobedience. 1. Cor.
4.
By this did he threaten to come to the faithful with a rod of discipline:
2. Tim. 1.
By this he prescribed to Timothy whom he consecrated Bishope how he should
hear accusatio^s, and behave him self in rebuking sin, 1. Tim. 2.
and correction of diverse states. By this power did he mightily deliver up
some to Satan and bodily vexatio^: By this power did he strike blind Elimas
ye witch, Act. 13.
and released him at his pleasure again. By this power have holy Bishopes
excommunicated mighty Emperors, suspe^ded many from ye sacraments, disgraded
diverse spiritual me^ from their functio^s, interdicted whole realms, and to be
short, by this power has ye Church of God prescribed a due punishment for
every deadly sin, justly respecting ye greuousnes thereof, and co^tinua^ce
therein. As we may see in ye penite^tial book of Theodorus and Bid, ye canons
whereof be translated into ye book of decrees, Vide decret. Iuo par 15.
which is ye 15. entitled De poenite^^. and namely in ye most ancient Counsel
of Ancyre, which was holden well near xiij. C. years sithe^s, in ye most pure
time of Christian religion, when I trow our Aduersaies dare not say, yt ye
faith was corrupted. Cap. 1. and cap. 2.
There ye Priests and Deaco^s ye rele^ted in persecution were suspe^ded from ye
executing of their several functio^s. such as supt in ye temples of Idols, Cap.
4.
and sacrificed to false gods were charged, beside absteining from ye
sacraments, Cap. 15.
with three years penance. those yt committed brutish sins and unnatural, Cap. 20.
should do xxv. years penance. for adultry vij. years penance: for women yt
destroyed their birth, Cap. 21.
x. years: for murderers vij. if it be not volu^tary: if it he wilful, Cap. 22.
til yt end of ma^s life: for superstious southsaiers or dream reders, or
sorcerers, Cap 23.
and witches v. years. Finally for rape, x. years were prescribed. The like
were made for diverse crimes in the Counsel of Nice. Cap. 24.
But it is enough yt we know though the eternal pains deserved by dedly sins,
be forgiven with ye sins the^ selfs, yt yet there remains for the satisfiyng of
gods justice, some temporal scourge, to prevent which, ye church enioineth pain
for faults remitted, that both Gods mercy be followed in ye remission of their
syns, and his justice partly answered in punishment of ye same. the which der
of deserved pain, being not here fulfilled, or released it must in an other
world be answered.

And therefore s. Austine says of ye Churches usage in prescribing penance
thus: Cap. 65. Enchir.
Sed neque de ipsis criminib. quodlibet magnis remitte^dis in S. Ecclia dei
despera^da e^ mi^a, age^tib. poenite^tia^ secundu^ modu^ sui cuiusque peccari:
et quoda pleru^que dolor alterius cordis occultus e^ alteri, recte
co^stituu^tur ab ijs quod Eccliae presunt te^pora poenite^tiae, vt fiat e^t
satis Eccli^ae, in quae peccata remittu^tur. Eue^ for sins being never so
grievous and great, we may not despair of gods mercy, nor of remission to be
had in ye Church: mary always presupposed yt ye offe^ders must do penance,
according to ye quantity and greuousnes of their offenses. And because often it
cha^ceth, yt ye sorrow of ma^s heart, wherein much stands, is unknown to other
me^, it is very reasonable that the Church should limite their penance by her
governors, to be accomplished in certain times and appointed seasons, for ye
answer of the Churches right, in which only all sins be remitted, as out of
her lap, none at all be forgiven, for any benefit to ye party. So says this
doctor of public penance.

And of secret satisfaction, which now is more used after confession, lest any
man should fear, that that were not sufficient to satisfy for the remna^t of
debt due for mortal sins forgiven, thus faith ye author of ye book de
ecclesias. dogm. set forth with S. Augustines name: De ecclesiasticis
dogmatibus. Cap. 53.
Sed and secreta satisfactione solui mortalia crimina non negamus: Neither we
do deny, but mortal sins may be loosed by secret satisfaction.

Fear not ye word satisfaction, as though it derogated any thing to the
rede^ptio^ which is in Christ Jesus. It is here and in many places of S
Augustines works most common, Satisfaction an usual word in the doctors.
and no less used of al Catholic writers since Christ's time, who knew right
well, yt the fructes of Christian penance done in ye virtue and force of Gods
grace, do apply Christ's satisfaction effectually to our benefit, and not
remove the use thereof from us.

But they have a faith so solitary now a days, that it will alone apprehende
what ye list, and reach so far into Christ's justice, that her fautors shall
have no need of christian works, or fruitful repentance.

Now to this end have we said all this, that the faithful may understand
perfectly, what the Pope may by right remitte through his Pardon and
Indulgence. Note well.
For look what the officers of Gods Church may bind, that without all doubt
may they upon good consideration release again. Therefore if they may enjoin
penance for years and days, both openly out of the Sacrament, and also in
private satisfaction after Confession, then may they release certain days and
years of the same penance which was prescribed before. For loosing and
binding pertain by reason, law, and Christ's own grant, as to one act of
jurisdiction, that ye one being laufull, How the pardons for days and years
do rise.
the other must needs so be also. If the Church be of right power and
authority to prescribe penance of seven years, she has the like right to
remitte upon just respect, either all those years, or some part of the same,
especially having means otherwise, to supply the lack of satisfaction of Gods
justice in the party penitent.

And therefore I join in argument and open reason with our Adversaries thus:
To give pardon in most common and catholic sense of that word, is to release
some part, or all the enjoined penance for sins remitted: But the Pope,
because he is the principal governor of Gods Church, may release any penance
enjoined, upon just consideratio^s: ergo, the Pope may laufully give Pardons.
The Minor, wherein the Adversaries may perchance give back, I prove thus: That
which was bound by the Churches or Popes authority, may be laufully loosed by
the same authority again, because Christ him self joined in his grant both
these acts together, and they are proved to be propre to one iurisdction: But
the Church by the Decrees of Bishops and Councils has appointed such penance
and so many years of correction for sundry faults: therefore the same Bishops
or such as be of the like authority, when they see occasion, may remit the
penance of the said years or some part of it by limitation of days or seaso^s,
as the state of ye penitent requires, or the time it self does move them.

And this argument shall be immovable, except they reject with the Popes
Pardons all manner of discipline, as well of excommunication, as other lesser
satisfactions, whereof we have already spoken, as in deed to maynteyn their
falshod they must needs do, as also they shall be enforced to reprove both the
holy Council of Nice, all the holy Fathers, and the general practice of the
Church, and with them ye express scriptures in which the worthy fructes of
penance, sharp disclpline, Math. 7. 1. Cor. 11. Heb. 13. Mat. 16.18 1. Tim. 1.
judging our selves, obedience to our Prelates, bynding and reteyning of
sins, exco^municatyng and deliueryng up to Satan, be so often commended. It
must needs be a miserable doctrine of these Protestants which can not be
vpholden but by so shameful shifts, and when we drive them into such
straites, in a matter where they think most may be said for them selves, and
least for our defense, where shall they stand in our plain causes, in which
almost our Adversaries confess us to have the vantage of Antiquity, and the
pre-eminence of all the Councels in the world? But surely, I think falshod has
so little hold in all matters, yt it stands only upright whiles the contrary is
not seen, or not understood, which she seeks ever by all means she may,
to cover and keep close. For the night she loves, and in darkness she
deliteth. Do but open the true sense of any Article by them impugned, and it
is more then half proved, and the ennemies without argument, upon the sight of
truth, in a manner discomfited. So it fares with them in our present cause,
which they have long toyled and troubled in the mist of their fantasies, and
upon false interpretation disgraced amongst the simple sort that thing, which
in this sense, as Gods Church that has the ruling of the matter, takes it, is
so sure and so clear in it self, that I think they shall never be hable with
honesty, to speak against any one parcel thereof.

That there be diverse ways of temporal punnishment remaining after sins be
remitted, every of which ways may be in some cases released in part, or in
whole, by the Pardons of Popes and Bisshops. The sixth Chapter.
ANd yet to give more light to the matter, and the greater overthrow to
falshod, let us drive ye cause forward, and weigh with our selves the whole
state of things in this order. First that there be three ways of punnishment
of man's sins after they be released in the sacrament of Penance (besides ye
fruits of repentance which man charge himself withal, Of three sorts of
punnishments temporal.
and besides the punnishment appointed for offenses by the civil or temporal
laws, whereof I now speak not, the first and the easiest, is that penance
which is in secret confession enjoined by our Confessor, which is lyghly (as
these times be) much less then ye nature of ye offense, for which it was
prescribed, requires. Yet because it is taken obedie^tly, and by our judges
prescription, and in a sacrament, Small works by force of the Sacraments are
very effectual.
in which God always works much more grace, the^ he does by ye self same
things without ye sacrament, and because ye penitent is ready to take more if
more had been prescribed: in all these respects, it stands often, if it be any
thing corresponde^t to the crimes for which it was enjoined, for a full
satisfaction before God, when it is accomplished.

The second way of punnishment is appointed by the Canons generally, for such
faults as be committed after Baptism, that is to say, by the laws of the
Church, or Decrees of Bishops and chief Magistrates thereof, and is called
Canonical Satisfaction. Canonical satisfaction.
Which is much more sharp and grievous then the other yt in private penance is
commonly given, and a great deal more answerable to Gods justice and the
grieuousnes of ye crimes committed. And so the Canons were not only prescribed,
as some judge not right of them, for open offenses, to satisfy the Church and
the offense of ye people, but also eue^ for secret sins, as we may perceive
by S. Augustine, Tertullian, and other that have written of penance. And this way
of prescribed satisfaction by ye ancient decrees of Councils, which lightly
appointed seven years of penance for every deadly sin, was almost a rule for
such as heard secret co^fessions to moderat their penance by, which they
lightly gave to ye penitentes even after the limitatio^ of ye said decrees and
ancient Canons. Now to give so many years or days of penance, signifies ye
iniu^ctio^ or prescriptio^ of fastes by certain days wekely throughout the
said prefixed times, or continual fasting from most meats every day in all those
years of penance, other the^ would suffice for susteinyng of nature, as bread
and water, and such like thin diet which man's body, in this fall of our
strength and manners, could now scarce bear, and with this, continual mourning
in outward behavior of countenance, speech and apparel, and, which was the
greatest of all, necessary abstinence from the holy Sacraments, till the said
penance was accomplished. Penance appoi^ted not only for cautel but for
satisfaction
And this great penance was in the Primitive Church prescribed by the Canons,
not only for cantele and provision for the like sins afterward to be
committed (then when ye Church had her punnishment for sins, several from
the pains appointed by the civil laws for the same) but also for the
satisfieng of Gods justice for ye penitentes sins, the burden whereof, then
was counted (as in deed it is) so intolerable, that neither the Church spared
to enjoin great satisfaction, nor the offenders refused to receive and
accomplish the same with all humility.

This therefore is the second way of punnishment or prescription of penance for
mortal sins remitted, or in way to be remitted, by the penance of the party.
In which kind, you may account also the severe punishments which concern the
soul most, although sometimes they are joined unto some corporal afflictions,
as excommunication, suspension, degradation, and such like: for all these were
usual in the beginning of Christian days for correction of sin.

The third way of punnishmente of temporal sin, is by Gods own hand, as when
he strikes some by sickness, or by temporal death, or by ye pains of
Purgatory, which is a place of temporal satisfaction and correction of the
soul only in the next life. 1. Cor. 11.
Thus was diverse of the Corinthians cast into infirmities, many stricken dead,
and further also punnished in the next world in the place of judgment there,
not eternal but transitory, because they would not iustlye judge and
correct them selves, And, which is much to be noted for our purpose, the
Apostles also, had authority given them, to punnish the offenders often by
bodily vexation, and death sometimes, that they might thereby make true show and
proof to all the world, The Apostles had authoriti to afflicte the bodies of
men for sinne^
that they and their successors had jurisdiction over ye souls of men, whiles
they made it evident by manifest signs wrought in the face of all the world
even upon the bodies them selves, which are not so properly subject to the
governors of the Church, as ye souls of the faithful be, though their bodies
to, for the souls sake, be subject to the said power. And not withstanding the
same miraculous force in correcting sinners did cease afterward, yet the
like power, ordinariely to be exercised by giving penance and seperating from
the sacraments remains in the Churches right still.

And here we may not think, that the killing of diverse, as well by Gods
own hand amongst the people of Israel in Moses time, Exodus 32. Number. 11
14.16.
as of other that dyed of diseases, for punishment of their unworthy receuing
the Sacrament in S. Paul's days, 1. Cor. 11. Act. 5.
or the sleaing of Ananias and his wife by S. Peter's hand, and many more perhaps
whereof there is no talk in the text, we may not deny, I say, Hier. in
Comment. Ezechielis. cap. 10
that these were all killed either of God or of Christ's Apostles, to eternal
damnation, but rather for their temporal correction, and the avoiding of
Gods judgments to come, especially where any of them did repent them of
their fault, before their deserved death came upon them.

Now by these three diverse ways of correction for sins remitted no dout the
Pardons of Gods ministers must be limited and understood, so that who so ever
gives a pardon laufully, he must either discharge the Penitent of the
punishment which his Ghostly Father enjoined him, or that the old laws of most
holy Councels charged the like offenders withal, What pain pardons do
properly remitte.
or that God himself enioyneth sometimes in this world, but especially in the
next life, where God more exactly and proprely punnisheth both for sins
remitted and not remitted. If the Pardon be large, it takes away the whole
pain, if it be otherwise, it determines the number of days, and releaseth
not al, but part of the penance only: that is to say, so many days or
years, as in the Indulgence is mentioned. Whereof no man can now be ignorant,
if he do but mark, that the penance which the Pope takes upon him to
remitte, was also limited by years of fasting, praying, abstinence from the
Sacraments, and such like: as if your Confessor had given you in penance, to
fast every fridaie bread and drink only, for some notoriouse sins
confessed unto him, then ye Pardon for twenty days, would discharge you of so
many days, from your said bond, as be named: and if it be a free and plenarie
Indulgence, it shall discharge you of the bond of all the days or years
appointed, which you have not before the receipt of the said Pardon
accomplished. And this is exceeding plain for the two first kinds of
punnishmentes, which we said were joined for satisfaction by the Churches
laws, and by the Confessors prescription. For as they stood upon days and
years, so the remission of ye same must needs keep the like form. For which
cause you shall often see expressed De Poenitentijs iniunctis, in the Indulge^ce.

And that form of grant and remission was used always in Gods Church. De
Poen. iniu^ctis.
For S. Cypria^ did remit a great piece somtims De poenite^tijs iniu^ctis of ye
enjoined penance, when he gave peace to such as fell in time of persecution,
long before they had fulfilled their prescribed penance: And so did S. Paul to
the Corinthian that had committed incest. and so does Nice Council prescribe
to Bishops, that they should or might at the least, Humanius, Can. 11.
deal more gently with those that denied their faith in the persecution of
Licinius, and that they might pardon them before, if they saw cause, though
seven years penance was prescribed unto them. In which places that the
Church now calls a Pardon or Indulgence, How pardons were termed in the
Primitive Church. 2. Cor. 2.
was termed sometimes, donare aliquid in persona Christi, to give or grant
something to the offender in Christ's person and so called S. Paul it:
sometimes it was called Dare pacem, as S. Cyprian terms it in many places of
his works, sometimes it was called Humanius agere, To deal gently with
sinners, or to show unto them humanity, and so does Nicene and Ancyran
Councels term it: Licebit etiam Episcopo humanius circa aliquid cogitare, Can.
11. Cap. 5.
It shall be lauful for the Bishop to deal more courteously with them, says
the holy Council.

Whereby we see this pardoning of enjoined penance, is an ancient usage and
counted most holy of all the Church, whereof we make this assured ground and
foundacio^ of our Pardons, An assured argument for pardons.
and for the truth of them we make this argument. S. Paul did remitte enjoined
penance in Christ's person: S. Cyprian and all the Bishopes of Affrike did
remitte penance enjoined: Nicene Council gives license to Bishops to remitt
penance prescribed by the law: Therefore the Pope by their example, and in the
person of Christ may remitte enjoined penance, and therefore may laufully give
a pardon. The pain prescribed by the law he may release, because he is the
principal executour of the law: the penance appointed by ye inferior priest
in confession, he may likewise remit, because yt, which is prescribed by
thinferiour may by good reason, be, upon co^syderations, altered by the
superior, especially where the Magistrate has good means to provide, yt
neither the Common Wealth suffer damage thereby, nor the party to whom it does
pertein to be loosed or bond in penance, receive any loss thereby. By like
authority also does a Pardon change sometimes a sharper and longer pain enjoined
into some more gentle penance and more fit and needful works for the time and
state then being, as his power, yt is the chief governor may be exceeding
beneficial to the world in such cases, which ever ought to be practiced for
edifiyng and never for destruction. For it is to be considered, yt the high
Pastor usually grau^teth no releasse of the debt of good works, or the bond of
deserved punishment but by prescriptio^ of some other holy work to be
accomplished before the party obtain ye benefit of his remission. As when a
penitent has enjoined him to punish his body by continual fasting or long
peregrination, or other exceeding much temporal pain according to the
grieuousnes of his deserts, the freedom of a Pardon oftentimes turns the
said due pains enjoined in to some easier work of christian charity, yet
being much more to glory of God, and beneficial to the Church, as the time
stands, then the other could be. Ita Vrbanus 2. in Synod. Claremo^t
As when the Turk or other ennemies of Christianity, do invade any Christian
Kingdom, it is more beneficial to put to our helping hand in the withstanding
his crueltye, either by resisting him in our own persons, or contributing any
piece of our goods toward the same, then any private Penance that may
concern our persons. Therefore the governors of the Church, often, to move
the people to such necessary devotion gives them a releasse of all pain due
for their sins, or at the least, of the bond of their enjoined penance, only
upon respect of some small furtherance in such a good and godly purpose.

The like they do also often, to set forward other works of charity, to the
benefit of Gods people, as for the relieuing of Hospitals, of Churches, of
high ways, and such like. Sometimes again, they extend their power, which
Christ gave them, to edify his Church, and increase religion and devotion in
the people, as when they give pardon for so many days to such as shall
receive the blessed Sacrament, fast and pray, that heresy may cease in the
Church, that the enemies of Christianity may not prevail, that Infidels Jews
and heretics may be converted, and Schismatikes knitte them selves obediently
to the felowshipe of Christ's fold. So does the Pope for the increase of zealous
devotion and advancing Gods honor, give days of remission or full pardon, to
such as shall usually have meditations of Christ's passion and death by
certain holy prayers appointed, or by visiting places in which there be seen
some lively steps, memories, and express tokens of Christ's miraculous
works, or his Sanctes. Thus to help up the dullness of praying and serving
God in our days, he gives grace and pardon to such as shall frequent the
Churches at the times of their dedication, or on certain principal Feasts,
there either to be confessed and receive the holy Sacrament, or else to join in
prayer and devotion with other the faithful people that thither at those days
have principal recourse. Hereof we have example not only in the story of the
institution of the solemn Feast of Corpus Christi, but also in the great
general Council holden at Lateran. Can. 62.
For this cause also, and the like maintenance of holy prayer, by which the
Church of God most stands, has he mercifully and with singular wisdom,
given a pardon of certain days or years to such as should devoutly occupy
such beads, books or prayers: in all which things orderly given and
reverently received, I see not what ca^ be reprehended, of any but such as are
offended with all works and ways of mercy, charity, and devotion. The power
and jurisdiction is proved lawful, the causes why he should exercise his
authority herein be very urgent, and Gods honor with the peoples commodity
exceeding well respected, all things here do edify, and nothing at all
destroy, all things do stand by good reason, nothing can be reproved either
with reason or good religion.

That not only the penance enjoined in the sacrament, or otherwise by
canonical correction, but also such pain as God him self provides for
sin, may be released by the Popes Pardons, and that Purgatory pains may
especially be prevented by the same remissions. The seventh Chapter.
BUT now because some may by course of our matter, look yt I should declare,
whether the Popes Pardons may release any whit of that pain, which God him
self puts the penitent unto, after his sins be forgiven: I must somewhat
stand hereon, the cause is weighty, and much misliked of the Adversaries, and
some other perchance to, that see not so far into the matter as they should
do before they give any judgment thereof. That the governors of the Church,
should remitte Canonical correction, and priuei satisfaction, with the bond of
penance, either enjoined, or else which by the laws spiritual might be
enjoined, many will confess. But that their power should reach to the
remitting of that pain, which Gods hand has laid upon the offender for
temporal correction, that they understand not.

God punishes us for sin the more because we punish not ourselves.
and was practiced of God him self before any man's laws were made for
punishment of sins, yet now it rises principally, upon lack of punishing
of our selves, or the accomplishing of such penance, as the Church of God
prescribes. For if the Church punnishe her Childrens faults by sharp
discipline, doubtless it satisficeth Gods righteousness, and he will not
punish bis in idipsum twice for one fault: Number. 1.
or if man earnestly and sufficiently judge him self, God has promised by S.
Paul, that he will not judge him also, that is to say, that he will not correct
him with more heavy discipline of this life or the life to come, for that
signifies this word iudicare, 1. Cor. 11.
as the Apostle him self, does interpret it. Then it follows, that the bond
of any temporal punishment to be inflicted by God him self, does not now
bind man otherwise, then for lack of necessary discipline to be taken in this
life, and therefore that Purgatory binds no man, but in respect of
satisfying Gods justice, which was not answered here before, either by our
selves, or by the Churches correction, and enjoined penance.

Consider secondly, that he that fully Church, and aunswering otherwise his
lack therein, the same person must of necessity be also discharged of
Purgatory, and al pain in this life which else God would have enjoined for
sin, because this debt of Purgatory rose unto the penitent for the answer
of Gods justice, and lack of payment in this life, the which being discharged
to the honor of God and the relief of the party, there remains no bond of
pain to come. For debt is discharged properly either by remitting it freely,
or by payment justly, and I speak rather of Purgatory, then of other pains
enjoined by God in this life, Purgatory is never suffered but for satisfying
for sin only, vvher other pains of this life may be for other causes.
because that is ever appointed to man, only as a recompense of Gods
justice, and as a due correction for sin remitted, when of al other pains in
this world, whether it be sickness or death, no man can assuredly say, that this
or that bodyly punishment came upon any man as a correction for his sins
only, or as a purgation of his life past. For sometimes such things follow ye
necessity of our corrupted nature, sometimes they be for our proof and
exercise, and sometimes for other causes. But those kinds of punishme^tes which
God lays upon man only for correction and satisfying for his sins, never
fall upon him after he be either judged by his own tears, or the Churches
sufficient satisfaction enjoined, or else upon reasonable causes remitted. The
like afflictions may continue in any person, after the bond of them be
removed, or may be given afterward: but for the satisfaction of his own
sins, or any debt proceeding thereof they be not, because the debt is
discharged, in so much, that I dare be bold to say, if any man were sick by
Gods appointment, for that cause only, to satisfy for his sins remitted
before in the sacrament, that he should straight recover upon the discharge of
the debt which he did owe to God for his justice, if that infirmity were for no
other cause but yt only, as it may be for many mo, whereof no man can easily
judge.

And therefore, not only Christ him self, as I shall declare hereafter, but
Aaron also healed in the old law the infirmities of thousands, which came
upon them only for temporal punishment of sins.

And in the sacrament of extreme unction, the Apostle S. James affirms, that
our Lord shall upon the priests prayer lift up the penitent, or ease him
of his sickness. Which may seem to be meant only or chiefly of that sickness,
which comes upon the party by Gods hand as a punishment of those sins,
which be remissible in the sacrament or such like means. lib. 3. de sacerdot.
As S. Chrysostom shows also a passing power in the ministers of Gods
Church, saying, that they may keep man's soul from perishing, and may charge
him with more easy pain even at his passing hence, besides that they may ease
his bodyly infirmity also, by their holy prayers in the act of extreme
unction: in this sense speaks he thereof.

But, as I said, because no man can well judge, when man is afflicted only
for temporal discipline or satisfaction, or when for other purposes to us
unknown, ye Church of God that uses high wisdom and moderation in all
things, medleth not directly in pardoning by her jurisdiction, any such
bodyely aflictions as God charge man with all in this life, which may be to
the forsaken as a beginning of their eternal damnation, (as S. Augustine says)
as well as a te^porall correction, and therefore not effectually remissible in
the Church. But the bond of Purgatory, that, I say, in the Church may be
released, and is released, at every time that man worthily receives a full and
plenarie remission of all penance enjoined, and due to be enjoined by the law
of the Churches decrees. I do not speak now, of the delivery of any person
from the pains of purgatory, which already is actually there, or for the
Churches power in releasing of their pains, It is another thing to release
Purgatory pains, and to prevent purgatory.
after they be in the course of Gods judgment for the same, I am not so far
yet: but I speak of the discharge of the bond thereof, or some portion of the
same, now before the party do pass hence, which is a great deal more
proper to ye Churches power, and more easy to be brought to pass, then when
the penitents soul is already in judgment there, to which place, the Churches
jurisdiction (as some suppose) does not extend. If the simple understand me not,
let him mark my meaning by an example: The pains of Hell can not, neither by
God nor man ordinarily be helped or released, after man be in the same, but the
debt of Hell which is due for every mortal sin, is discharged always at
our repentance, in so much that the priest in the sacrament of Penance,
with the sin ever remitteth the bond of Hell, and preuenteth Gods judgment
in the same: So if Purgatory could not at all belong to ye jurisdiction of ye
Church, nor no person therein, yet in the life of, the party some piece of the
debt thereof or all may be released before hand, whiles the party is in the
power of the Church and her discipline. And so it must needs be at every time
yt the Church pardons the party of all satisfaction, or any portion thereof
recompensing ye same by application of Christ's satisfaction and his Sanictes.
For the bond of Purgatory rises, as I have said, upon some satisfaction and
penance to be fulfilled or done in this life, the which being here either by
our pains accomplished to ye satisfying of Gods righteousness, or otherwise
pardoned, there is no debt or bond of purgatory at al, the which is so
ca^celled by the Church our Mother, that it ca^ not be required of God our
Father.

And this moved always the Church of God diligently to provide of her tender
mercy toward her loving Children, that they should never depart out of this
life in any det of penance, knowing well, that ye residews not satisfied here,
should be required at their hands before God in ye next life. And therefore
though many years of penance were prescribed to al such as did notorious
crimes, yet there was made ever lightly a prouiso, that at the hour of their
extremity. they should have peace and pardon, and the Churches blessing in ye
holy sacrament, and so depart free from bond of the Churches discipline, and
as far as in her lay, might be also discharged of the temporal scourge in
the next life, as no doubt they were, if there remained no other impediment in
them selves. So does Nice Council most mercifully provide, Can. 12. lib. 3.
Epist. 17
and so does Cyprian and other fathers of ye primitive Church, that saw in
their high wisdom, the temporal pain to come, much to hang on the parties
satisfaction, and the bond of ye Churches enjoined penance. And even at this
day provision is also made, that no penance be given, but upon condition of
his recovery, to any man that lies at the extremity of death, least he
should depart hence, Epist. 180
Ligatus, bound, as S. Augustine terms it: whereby the debt of his eioyned
satisfaction, might be required in Purgatory. And nothing in the world proves
more the Churches doctrine of Purgatory and Pardons, then does the continual
co^corde and most agreeable practice of these holy acts of binding and loosing
justly used in her government.

How the practice of pardons of these late hundredth years, differs from the
usage of the primitive Church, and in what sense such great numbers of years
and days be remitted by the Popes pardons. The eigth Chapter.
BUT here we must note some diversity in giving Pardons, and preventing
Purgatory pains, betwixt the primitive Church of old, and ours of these
latter hundredth years, which did most justly rise upon the alteration of men's
manners and state of things. For in the primitive Church the enjoined penance
was so large for every mortal crime, that it might seem very answerable to the
nature of the fault. And doubtless it may not otherwise be thought, but the
spirit of God did limitate satisfaction by the Canons, as agreeable in all
points to the debt of sins forgiven, which God required for answer of his
justice. And therefore when they gave a Pardon of the enjoined penance, there
could be no great doubt, but the penitent being in zeal and devotion qualified
thereunto, was therewith fully pardoned of Purgatory, and the bond of al pains
to come in the next life.

But now of days when penance and large satisfaction (our nature declining
ever to the worse, and devotion continually decaying) is not enjoined
according to the old Canons, and but a small sign thereof, remaining only in
secret satisfaction, which is not of it self in this exceeding flow of sin
any thing agreeable to the faults committed: in this case, to remitte only the
enjoined penance, were not enough commonly to prevent Purgatory pains, or to
discharge ye penitent of all satisfactorie correction to come. Whereby ye Church
by instigation of Gods spirit deals so much more mercifully now the^ before,
because the people had never so much need, to hang on pardon, as when their
sins be greatest, and their recompe^se least. Never ye less, such is ye
frowardnes of our time, yt they had rather take away penance contemptuously,
then have it released by ye power of God laufully. For the great infirmity of
this world was this manifould remission used, and yet the meeknes of the
Church, which by ye motion of God, she applies her self unto for the
distress of these days, and for the sinners sake, is yet most of sinners now
commonly conte^ned, and of very many, that have full great need thereof, as mere
folly laughed at. Yet the Church for her childrens relief bestows mercy
still, and a great deal less it is to offend on that side, then the other, as
no doubt the holy Ghost guiding her affares, she stands upright on both sides.

She seeing therefore, that ye remission of the enjoined penance could not
discharge us of the bond of transitory pain to come, and being sure yt it is
nolesse lawful to remitte the pains due by the Canons, as enjoined effectually
by ye Canons, she gives now pardons not only de iniunctis poenitentijs but
also, de iniungendis: of such penance as by the nature of the fault before
God, or by the decrees of Counsels should or had wont to be enjoined. For there
is no man that has in penance prescribed either of fasting or praying or
such like a thousand or more years. And yet it is known, that many such
pardons are, and have been given long. Neither could the debt of Purgatory
wholly be discharged now, as it was of old by the pardons of the primitive
Church, in which only there was remission of the penance appointed (because al
penance thought needful was then appointed) except there were releasing also
sometimes of all the penance, or a great piece of the penance that should by
law and reason have been enjoined. How the great number of days or years be
to be understand, in the form of Indulgences.


And this is the Churches meaning, in giving so many days and years as be
often times expressed in pardons, in titles of prayers, or use of certain
sa^crified creatures made holy by Gods word and prayer. Of which, because we
see not the original, and because by unlawful practice of Printers or
writers, the grauntes of diverse Bishopes for multiplication of the years, may
be joined togteher, against the meaning of ye giuers, there may be some
forged, and not authentical, yet we will not stand in that point, because it
is certain, that such be in deed granted diverse times, by them that have
lawful authority in ye Church. The undoubted sense whereof, though every man
may easily understand by the premises, yet fully to open the case which is now
so common in most men's mouths and not well considered of many:
Look how many days or years a man may deserve to be punished in this life,
if his sins were to ye uttermost taxed, and ye appointed penance of ye Church
fulfilled, so many years may the governors of the Church remit, and forgive
by a Pardon. But many a man may, and God knows often times does commit, so
many greuouse offenses, continue so long in sin, live so wantonly and so
carelessly, in all manner of wickedness eue^ to his life's end almost, that, being
converted by Christ's grace, and so deparring hence in his favor, as it often
through much mercy falls, he must needs be in exceeding great debt for so
long a life so euel spent. And, I think, if you call him to account for all
his common and daily offenses, This is over common a case in the world.
for all his days unthriftily wasted, for every of his idle words, for every
of his vain thoughts, for so many occasions of good works omitted, which he
ought have done, for often fellowship in other men's misdedes besides his own,
all this will rise to a great debt in a man's case yt never required in all his
time effectually, to have his debtes forgiven him, and therefore he must needs
stand much bound, even for his venial trespaces: which, though they deserve
not of their nature damnation eternal, yet being not remitted, they bind man
to transitory punnishment, according to the number, time and weight of them.

But now if you sit on the audit of the greater matters of this man's
conscience, where every of his sins deserved by the Churches limitation, for
correction only, after they be remitted, nere hand seven years penance, and
some many more, where he has done nothing else all his evil and long time,
but heaped sin upon sin, where infinite sacrilege boldly has been
committed, where his flesh was never satisfied of most unlawful lusts,
where his mind was ever full of greedy gain, where his hands or heart were
always imbrued with innocent blood, were no part of his mind or body, has
been free from what iniquity you can name: in all this corrupt case of many a
ma^s life, De com^ punc. rordis lib. 2.
where no good works (that I may may use S. Chrysostoms words) are found, by
which there may be any hope of release, where there is abundance of all sins
without any satisfaction, in this lamentable state of a life so evil spent,
how many years penance, (if it were possible for the party to live so
long) were he, by the Churches judgment, Note well this case.
by the weight of his wickedness, or by Christ's justice, to be chardged
withal? Surely if his life were not only a thousand years (for so long
almost did some of the old fathers line) but if it were ten thousand years,
he could not satisfy for so much temporal pain and debt of sins, as
reason, law, and Gods justice would and well might charge him withal,
though the great debt of everlasting damnation, by Christ's grace, were
mercifully remitted in ye priests absolution at his confession before.
Therefore, whether the party live or die, he is in debt for such penance, if
rigor were showed, as so great sins deserved. And if he lived ten thousand
years, he were bound in his life time, and in his body, to accomplish as he
might the due penance for his deserts, and if he die straight upon his
repentance, he is no less bound by suffering pain and punishment in the
next world to fulfill ye same. For Gods justice leeseth no right, because man
leeseth his life.

Neither is it necessary for the due payment of that great debt of so many
years, yt the pain of purgatory should endure so long, or so many years,
as had been necessary for ye accomplishing of his penance in this life. For ye
might, the force, the hougenes, the excess, and the nature of ye pain in ye
next world, is so fearful and so great, Super psalm. 37.
as S. Augustine often notes, that a great deal less time sufferance of the
same, is answerable to much more in the world and this present life. For what
comparation is there betwixt a days fasting here, and a days punishment in
purgatory? better it were surely to suffer a hundred years such penance as
the Church prescribes in this mortal life, that has in it much wordly ease,
and comfort for the release of the enjoined pain, then to abide one day or
weke in so grievous a torment, as the holy Doctors and all the Church holds
Purgatory to be.

Therefore to forgive such a grievous sinner in the latter end of his life
received to mercy, as we have now spoken of, a thousand or two thousand years
of penance, is as much in effect and nature of the terms, as to remitt and
release him of so much punishment, or the debt and bond of so much punishment
in Purgatory, as is proportional and correspondent to so many days or years
of penance, as the penitent in this life was bound unto by the Canons of the
Church, or the just enioyning of his Ghostly Father. Orige^ in Number li ^ Hom.
11.
For the Pardons measure the matter, not by the limits of Purga^orie, the
bonds, borders, or way of limitatio^ whereof, the Church knows not, but by
the years and times of penance prescribed to sinners by the holy Canons, upon
the bond whereof, Gods justice temporal in the next world, does, as I have
proved, much depend.

To be short then and plain, to give a pardon of a thousand or two thousand
years or more, if the grant goes so, is as much to say, as to forgive so
much punishment as might be aunswerable for so great penance, not fulfilled
in this life. As if I were behind with ye Church and indebted to God hard before
my death of a hundredth days fasting, in which case. I ca^ not recompense, if
my Bishope then, or the chief head of al ye Ecclesiastical Hierachie do
forgive me twenty of the said days, then my punishment shall be so much less
in Purgatory, not by twenty days, I say, of Purgatory pains, but by so
much as in force of satisfaction there, is answerable to twenty days fast
here. So that, ye Church measuring her mercies, by the years of penance
deserved by ye law in this life or else where, takes effect not only in this
life, where there ca^ not be so many days in our short time, but especially
in preue^ting Purgatory pains, where there may well be punishment answerable
in a very short time, to all the days prescribed by the measures of the law,
and discipline of our present days in the world.

And yet I talk not now of taking or delivering any man out of Purgatory, so
much sooner as so many days release does importe, when he is in it already,
but I mean (as I often say for the simples sake) of him, yt is yet alive, and
in the Churches jurisdiction, and therefore may have by the Keys of the
Church a pardon of his debtes, either all, or part, to prevent the pains of
Purgatory, or to discharge ye debt thereof before that terrible day come, when
it shall be actually required. And in this sense undoubtedly are the great
number of years and days to be taken, which be exceeding necessary to procure
mercy in these evil times, wherein we may behold the pitiful waaste of
christian works every where, and little penance to be done no not of ye better
sort of Christian people. As for the other disobedient children, that every way
laugh their Mother to scorn, whether she use severity of discipline, or
lenity in remission, they have no part, neither of the Churches blessing, nor
of the holy works of Sanites, nor of Gods own peace and pardon. Our Lord
give them the grace of repentance, that they may have a taste, either of the
Churches discipline, or of her mercy and leuitie.

It is proved as well by sundry examples of the old Law, as by Christ's own
often fact and his Apostles, that enjoined or deserved punishment may be
released by the governors of the Church in their Pardons. The Ninth Chapter.
SOme may here marvel percha^ce, that such power should be given to mortal
men, as to remitte such great portion of penance as by justice ought to be
enjoined, or such a number of years as are oppointed for satisfaction and
correction of former misdedes, thereby to remove from the party, the heavy
hand of God prepared for judgment, who, would not wonder much hereat, if they
considered that the debt of hell pains and eternity of punishment, which
incomparably excedeth many thousand years, might by the priests office, and
always is in the due execution of the sacrament of penance, fully removed
from the party penitent. And where mercy puts away deserved damnation, there
may much less force of grace turn away the punishment of Purgatory, being
but transitory, and equivalent only to the penance of a number of years
prescribed. Pristhod in the nevve law of more power to purchase mercy them
in the old.
In which case, if ye Church of God should have no pre-eminence now after the
incarnation of Christ, since which time the ways of mercy toward mankind
must needs be much enlarged, our state and government should be much
inferior to the regiment and to the priesthod of the old law, which truly
did in all things, but as a shadow and figure, resemble the Majesty of our
Churches pre-eminence, especially there, where mercy and grace were to be
showed, which came by Christ Jesus.

Behold the^ some step of this more excellent power given to our chief
priests, Moses and Aaron procured mercy and pardon for the people.
in the persons of Moses and Aaron, who are noted in the book of Exodus and
Numbers meruelously to have procured Gods mercy, and sometimes by force of
sacrifice, prayer, and singular zeal, to have released some great portion of
the pains and punishment which God him self by his own mouth and
determination had laid upon the people. With what marvelous confidence of his
office, and pity of the afflicted sort, did one of the^ cry out unto God to
hold his hand, and pardon the people, after they had deserved so great
punishment for worshipping the golden Idol of the Calfe in wilderness? Lord
(says Moises) this people has committed an horrible sin, and they have
erected golden Gods. Forgive them this sin, Lord, or else if thou will
not, dashe me out of thy book toe, which thou haste written.

This gouernoure and this priest, prayed not after a common sort for pardon of
the peoples punishment, but he claims it with confidence, and in a manner
requires it as by his jurisdiction and office. Such was the force of prayer
and priesthod, before Christ's spiritual sovereignty was honored in the
world, otherwise then in a figure. And yet, God, in a manner, was at yt point
with them then, that he would pardon and punish at their pleasures. For when
the sin was exceeding grievous, he makes as it were means to Moises, that he
should not stay him, nor his Anger, from punishing of the offenders: Let me
alone Moses (says our Lord) and suffer me to be angry. Ibid.


Number. 12.
So when his sister Mary was punished by a leprosy for enuiyng at her brothers
auhority, he cried unto our Lord and said: Lord God heal her again of this
disease, and of his mercy so he did, enioyning only unto her seven days
separation. Aaron also procured pardon for the people by the like force of this
prayer, and priesthod, when by sedition the people had highly offended God:
Number. 16.
yea he did as it were limite and moderat Gods appointed punishment, that
his wrath should extend no farther but to the destruction of a certain number.
For when God said unto Moses and Aaron, depart you hence from amongst this
people, for even now I will consume them. Upon which word straight the
destruction began and grew very sore, a flame of fire pitifully consuming them.
But Aaron out of hand with his incense, ran to that part where the plague
of Gods ire wasted most, and there censed up toward heaven, and earnestly
requested for the people, and so placing him eue^ just betwixt those that were
slain, and the residewe that were alive, the wrath and indignation of God
ceased.

But it were to long to make rehearsal of all such punishementes as God has
afflicted his people withal for sin, and yet has been either wholly put of,
or much thereof abated by these priests even of the old law, when they had
no warrant, promise, ne commission in sacrament or other wise, other to bind
or loose as by jurisdiction, or any otherwise, but by their prayers: where
ours of the new law and testament have expressly received a full power and
commission concerning the same. Therefore now in the new law and in the days
of grace where mercy and judgment be met together, Psalm ^4.
truth and peace have joined, we shall find express examples of justice and
judgment on ye one side, and grace and mercy on ye other, not only in ye
government of Popes and Bishopes, but in Christ's own regiment and his holy
Apostles, from whom to our priests, all this power proceeds.

In them then, of whom heresy and falsehod do stand in awe, let us see
whether any examples may be found of pardoning the pain due for sin. The
seven devils possession of one woman's body, Lucae 7. and 8. Christ him self
gave a pardon.
was no small punishment for sin: yet when it pleased Christ, he both
forgave her the sin, and discharged her of that horrible punishment for the
same: and she had a grau^d Pardon and a plenary Indulgence, because she loved
much. Yea a woman that had committed adultery, Joan. 8.
and therefore by ye law subject to death, was pardoned by Christ, not only of
her sin and damnation, but of ye penalty which by Gods law she was subject unto
for ye same syn, whereby he declared that he had full power, not only to remit
sins, but also to give pardon for any temporal pain or punishment provided by
law for sin. where are they, woman that do accuse thee, quoth Christ: Here
is none here, said she, Lord. If none have condemned thee, says Christ, the^
do not I condemn thee: go thy way therefore, and sin no more. And this is
in the viij. of S. John's Gospel.

Which example I allege ye rather, because. S. Augustine notes it as a
strange power and jurisdiction, Epist. 54^
yt should remit the punishment enjoined by ye law it self for a public
crime, where ye person was taken with ye manner: Yea he applies it to Priests
and Bishopes, and proves, yt it becomes the^ at ye least to make
intercession to ye temporal officers, by occasion, for ye release of offenders,
eue^ there where they be subject unto ye appointed punishment of ye laws. Wherein,
he says, that though they ca^ not by their authority command their release,
yet yt it behooves ye Civil Magistrates to release ye pain, where they do
make request. For which cause Macedonius a Magistrate had chale^ged S. Augustine,
or rather asked him ye question, why Bishopes did so much intermedle in ye
temporal judgment for procuring pardon to offe^ders, in so much yt they would
not take it well, if they obtained not the remission of the parties punishment,
for whom they made intercession. To whom S. Augustine answers trimly and
largely: where amongst other things he says, Ipse Dominus intercessit, ne
lapidaretur adultera, and eo modo nobis commendauit intercessionis officium.
Our Lord him self made intercession for the woman taken in adultery, and by
that fact commended unto us the office of intercession.

And S. Augustine excommunicated County Bonifacius that he took from the
Church an offender, Epist. 187
and put him to execution when he came to the Church for mercy and pardon. So
prone has Gods Church ever been to remitte the pain for sin deserved, not
only where she had full authority to pardon at her pleasure, but even there
where it could not otherwise be had, but by intercession to other men who had
to do therewith.

Again Christ delivered in the fifte of S. John, one that had been feeble eight
and thirty years long for a punishment of his sins, and that he might
understand, that, that sickness came unto him for correction of his former
offenses, he said unto him after in the temple: Lo, now thou art made whole,
look thou sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee. Neither is it
unlike, but the party had his sins remitted long before Christ healed him of
his corporal infirmity, by the sacrifices of the law and by ordinary means of
that time, through the faith in Christ Jesus. Whereby you may perceive, that
our high Bishope Christ has given pardon to many, not only of their sins
and everlasting damnation, but also of the temporal pain and punishment,
either prescribed by the law, or enjoined by Gods own appointment. Then we
need not wonder, that the Churches officers holding by his right both the
title to pardon and to punish, should be by his example so prove to mercy,
which of the two is always most commended in spiritual regiment.

Never the less we mean not, that ye priest has alwais such power as Christ
had in removing of bodyly sickness, not only because they know not when it is
the deserved pain for sin, as he did, but also because, as S. Augustine
says, Remissio in Ecclesia magis fit propter futurum iudicium: Enchir. Cap. 66.
Pardoning in the Church has more respect to the judgment of the next
world. He means by the temporal judgment, and for that he alleges out of
S. Paul, that the judgment, which he wills us to prevent by punishing our
selves, is the correction of such as God loves, least they be damned with the
world, which can not signify the everlasting judgment. We mean not then, that
the Pardons of the Ecclesiastical Magistrates should perteine always to ye
releasing of bodyly pains duly deserved for sin, or for other causes
appointed, because Christ so did not unto al, but unto some as it pleased his
wisdom: but this we say, that as he of his mercy took away and released the
sinners of certain temporal afflictions, as well appointed by the Law of
Moises, as enjoined by Gods own hand, and so gave a pardon of that which both
Moises and his own Father appointed: even so may the Apostles and their
successors, pardon any man, that is worthy of that benefit, of some part or
al such penance, as their own law prescribed, or the justice of God, upon the
bond of their decrees, and the debt of the sinners, has in the next life
prepared. Although, as I have once noted before, not only ye Apostles
miraculously, but also Gods Priests daily do heal in the sacrament of
extreme unction and prayers, not only sins, Jacob. 5.
but the penitent of their sickness and infirmity, where ye disease especially
came of sin, as I suppose, or otherwise, when it is expedient to the party and
glorious to Gods name.

But in S. Paul we have an invincible proof f ye authority and jurisdiction of
Bishopes and principal Pastors, Jurisdiction exercised, by S. Paul.
touching as well ye power of enjoined penance and satisfaction for sins
committed, as ye lawful power of pardoning the same which before was enjoined,
and so in one fact of ye Apostle a clear practice of binding and loosing. He
first bound him by exco^municatio^ yt had so grievously offended, and to show
what a terrible torment this kind of punishment is, and how much it is to be
dred, he makes it evident by a strange corporal vexation, yt al Christian men
might conceive ye misery of those persons which be excommunicated hereafter,
when the external sign and miraculous torment should cease in the Church. I
will report the matter fully: There was amongst the Corinthians one of
reputation, 1. Cor. 5.
that kept unlawfully his fathers wife, the which being known to their Apostle
S. Paul, who then was absent from them, and being acco^ted of him, as in deed
it was, an exceeding grievous fact and notorious, he gave in charge to the
Church of Corinth, to take the person that had so offended, as excommunicated,
that is to say, to be separated from the sacraments, the service, and the
common fellowship of Saints. But see with what a majesty and might of
operation, with what force of words and authority of his calling, with what a
strange kind of punishment Christ's officer here corrects the offender.
Thus runs his determinate sentence, on the offender, that all the world may
take heed and wonder at the Churches authority, and contemn the vain voices
of the^ that do restrain the power of Gods ministers only to the preaching of
the Gospel. The form of excommunication and binding. offenders used by S.
Paul.
I being absent in body, but present in spirit, have already given judgment
as well as if I were present, that the person, that has thus wickedlie
wrought, should be delivered up to Satan in the virtue of our Lord Christ
Jesus, you there being gathered with my spirit in the name of our said Lord
Jesus, and all this for the vexation of his flesh, that his soul may be safe in
the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This in effect, is the Apostles sentence on that Incestous person, whereby he
was temporally tormented by the force of S. Paul's power of binding sinners,
given by Christ, and exercised no otherwise, as you may see, but in Christ's
virtue and holy name. Where it may be noted for a strange efficacy of man's
word, that the devil him self should be thereby appointed to torment a
sinners body, not as he would but as far as ye divine Magistrate shall limite
him. Diabolus enim, quia ad hoc paratus est, vt auersos a Deo accipiat in
potestate^, audita sententia corripit eos: The devil (says S. Ambrose) who is
always ready to take them to his power, In 1. Cap. 1. ad Tim.
that are turned from God, straight as soon as he hears the sentence
pronounced upon sinners, he does afflict and correct the^. As it may also
appear by our Sauiors words in ye Gospel, Lucae 13.
of a womam y^ had spiritum infirmitatis, the spirit of infirmity, who^, yt
devil had xviij. years together fast bound in sickness for her sins, to whom
also Christ gave a pardon by impositio^ of his holy hands. Where we may have an
other example of his mercy, in loosing the temporal band and punishment
appointed for sin.

But let us turn to S. Paul's patie^t, who^ we left by ye key of ye Apostles
jurisdiction so fast locked and bound for his wickedness, and let us consider,
whether by the same jurisdiction, he may not receive pardon and be loosed, by
which he was bound and punished before: Yea let us not doubt but it stood in
Paul's pleasure, to pardon ye man sooner or later, as he thought most convenient
for ye Churches edifiyng, and ye parties profit, and therefore might have tied
him for twenty years together either in Satha^s bo^des, or other e^ioyned
penance, or contrary, if he had thought expedient, might have loosed him
within one hour, and so have given him so many days of pardon as he list, and
meant to recompense by Christ's satisfaction and the communion of Saints, in
which, the lackes of certain may be supplied by the abundance of others. S.
Paul gave pardon. 2. Cor. 2.
Thus then S. Paul meaning to pardon the penitent, gives the Church of
Corinth to understand his pleasure touching the said sinner, that there stood
in the bands of penance, upon his former sentence. Let this rebuke and check
given him of many, be enough. And now rather, it were expedient that you did
forgive him and comfort him, least perhaps he be drowned and ouerwhelmd with
excessive sorrow. Therefore I pray you, renew and confirm your love toward him
again: I move you in this matter to prove, whether you be obedient in all
things. And where you pardon, there do I forgive also. In deed as for me, when
I pardon, it is for your sakes, and in the person of Christ, that we be not
circumuented of the devil, whose meaning (in such matters) I well understand.

Thus you see did yt Apostle punish, and thus did he remit again. Having ye
moderation of ye Churches discipline in his hands so far as his jurisdiction
did exte^d amongst Christ's people, whose obedience in all such matters he
claimed, as you may perceive by his own words, not yet without great respect
and consideration of ye offenders case, and especial care of the Churches
edifying. Cap. 65. Enchir.
For full truly S. Augustine said: In action autem poenitentiae, vbi tale crimen
commissum est, vt is qui co^misit a Christi etia^ corpore separetur, non tam
consideranda est mensura temporis, quam doloris: In ye doing of penance where
the sin is such that it deserves excommunication, there is not so much
respect to be had of the time, as of his sorowfulnes that committed the fact.

That the Church of God means not to make al men partaker of her Pardons
which would seem to be relieved thereby, but such only as be of fit
disposition therefore, and how they ought to be qualified, that must be
partakers thereof. The tenth Chapter.
IT is here necessary therefore, yt we should advertise all me^, that ye Popes
and Bishops of holy Church, though they have not only by Christ's express
word, but also by the warraunt of the Apostles, Pardons are not al vvays
beneficial no more the^ the sacraments themselves.
and practice of their predecessors, authority to bind and loose, yet every
of their Pardons or releasing of penance, not always to be beneficial to
every one that shall claim benefit thereby, either in the world present, or
the next. For the holy sacraments them selves do not at all times atteine to
that effect in man, for which they were instituted by Christ, through the
unworthiness of the party that should receive them. Therefore to make the
Pardons beneficial, as there must be good consideration and respect in the
giver, so the receiver, must by especial love, zele, and devotion be made fit
and apt to be partaker of so singular a treasure.

The giver of the Pardons because he is a man, may have sinister respect to the
parties person, whom he seeks to pleasure, either for kindred, for friendship,
for fear, for riches, for honor, and such like: and they which required
the^, may for slouthfullnes because they list not do penance for their
sins, or for delicateness, whiles they refuse to abstain from things that
be pleasant, for recompense of their pleasures paste: in these and such other
cases, some Popes may give by the abuse of their Keys and authority, or by
error proceeding on false suggestion, a pardon, as the penitent may also
receive in the face of man. But let them assure them selves that so be
affected, that God him self, who can not be deluded, nor by sinister affection
carried from just judgment, will not here confirm the sentence of his servant
who was in this matter either him self to blame, without cause to bestow so
precious a perle of Gods mercy, or else ye party unfit, that required to be
partaker of that grace, whereof before God he is proved unworthy. Though the
pre-eminence be never so great, yet as well the Key of order may err through
the fault of one party in remitting sins in the sacrament, as the Key of
jurisdiction may err, in pardoning the enjoined penance out of ye sacrament.
Therefore it is not good for any man to leave his prescribed penance undone, or
to omit such necessary works of christianity, as whereby he shall rather be
worthy to be partaker of a pardon.

Christ our lord pardoned Mary Magdelen of many sins, and by all likelihod
forgave her all ye pain due for her grievous offenses, both eternal and
temporal. Mary she was wonderfully well framed and apt to receive such a
singular benefit, Lucae 7.
for she loved exceeding much, and therefore much was forgiven her. She washed
Christ's feet with her tears, and with the hear of her head she wiped them
again. She honored Christ's body with ointement of price toward his
burial, with other such express tokens of passing love of our Lord, which
did win her a pardon of so many sins. For of love it is written, Charitas
operit multitudinem peccatoru^, Charity covers a number of faults. 1.
Petri. 4
And yet after all this large remission, if we believe histories of the Church,
she ceased not al her life to do passing penance.

Pardons dyscharg not men from doing good works
In deed if we speak exactly, a Pardon does not so much remitte to the
penitent any good work either freely done, or chardged unto us by others
apointenent, as it does release ye bond or debt of penance: that where before
I was of necessity bond to satisfaction for penance of my sins, I may now
after the debt be remitted, pay my penance freely, that I may not appear
unworthy of other men's relief, Note well
whiles I refuse not to work also my self as a poor member in the whole
mystical body of Christ, in the knot whereof his mercy comes unto me. And if
it then so fall out, that I by reason of sickness or short life, can not
fulfill my penance, I shall the^ departing hence, be free by the grace of
Christ, granted me in the Indulgence, and so be wholly free of such debt, as I
else should have supplied by sufferaunce in Purgatory, in my soul.

Let no man therefore, do less penance for any pardons sake, if his
ability serve thereunto, which is never given to hinder the fructes of good
works and repentance. But where there is before God and our consciences just
cause, why we ca^ not fulfill such necessary and requisite satisfaction, as is
enjoined or deserved, there we may be in assured hope, that God will confirm
the sentence of his servants. Otherwise, as S. Cyprian says, if any man not
thus qualified, seek deceitfully for a peace or pardon, he deceives him self
and Gods priest to, Lib. 1. Epist. 2. and lib. 4. Epist. 2.
who sees the faces outwardly of the penitents, but the hearts of the^ God
only beholds, and according to the behauioure of their minds and meaninges
shall judge them in the next world, and amend in their punishment the sentence
of his priests.

Gods Church, though she be much inclined to mercy, yet she cries not
with the flatterers and false preachers of the world peace, where there is no
peace. Enchir. Cap. 70.
And of our mother the Church it may well be verified that S. Augustine spoke
of God him self in the like case. Nemini dedit laxame^tum peccandi (says he)
quamuis miserando deleat iam facta peccata, si non satisfactio congrua
negligatur. She has given no man a freedo^ to sin, though by mercy, she
remitteth sins already past, if competent satisfaction be not neglected. So
that a Pardon can not well be beneficial to any man yt neglects penance, or
without al cause omitteth his duty in fulfilling the same, though it be
exceeding commodious and profitable to him that lacks time and space to
satisfy, where of good will and devout intent he is ready thereunto.

Therefore I would advertise all such, what is to be doe^ of them that have
received a pardon.
as have a Pardon or Indulgence upon just and true suggestio^ obtained, for
release of their enjoined penance, or other deserved pain, and thereupon
omit to do their said satisfaction, that they help the lack thereof
otherwise, where their ability is the better. As if they can not through
feeblenes, or other notorious perceiving of harm thereby fast for satisfaction
of their sins, the^ let the^ supply yt by more liberal almose, and
charitable relief of such as be in necessity. For that kind of charity
Christ gave in charge to the pharisees, Lucae 11. Almose purges not mortal
sins, but venial.
for the purging of their sins, which signifies the recompense of the
residewe of their pain, and necessary clensing of the remnantes of their
faults and filth after the remission of the same. For almose will not purge
deadly sin, and the very iniquity thereof, as S. Augustine well noted in the
place last out of him alleged. Of the pain temporal then, Christ said, give
almose, and al is clear with you. But if you can not that way for lack and
insufficiency, then be earnest in prayers, August. 1. Enchir
and continually cry out in the Pater noster, forgive us our debtes, dimitte
nobis debita n^stra, and by yt Orison not only venial sins, but also the
temporal debt that remains for deadly crimes, after they be remitted and
repented for, Spiritual exercises
be forgiven.

In this case also, it is very good to help both by counsel and travail to
turn the wicked sinners from their evil ways, and to call Heretics and
Schismatikes home to Gods Church and Christ's faith. For of that work it is
written, that it covers a multitude of sins. Again to be daily and devour
at the blessed sacrifice of ye Mass, there with zele and love to embrase with
Marie Magdelene ye holy body of our Savior, Lucae 19.
and often to receive the same with zacheus into our house and temple of our
body, in the holy sacrament. This most excellent act of religion does
wonderfully diminish the deserved pain for sin, and makes us fit to receive
fructfully, the Pardons given by the Magistrates spiritual in the person of
Christ.

Or if this, in these dismal days, may not be had, yet learn at the least,
as well to lament the lack of it, as to be sorrowful and contrite for thy
sins: for earnest unfeigned tears proceeding of love and devotion have
purchased many one a pardon. Peter wept bitterly, and loved heartily, and
therefore he was restored to grace and mercy, and after Christ had punished, as
in way of penance, his three denialls, with a triple demand of his love, as
though he had doubted of his heart toward him, as S. Hilarie, S Cyrill, and
other do interpreet it, Super Joan. vlt.
he not only gave him a pardon of all that was past, but made him his substitute
in earth and chief pastor of al his flock.

If it stand thus therefore with ye party penitent, then the Popes Pardon shall
undoubtedly be beneficial unto him, and otherwise either not at al, or else
nothing so much as they seem to sound. For although it be an old saying,
quod, indulgentiae tantum valent, quantum sona^t, that Indulgences be of as
great force and valor, as the form of their words do importe, yet that is
not otherwise to be understand, then there, where there may seem just cause of
grant to ye geuers, and not evil disposition in the receivers. Adrianus.
For as Adrianus that once was Pope him self reasons: If the Magistrates of
the Church may not without just cause give dispensation concerning vows
oaths, fastes, marriages, or such like, nor dispose the temporal treasures of
ye Church, without reasonable cause: then may not surely ye Bishopes be
lauyshe of the treasure of Gods House, which is much more precious, whereof
there can be no man partaker, that is an vnprofable member of the body.

Never the less the causes of giving indulgences may be more or less
reasonable, according to the state and variety of things, which to the wisdom
of Gods Vicar in earth is best see^, whom Christ so rules in that case, that
he may be most beneficial to his holy household, in so much, that it is not
to be doubted, but in these days and in this great contempt of devout and
religious exercises, the moving only of the people, to prayer to holy
peregrinations, to the obedience of the Church, may be a sufficient cause, why
there should be to prayers said upon books or beads sanctified creatures, for
such purpose annexed great remission. The things that heretics do hat,
must most be reverenced.
For look what things be most condemned of Heretics, those things must
Christian men be induced to reverence with most singular zele and religion.
Neither ca^ therebe any thing in ye world so necessary for us christian me^ of
these times that be so void of good works, as by devotion and entier zele to
ioyn with our elders, yt in ye holy communion of Sa^ctes, we may be partakers
of their virtuous deeds. The end of the Popes pardons.
And yt is ye very end of al ye Popes Pardons, to make us in our lack of
satisfaction for our sins, fellows and coparteners of the abundance that was
in Christ first, and then by him in our holy brethren departed before us.

Upon all which it is very plain, that every man can not beneficially receive
ye fructe of a Pardon, this at least being requisite in every man, that
lists to attein benefit thereby, that he be in state of grace, and in earnest
intent to continue in the knotte of Christ his Church, Thus he must needs be
qualified that vvil take benefit by a pardon.
with love and liking of the holy works of his christian brethren, and
accomplishing at least, that small work, which commonly now is joined to the
Pardon, for increase of christian devotion. The continuance of which devotion,
that more and more decays, makes the Pardons to be more common at this day
and of late years, then they were in the primitive Church, when most men in
the spring of christian religion and feruoure of faith, sought to satisfy
exactly the debt of the penance, or else, which was a common case the^,
recompensed it by Martyrdom, though S. Gregori the first of that name more then
nine hundred year since, Vide cronica Pa^dalio. Lutherani.
in ye ordering of the stations at Rome, is known to have given pardons for
years or days, in like form as now is used. And clear it is, that the
thing it self being found lawful, and no Protestant alive ca^ ever be hable
to show me the first vser thereof, much less that it was ever controlled by
any man that ever was compted Catholic, it may be measured according to the
necessity of the time, and so, as the Church may be most edified.

And thanks be given to God, the effect of the love of Indulgences, and the
contrary issue of the contempt thereof, do well prove the Churches good
meaning therein. For if you view both parties well, you shall perceive more
profitable devotion, more christian charity, more furtherance of common
wealths causes, in that side that fears pains for their sins, with ye
Prophet David, even after they be remitted, and therefore seek for all means
most humbly by man's ministry to receive mercy, in one year you shall see
in these devout persons more fructes of repentance, then in a whole old man's
life can be found in all the other side, that contempteously disdayn or
scornfully deride the most profitable usage both of penance, and Pardons in
Gods Church. Therefore in so great proof of the benefit that proceeds
from this kind of remissions (for so Alexander the third above four hundredth
years since termed Pardons used then to be given in Dedication of Churches)
and upon most assured grounds, Vide tit. de poeniten. and remis.
that it well agrees both with Gods word, and practice of the primitive
Church, and never condemned of any, but of such as be them selves worthily
condemned of other great heresies and errors, the Magistrates will show
mercy still in Christ's behalf, and all the holy Bishopes succeding laufully
the Apostles of Christ, will give peace and benediction to such as humbly
ask it at their hands, Math. 10.
and if the parties be worthy, their peace by Christ's promise shall rest
upon them: if they either contemn it, or be unworthy of it, then no harm
done, it will return to the giuers again.

Treuly, that holy peace which Christ gave to the Apostles at his coming in to
them, at his departure from them, ^oan. 20.
and else as he entered upon any holy action, signified nothing else but an
agreement and peace of man's soul with God, and did no doubt purge the^ from
their daily infirmities, which we call Venial sins, and the bond of all
pain, as it may be thought, due for the same, that in ye presence of Gods
majesty, sin might cesse, and the parties appear clean before his face, yt
had no spot of sin in him self at all, as by ye said peace yet given to the
worthy receivers by holy Bishops ministry, Bishops blessyngs.
some l^ke effect does surely ensue. I use this term of peace, when I speak
of pardons, not because they are precisely meant in yt actio^ of gening peace,
common to Christ and his Apostles, but because I see ye old Fathers lightly
call yt peace, which we now call Pardoning: Math. 10
and perchance they did allude to that which Christ willed his Disciples to
bestow on every ho^shold for a kind of blessing. Which no doubt was some
great benefit, and so great, yt our Master signified unto the^, yt many
should be unworthy of it, and yt the fructe thereof, should redunde to the^
selves. Which caused both Bishops of old (for S. Augustine makes mention
thereof) to give their blessings, De Ciui. Dei li. 22 Cap. 8.
and every man humbly to require the same on their knees, whereby surely some
spiritual grace was received, and remission either of Venial trespaces, or
pain due unto former sins, given. Let apishe Camites here mock and mow at
their Mother, as they customably do, whiles the obedient children, the
discrete and devout of Gods Church think it an high point of wisdom,
only to consider the marvelous direction of our forefathers ways, in the
doctrine of discipline, and awe of Gods religion.

That the Bishops being the highest ministers of Gods Church, and namely the
Pope as the principal of the rest, may only lawfuly give Pardons, and in what
sense the souls departed may be releiued by the same. The eleventh Chapter.
OF the necessary disposition of the^ that should effectually receive benefit
by ye Pardons of ye Church and of the right intent of the^ that should give the
same, we have already sufficiently spoken. And now perchance some may think it
necessary, that it should be opened briefly, in who^ this authority of
releasing the pains enjoined for sin, does principally consist. Whereof I
shall with better will bestow a few words, because we shall have occasion
thereby to open the common sense of a whole Council both learned and godly,
touching the matter of Pardons, in the judgment whereof, assuredly proceeding
from the Holy Ghost, we may with saftie take our rest.

Of the lawful minister therefore of these remissions, Who be the lavvfull
ministers in giving pardons.
the scripture in precise terms prescribes nothing, though the power of
binding and loosing, wherevpo^ the matter stands, is proved properly to be an
act of the Keye, namely of jurisdiction and external regiment, which agrees
not to the simple priests, having no further jurisdiction, but in the secret
court of man's conscience. Whereupon, as also by the usage of al ages, and by
the prescriptio^ of the law, it is proved, that Bishops only or such as have
their authority for the execution of their office, may laufully give remission
of satisfactions appointed for sins remitted. Neither were it convenient, that
the release of deserved penance should be had of every inferior priest, lest
the discipline of the Church should so become co^temptible, the release thereof
being made common to so many. And it is the high providence of God, that the
way to remitte deadly sins, which is of necessity to our salvation, should be
near us in every place, and by the common ministers of the Church at al times
to be obtained, Why the inferior priests cannot give pardons.
where the remission of the Churches discipline being often more necessary to
be fulfilled, and never or very seldom necessary to be wholly released, should
not be so easily obtained, but hardly had at the hands of a few, and them of
excellent authority and reverence, in Gods Church.

And not only that, but also the nature of the act of pardoning, does wholly
chaleng this function to the higher Magistrates of Christ's Common Wealth. For
it stands not only upon the remission of debt, but also upon recompense or
repaying again the bond thereof, by the common treasure of the whole houfhold
of the faithful, which can not be by reason dispensed and bestowed upon any
man that lacked, by any, but such as are principal stewardes and rulers of
some whole portion of the said family, as Bishops lawfully succeding the
Apostles are known in this case to have received the Keys of Christ's
kingdom, and the dispensing of his holy mysteries, and therefore may justly
dispose the treasure of Christ and his Saints satisfactions to the benefit
of the faithful, in whose lardge cures, it can not otherwise be thought, but
there be the merits of diverse holy and blessed men laid up in store before
God, for the relief of their brethren, which may be disposed at the Bishops
wisdom, to such namely as be of his own charge and regiment. But of
particular parishes, it can not be certain, that there should always be some
sufficiency of abundant satisfactions, to remain without decay, for the
continual bestowing upon some of the said small circuit, and that is it, which
the schole diuins say, in particulari ecclesia merita non sunt indeficientia:
merits of Sanctes be not vnspendable in particular Churches.

But the communion of Sanctes being the general benefit of the whole common
wealth of Christ's Church, continues for ever by the abundance of many holy
works which may satisfy for other men's sins, according to the disposition of
such as be the governors and guides of our souls, that the overplus and
abundance of one sort, may ever relieve the lackes of an other sort, as S.
Paul speaks in the like matter.

And yet the Bishops them selves have not in this case so full power and
prerogative, No Bishop has so great preemine^ce in giving Pardons as the pope
has, and why.
being but rulers of portions of Christ's Church, as he has whom Christ
appointed to be his own Vicare through his whole dominion. For as Christ the
head of the whole body is anointed far more plentifully, then al his brethren,
so doubtless he that occupies his seat of judgment, through out the whole
earth, to whom not only the affairs of al private men, but also the
confirmation and government of all his brethren Bishops, of what dignity so
ever they be, does belong: Upon whom Christ has laid the fundation of his
Church, and to whom he severally gave the Keys of heaven, with most ample
authority, both to loose and bind, feed and govern all the sheep of his
fold: It is this man, no doubt, that has the full treasure of the holy
communion of Sanctes to bestow, with marvelous authority over man's soul, with
wonderful might in binding, and exceeding grace and mercy in loosing. This is
the man of whom S. Bernard says: Ad Eugenium.
alluding to Iosephes pre-eminence in Pharos house, cons^ituit enim Dominum
Domus suae, and Principem omnis possessionis suae: He has made this man the
Lord of al his house, and the Prince of his whole possession. This man
therefore representing Christ's own person through the whole Church, and
having the cure and regiment of every one of Christ's sheep, may most
lawfully, 2. Cor. 2.
donare aliquid in persona Christi, show mercy to any man in Christ's behalf,
none being exempted from his jurisdiction, nor any of the Churches treasure
restreined from his disposition.

But because I can not ground this my meaning better, then upon a general
Council, I will report the decree of the most holy assembly holden at Lateran
more then three hundredth years since, under Innocentius the third, by which
not only this doctrine of Pardons is approved, but also the superfluity
thereof, and such disorder as was therein through covetousness of evil
persons, or lack of authority in the giuers, is corrected, with a declaration
who be the only lawful ministers in such remissions of enjoined penance.
Thus goes the decree: Cano. 62.
Quia per indiscretas indulgentias atque superfluas, quas quidam Ecclesiarum
Praelati facere non verentur, and claues Ecclesiae contemnuntur, and
poenitentialis satisfactio eneruatur: decernimus, vt cum dedicatur Basilica,
non extendatur Indulgentia extra annum, sine ab vno solo, sieve a pluribus
Episcopis dedicetur: ac deinde in anniuersario dedicatiouis tempore,
quadraginta dies de iniunctis poenitentijs, indulta remissio non excedat: and
intra hunc quoque dierum numerum, indulgentiarum literas praecipimus moderari,
quae pro quibuslibet causis aliquoties conceduntur, cum Romanus Pontifex (qui
plenitudinem obtinet potestatis) hoc in talibus moderamen consueuerit obseruare.

That is to say: Because the keys of the Church be contemned, and
sacramental satisfaction is much weakened by certain indiscrete and
superfluous Indulgences, the which certain Prelates of Churches ar over bold to
bestow: we decree, that hereafter at the dedication of any Chapel no Pardon be
given more then for one year, whether it be dedicated by one Bishop or more,
and then that there be no remissions afterward in the yearly celebrating of
the said dedications, more the^ of forty days of enjoined penance. The like
also to be observed in all other common instruments, by which for other good
causes and holy purposes Pardons shall be given, seeing the Bishope of Rome him
self, who has ye fullness of power herein, uses customably so to moderate
the letters of Pardons that proceed from him.

By which holy Council you may perceive, not only that the Bishops of Gods
Church may give Pardons, but that the Bishope of Romes right is much more ample
in this case, the^ theirs can be: and especially how careful the Church ever
has been, to purge al corruption of doctrine or usage, crepte into the world
through the disorder of man's mis behauioure, and how wicked the endeavors of
some evil disposed persons be, who cease not unhonestly to attribute that to
the Church of Christ, which she has ever sought to redress in the euel manners
of them that have disgraced the doctrine of truth, and made contemptible the
most profitable practice of holy things, by their misuse of the same.

But he that list fully to see, how little ye Catholic Church likes the abuse
of wicked men in these matters, and yet how severely she accurseth all the
co^temners of this holy function in the right use thereof, Conciliu^ Trident.
Sess. vlt.
let him read the Decree of the last general Council touching as well the use
of holy pardons, as the earnest consideration had of reforming all disorder
therein, and he shall fully be satisfied in this article, if he have learned so
much, as to give over the prejudice of al private opinions, to the common
judgment of Gods Church.

Being now thus far in our matter, that it is well known the Bisshopes of
Gods Church principally to have this binding and loosing by the keye of
their jurisdiction to be exercised in the open court of ye Church, and that
the power of the Bishop of Rome, not only by special privileges given by
Christ, but also by law and prescription of all antiquities, passes in this
point, as in all other government, the terms or several limits of all his
brethren, it shall not be needful to dispute, whether the Key of jurisdiction
only separated from the Keye of order proper to priesthod, be sufficient to
give remission of enjoined penance by. Commonly it is holden, that as
excommunication, and other like acts of jurisdiction, may be exercised by the
Bishops Legates or Substituts being no priests, or by them selves being
elected Bishops, and yet neither consecrated nor ordered: even so may
Indulgencies be also profitablie granted. Whereof I will not now talk, because
it is not much material, seeing commonly they be not granted otherwise but of
Bishops, neither so often of other as of the Pope, and never any otherwise, but
by his or other bishops authority, by whom so ever yt function is executed.

But this I know will be required rather at my hands, Weather the Popes
Pardons do extend to purgatory, and how.
the course of the matter giving occasion thereunto, how far the limits of
the Popes jurisdiction, who has the sovereignty herin, does extend, and
whether the benefit of any Pardon may perteine to any person that is already
appointed to suffer in his soul the pains of the next life, and is at this
present in the course of Gods correction in Purgatory, and finally, whether
the grant of an Indulgence may release them there of some piece or all their
pains, as it might have doe^ whiles they were in this present life.

To all this I answer bressy, that the Pope may do it lawfully, whereof there
can be no more doubt, then there is of the other, of which we have made so
plain argument already, though in the way and means of appliing the Churches
remission or the Sanctes satisfaction unto them, there may be some diversity,
not such as may any thing hinder ye truth of ye cause, which of al catholic
me^ is most certe^ly agreed upon, but such as may stir up ma^s industry in
the moderate search of Gods truth and mysteries. For the souls departed
and being assured to be saved, must needs be of the same body mystical and
fellowship of Saints, that the faithful be of alive: and therefore, they may
according to their aptnes more or less be profited by the holy works and
satisfaction of their head and fellow members, because in every lawful Pardon
there is made by the keys of jurisdiction and application of Christ's holy
merits and his Saints, in that respect as they be satisfactory, to the use
of their inferioure members, that do lack that wherein the other do abunde.
Whereupon it stands with plain reason and meaning of Gods word, touching
binding and loosing, that the souls in Purgatory should sometimes be
partakers of this blessing no less then other that be yet living. For the
denial of which catholic assertion Leo the tenth accursed and condemned
Luther by his letters patentes, as ever since his memory has been condemned
most woorthely of all good men continuing in the unity of Christ's Church. In
bull^ condem. Luth.
Mary whether the Indulgencies take place so often upon the dead, as upon the
live, that is not so well known, because the persons departed be not in case to
make them selves more apt to take benefit thereby, then they were at their
departure hence: And therefore if they were not with singular zele and devotion
so qualified in the end of their life, they can not now any whit a better their
own case, or otherwise dispose them selves to atteine the fructe of those
singular remissions. And more then that, no Indulgence, is lightly granted,
but upon the fulfilling of some appointed work of piety, and the departed not
having always in this life such friends as will accomplish co^petently the
work prescribed by the Pardon, nor him self now in case to do the same, he
often misseth the benefit of the Churches remission which else he might have
had by the meaning of the giver. Whereupon it seems to some to be no surer,
how far the departed may be relieved by the Keys of the Church, then it is
of other holy suffragies and good works either of priests or private persons,
all which do assuredly relieve them that be in Purgatory, but without any
limitation of benefit, which wholly is unknown unto the living, without
special revelation, in what state they stand.

And therefore upon this consideration, the learned divines do teach, that
the Pope does, and lawfully may apply unto the souls departed, by his keys,
some part of the Churches treasure, which consists of Christ's satisfaction
and other his Sanctes, by which the departed, as they have need and be in
competent terms to receive benefit by the merits of their head or fellows,
may be released from some part of their pains: but yet they will not charge
any man with necessity of believing, that the Pope or Church should use mere
iurisdition over them, that be in an other world.

To be plain for the peoples understanding, the meaning is, In a pardon there
be two things.
that in a pardon there are two things: the one is a sentence of absolut^on
definitely pronounced upon any person penitent: the second is the recompense of
the debt of sin remitted by the said absolution through the application of
^he Churches treasure by the power of the officiers Keys. Both these two
jointly can never be exercised upon any person not subject, though the one
may. Absolution can not properly be given nor fructfully, to any man not
subject to the giuers regiment, but the application of the treasure may be
made by the Keys to procure mercy for them that be not under their power, but
that is not by proper jurisdiction, but by aid of request made by just offers
why the party should be received unto mercy. In this sense then the Pope
absolueth no man departed absolutely. but only offers in the person of Christ
for ye releife of him yt is in Purgatory to God his mighty judge there ye
abu^dante price of Christ's passion and the satisfaction of Saints: And no doubt
for his reverence and representing Christ's person, he is more often heard
then any private man offering only his own almose and prayer for the soul
departed. And for that cause, in this sense the Popes Pardon works only per
modum suffragij, as by aid of suit, and not by regiment or jurisdiction, which
many suppose does not extend past the compass of this world, and therefore
that he can not exercise the act of binding or loosing, which be proper to his
power and government over any in the next life, though to make suit for them
before God he may apply some portion of Christ's copious redemption, and
Saints satisfaction, by the use of his keys, which there make forcible
intercession, though they ca^ not give judiciary absolution.

And all this, that the folly of many men so much wondereth at, is nothing else
but to set before God the Father, the death of his own Son, and his grace in
all Saints, for to procure mercy for their poor brethren in misery in the
next life: as the like is done with great piety in many other holy acts of
religion continually practiced in the Church for the mutual help one of an
other. And indeed, the Church has used these many years to put this clause in
such Indulgencies as did in any part concern the departed (per modum
suffragij) as Sixtus the fourth, Innocentius the eigth, and now of late both
Pius the fourth and the fifte and all other lightly in the like grauntes.

Whereby it is plain that we are not charged by the Church further to believe,
then that the Pope may assuredly release the departed of some part of their
pains, or al, by the way of suffrag and suit, as other holy works of
christianity applied unto them by their brethren alive, may do. For yt were
no reason, that private persons should as it were communicate and send unto
them, their fastes, almose, and prayers, for the release of their pain, and he
yt represents Christ's person, should not in Christ's name and the whole
Churches, apply unto them some part of the common wealths treasure, to sue
for their delivery and help to satisfy for them in their lackes.

This therefore they call a Pardon, per modum suffragij, as by way of aid of
request. Which doctrine is most true in it self, and agreeable to the practice
of ye Church and form of Indulgences always used, and may assuredly reliue
such as departed hence in grace and zele of Gods house, which I count
disposition enough in the party, and have frendshippe in the world of such
as for their sakes will be content to accomplish the appointed work of the
Pardon.

A declaration of the Churches meaning touching the common treasure, which is
said to remain in her store for the reco^pe^se of such enjoined penance, as
she releaseth by her Pardons, with the conclusion of the whole matter. The
twelueth Chapter.
BUT now if you ask me here how it stands with the justice of God, thus to
forgive the pain and debt of satisfaction, which either God or the Church
enioyneth, for the recompense of the former sins especially seeing the
catholic Church does hold that it pertains to Gods justice, no less to
punish sins with some temporal scourge after it be forgiven, then it does
perteine to his mercy to forgive the said sin and the debt of everlasting
damnation. Now if it stand not with his justice, to let a sinner escape
wholly without correction or satisfaction, then it may much more appear to be
against his justice also, that any power of man should remitte and release
that bond of satisfaction, which Gods justice required, and was to the
offender enjoined.

For the answer and perfect understanding of this doubt, it is to be known
and well weighed, that in deed no release could be had of such enjoined
penance or deserved pain for sins past, if Gods justice were not
otherwise recompensed, and the lack of the parties punishment, supplied again
by the abundance of satisfaction made by Christ upon ye Cross, every drop of
whose innocent blood and stroke laid upon his blessed body, were hable of the
infinite and inestimable worth and force thereof, to satisfy for all debt due
to all the sin in the world, whether it be death and everlasting damnation,
or temporal pain and purgatio^. By which abundant price of his passion, and
copious ransom, the Church, for whose sake this precious price was paid,
does not only hold her self to be redeemed from death and damnation, and so
saved by Christ her head, for he is ye Savior of his body, says S. Paul,
Ep^res. 4
but she holds the over plus (as a man would say) of so abunda^t, copious,
and infinite redemption, to be a tresure in the house of God, to relieve her
childrens lackes, to release their pains, to work with them in satisfyng for
there sin, and to work mercy for them also, for lack of satisfyng for their
offenses: that want being found in our penance toward the recompensing of
our evil life past, may be supplied by ye treasure of Christ's death that
remains yet of full force and strength, to be applied unto us in such our
necessities, as shall be thought meet unto Christ's Vicar general in earth,
and other his holy appointed ministers, 1. Cor. 4.
with who^ (as S. Paul says) he left the bestowing of Gods mysteries. For
although the holy and precious treasure of Christ's pain and satisfaction be
of it self sufficient to relieve the lackes of all men without exception, not
only of those which shall be saved, ^ Epist. Cap. 2.
but also for the damned and for the whole world (says S. John) yet no man
may be so hardy, to claim ye benefit thereof otherwise, the^ through such
means as he has appointed, and by the ministry of such men as he has placed
over his household and family, to give the children meat and susteinaunce in
due season not as they shall niordinatly crave it, but as he shall discretly
find to be meet for them. Therefore where this wise steward of Christ's holy
household, to whom he gave the keys of the treasure, and susficient authority
to feed and govern his whole flock, where he shall orderly judge the
offender meet, and of good congruytie, worthy of grace and mercy, there he
may pardon, and recompense the residue that can not be fulfilled of the party
penitent, with soome piece of that inestimale treasure of Christ's redemption,
which remains in the Church impossible to be wasted, and so shall remain to
the unspeakable benefit of the faithful.

And such a perfect knot their is, now since Christ's incarnation, of every
member in Christ's mystical body, which is the Church and compaine of
faithful, with him being the head of ye said body, that his merits, works,
suffering and satisfaction may well be applied to serve and supply all wantes
of each member thereof: Yea more then that, the holy suffering and tribulation
of holy Sanctes, as of our Blessed Lady Christ's mother, Satisfaction of
Saints.
and the holy Apostles, with numbers of constant Martirs, Confessors, and
Virgins, help to supply our lack also, and increase the huge treasure of ye
Church, for the satisfying for our sins, which yet notwithstanding, as they
were meritorious to the sufferers, be fully rewarded by the glory of Christ's
kingdom and eternal felicity, which far excedeth not only the merits of
all Sanctes, but sufficiently rewards the incomparable hu^ility and obedience
of Christ to his Father, in suffering death upon ye cross, though his works
as they be satisfactorie for us, are not yet answered in us nor ca^ not be til
ye worlds end.

And for Christ in this case our adversaries perchance would not much stick
with us, but for the remains of Sanctes satisfaction, they ca^ not abide. And
if S. Paul in express words did not utter this my meaning concerning the
travail of holy Sanctes for Christ's body, which is his Church, the little
holy ones of these days would have spurned at these kind of speeches, for fear
of doing injury to Christ, of whose honor the good men make the^ selves so
tender. Colos. 1.
These words then does S. Paul utter of his travail taken for the Churches
sake: Now I do rejoice in my passions or tribulations, taken for your sake,
and I fulfill those things that do want of Christ's passions, in my own
flesh, for his body which is the Church. Thus said S. Paul. Whereby you see,
that not only the want of one member may be supplied of the head of the body,
but that each member may help the infufficencie of an other member.

Whereby for all that, we may not conceive, that there is any lack or
insufficiency on Christ's part or passion, which was so full and abundant of
it own valor, that by it self alone without the help of all man's merits or
other creatures, it was a sufficient price for the sins of all the world,
and more if more might be. But the lack that this his passion was not in effect
so forcible and so fully in all men's cases, was the want of some pains and
passion in his body the Church, by which she and every of hers were bound to
conform them selves unto Christ, by taking pains in their flesh and
suffering together with Christ their head. For so long Christ's passion
wants his due effect in us, (though it were never so full and sufficient in
ti self) as we do not conform our selves to his pain and tribulation taken
for us. Therefore, though Christ in his own person suffer now no more, yet he
does suffer, and daily shall suffer till the worlds end in diverse members of
his holy body, as the head, says S. Augustine suffers when the finger
aketh, and as Christ him self charged S. Paul that he persecuted him, Act. 9.
when he only molested his members. And so long as the Church militant
trauaileth here in earth, so long has Christ our Master somewhat to suffer to
make his passion effectual in such as shall be saved, and in that sense some
piece of his passion, in every of ye faithfulls bodies must be supplied. By all
which holy pains of ye head him self principally and of the holy members of
his body, who wrought not only for them selves, but expressly mea^t to
benefit other by their works, as the Apostle confesses of him self, we need
not to doubt, but the lack of many a poor member of this blessed
incorporation, is duly supplied, and the want of work satisfactorie in some,
recompensed by the abundance of pains and penance of others. For this is the
blessed case of such as be in the Church of God, in the felowshipp of the
faithful, in the knotte of those members, whereof our Savior is the head,
that is to say, in the holy communion of Sanctes, in which as some do lack,
so other some by Christ's gift do abunde and are hable to procure mercy for
the needy, and to satisfy God for their poor brethrens sins. 1. Cor. 8.
And yet all this intercourse of benefits and mutual helps passes not from
the head to the members, nor from one member of the body to an other, but by
the ordinary means of Christ's appointment, as by sacraments, sacrifice, and
sundry ways of his service, and that not without ye ministry of men, in
whom he has put ye word of this reco^ciliation, to whom he has committed
his keys to keep, his sheep to feed, his mysteries to dispose, and to whom
finally he has given full power both to bind and loose.

Let no man marvel, that in such a face of Gods justice, as we see by ye
enioyning of great penance in the Church after sins be remitted, and by
Gods own often scourgies temporal both in this world and in the next, let no
man (I say) marvel, yt yet there be ways of Gods mercy, and means through
the ministry of man to turn away the wrath of our Lord, and by other helps
to satisfy his justice again. Only let the party in all his insufficiency be
zealous, devout, and dilligent as he may, and God him self will a thousand ways
seek of his own mercy to satisfy him self with his Sons pains applied by
ye travail of other the faithful that have been and be in his Church, to the
help and relief of that member that has nothing left but love, and the
fellowship of holy Saints, whereby he may crave mercy and pardon.

Let them consider that doubt of this point, how often God has, as it were,
determined to plague the people of Israel, which he chose to be his peculiar,
and yet in the midst of his decree and justice, has given mercy and grace at
Moses and Aarons requests: Yea, how often he has, as it were, procured the
just to stand betwixt him and the people whom he meant to punish. Mansuetum
habemus Dominum, Homil. 10. de poenite^t.
solum occasionem accipere vult, and mox omnem prae se fert misericordiam,
says S. Chrysostom. We have a meek master, he only takes occasion, and
straight he shows him self wholly to be given to mercy. He appoints to
punish, that they may see, what of justice their sin requires, yet he
seeks means him self, that their high priests and guydes may turn away the
enjoined plague, that they may learn (said the said holy Doctor) that they
had their pardon, not of their own merits or deseruinges, but by Moses
Patronage and prayers. That you may see thereby, how one member relieueth,
through Gods mercy, his fellow member yt lacked. Whereby there appears both
exceeding justice, and much more mercy. Al his ways truly be mercy and
judgment, to such as love his testimonies.

And it fares with our Lord God, as it does with a wise and discrete master
toward his servants, or with a father toward his loving children: for they
will often show the^ selves to be rigorous and bent to chastise ye faults of
their servants and children, and yet themselves of their own accord will
often procure some other to hinder their intended punishments, and to take
from the^ as it were by force their children or other offe^ders: eue^ so
stands it between God and the children of his chosen Church, who, though he
often justly show him self angry, and bent to correction, never the less he
does not only mercifully remit, but procures him self, other, either
patrones, or intercessours, for whose sakes he may justly and by good reason
remitte.

Hiere. 5.
After many threatninges of ye City and people of Jerusalem he thus moves him
self to mercy: Circuit vias Jerusalem, and aspicite, and considerate, and
quaerite in plateis eius, an inuenias virum facientem iudiciu^, and quaerentem
fidem, and propitius ero ei. Look round about the City, and view the
streates thereof, and have good consideration, whether any one may be found
there that does justice, and studieth after faithfullnes, and I vvil hau mercy
on the City. In ye fifth of Hieremie. Where you may perceive yt God will
forgive all, for ones deserts, and that the good works of one, may by Gods
justice supply the lack of many other, not yet to deliver any man from
everlasting damnation that is impenitent, and therefore in case and state of
eternal death. For ye work of ye faithful can not exte^de to do good to such
as be for ever separated from their fellowship, and therefore can be no members
of ye common body, in ye firm knotte whereof only, there is mutual health and
help, among such as partly lack and partly do abund, for release of the rod
of temporal correction, that is often laid upon ye children, and not of any
eternal punishment, that only happeth to such as be separated and cut of
effectually from Christ's body, which is the Church, for ever. The trea^u^^^
of the church rises a^^o by the de^erts of the departed.


Neither do the deserts only of the living help the necessity of their
fellow members being yet alive, but such as be dead also, do communicate in
their works with their brethren yet abiding in this world. And God of his
singular mercy is often contented, to be answered by them for their poor
fellow servants that be indebted so far in the Church, that they be not
hable in their own persons to discharge their own debt nor coome out of the
same, Sermon ^^e poeni^^^. and confess.
whereof the said S. Chrysostom does excelle^tly well consider in these words
of his sermon de Poenitentia: Mihi autem (says he) aliud maius est diuinae
misericordiae iudicium, quod dicam. Cum enim no^ inuenit homines viuos, et
fiducia praeditos, qui possint intercede^do venia^ obtinere, confugit ad
defunctos, and per illos inquit, se remissurum peccata. Ezechiae enim dicit,
protegam ciuitatem hanc propter me, and propter David pueru^meu^. Olim enim
mortuus erat David. That is to say: I have yet a playner and greater token of
Gods mercy, which I will show you. For when he finds none alive that be of
confidence, which might by intercession procure pardon, he turns to the
departed, and says he will remitte sins for their sakes. 4. Reg. 10. and
Esa. 37.
For he spoke to Ezechias thus: I will defend this City for my own sake, and
for my child David's sake, and yet David was dead long before.

And surely if in the days of old, where neither so much grace nor mercy was
to be found, nor Christ which is ye fountain of all pardon, was not yet
offered up to pay ye debtes of his brethre^s sins, nor the communion of
Sanctes was yet so fully established, whereby the merits of one might redound
to an other, nor ye Church so honored with ye gift of Gods spirit for
remisso^ of ma^s offenses, nor ye priesthod of God so credited with ye Keys of
ye kingdom: if before all these things were no otherwise wrought, but in base
figurs, such ways were found out, and that by Gods own procurement of mercy
and grace, in the midst, of enjoined penance and punishment, what need we
to doubt, but there now be many means made in this happy society of Saints, so
to remitte the bond of satisfaction to some, that Gods justice may be answered
again by other of this happy household in the abundance of their holy works,
which the Church holds most holily for to be a perfect and everlasting
treasure, to satisfy Gods righteousness and procure mercy to the needy, which by
love, zele and devotion do deserve the same? If God remitted of old, temporal
pain unto his people at the call of Moses and Aaron, and for his Child
Dauides sake that was dead, what will not he mercifully forgive by our high
priests procurement, whose pardons and punishments Christ has solemly
promised he would ratify and allow in heaven above? What will he not do in
respect of the pains and abundant passions of his own child Jesus, that has
yet in ye Catholic Church his death so duly represented for the remission of
our daily debtes? What can be denied to the intercession of so many Saints,
to the chaste combat of so many Virgins, to the bloody fight of so many
Martyrs, to the stout standing of so many Confessors? What mercy may not the
Church crave, and doubtless obtain for any of her children, either in penance
in this world, or in pain in the next: that has in her treasure such
abundance of satisfaction, first in our head Christ Jesus, through whose
gracious works al other men's pains are become beneficial either to them
selves or their brethren, and then in the store of all holy Sanctes travails
not yet wasted in procuring mercy for others, besides more ways of grace and
remission, that our Mother the Church has in readiness to relieve her
children that do continue in her happy lap and in the society of her
communion, with humble submission of them selves to the powers ordained of
Christ for the government of their souls, with request for this pardon, at
their hands, to whom be given the bestowing and disposing of the inestimable
treasure of so blessed a ministry?

Would God every man could feel, Psalm. 132.
how happy a thing it is, to dwell as brethren together in the house of God
under the appointed Pastors of that family, in which only Gods favor is
everlastingly found, that they might therewith be partakers of all their
works that fear God, and might have some sense and taste of that holy
ointment of Gods Spirit, and gift of his grace, that first was upon the
head of this householde, our Master Christ Jesus, and then dropped down
abundantly to his bearde, even to the very bearde of Aaron, whereby (as S.
Augustine says) the holy Apostles be signified, In Psalm. 132.
and by them, it ishued down to the hemmes of Christ's coat, and imbrued all
the borders of his garments, that every one of the fellowship might receive
benefit, and feel the verdure thereof. Quoniam illic mandauit Dominus
benedictionem, and vitam vsque in seculum. For in this happy fellowship only
our Lord bestows his manifoold blessings, and life for ever more. Amen.

Tractatus iste de defensione legitimae potestatis and authoritatis sacerdotij
in remittendis peccatis, and de necessitate co^fessionis sacerdoti facie^dae et
de indulgentijs lectus, excussus, and approbatus est per viros Anglici
idiomatis and sacrae Theology peritissimos, vt tutu^ and vtile existimem, eum
praelo committi and cuulgari.

Ita Iudico Cunerus Petri, Pastor Sancti Petri
Louanij. 20. Aprilis Anno. 1567.
THE CHIEF CONTENTS OF BOTH THE parts of this Treatise with the Preface jointly.
Apostles had power given to remitte and punish sins. 20. 50. The same power
ceased not in the Church by their death. 79. 85. Reasons to prove the
continuance thereof. 81. 95.
Bishops are in the Rooms of the Apostles. 91. By what scripture they challenge
Jurisdiction. 23. 295. Their high state. 692. They may grant pardons. 260.
269. They may absolve none but their own subjects. 273.
Bishops blessings. 275. The lame^tacio^ of the ancient Christians for their
banished Bishops. Preface. Bynding. Loosing. 196. 286. 288.
Caluinists agree with the Nouatians against the Sacr. of penance. 116. Cathari
the Heretics. 88. 115. Christ a priest in his humanity. cap. 1. He executes
his priesthod in his Church by ma^s minist. 82. See Min.
Confession of mortal sins to a priest proved necessary. 173. 187. 190. 262.
It has be^ used in all laws. 168. 213. why it is accounted burdenouse. 188 The
comfort of conscience received thereby. 249. 160. The evils like to ensue for
want thereof. 162. Distinct co^fess. of secret sins. 226. 199 what ground it
has in Scripture. 195. General confession suffices not. 204. what a general
confession auail. 206.
Confession could never have be^ established by the power of man only. 246. It
is not grounded upon posit. law. 155. It was used before Latera^ Coun. 236
Considerations to remove the impediments of Confession. 188. 216. 245. S.
Ambrose satte on Co^fessio^s. 239. S. Bid shows examples of Confession used
in England. 233. Penite^tiaries appointed. See pena.
Confession necessary before the receiving of the B. Sacrament. 209.
Difference of purgingth eleprou^e in the old law, and remitting sins in the
new law. 179. Difference of Baptism and penance. 197 Dissease of our time.
238.
Exco^municatio^ used by the Apost. 301. The form thereof used by S. Paul. 357.
External Sacraments. 157. 165.

Grace in two significations. 99. Grace joined to external elements. 39.
Hurt that ryseth thereby to yowth. lb. Who be in most danger of heresy. 113.
Heretics usurp unlawfully Catholics rooms. 96. Heretics never list brag of
their ancestors. 114. Their practices in corrupting scripture. 53. 194.
Heretics deniyng the Sacr. of penance. 221.
Exercised by the Apostles. 301.
Indulgence. See Pardon.

Loosing. See binding.
The ministry of evil men. 98. The work of God and man go jointly together in
sacraments. 175. The practice of God for confirmation of man's ministry. 182.
Master of the sentence his error. 177. Matrimony a Sacrament. 57. Ministry
of man ever used in remitting of sins. 5. 165. Contempt thereof. Pref. and 18.
29. 181.
Monks in S. Dionise time. 241.
Nouatus described. 117. Nouatia^s and protesta^s compared. 150. 289
Grace given in the same what yt is. 99.
Oath required by Nouatus of his adherents. 120.
Three kinds of punishment for sin. 309.
Pardon, grace, Indulgence. 261. Pardon what yt is. 281. The true meaning of
pardons. 277. Who may grant them. 377. How Luther fumbled at first to deface
them. 258. How far the Protestants have proceeded since. 259.
Pardons were never granted to remit deadly sin without the sacrament of
Confession. 265. Pardons for nombre of days and years how they arise. 306.
336. What pain they remit. 315. How pardons were termed in the primitive
Church. 317. An argument for pardons. 306. 318. They be not always beneficial.
361. They discharge not men from doing good works. 364. What he must do that
has received pardon. 367. The end of pardons. 371. Two things in a pardon.
391. Moses and Aaron procured pardon Christ gave pardon. 350. S. Paul gave
pardon. 359. whether pardons exte^d to purgatory pains. 3^3.
Penance is a sacramen. 150. 184. An argument to prove it. 153. Diverse ways
of sacramental penance. 156. The necessity thereof. Praeface. 190.
Penance appointed not only for cautele, but for satisfaction. 312. How it
stands with Gods justice to pardon a man of his deserved penance. 395. The
comfort of that sacrament. 160.
Penitentiaries appointed to hear Co^fessions. 226. Pope slau^dered for giving
pardons. 264 He never remitteth deadly sin by pardon only. 265. what he
forgeueth. 294.
Power to remit or punish sin what ground it has. 22. 30. 63. Power given to
priests that was never given to Angels. 73. Practice of priesthod in remitting
sins, taken for a ground of faith. 45. 1^2. Priest being but man may remit
sin committed against God. 40. The ignorantes reason against priesthod
maintened by Calvin. 77.
Priesthod of the old law and new compared. 178. 346. Protestants profess
otherwise, then they teach secretly. 147. Their congregation is barren of all
Gods gifts. 134. Their selves refuse the right of all holy actions. 135. Their
practice in corrupting scripture. 52. 144. 194. 297. The fruict of their
doctrine. 186. 207. See Nouantians.

Purgatory pain why it is suffered. 326.
Ordinary remission of deadly sin after Baptism is only by the sacrament of
confess. Prefac. and 190.
Remission of sin by sacraments is more certain then the woorking of miracles.
126. It stands well with Gods honor. 112. 12^.

SAcraments ordained for good causes. 157. More sacraments the^ one instituted
for remission of sins. 152. 27^ Sacramens ever used. 1^ Ministers of sacram.
in Schism. Pr^
Satisfaction an usual word in the doctors. 304. Canonical satisfaction. 302.
Satisfaction of Saints. 399. Scripture perverted in the words of Sacraments.
52. Shame joined to sin by Gods ordinance. 248. Remedies for sin after
Baptism. 222. Mortal sin how it is remitted. See Remission.
Venial sin how remitted. 206. 274.
Spiritual exercises. 3^8. Succession of ministry in the Catholic Church. 77.
89. No man succedeth God in any fun. 1^6 Christ resigneth his room, but not
his right. 137.

TItles given to priesthod. 42.
Unction a sacrament. 57. 143.

FINIS.

