AA



Wits Private Wealth.

Stored with choice commodities to content the mind.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Edw. Allde, for John Tappe, and are to be sold at his shop
at St. Magnus corner. 1612.

TO To the right worshipful, my much and much worthy beloved friend John
Crook Esquire, Son and heir to Sir John Crook Knight, all prosperity on
earth, and the joy of heaven.
TO present you with a long discourse, might perhaps weary you in the reading;
and to write obscurely, might be a trouble to your understanding: To avoid
therefore inconveniences, I have chosen this little piece of labor to fit the
patience of your idle leisure; hoping, that as in foreages, men of great
Titles, would patronize the writings of good Studies, not regarding the estate
or quality of the person, so your true spirits that can rightly judge of the
natures of well deseruings, will not altogether shut my Book (with my better
service) out of your good favor: the subjects are many, and of diverse natures,
but (as many flowers in one Nose-gay) they are here put together in a little
volume, which perusd with that good patience that may make profit of
experience, I hope shall give you some way contentment, and no way the
contrary: but least I make to great an entry to a little house, I will shut
the door to my further speech, and only rest in some better service.

Your affectionately at command. N. BRITTON.

To the Reader.
YOu that shall happen to light on this little piece of a book, how you will
or can judge of what you read, I know not: if it be well I am glad you are
pleased, if otherwise, it is past the print, and therefore too late to be
mended: many things are comprehended in a little room, and he that reads all
and takes good by none at all, I am persuaded is either incapable or careless:
to be short, such as they be I send them to you, set down with the days in
the year: in half one day you may read them, and ever after think on them as
you can conceive, digest, or remember them: some of them were written by wiser
men then my self, and for the rest (like wares in a shop) the good must help
away with the bad: To conclude, I commend them with my further love and
service, to the favor of those spirits, that judging the best, will not say
the worst: among whom, hoping you are one to fill up the number of honest men,
I rest.

Your friend as I may. N. B.

Wits private wealth.
He that takes much and gives nothing, shall have more wealth then love.

He that gives much and takes nothing, shall have many thanks and few friends.

He that spends his youth in whoring and dycing, may curse the bones, and cry
out upon the flesh.

He that buildes Castles in the air, in hope of a new world, may break his
neck, ere he come to half his age.

He that meets an ilfauourd woman in the morning fasting, it is ods he shall not
see a worse sight before dinner.

He that tells a lie and binds it with an Oath, is either weak in wit, or
vile in conscience.

He that braggeth much of a little worth, has made his tongue an overthrow of
his wit.

He that marries a rich wife and abuses his Matrymony, will either beg
among Rogues, or hang for good company.

He that cries before he is hurt, has learned wit to avoid pain, and he that
cries after a hurt, must learn patience for ease.

He that owes money and cannot pay it, is an agent for sorrow but he that has
it and will not pay it, is a Steward for hell.

He that scof^eth at God, is already with the Devil, and though he walk in
the world, he has a hell in his c^nscience.

He that sells his clothes to be drunk with the money, will beg in age and
starve for food.

He that rises early and makes light meals, keeps his body in health, and
his stomach in temper.

He that makes Religion a cloak for villainy, deuiseth with the Devil to cosen
his soul of her comfort.

If you see a fair wench leere after you when you are past, lay your hand on
your heart for fear of your purse.

If a stranger scrape acquaintance with you in some private place, think his
wit, his wealth, or his honesty out of tune.

He that sells his ware, and lives by the loss, must give over his trade or
die in poor case.

A kind hearted man is easily abused, and a high spirited woman must be warily
observed.

If you offend God, repentance will have pardon, but if you offend the law,
take heed of execution.

If you marry a Whore, make much of the Horn, but if you marry a Scolde, fall
to your prayers.

If you have a friend, and cannot use him, you lack wit, but if you abuse his
love, you want honesty.

He that tyeth his love to beauty, may bring his heart to trouble, and he that
marries a foul woman does wrong to his eie-sight.

He that will never lend is unworthy to borrowe, but he that comes into
suretiship is in the way of undoing.

If you see an offenders punishment, pray for amendment: but if a horse-courser
be hanged it is happy for Trauailers.

To give a woman her will may be hurt to her wit: and to bridle her nature, may
move passion beyond reason.

To build a house without money, is but a dream of folly, and to travel among
thieves is danger of life.

He that spends more then he gets, will hardly be rich, and he that speaks
more then knows will never be counted wise.

He that least sins is the best man, and he that never repents is the
worst.

A prodigal spender will keep coin from cankering and a greedy Usurer will
gnaw out the heart of a purse.

He that trauaileth a strange way had need of a guide, and if he want money he
must fare hard.

A Mouse in a Cupbord will mar a whole Cheese, and an ill tongued woman will
trouble a whole Town.

He that is given to sleep, is borne to much trouble, and to ouer-watch nature
may be a hurt to wit.

He that leaves the learned to live with the ignorant, may happen upon some
wealth but he shall never be wise.

An untrusty servant may rob a man of his goods, but a dogged wife will vex
his heart.

If you see a trull scarce give her a nod, but follow her not least you prove a
noddy.

A courteous Physician will make much of his patient, and time pleasers are no
true divines.

Strong beer has two contrary virtues, it will quench a thirst, and warm the
stomach.

He that offends God to please a creature, is like him that kills himself to
avoid hurt.

She that loves to make faces may have an Ape for her Schoolmasters, and he
that feeds her humors, puts his wits to much trouble.

He that loves many can hardly please all, and he that loves none, is either
dogged or foolish.

A Fool that is rich shall be followed with beggars, but the virtuous and wise
are truly honorable.

He that feasteth the rich, makes a friendship with Mommon, but he that
relieueth the poor, is blessed of God.

A Whores tears are a Fools poison, and a Thieves watch is the Trauailers woe.

The shot of a Cannon makes a terrible report, but he that starts at the noise
of it, will hardly prove a Soldier.

The sound of a Trumpet stirs up the spirit of a Soldier, but if his heart
fail him, he will not fight.

Women's Tyers are an idle commodity, and t^ live by panderisme is a roguish
profession.

Swearing and lying is much among wicked men, and yet being so little believed,
I wonder they do not leave it.

A proud spirit is hateful to nature, and he that is unthankful for little,
is worthy of nothing.

the hope of the virtuous makes harvest in heaven, and the despair of the
wicked brings their souls into hell.

The Spiders web is a net for a Fly, and a flattering tongue is a trap for
a Fool.

That sight of a sword will affright a Coward, while a seasond Soldier makes a
flea-bite of a wound.

A partial judge makes a pitiful law, and a dumb Preacher a pitiful
parish.

A bloody Soldier makes a pitiful war, and he that trusts an enemy, may
be betrayed ere he be aware.

The Soldiers honor is got with great travail, while the Usurer tumbleth in
the ease of his wealth.

The true spirit regards no dross, and he that makes a God of his gold will
go to the Devil like a Beggar.

He that leaves his spurs in his horses belly, may sit down and sigh when he
is weary with walking.

He that will pass quietly through a common wealth must avoid the fool, and
take heed of the knave.

An Usurper of a crown will breed murmures in a kingdom, but a wise
governor is worthy of his place.

He that cloyeth his stomach is an enemy to nature, and to ouercharge wit is
an abuse of reason.

Vanity and pride, make the fools paradise, while love and beauty are the
nurses of idleness.

Blessed Children are the Parents joys, while the barren womb is the curse of
nature.

A wise General and a valiant leader, are requisite in a Camp, but tyranny in
conquest disgraceth the soldier the Gloe-wormes belly is the candle of the
earth, and the Phoenix nest is too high for the world.

the longest day will have a night at last, and age will with^r the smoothest
skin in the world.

the dearth of the Corn makes Farmers rich, but to starve the people is the
shame of the state.

No preaching in the world will make a Jew a Christian, and a cutpurse will be
his work when the thief is at the Gallows.

He that has lost his eyes may bid his friends goodnight, and he that is
going to the grave, has made an end with the world.

A fair man is like Curds and Cream, and a foul woman the grief of the eyes.

A witty wanton is a pleasing mistress, but an honnest huswife is the best to
breed on.

He that is given to drinking is subject to the dropsy, and a licorous grocer
will eat out his gain.

A Garden is pleasant if it be full of fai^e Flowers, so is a fair woman
endued with good qualities.

A fair flower without scent, is like a fair woman without grace.

Herbs are wholesome, gathered in their time, and money well used is an
excellent metal.

If Christmas lasted all the year, what would become of Lent? and if every day
were good friday, the world would be weary of fasting.

The grief of the heart is a weakening to the body, but the worm of
conscience eats into the very soul.

A jest is never well broken, but when it hurts not the hearers, and
profits the speaker.

Hope is comfortable in absence, but possession is the true pleasure.

Words out of time are lost, and service unrewarded is miserable.

To follow fools is the anoyance of wit, and to serve a Churl is a miserable
slavery.

Variety of acquaintance is good for observation, and to make use of knowledge,
proves the sense of understanding.

Early rising gains the morning, and a dark night is the thieves watch.

A fantastical Trauailer, is the figure of an Ape, and a proud woman is a
fools Idol.

The eye is small yet is sees much, and the heart but little, and yet it is
the life of the body.

The hope of profit makes labor easy, and the hand of bounty winnes the
heart of virtue.

A Candle gives a dim light in the Sun, and where Diana keeps her Court,
Cupid is out of countenance.

A man is as dead when he sleeps, and darkness is the sorrow of time.

There is no true rich man but the contented not truly poor but the covetous.

A weak body is not for travel, nor a sim ple wit for a Scepter.

No man lives that does not sometime amiss, but he that delights in sin
is a devil in carnate.

They that love their beds, are great flea-feeders, and he that spends his
spirits, cannot have a strong body.

The rich man's goods makes him fearful to dye, and the poor man's want makes
him weary of his life.

The fire of Anger burns the Soul, and the cold of fear chilleth the heart.

Snuff a Candle and it will burn clear, and cut off dead flesh, and the
wound will heal the sooner.

The heart-ache brings the body into sickness, but the Worm of Conscience
breeds the souls torment.

Times alters natures, and Honors manners; but a virtuous heart will never
yield to villainy.

Miseries are the trial of patience, but love is the master of passions.

Thought is a swift trauailer, and the Soul is in heaven in an instant.

A kind nature wins love, but a stubborn spirit is a plague to reason.

The disease of opinion does beguile us in the taste of happiness, while the
vanity of delights is but the superfluity of desires.

Patience at the point of death, sets a seal to the perfections of life.

How vain is the love of riches, which may be lost or left in an instant?

In the trial of truth excuse will not help dishonesty.

Try wits by their wisdom, and love them for their virtue.

Rejoice not in any man's misery, but be pitiful to thy very enemy, and
comfort the afflicted in what is fit for charity.

Follow not the Amorous, for they are humerous, nor the humerous, for they are
idle.

Give what thou do francklye, and be Master of thine own purse, least base
seruilitie make abridgement of thy bounty.

Be not jealous without just cause, and do no wrong for any cause.

If thou do ill, do not excuse it: if well, do not boast of it.

Nature enclinde to evil, must by correction be brought to good, for
discretion by instruction finds the way to perfection.

The key of wantonness opens the door unto wickedness.

the cares of business, and the variety of pleasures, are the souls hindrances
to her higbest happiness.

Sin comes with conception, but grace only by inspiration.

In the repentance of sin sorrow brings comfort.

Where pride is poison to power, and will an enemy to patience, there envy can
endure no equality, til death put an end to desire.

Greater is the grief to loose then never to have, and to see the fall of
virtue then the death of nature,

Irreuocable is the loss of time, and incomparable the grief of ingratitude,
but the abuse of love is abhorred in nature.

When a Dog howles, an Owl singes, a Woman scoldes, and a Pig cries, whether
for a penny is the best music.

Full hearts cannot weep, and swallowed sighs make swollen breasts, while
wisdom covers woes, till death cover wretchedness.

Who labors for knowledge, makes a benefit of time, but he that loves
virtue looks after eternity.

The instruction of truth makes the wit gracious, while the practice of Craft
makes the heart impious.

He that makes beauty a Star, studies false Astronomy, and he that is
soundly in Love, needs no other purgatory.

The depth of passion, tries the height of patience, where if wit bridle not
the senses; nature will reveal her imperfection.

The remembrance of vanities, is a reviving of miseries, where the looking
glass of life becomes an houreglasse of death.

The exercise of venery is the Cow-path to beggerie, and he that diminishes
his stock, may go to the hedge for a stake.

The Landlords prodigality makes the tenants profit, and a proud beggar is a
dogged Rascal.

A Cat may loose a Mouse and catch her again, but he that loses time can
never recover it.

When rich men die, they are buried with pomp, but when good men die, they are
buried with tears.

Bloody actions makes fearful visions, while the joy of peace is the spirits
Paradise.

When al under the Sun is vanity, where has virtue her dwelling in the
world, but only in the heart of the elect, whose love is only in the heavens.

An intemperate spirit spoils the body, and a proud heart gives a wound to the
soul.

The sha^me of wit is folly, and the shame of nature sin.

Who trauaileth out of the world, to seek the truth of heavens history, if he
be not assured of grace, will make but an unhappy journey.

Comfortable is the grave where death is the end of grief, but joyful is that
faith, that finds the life of eternity

A Knight that dares not fight, has honor in jest, and a merchant without money
may adventure for nothing.

The pinching of the body, makes a stinking breath, and straight shoes fill
the feet full of corns.

Women with child long for many things, but all the world longs for money.

A great wit may have a weak body, and a great head but a little wit.

The Dolphin is held the swiftest fish in the Sea, but the thought of a man
has no comparison in the world.

The Tiger is said to be the cruellest beast in the world, but an Usurer upon a
bond will go to the Devil for money.

A Maiden blush is an excellent color, and a virtuous wit makes a Virgin
honorable.

A constant Lover is an admirable Creature, but the man of wealth goes through
the world.

Offices are sweet in the nature of gain, but the abuse of an oath is the
burden of conscience.

A sore eye is ever running, and a Gossips tongue is ever babbling.

Cross paths many times puts a man out of his way, and cross fortunes many
ways puts a man out of his wits.

Great winds are dangerous at Sea, so is a Judges breath, to an offender.

The Philosophers stone has mocked a number of Students, and Love has troubled
a world of Idle people.

Virginity is precious while it is purely reapt, but is it catch a crack the
beauty is gone.

The eyes grow dim when they come to spectacles, and it is cold in valleys
when a snow lies on the Mountains.

The sting of a Scorpion is only healed with her blood, and where beauty
wounds, love makes the cure.

Emprisonment and death are the miseries of nature, and the Sergeants Mace is a
hellish weapon.

A Child that fears not the rod will hardly prove gracious, and a man that
fears not God, will be in hell ere he be aware.

Elixars are great restoratiues, but much Physic is offensive to nature.

A Pen without ink writes a very blancke Letter, and a Purse without money,
makes many a cold heart.

Stolen Venison is sweet, so the stealer can escape, but if he be caught he
will pay for his hunting.

The Anglers sport is full of patience, and if he loose his hook he makes a
fair fishing.

A shower of Rain does well in a Drought, but when Dust turns to Dirt, the
house is better then the highway.

A little Salt seasons a great pot, and a little poison kills a world of people.

Jewels are as they are esteemed, and there is nothing forced that is welcome.

A little seed will sow a great ground, and a Snuff of a Candle will set a
whole house on fire.

The want of necessaries breaks the heart of an honest man, and to be
beholding to a Dog, is a death to a good mind.

When the Rich pray on the poor, and the poor pray for the Rich, there is
great differnce in praying.

A scolde and a fool must be answered with silence, while wisedoms words are
worth the writing in gold.

Philosophy is a sweet study, and History are sometime worth the reading, but
the Bible in all excellence, puts down all the Books in the world.

Much reading makes a ready Scholar, but the gift of nature does much in Art.

A Fool and a knave cannot take thought, while an honest heart is full of
sorrow.

A far Trauailer seeeth much, but he that goes to heaven makes a happy journey.

The Kings of the earth are rich in gold, but blessed are the souls that are
rich in grace.

The air is often cleansed by lightning, but till the world change it will
never be clean from sin.

An escape from danger is comfortable, but to keep out of it is wisdom.

He that makes an Epicure of his mind, makes a Gull of his wit: for time is
precious to the understanding spirit.

A Diamond may be little, and yet of great price but the grace of God is more
worth then the whole world.

Fancy and fashion trouble many idle people, but the study of Divinity
rauisheth the souls of the elect.

Cocks of the game will by nature fight, and a heart of Oak will burst ere it
bend.

The sight of the Sea will a fray a faint heart, while the Sailers care but a
little for the Land.

The cries of Fools make a foul noise, while the hearts of the honest bleed
inwardly.

May-games and iestes, fill the world full of mirth, but the feeling of grace
fills the soul full of joy.

A Fly feeds a Swallow that will choke a man, and that which kills a Spider
will comfort a man.

Th Stone and the Gowte follow the rich, but death where he comes makes a
swoope with all persons.

A poor man in his cottage is merrier with his pittance, then many a Lord in
the midst of his Living.

Great minds and small means are the overthrow of many good wits.

A broken heart is Gods cure, whose oil of grace is a salve for all sores.

He that has forsworn a beard, has a strange face, and she that has no
teeth, may learn to suck.

A friend is best tried at a need, and a fawning foe is not to be trusted.

Beef and Mutton are strong food, and hunger is the best sauce to any meat
in the world.

Sickness is the bodies Curb, and sorrow the minds, but unkindness in a
friend is the breake-heart of a goodspirit.

Necessity will break through stone walls, but to make an exercise of
Beggerie, is the condition of a Rascal.

A painted sword is for a bragging Coward, but the Soldiers Iron makes way
where he goes.

The rarenes of a Toy, will set up the price, but the goodness of anything is
best esteemed of the wise.

A Bird without feathers will fly ilfauouredly, and a man without money is out
of heart with all mirth.

To be delivered of a Child is a joy to a Woman, and to be delivered from
prison is a comfort to a man, but to be delivered from sin, is the truest joy
of the Soul.

A forward Child is sildome long lived, and to beget a fool is a grief to
the Parents.

He that cries without cause, is worthy of hurt, and he that feels no hurt is
full of dead flesh.

Travail is good for stayed wits, and a strong body is best for labor.

The rich man to fill the the other bag, will pare a poor man to the very bones,
but the good man will relieve his poor neighbor at his need.

An unskillful ryder may soon be out of the saddle, and a poor horse can go
but softly.

Some say Tobacco is good to purge the head, but he that follows it well,
will find it a shrewd purge to his purse.

No eye can see the brightness of the Sun: how glorious then is that life from
whence It has light?

Many are fortunate that are not wise, but there is no man happy until he
come into heaven.

Fire and Sword are the terror of a Camp, but Thunder and Lightning are the
terror of the world.

A fair house is a comfortable lodging, but the sweet Air reuiueth the senses.

A fair horse is comely to look on, but if he prove heavy he is naught for
travel.

The sires of afflictions refine the spirits of the faithful, and happy is the
heart that endures to the end.

many factions breed seditions, but unity and peace are the joys of a
Kingdom.

An Asses braie is an unpleasant noise, but the knell of a passing bell kills
the heart of the wicked.

A man will forbear many things for fear of the law, but how few forbear any
sin for fear of Gods judgment?

Delicate meats are no strong food, but the spring water is clear drink.

Great assemblies are markets for the Cutpurse, but a bare purse kills his
heart.

Envy among great men, make misery of poor men, and when women breed the
quarrels, they are not easily ended.

A discreet Judge makes a blessed Law, and a penitent offender is worthy of
pardon.

Great boast and small roast, makes a cold Kitchen, and shrugging of shoulders
is no paying of debtes.

He that may live well and will not, is of a wicked nature, but he that would
live well and cannot, has his heart full of grief.

The Flies and the Bees live in swarms, and the Antes and the worms live in
heaps, but men can hardly make a company to live quiet.

Poisoned drink may be in a silver cup, and he that plucketh a Rose may prick
his hand in gathering of it.

The Porposes in the Sea will play against a storm, and many make a banquet to
make an end of the guests.

The merchant and the Tradesman are the vpholders of a commonwealth, but if
they leave out the Farmer, they may fast for their Supper.

A discreet woman is worthy of honor, and a foolish man the disgrace of nature.

Burnt Children dread the fire; while old fools will play with the Coals.

A ravening Curre is not good for a house, and a Hawke that feeds foul, will
never be a high flier.

He that remooues a Land-marke is a very bad neighbor, and he that sets a
trauailer out of his way is a wickked villain.

A delaying hope is grievous to the heart, but despair is the greatest torment
of the soul.

To lie in bed and not sleep, to see meat and have no stomach, to serve
long, and get no wages, are three great miseries in the life of man.

No man knows a grief so well as he that has it, and no man more joyful
then he that is rid of it.

It is a grief to a man to lack wit, but more grief to some to lack grace
to govern it.

An aged man is a Calendar of experience, and a spruce you^h is like a picture.

A deadly wound makes a quick dispatch, but a lingering hope breeds a long
grief.

To meddle with state matters may be more trouble then profit, but to part man
and wife is a wicked practice.

At a little hole a man may see day, but if he shut his eyes the light will do
him little good.

Horselieches will burst with sucking of blood and a swelling Toade is a
venomous creature.

A Tortois shell will hardly break, but at the least touch she will pull in
her head.

He that has a wife has a charge, and he that has a good wife has a
blessing, but he that has a bad wife, is in a pitiful taking.

She that loves not her husband, lackes either honesty or wit, and she that
loves not her self, will go near to be sluttish.

The Winter nights is for the Gossips cup, and Summers heat makes the Brewers
harvest.

The Lamb and the Dove are two pretty creatures, but the Dog and the Hog are
sullen beasts.

A Fox by nature is full of craft, while a fool wants reason to make use of wit.

The smooth grass will hide a Snake, and a fained smile a false heart.

To go to Church for fashion, is an abuse of religion, and to pray without
devotion, is breath to no purpose.

Good Incke graceth a Letter, but if the paper be naught, the pen will do
no good.

A long diet kills the stomach, and a desperate purge may be a perrill of life.

The Owl and the Swallowe brings in Winter and Summer, but the Nightingale and
the Cuccoe talk only of the merry time.

Light gains make heavy purses, but he that labors for nothing may give over
his work.

He that will hold out the year must abide winter and summer, and he that will
go into heaven must endure the miseryes of the world.

To feed a iester is but a jest of wit, but he that gives not care to a tale,
it never troubles him.

When a Lion roares come not in his way, and when a Fox preaches beware the
Geese.

A faithful friend is a rich jewel, and a silent woman is a strange creature.

Nature is subject to imperfection, but an Atheist is a horrible creature.

He that lighs in a whirle poole, is in danger of drowning, and the loss of
liberty is the sorrow of nature.

A rich Court is a goodly sight, but he that looks up to heaven will not care
for the world.

when old men are wilful, their wits are out of temper, and when young men are
wise, they are in the way to honor.

An old sore tries the skill of a Physician, and if he get a name, he will
quickly be rich.

The fish of the River is not afraid of drowning, and if he play with a bate,
it may cost him his life.

An Ass has long ears, and a Fox a long tail, but a tongue will be so long
that it will ouer-reach out of measure.

A neighing horse is not good for a thief, nor a questing Spaniell will make a
good setter.

A Dog will rejoice at the sight of his Master, when perhaps his Mistress
will frown at his comm^ng home*

The bones of the dead, break the hearts of the living, when a poor Gamster
loses his money.

The kindenes of the heart is tried in adversity, and the dog ednes of the
mind in the hight of prosperity.

When the Hare is in chase, fear makes her run, but when the hounds are at a
falt, she has time to get away.

He that plays the Rogue in the morning, may be a villain till night, but if
he be sorry when he goes to bed he may rise an honest man.

He that is wounded in the heart has made an end of his days, but he that
has a wound in the Soul knows not when to end his sorrow.

A looking-glass will make a fool proud of his beauty, but an houre-glasse
will make a wise man remember his end.

The variety of Flowers makes a Spring beautiful, but the fair harvest makes
a fat barn.

Tobacco smoke is very costly, but the ashes of it are good for a galde back.

A proud Mechanique will look over a Merchant, and a rich Churl will look
like Bull beef.

The wind is weak, yet it bears down great Oaks, and water is weak, yet it
swallows up great ships.

A worme-eaten nut is not worth the cracking, and a cracked jewel not worth the
wearing.

Mony-masters are the pride of the market, but if you part without a pot, you
are no good fellow.

A subtle Bowler will have a shrewd aim, but if he miss his byace his bowl
may deceive him.

A dropping nose had need of a handkercher, and a splay footed woman is a
beastle sight.

Time is never idle, but not ever well imployd, when wit without government
falls to fast upon folly.

he that has many wounds loses much blood, and he that has many quarrels
will have little quiet.

Unkindness is a cut to an honest heart, but a Dogged wife is the hearts
torture.

He that saltes his meat will keep it from stinking, and he that mortifies
his flesh will keep it from much sin.

He that has an ill face has need of good wit, but money covers many
imperfections.

When the winds are down, the Sea will be calm, but quarrels begun are not
easily ended.

Where there is much Carrion there will be store of Crows, and at the burial
of a Rich man, there will be store of beggars.

Threescore years and ten are a man's fair age, but after foure-score his
strength is gone.

To wrestle with a beggar a man may get but a lowse, and to brabble with a
Scolde will make but a foul noise.

Many hands makes quick work, but one is enough in a purse.

Good herbs makes wholesome broth, but a filthy weed among them may mar
all.

A VVinters Summer makes an unkindly harvest, and a Summers VVinter is not
healthful for a man.

A Cuckolde is the scorn of marriage, but a VVittoll is a beast in nature.

A finicall fellow is like an Usher of a Dancing School, and a demure
Mistress like the picture of hypocrisy.

Three chief things a Trauailer had need to have a care of: his Tongue, his
Purse, and his middle finger.

Three other chief things had all men need to look to: the soul, the body,
and the state.

To converse with Children, is got little experience: but to talk with fools
is the abuse of wit,

Revenge is the villainy of nature, and Tirannie the horror of reason.

What a jest is it in the nature of reverence, when men must put off their hats
while their Masters are pissing.

Use makes perfection in many things, else could not the hangman be so nimble
at the halter.

A skillful Physician knows how to use his Patient, and a cunning Lawyer to
do with his Clyent.

He that has a mint of money, and an idle Woman to spend it, let him feed all
her humors, and he shall soon see an end of it.

He that reckons his Chickins before they be hatched, may miss of his brood
when the Hen leaves the neast.

When Geese fly together they are known by their cackling, and when Gossips
do meet they will be heard.

All earthly things have an end, but the torments of the wicked are endless.

In great extremities is tried the greatest friendship, but when man's help
fails, God is a sweet comforter.

The miseries of the world are many, but Gods mercies are infinite.

Hollow winds are a sign of rain, and a long consumption is incurable.

The Gowte and the stone are two tickling diseases, but the pox is a slight
cure.

Hell Gates and a whores aporne are ever open for wicked guests.

To the faithful there is no damnation, and to the damned no salvation.

A crafty knave needs no broker, and a snarling Curre will bite behind.

Under simplicity is hidden much subtilty, and the Crocodiles tears are the
death of the trauailer.

The camelion lives only in the air, and the Salamander lives only in the
fire.

To traficke with vanity, is to run into misery, and had iwist is an idle
speech.

The world goes hard with pride, when a Lady lies at a red Lattis.

True Knights make Ladies, and counterfaites mar them.

Need makes a heavy shift, when a man pawnes his clothes for his dinner.

When Tailors began to meat Lords lands by the yeard, then began
gentilitie to go down the wind.

When vanity bringes toys to idleness, let wit beware of foolishness.

When a Soldiers pay is most in prouant, he will hardly be led into a sharp
piece of service.

He that makes holliday of every day, makes an idle weeks work, and he that
labors on the Saboath will never have his work to prosper.

A Scholars commons make a short dinner, and yet he may be in more health then
an Epicure.

An ill blast of wind will spoil a young plant, and a bitter frost is bad for
fruit.

A poor man shuts his door to keep out the wind, but a rich man shuts his
door to keep out beggars.

A kindly Colyer is ever besmeered, and a Smith and a Glasse-maker are never
out of the fire.

A down bed is soft to lie on, but yet it soakes the body more then a
mattresse.

Truth has often much a do to be believed, and a lie runs far before it
be staide.

To be busy with a multitude, is to incur trouble, and to fear
sparrow-blasting is a pitiful folly.

When wit brings youth to beauty, and vanity brings pride to beggary, then
reason sees natures misery.

A sorry bargain makes a heavy soul, when the heart aches and cannot be helped.

Evil words are the worst part of eloquence, and he that breaks the peace
must answer the law.

Affability breeds love, but familiarity contempt.

He that is careless of his state, may quickly prove a beggar, and he that is
feareles of God, will quickly prove a Devil.

Witches and Sorcerers do much hurt in a Common wealth, but after the
Gallows they do go to the Devil.

A Parret well taught will talk strangely in a Cage, but the Nightingale sings
most sweetly in a wood.

An unkind Neighbor is ill to dwell by, and an unwholesome body is ill to lie
by.

A poisoned sword is a pestilent weapon, and he that uses it has a murtherous
heart.

A trotting horse beats sore in hard, way but a restie Jade is a villainous
beast.

The wound of sorrow goes deep into the heart, but a Bullet in the Brain is a
medicine for all diseases.

An ill weed grows fast, but a pair of sheeres will cut him down.

Judas Treason was most abominable, and Jobs patience most admirable.

Sweet fresh water is comfortable in a City, and the want of it is the
plague of the people.

Study is the exercise of the mind, but too much of it may be a spoil of the
brain.

When the saddle pincheth, how can the horse travail? and when the wise lack
money their, wits ara in a poor case.

Howling Dogs betoken death, and a Scritch-Owle at a window brings no good
tidings to a house.

Babes will be stilled with lullabye, but an old fool will never be quiet.

The Sun is the Laborers dyall, and the Cock the Huswiues watchman.

Diogines Tub was a poor house, and yet Alexander would come thither to talk
with him.

Many a dog is hanged for his skin, and many a man killed for his purse.

He that loves not a woman lackes a piece of a man, and he that loves too
many, may be weary of his woing.

The savor of the earth makes a Plough-man hungry and after a storm the
Sailers drink merrily.

A wax-candle and a Watch are good for a studient, but if he want wit, he will
be no great scholar.

A private rebuke is a sweet correction, but an open punishment makes some
shameless.

When sheapheards fall to be Hunts-men, the Wolf may be with their Flocks:
and when the Warrener is at the Alehouse his connies may be stolen.

He that goes softly commonly goes safely: but if he have haste of his way
he loses much time.

It Is soon enough that is well enough, and never to late that does good at last.

The desire of doing well, is accepted before God, but the neglect of doing
well deserves his displeasure.

Sweet are the deceits of love, but bitter is the taste of repentance.

Who attends profit is not sorry for patience: and the faithful with the
patient are best Trauailers to heaven.

A fair hand is a virtuous ornament, but a virtuous spirit is a royal
treasure.

A sharp wit has a quick invention, but a judicious spirit has best
understanding.

He that trusts words proves hope, and he that serves a fool loses
time.

Without valor men are shadows: and without Love women Torters.

Delay is the grief of hope, but good never comes to late.

That is not to day, may be to morrow, but yesterday will never come again.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God, but it is a foul thing
to shake hands with the Devil.

The greatest proof of follye is wilfulness, and the greatest proof of wit
is patience.

too much reading is ill for the eyesight, and too little reading is ill for
the in-sight.

Time slipped is unhappy, time lost is grievous, time well taken shows care,
but to employ it well is gracious.

And so much for this time.
Laus Deo.
FINIS.

