(...).

The poor man's Library.

RAPSODIAE G. A. Bishop of Exceter upon the first epistle of saint Peter, red
publicly in the Cathedral church of saint Paul, within the City of London.
1560.

Detrahebant mihi: Ego autem orabam.

For my friendship they were mine adversaries, but I gave my self to prayer.

Psalm. 109. Qui veritatem occultat, and qui mendacium dicit, vterque reus est:
Ille, quia prodesse non vult: Iste, quia nocere desiderat.

1. Anselmus in epist. 1. Corinthians. He which the truth at any time does conceal,
And which deliteth a lie to reveal,
Are both subject to a guilty zeal.
The one to do good does not desire.
The other to do hurt does much aspire.
Here are adjoined at the end of every special treaty, certain fruitful
annotacions which may properly be called Miscellanea, because they do entreat
of diverse and sundry matters, marked with the nombre and figures of Angrime. 2.

Tutior est discentis, quam docentis conditio.
Augustinus. Of him that does learn better is the condition,
Then of him which to other does give erudicion.
Read first, and then judge.

Imprinted at London by John Day.

iillustrated title page DIE ET MON DRIOT on top: coat of arms with crown, lion
and dragon, small figures of people on either side on both sides: a person
standing on short columns holding up the top image with another person holding
up the back ARISE FOR IT IS DAY one person leaning over another, sun in
background

IN HIRCI ENCOMION (...) per G. Exoniae Episcopum.
Hircus natura calidus, transuersa tuetur.
Hirci adamas durus, sanguine conteritur.
Hircus vesicae, renumque medetur arenis.
Hirci serpents, cornua adusta fugant,
Hirci fell visum magnopere reddit acutum.
Hircus (...), sustinet arma (...).
Arma inquam comitis de Bedforde suspiciendi.
Illius hic hircus plurima dona (...).
CHE SARA SARA.
woodcut of coat of arms with lion, goat
Vt calet hic hircus, sic feruet relligione
Pura, Franciscus, prouidus atque sagax.
Emollit duros leni sermon papistas,
Et Christo infestos, proterit atque fugat.
Peruigil in sacro vidit quam plurima libro.
Complures potis est, erudijsse pie.
Si bona quaeque sient hirco quae significentur
In se ea Franciscus, reddere vera potest
IOANNIS COOCI, PAVLINAE SCHOLAE Gymnasiarchae dialogismus cum lectore.
Iambicisenarij.
AN ad infimos demittit huc sese viros,
Quae musa summi verticem poli ferit,
Affixa magnisemper adsolium Iouis?
Et Urania Graio cluet been nomine?
Certo Vel hinc tibi lector iudicium cape,
Quod ea hic nouus prodiuit a musa liber,
Quem and salibus ipsa Pallas aspersit suis,
Et dente lima perpoliuit Attico,
Numine supremi plenus immenso Iouis.
Esto, quod inquis, plenus hic liber Jove,
Ad nos, calore missus illinc entheo.
At pauperi, dic, qua probas fide mihi,
Ad tam aureum patere codicem viam?
Quia, quos sui placuerit esse compotes,
A front titulus, quem gerit, palam indicat.
Nam ptochomusaeum author hunc fecit suus
Ideo, quod omni se recludat pauperi.
At pauper hinc legendo quid lucri teret?
Quid? non vides hunc esse cornucopiae?
Hoc ptochomusaeum si frequentes sobrie
Non pauper, at nexu beato propediem,
Eris, optimo grauis aere, ptochoplusius,
Munereque te beabit octuplici deus.
Ad Alleum, nunc Antistitem, dum beati Petri epistolam priorem explanaret.
All quatis triplex latij diadema tyranni,
Ardua fulmineae deturbas cornua mitrae,
Detegis agnina tectum lanugine monstrum,
Detegis immani faedatum sorde lupanar,
Impia demonstras puri ludibria cultus,
Debellas saeuis pulsantem cornibus hydrum.
Veiouis ingenti confectus vulnere saeuit,
Mundum crudeli perstratum caede cruentat,
Corpora consumit diris torrentia flammis,
Oppida sanguineo funestat craedula fumo,
Excitat immites furiali a sede sorores,
Horrida terribilis quae spargant semina belli.
Ad eundem.
Obscuros superas sensus, and lumine Petrum
Verborum illustras, difficilesque locos.
Exponis magica suffultos fraud susurros,
Panisci, inclusi pixide sacra, dei.
Po^tificem summum, qui plumbea fulmina mittit,
Tu percussisti fulmine laetifero.
Quise posse putat diuos detrudere caelo,
Tu detrudebas ad Stygis antra nigrae.
Nunc vbi conducit gliscenti milite turmas,
Exit turba minax, and scelerata phalanx.
Emergit pluto toto comitatus auerno,
Alecto assurgit, Tisiphoneque furens:
Cerberus ille triceps, grassans Bellona flagello,
Stymphalides dirae, pontificumque cohors. Chrystophorus Carley.
EDVVARDI BVRNELLI (...), AD LECTOREM.
HVnc eme multifluum librum tibi, candide lector,
Si paginae sacrae te pia cura mouet.
Hic liber illa tenet quae magna volumina tractant,
Fert varios flores, fert liber iste rosas.
Hoc duce, de rebus varijs poteris (...),
Hic potes e siliquis, carpere grana cauis.
Ergo eme, (...)? aes profer and accipe librum,
Qui tibi paruo emptus, (...) dabit.
THOMAE WILLIAMS IN HVIVS libri laudem Epigramma.
HErculeos magnosque duces demisit ab alto
Iuppiter omnipotens, publica damna videns.
Namque suae casus sponsae miseratus, acerbos
Proterit haereticos, monstra nephanda, tetros.
Ad quos sternendos, nihil est libro aptius isto,
Vt pote qui illorum, dogmata praua quatit.
Sustulit errores diuini dogmate verbi,
Pneumatis and gladio, clara trophaea dedit.
Quicquid apud celebres autores est reperire,
Vnicum in adduxti praesul amande, librum.
Scilicet est liber hic, verae pietatis asylum,
Huc celeri properent, inscia corda pede.
Hic hic intactum nihil est omnino relictum,
Hicque Papista strophas, soluit vbique tuas.
Praesulis vt meritis lector calcaria subdas,
Grates ex animo, read benign tuo.
Et tu perge precor studiis insistere Praesul,
Perge, feres superis, premia magna, locis.
Christophori Bodlei in hoc opusculum (...).
LAudibus hunc vllis tibi commendare libellum
Non opus est, lauds praedicat iste suas.
Quae bona sunt hederam non poscunt vina Venusta
Pingatur facies? Non eget vlla phyco.
Promittunt alij forsan maiora libelli,
Hoc qui plus praestet, vix tamen vllus erit.
Quod latet hic intus rutilo praestantius auro est,
Quod latet hic gemmis, splendidius niueis.
Ergo age, regalem thesaurum amplectere lector,
Sedulus assidua, volue, reuolue manu.
Doctrina quam multiplici est liber iste refertus?
Quam docte and scitu, plurima digna docet?
Omne tulit punctum. Sacra hic docet atque prophana,
Insuper vtilibus, dulcia mixta tenet.
Indoctus libro doctus reddetur ab isto,
Doctus ab hoc etiam, doctior esse queat.
Multorum vice sit tibi librorum iste libellus,
Pauperis hic liber est, bibliotheca (...). Leuini Iohnsoni (...).
Men's quid auara iuuat fibras constringere curis?
Quid lacerum pectus, sollicitudo premit?
Linque sophos varios, mendaces linque poetas,
Linque Stagiritici, dogmata vana, patris.
En tibi thesaurum nunc profert Exoniensis
Praesul, in hoc capies, quicquid habere voles.
Huc huc Pegaseo confer vestigia gressu,
Ebrietas sancta est, quam parit iste calix.
Quicquid aues liber iste dabit tibi, candide lector,
Librum emisse potes, non mage frugiferum. In Zoilum distichon.
Criminis insimulas Phaebaeum noctea lumen.
In culpa est oculus, non tibi Phoebus obest.
Ioannes Bullinghamus Magdalenensis in praeclaras G. Allaei lucubrationes.
Euigiletis Apes: melior vigilantia somno:
vernum tempus adest: euigiletis Apes.
Vndique nunc rident redimiti floribus agri,
tempora labuntur, surgite mellifices.
Allaei recta celeres volitetis in hortum,
consitus est etenim floribus omne genus.
Iam superest operi pro viribus inuigiletis,
atque operaepretio copia mellis erit.
Thomae Hatcheri Cantabrigiensis in laudem Praelectionum Exon. Episcopi carmen.
Quisquis es, aeternam didicisse fideliter arte^
qui cupis, et summi iussa tremenda Dei:
Nec vacat in varios dispersa volumina ca^pos,
non ipsos fontes sedulitate sequi:
Huc ades, et magno prouisum, creed, labori,
instar multorum, si liber vnus erit.
Perlege, sed vultu placido, sed mente quieta,
perlege, sed fructu non pereunte lege.
Omnem quod superat laudem, quid laudibus effers?
Quid medio accendis lumina parua die?
Quid quaeris? tumido liber vt laudetur ab host?
Nilagis, haud poterit displicuisse bonis. I^ Frerus Gormoncestrensis.
To the right honorable and his singular good Lord, Lord Russell, Earl of
Bedforde, one of the Queens most honorable priuye Counsel. G.A. wysheth
health and peace in Christ Jesus.
I Would verelye wish (most virtuous and right honorable Lord) that as I
perceive my self most addict and tied with the bonds of singular and great
benefits flowing from you, even so Fortune would suffer that I might feel,
although no faculty or ability of recompense, yet at the least some hope of
re^dring of thanks, which may flow likewise from me unto your honor. For as
often as the remembrance of your munificent liberality toward me, enters
into my mind (which enters truly very often) eue^ so often am I affected and
vexed with incredible sorrow, fearing least the note of a Gethicall Gethical. 2.
ingratitude (the^ the which there is nothing more odious) should be imputed and
laid to my charge. But that this kind of life might be no longer bitter and
sharp unto me: I have thought good to seek some way and means to produce
and show forth some argument of a grateful heart, and thankeful mind toward
your Lordship. And although I am not ignorant that you do not much regard nor
boaste of your benefits bestowed (as the common sort of welthy men do) nor do
therefore help them that be of lower degree, because you do either aspire or
desire to have thanks to be given unto you for a recompense, or that you
would have your liberality to be praised and setforth unto others: yet I (as
my duty is) do greatly esteem and weigh them which you have disposed, not
only upon me, but also do bestow them daily upon others, and for my part do
judge them worthy immortal laud and praise. In recompense whereof, because I
have no other treasures to exhibit unto your honor but only the little Talent
Talent. 3.
of my exile and sclender learning, I have thought good to dedicate unto your
lordship these my Prelections and readinges (although simple and rude, yet
plain and profitable (uttered of late by me in Paul's Church in London, Paul's
church. 4. London. 5
that they may be defended and delivered from the malignant adversary, by your
honorable wisdom and ready help. And this to attempt three things have
enforced and moved me: that is honesty, fidelity, and grateful duty. Honesty
to avoid occasions of obloquie, fidelity, to accomplish promise, grateful
duty in one or other thing to benefit my Country, unto the which (as Plato
Plato. 6.
says) and not only unto our selves we be borne and brought forth: Gicero
lib. 1 officiorum.
Sed ortus nostri (inquit) parte^ patria vendicat, partem amici. That is, but
part of our birth and being, our Country Country. 7.
does vendicate and challenge, the other part our Parents and friends do
require. Cassiodorus, Cassiodorus. 8
who of a Senator of Rome, was made a deep divine, writes of this thus in his
Epistles: Nobilissimi ciuis est, patriae suae augmenta cogitare, sed eorum
maxim quos respublica summis honoribus obligauit. It is the part (says he) of
a noble and worthy Citizen to have regard for the good increase and
advancement of his Country, but in especial it behooves them so to do, whom
the welthe public has tied and enhaunced to honor and dignity. Hierocles,
Hierocles. 9.
est patria (ait) velut alter quidem deus, et primus maximusque parens, quare
qui nomen ei imposuit a reipsa non temere patriam appellauit, vocabulo quidem a
patre deducto, pronunciato tamen feminina pronu^ciatione, vt ex vtroque parente
mixtu^ esset. etc. The Country (says he) is as it were an other god, and the
first and the greatest parent, therefore he which set unto it that name, did not
unadvisedly name it of the thing it self, Patriam, the word being derived a
Patre, a father, yet pronounced in the feminine termination, that it should be
a mixed thing derived from both the parents. And this reason does insinuate and
declare the Country, being but one, to be honored equalie with both the
Parents, and when it does thus set up the honor of the Country, it does
grant that both the Parents are not of a greater price and estimation, then
the Country, but does vouchsafe to beautify it with equal honor. What should
I molest your honorable ears with the multitude, not only of authorities,
but also of examples of most valiant and noble men? Which did not only employ
and bestow al their industry, study, labor, and diligence, goods and lands,
but also did adventure their own lives for the benefit, profit, and safegarde
of their Country. But because I will not ouerpasse them all, I will recite two
or three, and will first begin with Gods book. What praise worthy is that
mighty Captain and man full of prowes Ioab, which fighting against the Syrians
for his Country said to his brother Abisai: 2. Sam. 10.
If the Syrians be stronger then I, thou shall help me: and if the children of
Ammon be to strong for thee, I will come and succor thee: be strong therefore,
and let us be valiant for our people, and for the Cities of our God, and let
the Lord do that which is good in his eyes. It would be to long to rehearse the
history and chiualdry of Judas Machabeus Judas Macha. 10.
and other Emperors of great puissance, whose piety and love toward their
Country, is comprised and showed in the holy scriptures, I could bring forth
(besides these) the notable virtue and courage toward their Country, of
certain Gentiles. Curtius a famous Romayne, and a noble young man, for the
safegarde of his Country, cast himself into a gaping Cave of the earth, and
so willingly dyed. Publius Decius the father, and Publius Decius the son,
aduentred their heads for the safety of their common wealth, and manfully dyed
for the love of their Country. Chodrus king of Athens, when he understood by
the oracle of Apollo, Apollo. 11.
that Athens Athens. 12.
could not be saved, but by the death of the king (the enemies for that cause
commanding that no man should wound or touch the body of the king) to save his
country, put of his princely apparel, and put on beggars rayme^t, and so went
to his enemies, and of them was willingly slain. Phileni Phileni 13
the two brethren, had leauer to have the bounds of their Country, then the
course of their lives to be enlarged, and therefore suffered them selves to be
buried quick. Herodotus, Herodotus. 14
of all writers of histories compted the chief, does record in his seventh
book, that two of the Country of Lacedemonia took their journey frankly and
of their own accord unto Xerxes, Xerxes. 15.
king of Persians, to the end that they might suffer such pains as the
Lacedaemonians were judged by oracle to sustain. The cause which moved them was
this: The Lacedaemonians, contrary to the nature of al leagues and laws, had
slain the Ambassadors sent unto them from Persia. Which fact being both
heinous and odious, deserved a reuengement to be inflicted upon the
Lacedaemonians. Whereupon these two men before mentioned, came to Xerxes, willing
him to execute on them what kind of torment and death it pleased him, that he
might be moved by that to spare their Country, Xerxes the king (expending and
weighing both their piety toward their country, and also their bold and strong
encourageme^t of mind) did not only deliver the^ from al spices of tortures,
but also desired them that they would remain and make their abode with him.
The parties answered: how can we live here say they forsaking the good rules
and laws, which are put in ure in our country, and abandoning our selves from
the society and company of noble and notable me^, for whose sakes we repaired
hither to adventure our lives? If these men (being but Heathen and Paynims,
destitute and void of al divine knowledge) were so fervently inclined to the
beneficial furtherance of their Country: how much more ought a Christian
(endued with the knowledge of God and his laws) to be zealously enflamed
toward his country? These reasons and ensamples, as well taken out of the holy
scriptures, as other profane authors, move me to consider (right honorable
Lord) both my duty that I owe to my natural Country, and also the account that
I have to render for the little talent which God has delivered unto me, whereby
I am violently enticed to bestow for the benefit of my Country, some part of my
study uttered in certain Lectures. Which attemptate I trust will not be taken
in the wurst part, neither of your honor, neither of those that shall read them,
for here is not only the exposition of the Epistle it self set forth, but
also certain controversies in religion Religion. 16
so debated, certain heresies so refelled, and the glittering face of Papacye
so defaced, that neither the Scotist, Scotist. 17
Negry. 18 Furies. 19
the Sectary, nor the Papist shall have any just and lawful occasion to say
(...), to the contrary. Aristiphon. in Pluto.
Notwithstanding the furies of certain snuffing detractours, and the Momish
Momish. 20
affections of biting Zoilous Zoilus. 21
persons, had almost disanimate me from so virtuous an atchiefe, and godly
attempt. But no marvel, for that pernicious and noisome Stepdame of Virtue
Disdain and Envy, Envy. 22
puts in her foot, to let every honest enterprise. Saint Austine Austen. 23
in a certain Sermon says: Inuidia est odium alienae faelicitatis, respectu
superiorum, quia eis non equatur, respectu inferiorum, ne sibi equentur,
respectu partum, quia sibi equantur. Vnde Cain inuidit Abel Cain and Abel. 24
pro speritati, Rachel Liae Rachel and Lia. 25
fecunditati, Saul David faelicitati. Envy is the hateful disdain of an other
ma^s felicity, in respect of the superiors, because envious men be not equal
with the^, in respect also of inferiors, least other me^ should be equal with
them, and in respect of their equals, because they be equal with the^, whereupon
Cain did envy the prosperity of Abel, Rachel the fruitful deliverance of Lia,
Saul the felicity of David. Valerius Maximus Valerius Maximus. 26
says: Nulla tam modesta faelicitas est, quae malignitatis dentes vitare
possit, Lib. quarto.
dinites enim sunt alienis iacturis, locupletes calamitatibus, immortales
funeribus. Vnde quidam interogatus, quomodo inuidos non haberet, respondit: si
nihil (inquit) ex magnis rebus habueris aut nihil feliciter gesseris, nam sola
miseria caret inuidia. There is no felicity so modest and gentle, which can
avoid the teeth of malice and ill will. Envious men be rich with other men's
loss, welthy with other men's misery, immortal with other men's death. Whereof a
certain man being demanded how he might have no enemies, if (says he) thou
have no part of great and worthy gifts, or if thou do nothing luckely and
worthy praise, De compla^c tu naturae,
for only misery is far from envy. Alanus Alanus. 27.
writes. Quod inuidis aliena prosperitas aduersa, aliena aduersitas prospera
iudicatur: hi in aliena gratulatione tristantur, in aliena triflitia
gratulantur. Unto the envious other men's prosperity is counted adversity, and
other men's adversity is counted prosperity, they rejoice when other me^ be sad,
and they be sad, when other be glad. Which to co^firm with ensample, what need
I go any further then to Pliny Pliny. 28.
the writer of the natural history, who makes mention of one Caius Furius
Ctesinus, Lib. 1^. ca. 16
who being enfraunchised from servile bondage, and dwelling as it were in a
poor cotage, receiving of a little plot of ground belonging to the same more
ample, large, and abundant fruit of grain, then his neighbors did of great
and wide fields, fell into the hands of envious persons, who accused him that
he with sorcery and witchcraft did intoxicate other men's fruits and grains,
whereupon he had a day indicted unto him by Spurius Albinus (being one of the
Ediles Aediles. 29.
) to appear to his answer to clear himself. Caius (fearing condemnation by
the verdict of the people) brought al his rustical instruments presently into
the judgment place, he brought also his daughter, a ioly sturdy dame, well
decked and dressed, besides fat and well fed Oxen, and said with a loud voice:
Haec sunt Quirites Quirites. ^, 0
mea veneficia. O you Romans (said he) these be the sorceries that I use, and
I cannot at this present show unto you the hard labors of my hands, the
careful carckes of my watchings, and daily trauelinges: which things the Judges
hearing, sensibly understood that this occasion proceeded from dame (...),
which (as Bias Bias. 31
says) is ever faelicitatis comes, the collateral companion of felicitye,
Stobeus ser 1. de pruden
she never sleeps, but ever watches to bring virtue and good fame to
desolation and destruction: I will not now stand to recite what sinister
reports, diverse flattering parasites, Parasites. 32
not life, but lip Gospellers, bearing two faces in one hoode, carrying fire
in one Fire in one. 33
hand, and water in the other, sowers of discord, reapers of mischief, has not
long since bruted. But how untrue these reports were, I provoke no further then
to these adversaries, which were the original authors of the same brutes, what
care is and has been taken both for the setting forth of Gods glory, increase
of virtue, and repressing of vice, the said muttering Argi Argi. 34.
may them selves (if they will) testify. I call them Argos, because they be nec
lusci nec paeti, Pontanus,
poreblinde nor squint eyed, but of a very perfect and quick sight: for so much
as they have a sovereign collyry for their eyes. Actius Sincerus (a man of a
rare wit, and of no les nobilitye) when a question was proposed among the
Phisicions, what should be the most special remedy for the perspicuity of the
eyes (one saying that the moist vapor of fenel Fenel. 35
was good, an other that the use of crystal or glass) affirmed that (...)
was the best sovereignty for the eye sight. At the which the Phisicions
Physicians. 36.
were so dismayed, that they were had in derision of all the auditors, and not
a little offended. Why (says he) does not envy cause a man to behold and vewe
al things very largely and fully? and what is a more present remedy for the
eye sight, then when the virtue and faculty of feing is made greater and
broader? And forthwith he rehearsed this distichon out of Ovid. Ovid. 37.


Lib, 1, de ar te amandi.
Fertilior seges est alienis semper in agris
Vicinumque pecus grandius vber habet.
But as disdainful as (...) is, she cannot hurt them which ever have in store
the precious jewel of patience. Cassiodorus upon the Psalms writes. Quod
patientia est quae omnia vincit aduersa, non colluctando, sed sufferendo, non
murmurando, sed gratias agendo. Patience Patience. 38
is that which overcomes al adversity, not in wrestling against it, but in
susteining and suffering it, not by murmuring, but by thanks giving. Xenophon
Xenophon. 39
maledicenti sibi cuida^ tu (inquit) maledicere didicisti, ego (co^scientia
test) didici maledicta conte^nere. Xenophon said to one that enuiously railed
upon him, thou have learned to speak evil: but I (my conscience bearing me
witness) have learned to contemn and despise all evil sayings. But what need I
to trouble your honorable ears (being otherwise occupied with most urgent and
weighty matters) with this my heaping sentence upon sentence, example upon
example, history upon history, for as much as these my expostulations are
utterly impertine^t unto the port, to the which I entend by gods grace to
ariue. Therefore I will end and cease to trouble your Lordship with ambagious
winding of words in this tedious and trifling epistle, and will enter into the
porch of my disordered discourse, desiring God to replenish your mind with the
light and grace of his holy spirit, that al your doings may wholly redounde to
the glory of Gods holy name. Amen.

Veritati non praeiudicat antiquitas.
Although antiquity claim the chiefest place,
Yet shall it Verity never deface.
Hic sequntur Miscellanea. Here follows the mixed annotations upon the
preface going before.
Anselmus. 1.
This Anselmus, was Archbishop of Canterbury, he was a black Monk, and an
Abbot of a certain monastery in Normandy: he wrote works almost infinite,
and floryshed in the time of Henry the first, being King of England, which
Henry for his learning was called Beuclarke. There was a great controversy
between him and Anselme, concerning the inuestiture of Bishops, and giving of
benefices. This Anselme condemned the lawful marriage of priests, and
constrained the^ to forsake their wives. He accused also the King at Rome
before Paschalis the second, who was then Bishop of Rome, because the King had
made and ordained certain Bishops and Abbotes in England. And one William
VVarluuaste being the Kings Proctor and Clarke, aunswearing for the Kings
right among other things said boldly, that the King would not for the loss
of his kingdom, lose the prerogatyue of the inuestiture of his Bishops. Unto
the which Pope Paschalis answered full proudlye. If (as thou say) thy King
will not suffer the donation of Churches to be alienate from him, for the
loss of his kingdom, know thou (flatlye and plainly, I speak it before God)
I would not suffer him quietly to enjoy them for the price of his hedde (O
proud Satan.) Which talk being finished, Anselmus desired the Pope, that he
having no regard to the King, would depose the said Bishops, which thing
when it came to the Kings ears, he did confiscate Anselmus goods, and
deprived him of his Byshoprike. Notwithstanding as some write, the King
restored Anselmus again from excile and banyshment. This Anselme was Archbishop
of Canterburye after Lanfrancke, Anno Domini. 1100. or there about.

There were three Anselmes besides this Archbishop, one was Bishop of Lukes,
who was by the craft and falsehode of Hildebrand made Pope, and named Alexander
secundus, as Benno writes.

But the Lombardes with the consent of Henry the Emperor, set up an other
Bishop against him, whom they chose at Basile in a great assemblye. This
prelates name was Cadolus Bishop of Parma, who with a mighty host of men
besieged Rome, but after one or two battles fought, he was put to flight.
Henry the Emperor to take away this scisme, sent thither with his authority,
one Otho Archbishop of Colyne, who coming to Rome, made and said very much of
the Emperors side, for the election of the Pope, and did greatly blame and
accuse Alexander for that he was elected without the Emperoures consent. Then
Hildebrand interruptyng the Archebishoppes oration, defended stoutelye
Alexanders part, and affirmed that the election of the Pope perteyned only
to the Clergy. Otho easily gave place to Alexander and entreated that there
might be a Counsel assembled at Mantua for the appeasing of the scisme. In
the which Counsel Alexander decreed that no man should here the Mass of any
Priest that kept a concubine. He deprived also all married Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons of their benefices. Yet he permitted Priests sons to enter into
holy orders, having at the least the Popes authority. He decreed that the Pope
should be chosen only of the Cardinals, he commanded Alleluia not to be song
or said from Septuagesima unto Easter.

Benno Cardinalis writes thus of this Alexander. When Alexander understood at
the last that he was elect and intronizate by the subtletie and craft of
Hildebrand and the Emperors enemies, made upon a certain day a Sermon unto
the people, and said that he would not sit in the sea Apostolic without the
Emperous license, and said openly that he would for the same cause send letters
to the Emperor: which when Hildebrand hard, grudging and murmuring, could
scarce refrain his hands before the Mass was ended, but when all was
finished, he led Alexander with a strong company into his chamber, and before
he could vnraye him self of his pontificalibus Hildebrand so fell to buffeting
of him, that he made him to beraye the roast (as they say.) And Hildebra^d
appointed that from that day forward no more money should be given to
Alexander, but five shillings of the Lucenses coin. And so casting Alexander
into prison, retained all the reuennewes of the Church of Rome to his own use.
In the end Alexander in the night departed this world and perchance not
without poison. And Hildebrand was intronizate of his soldiers without the
consent either of the Clergy, or of the people, fearing least an other would
prevent him. Unto whose election not one of the Cardinals did subscribe. Unto
the which place when the Abbot called Abbas Cassinensis came, Hildebrand said
unto him, Frater nimium tardasti, the Abbot answered. Et tu Hildebrande nimium
festinasti, for thou (the Pope thy Lord and master being not yet buried) have
usurped the sea Apostolic contrary to the Canons and laws.

There was also an other Anselme, which did expound the whole course of holy
Scriptures with the gloss called, glosa interlinearis, and with other notes set
in the mergent, which he took out of the writtinges of certain fathers.

An other Anselme also was a black Moncke and a Frenchman which wrote the
book named. Itinerarium Leonis Papae.

Gethicall. 2.
GEtae, were people in Scithia, Appianus does call the^ Dacos. But Strabo in
his seventh book does make this difference between the people called Getas,
and the people called Dacos. That is that Getae dwell in the Orient toward the
great region Pontus: Daci dwell in the part opposite toward Germany, and by
the fountain of the great river Ister, which people many in the old time would
have to be called Danos. Among the Athenians the names of the Danes and the
Getes were usually compted and called servile.

Aelius Spartianus writteth them to have been called Getas who afterward were
named Gothi. Ovid in his book de Ponto writes this people to be barbarous,
fierce and cruel, his words be these.

Nulla Getis toto gens est truculentior orb.
No people in the world permanent.
Then the Getes are more fierce or truculent.
Therefore this Epitheton Gethicall is applied to them that be barbarous, fierce
and unthankful, whereupon this verse is spoken of an unthankful man.

Dicitur ingratos exsuperare Getas. Talentum. 3.
BVdeus, in his book de Ass, does thoroughly define what Talentum is, and how
many ways it is taken.

Concerning the signification of Talentum, when it betokens a sum of money,
it shall be sufficient to know that Talentum Atticum minus is most written of,
and conteyneth 60 Minas, every Mina containing 100 drachmes, or Denaries, and
every Denary being a grot^ sterling, so that the value of Mina is. 33. s. iiij.
d. or after Tunstall 40. s. and Talentum 100. pounds, or after Tunstall. 120.
pounds sterling, of this Talentum in this signification there be Tot sensus
quot capita.

But Talentum by a Metaphor does signify a gift, a dowry, a charge committed
to man, Math. 25.
as in Matthew it is said that unto one he gave five talents, to an other two,
and to an other one, to every man according to hi^ ability. Talentes in this
place, are the gifts of God and of grace committed and given to man to work
and labor, whether it be to teach, to preach, to exhort the people, or to
benefit and profit our neighbors any manner of way, Christ does not give
these gifts concerning the largenes and scarsenes of them, to one man more,
and to an other less, but to every man according as he is able to take and
receive. As the field being fertile and plentiful by nature does bring forth
fruit more abundant, then that field which helped by the industry and
labor of man, even so he that is helped with the instincte and furtheraunce of
nature. To one therefore which by nature is of a quick wit, and of a lively
spirit ar committed five talents, unto an other (according to his capacity)
ar given two, to an other one, whereupon saint Paul confesses that he fed
certain of the Corinthians with milk, 2. Cor. 3.
which (as yet) could digest no whole meat. And to the Ephesians he says,
Ephe. 4.
to every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ.

Chrysostom says, that talentes in this place of Matthew do signify that
which any man is able to do, whether it be to defend with authority, as
Princes and Magistrates may, or to help with money, as the rich may the poor,
or to admonish by doctrine, as the elders ecclesiastical may, or by any manner
of means to further their neighbor. And no man ca^ excuse him self from one
good exercise or other, nor ought (say I) have but only one talent. For in
distribution of alms who was poorer then that widow that cast but two mites
into the treasury chest? Nar. 12. Matthew. 10.
If there he any poorer, he may yet give a cup of water to them that need it.

Cautio.
But we must take heed, that we think not to have of our own, or of our
selves that which we have, 1. Cor. 4.
for (as Paul says) Quid habes quod non accepisti? what have thou that thou
have not received? Therefore we must grant and confess not only the offices,
but the faculty and power to the administration of them, to come of the Lord.
We be not (says Paul) sufficient of our selves to think any good thing, 2.
Cor. 3
but all our sufficiency is of God. It is far otherwise in Gods case, then
in man's case, for a prince and ruler may confer and give an office to any
man, but to give him the gift and faculty to do his office well, it lies not
in man's power. But in Gods case our heavenly king can give unto man not only
(...), that is liberty and authority to do things, but also he can give him
(...) rastonin, that is power, facultye and strength to do it.

Paul's Church. 4.
IN the year of our Lord.1087. and the vij day of July the Church of Paul's
and all that was in it with a great part of the City were burned, (Maurice
then being Bishop of London,) and in the 21. year of William Conqueror. In
the year also 1132. the most part of the City of London, was burned by the
fire of Gilbert Becket and in the.32. year of king Henry the first. Of this
kindred came that goodly impe Thomas Becket.

In the year likewise.1137. and in the first year of king Stephen began a
fire at London Bridge, and burned all the City and Church of Paul's unto
saint Clementes Church without temple bar, which was then called the Danes
Church.

In the year likewise.1382. and the.21. day of May with a great earthquake
through the realm, the Cross in Paul's Churcheyard was overthrown, in the
sixth year of Richard the second. To the building of that Cross again VVillia^
the Bishop of Canterbury gathered great sommes of money, and enriched him
self, and because men should be more liberal and willing to give, he and the
rest of such holy Bishops, granted many days of pardon, to them that would
freely give money to the building of that Cross again.

Furthermore Polichr. tells that a great piece of London, and Paul's Church
with the principal cities of England, were burned, Lib. 7. ca. 4
and he says that a hurlewind threw down an hundred houses in London, and
many Churches also.

On Candlemas even, in midwinter, Paul's steple was burned with lightening, in
the time of king Henry the sixte.

London. 5.
THe city of London was founded and builded of Brutus, in that time when Heli
the high Priest was judge of Israel, which was about the years before
Christ.1125. and was first named Troy nouant. This Brute had three sons
whose names were Locrine, Ca^ber and Albanact. Unto Locrine he gave the middle
part of Britayne, with the superiority of the I Will: Unto Camber he gave
Wales, unto Albanact, Scoteland.

Ebrancke the fith king after Brute, builded the City of York, and the
Castles of Dunbar and Edenbrough, and one Leyle the second king after Ebrancke
builded the City of Carlell, and Lud his son builded the Cities of
Canterbury, Winchester, and the Town of Shastisburie. Bladud the son of
Lud builded the City of Bath, and made therein the hot bathes, and by vain
trust of the Art of Necromancie took upon him to fly in the air, from whence
he fell down and brake his neck. Leir the son of Bladud builded the city
of Leicester.

At the last after the house of Brute was cruelly destroyed, Mulumsius Dunwallo
duke of Cornwall: brought this realm into one Monarchy, and he made the
four notable ways in Britayne, called the Fosse ways. In London he builded a
great temple, which some suppose to be Paul's Church, some Blackwel hall. He
lived about.441. before Christ.

Bellinus son of Mulumsius, did co^stitute three archeflamins, whose sees were
at London, York and Carlion, he finished the four great ways begone by his
father, he made Denmarcke tributarie unto him. In London he made the haven
called Billinsegate, and as Leiland writes, builded the tower of London.

Plato. 6.
THis Plato was called Diuinus Plato, for his excellent doctrine, which
doctrine co^teyneth many things (as S. Auste^ says) which accord with the
holy Scriptures, so that in the^ is perceived the first part of Genesis, unto
this text, Spiritus dn^i ferebatur super aquas, and the mystery of three persons
in divinity, is there expressed, his name was first Aristocles, and after
called Plato, because as some suppose, he was broad in the shoulders, other
write because he had a broad visage. He was before Christ.342. years, he
lived sole and chaste (as S. Austen says) and died being of ye age of.81.
years. Plato lieng in his cradle, bees brought honey into his mouth without
hurting of him, which thing diverse did interpret, to signify, that from him
should flow eloquence most sweet and delectable Socrates dreamed the night
before yt Plato was brought to him to be instructed in learning, that he held
between his knees a white Cygnet, who having feathers quickelie grown, flew up,
toward heaven, and filled the air with most pleasant tunes. So the day after
Plato being brought by his father unto Socrates, who beholding him well, said:
This is the bird, whose Image I beheld this last might, but his end and death
was (as some say) the disease of the lowsy evil, called of the Physicians
Ptyriasis.

Country. 7.
HOmer writes that Ulysses so loved his country, that he desired to see the
smoke thereof once appear before he died, yea although he should dye fourth
with.

One named Seriphius, when it was objected against him that his country was
poor and base, made this answer. Mihi patria dedecus est, tu autem patriae,
my country is a dishonor to me, but thou art a dishonor to thy country.

Teucer hearing certain conferring together of the sweetenes of their
country, said. Patria est, vbicunque est been. Where a man lives well, there
is his country, for it is often times seen, that certain has better
success, and be of more estimation among strangers, then they be in their
own country. And therefore it is a good and a golden saying: Omne solum forti
patria est.

Cassiodore. 8.
THis Cassiodore, was a Moncke of Rauenna, but was first consul, and the^
Senator of Rome, he wrote upon the Psalter, and many godly and learned
Epistles, anno domini. 550.

Hierocles. 9.
HIerocles, was a Philosopher of Alexandria, whose consta^cie, magnanimity and
eloquence, is of Suidas with marvelous praises commended. This his magnanimity
of mind (says he) may be perceived and understood by the commentaries which
he wrote upon the verses of Pithagoras, called Aurea Pithagorae carmina. He
wrote also of prudence, and many other books, in the which his excellent wit
and learning do plainly appear. Of this read more in Suidas.

Judas Machabeus. 10.
IVdas Machabeus was ye son of Matathias the Priest. This Judas did with a
most godly zeal, withstand the edictes and commandments of Antiochus. Who
commanded the Jews to reject the law of God, and to receive and embrace the
Idolatry of the heathen. He (vanquishing and putting to flight certain hosts
of Antiochus) at the last repaired to the city of Jerusalem, and to the temple
which he did purify and cleanse again, the.xxv. of November.

Afterward, when he had made a league with ye Romans, he was slain in the
battle by Demetrius the king, as it is recorded in the first book of the
Machabees, the.ix. chapter.

Quaestio.
Some will demand what is to be thought of the books of the Mabees, whether
they be Canonical or no, and whether they be of a sufficient authority to
confirm any doctrine?

Responsio.
For that our adversaries do mixed and mingle unto books auctenticall and
Canonical, other books named Ecclesiastical or Hagiographall (as ye books of
the Machabees and others) they do it for this counsel and end, to make equal
traditions and unwritten verities, with ye holy scriptures. But to omit other
their doings, they take upon them to prove and show out of the second book of
the Machabees, that it is an wholesome thing to pray and offer for the dead, that
they might be loosed from their sins. They brag also that they can show
out of those books, that the prayers of the saints being in heaven, are
offered unto God, for them which live in the earth. When notwithstanding in
the primative Church, the second book of the Machabees, and other like, were
never rehearsed nor nombred among the books canonical.

Obiectio.
Why sir? saint Austen in his book De doctrina Christiana, does number among
the books canonical, not only other books Ecclesiastical, but also the
second book of the Machabees.

Responsio.
If we look well upon the Histories and other monumentes of the ancient
fathers, it will appear that even the^ first, that is in saint Austens time,
this book was received into the number of the books cononicall, in the third
counsel holden at Carthage, about the year of our Lord. 400. or.399.

Nor saint Austen does dissemble or deny the same, for in his book De
ciuitate dei, and in his work Contra Gaudentii epistolam, he does admonish
and teach the books of the Machabees not to have been nombred of the old
fathers in the Canon. Notwithstanding he adds, that they were not
unprofitably received, so that they be read soberly and with discretion.

He says also in an other place, they are taken for canonical, because they
contain the vehement and marvelous passions and death of certain martyrs.
Besides this he writes, that every thing which is set fourth in that book, is
not to be received, except it be well examined and conferred with other
Scriptures. It may be showed out of the most ancient and noble Churches of the
East, that the books of the Machabees were never received for canonical.
Meliton Sardensis episcopus, which lived not many years after the death of
the Apostles, about the year of our Lord.173. under the Emperor Anthonius
verus (to whom he wrote an Appologie for our faith) does recite the books of
the old Testament, making no mention of any of those books called
Ecclesiastical. He says that he went into the East, where our preaching
began, and where all things were done, which are written, that he might
diligently inuestigate and search out all things, which does pertayne to the
verity and certaynetie of the books canonical, and that there he found out
the certain and true number.

Origin himself does rehearse no more books of the old Testament then.22.
Likewise saint Hierome not only in his Prologue named Galeatus, but also in
his Epistle unto Paul, does know and number only.22. books, other books
says he, must be set out of the Canon.

In his Prologue also upon the Proverbs of Solomon, after he had spoken of the
book of wisdom, which is said to be Salomons, and of the book called
Ecclesiasticus, he adds this. As the Church therefore does read the book
of Judith, of Tobie, and the books of the Machabees, but yet does not receive
them amongst the Canonical Scriptures, so likewise does she receive these two
books of Machabees to the edifieng of the people, and not to the authority
of any Ecclesiastical doctrine to be confirmed.

This Hierome could not be ignorant of the Decree of the Counsel of
Carthage, for (as many do write) he dyed about the year of our Lord.422, and
therefore it is to be judged, that saint Austen meant no otherwise, but as
Hierome did, that is, that he nombred the second book of the Machabees among
the Canonical, but yet understood it to be Ecclesiastical, that is not of so
great authority, as the books, which of old antiquity were counpted
Canonical.

Ruffinus in the exposition of the Apostles Symbol, does recite no more books
of the old Testament, but so many as are rehearsed before, and among other
things these be his words. Hec sunt veteris Testamenti volumina que secundum
maiorum traditionem, per ipsum spiritum sanctum inspirata creduntur, and
Ecclesiis Christi tradita sunt. Sciendum tamen est, quod and alii libri sunt,
qui non Canonici, sed Ecclesiastici, a maioribus sunt appellati: vt est
sapientia Salomonis, Ecclesiasticus, Tobiae and Judith, and Machabeorum libri,
que omnia in Ecclesiis legi voluerunt, non tamen proferri ad authoritatem fidei
ex his confirmandam. These be the books of the old Testament, which after
the tradition of the Elders, are believed to be enspired by the holy Ghost him
self, and delivered to the Churches of Christ: Yet we must know, that there be
other books, which are not called of the elders canonical, but
Ecclesiastical: as the book of Sapience, the book named Ecclesiasticus, the
books of Tobie and Judith, and of the Machabees. Which books all they would
have truly to be red in the Church, but not to be brought fourth out of them
any authority to confirm our faith.

Finally, the fact and deed of Rasias, recorded in the second book, is not
greatly commended of certain learned and godly men, because he in a manner
killed him self, also in the end of the book it is written: Si been scripsi,
est quod volui: Sin exiliter, est quod potui. If I have written well, it is
that, that I would: If I have written sclenderly, it is that which I could.
These words are not to be attributed to the holy ghost, for he is the author
only of words and works most perfect and pure.

Apollo. 11.
Certain Authors write, that Apollo first brought in the use of Physic, and
therefore deserved to be called a God. He is called also the Author and inue^tor
of Verses and Music, wherefore the Poets coumpte him their chief God.

In the Yland called the Rhodes, there is an image named Colossus, of such
great quantity and bigness, that it is no^bred among the seven wonders of the
world. Three fold power and authority is given unto him, that is, In heaven he
is called Sol, the Sun, in earth he is called Liber Pater, the father of Vine
and wines, in hell he is called Apollo. Three things are painted always with
his image, an Harp, a Buckler, and Arrows. There is ascribed unto him
continual youth, and therefore he is feigned of the Poets to be always
remaining among the flourishing herbs and green grass. There is a proverb
which sprange of Apollo. Apollonis oraculum, the oracle of Apollo, by the
which is signified a thing most true, because Apollo being co^sulted, gave
ever true answers. There is also an other proverb Ex tripode dictum, the
original and meaning whereof ye shall read at large in Chiliadibus Erasmi.

Athenae. 12.
AThens was a noble city where all liberal sciences were taught, it is called
the mother of all Philosophers, all Greece had not in it a more beautiful and
nobler thing. The situation thereof was very spectable and pleasant. It was
also as it were a certain mother city and refuge, into the which all other
cities nere adioygning, (afflicted and pressed with terrors of war or any other
calamities) did fly and had recourse. It was a most safe and sure receptacle
of all ships, mariners and Merchants. It was the noblest university of all
the world, and none in times past was coumpted learned, which had not given
diligence to learning at Athens. Strabo writes that there was in Athens a
certain rock set in a plain, which was inhabited round about circle wise.
In that plain was the temple of Minerua, and in that temple there was an
image, which the inhabitants did believe to have fallen from heaven. In the
said Church there was a perpetual fire with a company of virgins. This city
was called also Cecropia, of a certain king named Cecrops, and Mopsopia of one
Mopsus, as of Ianus the son of Iaphet, was named (as some write) Ionia, At
the last this city was called of this word Minerua, Athens, for the Grecians
do call Minerua^, Athena^. And Minerua the virgin found out Clothemakyng,
VVeauyng and Spinning, and many other Artificial things. And therefore she was
taken as a famous goddess. And because all her inventions did proceed out of
the quicknes of wit and great wisdom, the Poets do fable that she was borne
of Jupiters brain.

As Cecrops was repairing and fortifieng the city of Athens, water broke
fourth suddenly in a certain place, and in an other place there was found an
Olive tree, upon the which wonders, Apollo being demanded at Delphos, what was
meant thereby, and what were best to be done, made answer: that the Olive tree
did signify Mineruam, and the water did betoken Neptunum, and that they both
were sisters children, and both Gods, and that it was in the arbitrament of the
citezens, to call the city after one of their two names. So (all the citizens
being assembled) the me^ did cleue and consent to Neptunus, the women unto
Minerua: who obtained that the city should be called by the name of Minerua.
The Poets do say that Neptunus and Minerua did build the city of Athens, and
when there was altercation between the^ for the imposition of the name, (other
Gods being present,) they conuented between them selves, that whether of them
(smiting the ground) should bring fourth the most laudable and worthy effect,
should name the city. Neptunus smiting the ground with his mace, brought
fourth an borse, an instrument of war, but Minerua throwing her spear upon the
ground, brought fourth an Olive tree, of peace and quietness, which because it
was counted more profitable by their judgment, the city was called by her
name, Athens. Therefore the Athenians were not strangers, nor a rablement of
people gathered together which gave ye original of the city, but they were
borne in the same ground where they dwelt. They first taught ye use of
Clothemaking, and of Oil, they taught the manner to Ploughe and to sow Corn,
unto them which before did eat Acornes. Learning, Eloquence, and al civil
order of discipline did florishe at Athens.

Cecrops also made.iij. laws against their women, to pacify ye ire of
Neptunus, who^ the women did set behind Minerua. The first law was that no
woman should ever enter into the Senate, the second law was, that no child
should be called by ye mothers name. And the third was, yt no man should call
them Mulieres Athenienses, but Atticas. There be three proverbs which had
their original of Athens. The first proverb is this: Atheniensium inconsulta
temeritas: the unadvised rashenes of the Athenians, It may be applied against
them whose rash consultation comes to good success. For in times paste it was
commonly imputed to the Athenians, that they would slackelye consulte for their
affairs, and had little foresight, or no providence in their doings. But
Minerua Lady President of the city did accustom to turn their ill purposes
to a good end.

The like proverb is at this time in every man's mouth: Est fortunatior quam
prudentior. It is better to be happy, then wise. It may be spoken of him which
has good success and chance, not by his industry and wisdom, but by
commodity of fortune.

The second proverb is this.
ATticus testis vel Attica fides, a witness of Athens, or the fidelity of
Athens, which proverb may be spoken of a most incorrupt and upright
testimony and faith.

The original of this proverb sprang of this, because that at Athens there
was a Church builded unto the Lady faith. Velleius Paterculus makes mention
of this in these words: If any do impute to the Athenians that time of
rebellion, in the which Athens was taken of Silla, truly he is ignorant of al
truth and antiquity. For the faith of the Athenia^s, was so certain and sure
toward the Romans, yt always and in all things what soever was done with a
sincere and vncorrupt fidelity, the Romans would pronounce that to be don
Attica fide, by the faith of the Athenia^s.

Quintilian does write that the soil and ground of Athens, did always render
more sede then it did receive.

The third proverb is this.
NOctua volauit. The owl has floen: The fleing of the owl was to the
ancient Athenia^s, a simbole and presage of victory, because this bird was
dedicate as an holy thing unto Minerua, who always as it is said before,
brought to good success the slack consultations of the Athenians. And
therefore when any matter comes to a good end contrary to our expectation,
It may be prouerbially said, the owl has floen, as Suidas does write.

It shall not be vnaptely applied, when matters are brought to effect, not by
any industry and strength, but by the mediation of money. The original
whereof, came of this, because the coin of the Athenians had an owl ingraued
in it. It may well be objected against them which do both give and receive
bribes.

Phileni. 13.
THey were two brethren of Carthage of who^ it is written, that where they of
Carthage and they of Cyren did strive for their bounds, it was agreed that out
of each city two men should issue, and where as they met should be the
bounds, then the said brethren being sent, went a great way into the
bounds of the other, ear they did return, and when they of Cyren did see
that they were prevented, they took it displeasauntly, and manaced the two
brethren, that if they would not go back they should be put quick into the
earth, but they notwithstanding would not depart, wherefore they being buried
alive, their country men made over them two alters, which at this day be
called Arae Philenorum.

Herodotus. 14.
THis Herodotus was borne in a city of Halicarnassus in Asia, and he wrote
nine books of Histories, which he did entitle by the name of the nine Muses,
in the which he wrote the History of all the Acts done in Europa, and Asia, by
the space of.240. years. He came of a noble lineage, he began his History with
Cyrus king of the Persians. He was before the incarnation of Christ.200. years.

Xerxes. 15.
THis king was Darius son, and he invaded Greece, with seven hundred thousand
strange soldiers, and yet was vanquished by a few Greeks, and constrained
to fly away in great fear in a little boat unknown, and at the last was
slain by Artabanus the great Captain of his army. On a time when he saw
the whole Sea called Hellespontus covered with his Navy, and all the ba^ckes and
plain fields replenished with his army of men, he boasted him self blessed,
and yet straight way fell on weepyng. Artabanus his uncle which had dissuaded
him from that viage, maruelyng at so sudden a change, demanded the cause.
Then Xerxes said, I now record in my mind, how short the life of man is,
when of this great multitude after an hundres years not one of these shall
remain alive. He was before Christ.485. years.

Religion. 16.
CIcero de natura deorum says, that this word Religio comes a Relegendo, of
readyng again, or gathering again together, and so saint Austen, Lib. 2. de
ciuitate dei says, Religio dicitur a relegendo deum, quem amiseramus
negligentes, Religion is said of gatheryng God again, whom we being
negligent, had lost. Lacta^tius Li. 4. affirms yt it comes a Religando of
bynding, because we be bind bound to do our duty toward God. And so
Isidorus Lib. 18. Etimo: writes saying. Religio dicta est, quod per eam, vni
soli deo religamus animas nostras ad cultum diuinum, It is called Religion,
because we be it our souls to one only God to do him divine and godly honor.
Religio is taken sometime for fear and scruple of conscience, as Dignus es tua
religione odio. Thou art worthy to be hated for thy peuishe superstition.
Sometime it signifies wickedness, as Hoc patrare Religio est. It is an heinous
thing to do this.

Scotiste. 17.
John Duns, by sur name called Scotus, whom they call the most subtle doctr and
prince of all divines, did expound the four books made by Petrus Lombardus,
called the master of the sentence. He proposed and wrote also. 21. questions,
called quodlibetates, beside many other subtle works. Al his scollers and
followers were called Scotistae. He was about the year of our Lord 1304. and
died as some write, of the disease named Apoplexia, which makes the patie^t to
leese his feeling, his speech and moving, but the most part write, that he was
buried quick and a live. He was a gray Friar.

There was an other Scotus, a Benedictine Moncke, a great Philosopher, the
hearer and disciple of Bid, and lived in the time of Carolus Magnus, and
Bertramus. He translated the books of Dionisius the Martyr into Latin, and
made a book of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Sabellianus
writes, that some judge the University of Paris to have been institute of
this Johannes Scotus, but it is more likely that the University was made by
the means of Carolus Magnus, and furnished with learned men, and expert
readers by the same Scotus. Alcuinus, Claudius, and Rabanus, which came out of
Scotland. Vincentius in speculo historiali, says: That Elfridus king of
England, being ravished with the fame of this Scotus name and learning, brought
him into England, where (being in a Monastery called Monasterium Melbrine^se)
taught children, and at the last was dug and persed with writing pensels,
with which kind of martyrdom he finished his life.

Negry. 18.
NEgry quide^, is as much to say as he is able to say little or nothing to it.
For gry does signify a very vile or base thing, as the paring of the nails,
or the grunting of a sow, and therefore some think that grunire, which is to
grunt as a sow, comes of this word gry.

Furies. 19.
THe Poets feign that there be three furies of hell, whose names are: Alecto,
Tisiphone, Megera, and they signify the worm and painful remorse of
conscience, which horriblye tormenteth the minds of wicked persons. These
three furies betoken the three fold affections of the mind, anger, greedines,
and pleasure. Anger desires reuengement, greedines desires riches, pleasure
desires wantonness.

Momish. 20.
MOmus the God of reprehension, of whom all curious reprehenders ar called
Momi, that is finding fault with every thing. This Momus (as Aristotle writes)
found fault with Nature, because she placed the horns in the head of the Ox,
and not in the shoulders, whereby he might give the mightier stroke. Also (as
Lucia^ says) he blamed Vulcan, for that he had not set eyes in man's breast,
that he might see what is within him, and of this rises a proverb, Momo
satisfacere, to satisfy Momus mind, which is very hard to do.

Zoilus. 21.
ZOilus was an envious Poet, and called the rhetorical dog, very busy to write
and speak ill, not only of Homer, Plato, and other noble writers, but also
contencious and full of envy and strife against al me^. He being demanded of
a certain learned man, why he spoke so ill of al me^, because (says be) I
cannot do il when I would, and therefore the envious, of al learned me^ ar named
Zoili Aelia. lib. 11. de varta historia.

Envy. 22.
BIon beholding a certain envious man very sad, said: Nescio vtru^ tibi
acciderit aliquid mali, an alteri boni quippiam, I cannot tell whether any ill
thing be chanced unto thee, or some good thing happened to some other man. For
an envious man is no les tormented with an other man's felicity, then with his
own misfortune. Laertius. lib. 4.

Antisthenes said, that it was very absurd, to purge the wheat, from cockle
and Darnel, and to separate war from an unprofitable soldiour, and not to put
away envious persons, from a common wealth, signifieng envious persons to be
more unprofitable to a City, then cockle or darnell is unto wheat, and a
coward and dastard unto battle. Idem. lib. 6.

Socrates being demanded what thing was grievous to good me^, made answer,
Malorum faelicitas, the good succes of ill men. And being asked what was
grievous to ill men, said: Bonorum prosperitas, the prosperity of good men.
Antonius, in Meliss.

Saint Austen. 23.
Austen was a famous doctor of Christ's church, borne in Afric, in a town
called Gathensis. His mothers name was Monica, and his father was of the order
of Senators. They were very honest persons, but yet of no hie nor rich degree,
his brothers name was Nauigius. He was of such excellent wit, that in his
childhood he learned all the seven liberal sciences, without any instructor. He
was wonderfully learned, specially in the doctrine of Plato. His masters name
was Manlius Theodorus. He hated the Greek tongue, and was in great love with
the Latin tongue. In his youth being sixtene years of age, he was greatly
given to fleshly lusts, and by the reason of ill company committed theft.
About the age of.xix. years (his father being dead two years before) chaunsed
upon the book of Cicero called Hortensius, and being moved thereby, fell to the
study of philosophy. He somewhat applied his mind to the holy scriptures, but
for the simplicity of the style he did loathe them. He being of the age of.xx.
years, by himself did read the Catagories of Aristotle, and understood them,
and was expert in all the Mathematical sciences. A little after he chanced upon
the Manichies, and did embrace and receive their opinions.

And by the space of ix. years, that is from.xix. until he came to the age
of.xxviij. he did persist in the same heresye, and disceaued many. He used the
unlawful company and bed of one Concubine. At the age of.xxix: he heard one
Festus a Manachie read at Carthage, whom at the first he praised above all
other: but when by conference and disputacion, he perceived him to be ignorant
of the liberal sciences, and to be expert in nothing but grammar: he dispeired
that he might be taught by the Manichies of the truth, which to attain he
much desired. At the last he went to Rome, against his mothers will, who
pitifully lamented the same: where he professed Rhetoric, hoping that he should
find there more obedient and more thankful disciples. And there he fell sick of a
fever, and was in great danger, but he recovered his health, and used still the
company of the Manichies, but did not so much defend their doctrine, because
after the opinion of the Academickes he judged all things to be doubted of. And
being forsaken of his ingrate disciples, went unto Millen, where he was
fatherly received of saint Ambrose, whom he also loved again, not for true
doctrines sake, but only for his benificence. He heard Ambrose diligently, not
for the desire of the knowledge of truth, but because he would prove whether
Ambrose were of the same eloquence as he was reported to be. At the last he
became neither a Manichy nor a catholic, but doubted how the way of life and
salvation might be found out, his mother came to Millen unto him, hoping her
son to be converted by saint Ambrose.

When he was.xxx. years of age, he married a wife, and was betrothed unto her,
but she was not mariageable by two years, and he was feign to exspect and
tarry for her so long. When his Concubine understood that he minded to mary a
wife, she departed from him into Africa, and left him a son, which he had by
her, and then he took an other Concubine. At the last he came to one
Simplicianus, and did utter and open unto him all the circumstances of his
errors, and desired counsel of him, how he might come to a more perfect and
fuller knowledge of the truth, who did exhort and counsel him to read the holy
scriptures, and to follow the example of Victorinus, who with the diligent
reading of them, became a Christian, and professing openly his faith, was
bapzed. Austen being very desirous to follow the same example, his mind was
drawn hither and thither what he might do, and by chance one Pontinianus did
recite unto him the history of Antonius, and of other two, which readyng the
book of Antonie (forsaking al their goods and their wives) embraced the
monastical life. With the which narration, Austen being greatly moved,
lamented his life, and departing into a garden with his friend Alippius, fell to
pouring out abundance of tears, and desired God to give him a more pure
mind and better life. And there he heard as it were out of the next house, a
voice of children or maidens, singing and saying: Toll, lege, Toll, lege,
take and read, take and read. But when he saw no person, he thought it to be
Gods admonition and warning. And then taking the book of the new testament,
chanced upon this place of Paul. Induite dominum nostru^ Iesum Christum, et
carnis prouidentiam ne feceritis in concupiscentiis. Put upon you our Lord
Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh in concupiscence and lust.
After he had red these words, all darkness and ignorance were shaken from his
eyes, so that he saw the truth, and imparting this to Alippius, they both
purposed to embrace Christ's riligion: not without the great comfort and joy of
his mother Monica, who all the time that he was a Manichie, both daily and most
earnestly prayed to God for his conversion. In the mean time, he was greatly
tormented with the tooth ache, but by the prayers of his brethren he was
miraculouslye healed. At the last he renounced the profession of Rhetoric, by
the reason that he was short winded, and pained in his stomache, and gave his
mind wholly to the reading of the holy scriptures. He wrote to saint Ambrose,
declaring and confessing unto him al his errors, and shows what he purposed
to do, and asks counsel what books of the holy bible he ought chiefly to
read. Ambrose persuaded him to read the prophet Esaias, but when it seemed
somewhat hard unto him, he deferred the readyng thereof unto an other time. About
ye feast of Easter, he was baptized at Millen, with Alippius his friend, and
his natural son Adeodatus, which was of the age of.xv years. After his
conversion, he led a most godly and virtuous life. He wrote notable and worthy
works, he was very liberal and beneficial to the poor. He kept no company
with women, for avoiding of suspicion. His apparel was neither to costly nor to
base, but of an honest and comely sort. His table was not sumptuous, but
frugall and honest, having flesh for strangers sakes, and for them which were
diseased. At his meals he did more regard reading and disputing, then eating
or drinking. He was very harberous, and kept a good house. He most earnestly
hated detractions, and ill reports of such as were absent, and had written
upon his table these two verses.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam,
Hanc mensam vetitam nouerit esse sibi.
He that delights to backebite them that be absent,
I forbid him this table to frequent.
Often times, he would very sharply reprehend his fellow Bishops, for deprauing
other, and said that he would either put out those verses, or else that he would
depart from thence himself. Finally, the city Hippona being besieged three
months of the Vandoles and Goths (at which time the state of the Church, and
all things was most sorrowful) he often prayed unto God, that either it would
please him of his goodness to dissolve and break of that siege, or else to
grant him an happy and blessed end, and so he fell into a fever, and kept his
bed, and the disease waxing more and more, he by him self did read certain
psalms of repentance, and desired other also to read them. And so giving
himself, by the space often days to reading and prayer, at the last departed
out of this miserable life, Possidonius and other of his friends being present.
He lived.lxxvj. years, and was Bishop.xl. years, and died Anno domini. 437.
Saynct Ambrose and he, being both replenished with the holy Ghost, did sing
together the psalm Te deum, answering mutually one the other.

This man saint Austen does wonderfully set forth to us by his life, the
unspeakable mercies of God, who made of a fornicator, a chaste Father, who made
of an heretic, an Apostolic Doctor, who made of a thief, a Bishop, who
made of a wicked and naughty man, a sound member and sure pillar of his Church.
It is he that can make of a Saul a Paul, of a Publicane an Evangelist, of a
fisher a Preacher, of a thief a Confessor, and of a wanton Austen, a deep
divine, and a worthy preacher (O the great mercies of God toward mankind.)

Cain and Abel. 24.
ALthough the gestes of Cain and his brother Abel, are not unknown: yet that
the secrets and mysteries which they contain may more depely and worthily be
pondered and weighed, I will compendiously set them before your eyes.

Not long after that our first parents were driven out of the place of
pleasure, they begat a son, who^ (partly because he was the first borne,
partly because they supposed him to be that strong seed, which should
^halenge and deliver us from the tyranny of the Serpent) they made not only
head and chief of their posterity, but also the treasure and possession of all
their desire, for the which cause they named him Cainu^, which does descend of
this Hebrew word Canah, which signifies to possess.

They begat also an other son not long after, of whom they did not only not
depend, and had no regard, but did count him as a vain thing, and made
almost no count of him, whereupon they named him Abelum, which does signify
vanity, and as it were but a vapor, enduring but a little time. But how blind
and disceauable the judgment of the flesh is, and how many times he judges
darkness light, and light darkness: in this act of Adam it does evidently
appear.

The history of these two brethren is set forth at large in the book of
Genesis, but of the mystery of the same, I entend at this present to make some
discourse.

The mystery signified by Cain and Abell.
IN these two brethren, two peoples are signified. In the younger are signified
the elect people of God, and especially of the Gentiles. In the elder are
signified reprobates, and specially of the Israelites. Nor yet two peoples
only are signified by them, but also the chief heads of them. Wherefore
Abel is the tipe and figure of Christ which is the elect of all electes. And on
the other side Cain is the tipe and figure of Antechrist, which is the
reprobate of all reprobates. The elect, I say, are noted in Abel, because he is
counted the first just man, not by the righteousness of nature, law, and flesh,
but by the righteousness of grace, faith, and the spirit. He is just by the
righteousness of Christ, of whom he was partaker through the spirit, no
otherwise then as the members are partakers of the influence of the head: and
as the river is of the exundant flowing of the spring. For Christ is not only
full of grace and righteousness, but is full of the original justice, and capital
grace, that al persons may draw thereof.

And where it was said before that in Abel were signified the elect people, and
specially of the Gentiles: that was spoken partly because he is the younger, and
partly because his name is Abel.

For the first it does plainly appear that the Gentiles were younger then the
Hebrews, for the Hebrews had their original being of Sem, which was Noes eldest
son, and the Gentiles came of Iaphet, a younger son of his. They were
younger I say, not only in nature, but also in faith, for as much as God did
first open him self unto the Jews, and showed them away how they should
worship him.

For the second, Abel does signify vain, which does well agree unto the
Gentiles, both before they were converted, and after they were converted, but
yet in a diverse respect. Before they were converted, not only because they
were Athei, that is, knowing no God, uncertain, vain, swelling in their evil
thoughts, worshipping idols, being without hope, without promise, without
testament and couenantes, but also because God made none account of them, but
as one suffering them to follow their own lusts and ways, yea and regarding
them not only not to be his people, but as though they were no people, as the
Apostle Paul does often times record.

Now after they were converted, they were likewise vain, but yet in an other
sense. For when the most highest began to call those things which were not,
even as those things which were, and after it pleased him to make a people not
his, to be his people: and after he had opened their eyes, and had surrogate
them in the place of the Israelites, and made them his members: yet they were
compted vain, partly, because such is the peoples judgment of Gods elect,
compting their life madness, and their end without honor: partly, because they
which be elect, are inwardly taught by Gods spirit, that there is nothing
firm and sure under the sun, but that all things are vanity, and affliction
of the spirit, and specially that the life of man is nothing else but a vapor,
and that man is nothing else but Bulla, a buble of the water. The elect I say,
being thus persuaded, do little regard things temporal: nor greatly pass for
them selves, nor do trust to their own good works, but deny them selves,
hating their own life, and coumpting all things filthynes, which are without
Christ, as Paul says to the Philippians.

In Cain (as is said before) the reprohates are signified, Philip. 3.
because he is coumpted the first wicked man, the reprobate I say, specially
of the Hebrews, and that partly because he was the elder brother, and partlye
because his name is interpreted possession. The Hebrews did greatly flatter
them selves, and boasted them selves to be the peculiar people of God, they
were puffed up with incredible pride, and did persuade them selves, that the
whole world pertayned to them, because they dwelled in the chief and best
place thereof. They bragged often saying: Phan. 8.
Nos natura Iudaei, we by nature are Jews, and not sinners of the Gentiles.
We are not borne in fornication, but we have God for our father, with mary
other such brags.

Look more of this matter, if ye will learn the fulness thereof, in the book
called Scripturae medulla, compoed by Iacobus Naclantus.

Rachel and Lia. 25.
BY Rachel and Lia, are signified (as the divines do writ) the two kind of
lives of man. By Lia, the active life, by Rachell, the contemplative life.

Lia is interpreted labor, and therefore it may well be applied to the active
life of man, which ought to continue always in some travel and labor.

Lia was bleare eyed, by the which is signified the great cares and daily
troubles, with the which man is pressed, and enforced sometime to weep and
mourn.

Rachel does signify the life speculatiue, which is always occupied in divine
matters, as the sinful woman did sit at Christ's feet, pondering and weighing
the words which she heard of him.

Rachel is interpreted Ouis, a sheep, by the which is signified, that they
which be given to the life contemplative, should be meek, giving place,
studieng peace and quietness, always recording and chewing the cud of Gods law
and his holy word.

Question.
Genes. 31.
Why did Rachel steal and convey away her fathers idols, and what is signified
thereby?

Responsio.
Ephesians. 5. 1. Sam. 15.
Covetousness is the serving of idols, as saint Paul writes to the Ephesians,
and not to obey God, by the sentence of Samuel it is coumpted also idolatry.
Furthermore to observe supersticiously the letters, the titles and the points
of the law, (as the Cabalistes do) cannot be without the compass of idolatry.

Therefore that Rachel stole her fathers idols, is manifestlye signified that
they which do truly know God, and do vewe godly things, do not only coumpt
the thing before recited, to be foolish and vain, but also wicked and
diabolical.

Also by it is signified, that these two things, idolatry and superstitious
observation of the law, are taken away by Rachel, that is to say by the faith
in Christ, who did manifest and open the secrets of God, and taking away from
the Phareseies, the scriptures and oracle of the Prophets, which they had
corrupted with their false gloses, did restore the true sense and natural
meaning unto the law.

The whole mystery that is signified by Lia and Rachel, is described at large
in the said book of Naclantus before named.

Valerius Maximus. 26.
THere were two of that name, the one called Valerius Potitus, who after the
envy which rose concerning the office called December Viratus, did mitigate and
appease with laws, and certain conditions, the people being stirred and moved
against the Seniors.

The office of December viratus, was this: There were.x. men chosen and appointed,
which should make laws, write, and publish them, and their authority was above
al other, so that they might not only make laws, but also, if need were,
interpret them. And where before were but.x. tables of laws, they added unto
them two more, and so all these laws together were called Leges duodecem
tabularum. He (being the first Consul after the.x. men called December viri, when
he had vanquished the people called Volsci) had a denial of the fathers for his
triumph, but yet being the first, did make his triumph, without the authority
of the Senate, with his companion and fellow Marcus Horatius, and therefore he
got this name to be called Valerius Maximus.

The other Valerius Maximus wrote worthy and memorable sayings and gestes, unto
Tiberius the Emperor, and did digest them in.9. books into common places. He
was soldier unto Sextus Pompeius. He is called Valerius Maximus Historicus.

Alanus. 27.
THere were many of this name, one an english man called Alanus de Lynna,
Allin of Lynne, a white Friar. He wrote one book of diverse senses of the
scripture. He wrote also a book of the morals of the Bible, and also the book
entitled, Sermones notabiles.

Master Baal makes mention of him in his book De scriptoribus Angliae.

An other Alanus was called Alanus Teukesberiensis, he wrote of the exile and
life of Thomas Becket, Bishop of Canterbury.

What shall I speak of other, as of Alanus Restaldus, which wrote the
institutions of the Hebrew Grammar?

But this Alanus, whom I allege, was a Germane, and wrote many good works,
as the work De complanctu naturae, and four books upon the sentences.
Likewise upon the five books of Moses, with many other. He flourished in the
year of our Lord. 1300.

Plinius. 28.
There were two of that name, who both were notably learned, the one was called
Plinius secundus Veronensis. He lived in the time of Vespatian, in whose
affairs he was much busied. He wrote the most excellent work called
Naturalis historia, which he wrote by night, and at certain times by stelth.

Yet some say, that in that work be many fables, and therefore he is named
Pater fabularum, the father of lies. He would leese no time. He perished at the
last in a certain hill, called Vesuuius, by fire, while he attempted to
inuestigate and search the cause why the top thereof should be baren.

There was an other called Cecilius Plinius, neuew to the first Pliny by his
sister, who wrote eloquent Epistles, and one oration to Traian the Emperor, in
his commendation, which oration is named Panegericus. In the which he gives
thanks unto Traian, who made him Consul. He helped the daughter of Quintilia^
with a dowry, and also he succored Martialis the Poet, departing with
necessary costage for iourny, as Volateranus writes. Lib. 18.

Aediles. 29.
AEdilis was an officer, whose charge was to see the mayntaining of the Temples
and private houses, and to make provision for solemn plays. Of them some were
called Ediles curules, of a chair with crooked feet, wherein they did sit,
other were called Aediles plebis, because they were chosen out of the people or
commons.

Quirites. 30.
QVirites was a name, whereby the Romans were called by their first king
Romulus, called Quirinus, who was so called of this word Quiris, which
signifies in the Sabin tongue a spear, which weapon Romulus did continually
bear. Other write that he was so named of his father Mars, who was called when
he was fierce, Gradiuus, when he was peaceable and quiet, Quirinus.

Bias. 31.
BIas was one of the seven wise me^ of Greece (beholding his cou^trye taken by
enemies) fled, other men carrying with them such goods as they might bear: he
was demanded why he took nothing with him, whereto he answered: Truly I
carye all my goods with me, meaning virtue and doctrine, reputing the goods of
Fortune none of his.

Parasites. 32.
PArasitus is properlye he which haunteth other men's trenchers, which also does
praise all the words and deeds of him, in whose company he is, does never
resist, but suffers all things, and refuses to do nothing, for his bellies
sake, in the which he does constitute his chief pleasure, and of this he took
his name quod (...), hoc est, e cibo totus pendeat, he hangs altogether of
meat. The image and nature of a parasite Terence does trimly describe in his
Comedy called Eunuchus. The name of a Parasite, as Atheneus teaches. lib. 6.
was once an honest name, for they were given to the holy ministry, and
Parasites were called in times past the companions and fellows of Bishops and
Magistrates. This word Parasitus, has the last syllable saving one long.
Horatius, lib. 2. epist. 1. quamuis sit Dorcennus edacibus in parasitis.

Fire in one hand. 33.
THe like proverb is in Plautus, Altera manu fert lapidem, altera panem
ostentat. In one hand he bears a stone, in the other hand he shows bread.
By this they are signified, which to the face flatter and speak fair, but
privily they do detract and report the wurst. The like proverb, has Gregorius
Theologus writing Ad Eusebium Caesariensem, saying: Perindequasi quis eiusdem
viri altera manu scabat caput, altera manu feriat, that is, even as one would
scratch a man's head with one hand, and give him a blow with the other.

Argi. 34.
THe Poets feign that Argus had an hundred eyes, and that Juno appointed him
to keep Io, whom she had transformed to a Cow, but Mercurius being sent by
Jupiter, with his sweet harmony brought Argus a sleep, slew him, and took Io
from him, and brought her into Egypt. Then Juno took Argus eyes and set them
in the Pecockes tail. The eyes of Argus do signify wisdom and circumspection,
and that a man should use provident circumspection in all his doings.

Fenel. 35.
Pliny in his.20. book, cap. 23. says that Serpents has enobled the herb
Fenel, for in tasting of it, they cast their old skin, and refresh the
sharpnes of the eye sight with the juice of Fenel VVherby it is understand that
the dimnes of man's sight, is also with it remedied.

Physicians. 36.
WHen Alexander the great, had passed over the mount Taurus, with a very
expedite journey, and came to Tharsus, being ravished with the pleasa^tnes of
the river Cydnus, which ran through the middle of the City, being in a great
sweat, and full of dust, put of his armor, and went naked into the cold river,
by reason whereof such a cold stifnes came into his limbs and joints, that it
was thought he should rather dye then live.

Then one of the Physicians, Philip by name, did by himself alone promise
recovery of health, but one Parmenio^ sent letters unto Alexander, that he
should beware of Phillip his Phisitio^, for king Darius (says he) has
corrupted him with a great so^me of money, to poison you. Then Alexander being
in a suspe^ce, thought it a more safe and better way to commit himself to the
doubtful trust of the Physician, then there to perish and dye of that sudden
disease, he took the cup at Phillips hands, and delivered him the letters to
read, and as he drunk, cast his eyes upon the Physicians countenance, and
when he perceived Phillip nothing abashed at the letters, cherefully drank up
the whole potion, and the fourth day after recovered his health. This is a
goodlye president for all Physicians to be true and trusty to their soueraign
Lords, and I would unto God that the saying of Aristotle, with all that do
practice physic, might be verified, Vbi definit philosophus, ibi incipit
medicus. For a good Phisitio^ ought to be a good Logitian, a Geometrician, a
natural Philosopher, and a good Astronomer, of the which sciences how the
Physicians now a days be destitute and void, it is evident to all the world.

Rome was without Physicians six hundred years. Philemon was wont to say, Qum
quiuis se habeat been, tum medicus pessime.

When every man is in good health,
Then is the Physician without his wealth.
But when men be sick and diseased,
Then is the Physician best pleased.
Pausanias a Lacedemonian, who always having his health, without the
conference and counsel of Physicians, being demanded of a certain Physician,
how he came to so great an age without any disease, answered very feately and
merely. Quia non vsus sum te medico, because (says he) I have not used thee,
nor any other for my physician.

Adrianus the Emperor, lying in his death bed, said: Turba medicorum perdidit
Cesare^, the multitude of phisitio^s has killed the emperor.

I write not this to the dispraise of that noble art of physic, or the
professors of the same, whom the holy scriptures command to be honored for
necessities sake.

Ouidius. 37.
QVid was surnamed Naso, he gave him self most diligently to the making of
verses, in so much that he wrote of himself this verse. Quicquid conabar
dicere versus erat.

But he was withdrawn from it by his father, and put to learn rethoricke
wherein he much profited, and was in the number of the best orators at that
time, he was advanced to sondrie aucthorities, and made a Senator, yet he
chiefly gave him self to Poetry, wherein by nature he was excellent, both in
facility, and also in abundance of sentences.

He was in great favor with Augustus the Emperor, of whom at the last he was
exiled into Pontus, where he spent the rest of his life among people most
barbarous, who notwithstanding lamented his death for his courtesy and gentle
manners. The cause why he was exiled, was for the abusing Iulia the Emperors
daughter. Some suppose it was for making of the book, De art amandi, whereby
young minds might be stirred to wantones. There be which affirm.vi. of his
books called Fasti, to have been invented in this our time.

He was borne in a town called Sulmo, whereof he wrote these verses.

Sulmo mihi patria est gelidis vberimus vndis,
Millia qui nouies distat ab vrbe december.
Pliny makes mention of this place. Lib. 3. ca. 5.

Patience. 38.
CErtamen patientiae tale est vt qui vincitur ipso victore est melior.
Euripides.

Of patience always such is the conflicte,
That better then the victor, is the convict.
When one had smitten Socrates with his foot, he suffered it patie^tly, but
certain of his disciples and fellows taking it in ill part, did counsel him
to smite again. What (says Socrates) if mine Ass had hit me with her heel,
does it behoue me to kick again, by and by, and revenge it upon the domme
beast? Sabellicus.

Philip king of Macedonia said, he was bound to render great thanks to the
chief governors of the weal public of Athens, because by their slanderous
checkes they had made him better both in talk and in manners, for I now
endeavor (says he) to co^uice them of lies, both in sayings and doings. O the
noble and Philosophical mind of the prince, which knew to take profit of his
enemies, and not to have only a regard (as ye common sort does) to punish
and render evil to the ill sayers, but to care yt he might be made less evil,
being admonished by their evil sayings.

Xenophon. 39.
XEnophon a Philosopher of Athens, disciple of Socrates, and was also a noble
and politic captain, who for his most delectable style in writing, was
named the Muse of Athens. He made most excellent works, replenished with such
kind of wisdom and doctrine that to the instruction of a prince none may be
compared unto him. Wherefore it is to be wished, that all noble men would
read his works studiously.

To the gentle and godly affected Reader.
ALthough I am not ignorant, how dangerous an enterprise it is, in this age
either to write or diuulgate any work abroad (most gentle reader) yet I would
not willingly commit that inconstant leuitie, or light inconstancy should be
objected against me, for not impartyng unto thee these my simple Prelections,
and specially for not the accomplishyng of my promise, which I openly made to
an open auditorie, partly also to stay the great importunity of certain of
my friends, who has at diverse and sundry times expostulate with me, for
deferyng of the same so long a time. Behold now they come fourth, although
late, yet (I trust) not to late. And although they be more gross and rude,
then meet to satisfy and answer the fine heads of this time, yet coumpt
them, I pray thee, not all vain and unprofitable. And know thou that it is a
godly thing, not only to set fourth such worthy works, as tend to gods glory
and the vtility of the public weal, namely to the instruction of the simple
and ignorant, but also to have only a good will to do the same. 2. Cor. 8,
For where ability lacks, good will is only to be received, and not
rejected, as the holy Apostle saint Paul wtiteth to the Corinthians. Si
voluntas prompta est secundu^ id quod habet accepta est, non secundum id quod
non habet: If there he a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not: And look not here (gentle reader)
for an exquisite method, look not here for the flourishyng flowers of
Demosthenes, look not here for the eloquent style of Cicero, for that vein of
writing, to this kind of argument is utterly impertinent, but thou shalt have
here certain lessons, although plain, yet not al vain although not
beautified with great learning, yet profitable for thy readyng. If my rash
remeritie or temerous rashness shall offend any person, let him remember the
greek common proverb, which does promise (...), that is pardon to him, which
gives fourth his first attemptate, and experiment, wherefore if thou will
vouchafe to read them, when thou art at leisure, and (as they say) horis
successiuis, I shall think my labor well bestowed, and that I have not lost
omnino oleum and operam If these simple Prelections chance peradventure to
come into the hands of some scrupulous and captious critical reader (for
whose disease there is no medicine) let him know that it is a great deal more
easy to carpe other men's doings, then to give better of his own. Again on
the other side, if there be any of Momus clients which will vmbraide me for
inserting and putting in other men's sayings and sentences in this my
vnframed frame, let him consider these four things following. First let him
weigh I say what was in the like case objected to saint Hierome, writing his
learned Commentaries upon the Prophets, for he in the preface of the second
book upon the Prophet Micheas, writes after this manner. Where they say, that
I rob the volumes and works of Origin, and that it becomes not the
writings of the ancient fathers to be contaminate and spoiled, that thing
which they esteem and coumpte to be a vehement and reprochefull check, I do
coumpte it to be no small praise, for as much as I follow him, with whom I
doubt not both you and all wise men are much pleased. For if it be so heinous a
fault to translate the good sayings and sentences of the Grecians, then let
Ennius, and Virgill, Plautus, and Cecilius, Terentius, and Tullius and other
eloquent and learned men be accused and blamed, who have not only translated
certain verses, but also whole Chapiters, long books, and whole Comedies, yea
the^ let our brother Hilarious be gilty and accused of theft, because writing
upon the Psalms, he has translated and turned almost forty thousand verses
out of the foresaid Origene, and set them into his own book. All whose
negligence I wish rather to follow, Eccle. 1.
then their obscure and dark diligence. Haec Hieronimus. Secondly let him
remember not only that which Solomon records in his book called
Ecclesiastes. Quid est quod fuit? ipsum quod futurum est. Quid est quod factum
este ipsum quod faciendu^ est. What is that has been? that which shall be, and
what is that, that has been done? that which shall be done. But let him also I
say expende this which Terence writes, Nullum est iam dictum, quod non dictum
sit prius, there is nothing now spoken, that has not been spoken before.
Thirdly let him marcke the title of the book named Pragmatei^ or Miscellanea
Which entreats of diverse and sundry things, and therefore needs the more
men's judgments and helps, Fourthly and finally let him ponder and weigh how I
have eased the reader of a great deal of labor and pain, to the attaynement
of the knowledge of such things which he should otherwise been feign to have
sought in diverse and sundry works, and those huge and great. Here I have
collected and couched the same together in this one little opuscle and small
work, which also may save him from disbursing of some part of his money, in
dear biyng other great works. If he expend and consider (I say) these things,
I trust he will cease from fault finding, and be more willing to be
thankful. What should I say more? If any will be so open eyed, and such fault
finders, that they will despise these my poor mites, which I cast with the
poor widow into the treasury chest of Christ's Church, I would friendly
desire such with the words of Horace.

Si quid nouisti rectius istis, candidus imparti, si non, his vtere mecum.
If better thing you can write or say,
Gently imparte them, I do you pray:
If not, these things with me do you use,
As you would not that I yours should refuse.
What profit is it for any man to hide his talent in a napken: and with the
unprofitable servant to be cast into utter darkness? The son of Sirach
says, Eccle. 20.
Sapientiae reconditae and thesauri abstrusi nuilam esse vtilitatem.

Of wisdom shut up there is no pleasure,
Nor profit comes of hidden treasure.
Lucianus also writes. Occultae Musices nullum esse respectum.

Of hidden Music there is no respect,
Continual silence who does not neglecte?
By which aucthorities I am moved to give fourth the little talent of my
knowledge, where with God has endewed me, which if you shall take gently and
in good part, you shall animate, encite, and stir me forward to publish
other things that shall be I trust, both profitable and pleasant unto you, I do
not mean to such as has made great progress in deep and profounde learning,
but unto such as be yet arriving toward the port of good Literature, of which
number I coumpte my self to be one, or rather one who has tasted of good
learning only. (...).

Lucian.
This Lucian by a surrename, was called a blasphemer an Atheos, that is without
God, he wrote works in Greek to the number of.171. he lived under Traian the
Emperor, and being torn of dogs, dyed miserablye.

Oration G. A. Londini habita, ad populi Coronam, in Ede diuo Paulo facra in
ipso praeiectionum suarum vestibulo.
Demosthenes. 1 Cicero. 2.
SI Demosthenes, Cicero, caeterique su^mi and excellentissimi Oratores, tum
Greci, tu^ Latini, metu exalbescere, and tota mente ac omnibus artubus
co^tremescere soleba^t quoties prodire^t ad dicendum, quod de se no^ magis ex
euentu, quam hominu^ sensu, qui varius, multiplex and sui sepe dissimilis est,
iudiciu^ fieri intelligeba^t: mihi ignoscendum est or natissimi viri, si ego
qui vsu and ingenio parum possu^ vestra aucthoritate nonnihil co^mouear, vt
quorum cla^destina^ opinionem vehementer vereor. Ea eteni^ tacita sic mecu^
quoda^ modo loqui videtur. Tu tenuis quu^ sis, and vnus e multis ex vmbra in
lucem, and aspectu^ hominum prodire audes? Nescis quanti and qua^ prestantis
viri in locum sis surrogatus? Prude^tius profecto te tuo te pede me^sus, intra
domesticos parietes domi continuisses, huius me imbesilitatis conscius vestru^
omniu^ tacitoru^ iudiciu^ non mediocriter perhorresco. Neque hec mea reru^
domesticarum inopiae and angustiae co^scie^tia ta^topere me afficeret, si quod
aliis adiume^to esse solet: hoc co^tra me hac te^pestate no^ faceret. Na^ tum
in doctrina and firmae and consta^tes sunt opiniones, tum earu^ cum assensu
auditorum non obscura, sed manifesta, no^ difficilis sed illustris and facilis
est patefactio. At mihi concertandum and co^serendu^ manus cu^ Papistis
pessimis and peruersissimis belluis, cum Arrianis, cu^ Libertinis, cu^
Anabaptistis, qui scripturas sed detortas, Amentatae. 3.
tanqua^ amentatas hastas in me veheme^ter co^ torquebunt: Dii immortales qua
art, quo ingenio qua^ta eruditione, hic opus esse creditis vt infirma illoru^
firmamenta no^ magis cohere^tia qua^ arenae, Scopae dissolutae. 4.
and dissolutae scopae e manibus extorqueamus? Inhibita semel opinio, adeo sui
est laena: Sed nos fratres qui christianae doctrinae arce^ propugnamus, tuemur,
defe^dimus: teneamus firma^ fide^ stabilita^ insignibus apostolorum and
prophetarum testimoniis, and permittamus enerues hominu^ coniecturas aut ad
sacras scripturas non secus qua^ adulterinum metallu^ ad iudice^ and lapide^
Lidium exploremus. Lapis Lidius. 5.
Rimetur ignis verbi diuini, and secernat auru^ a stipula, auru^ resple^discet,
stipula aute^ exuretur neque poterit vim ignis sustinere. In primis fratres
dilige^ti ratione prouideamus, vt de rebus omnibus inter nos summa sit
co^se^sio and co^spiratio. Vnu^ vos moneo, imo vos obsecro in dn^o, vt
quemadmodum sumus in seriis and graui bus controuersiis nobis semper similes,
sic de adiaphoris que nullius pene momenti sunt nullas tragedias excitemus.
Tragedia. 6.
Eadem velimus ac nolimus, ne nostra discordia pariat offendicula, and nos qui
sumus duces populum in deuia dissipemus. Dissidium etenim non poterit videri
proficisci ex vnanimitate spiritus. Et ex tacita populi suspicione, ingentes
doctrinae, morum ac totius pene religionis ruinae suborientur. Dixi.

Hec sequntur Miscellanea.
Demosthenes. 1.
DEmosthenes was a Cutlers son, and left very rich, he was the most
excellent Orator of the Greeks, and used such wonderful diligence to attain
the perfection of eloquence, that where he had an impediment in his
pronunciation, by putting small stones in his mouth, and enforcing himself to
speak treatably, at last attained to most perfect form of speaking, he did
remain close at his study in his house two, and sometimes three months
together without intermission, and did shave part of his head, that he might
thereby, put away all occasions to go abroad. Saint Hierome says, Demosthenem
expendisse plus olei, quam vini, to have spent more Oil the^ wine, by reason
of his study in the night. This Proverb sprang of Demosthenes, Non anginam
patitur, sed argentanginam: that is he suffers not the squince, but the
receiving of pence, because that he was corrupted with a great piece of money
by the Legates of the Milesians, Aulus Gellius, Plutarch, Erasmus in
chiliadibus.

The original of this Proverb came of this History. When the Legates of the
Milesia^s came to Athens to entreat for aid and help, Demosthenes withstode
them with a very sharp and vehement Oration. The cause was deferred unto the
day following. In the mean time the Ambassadors repaired to Demostenes, and
did corrupt him with a great so^me of money, that he should cease to say against
the^. The next day after when the matter should again be heard, Demosthenes
comes forth to the pleading place, having a great piece of wool round about
his neck, feyning himself to suffer the sickness called Sinanche, and that he
thereby was let and stayed to speak as he did before. Then one (suspecting the
dissimulation and corruption of Demosthenes) cried out: No^ anginam, sed
argentanginam patitur.

Cicero. 2.
CIcero was coumpted the father of all eloquence, his auncetours were called
Cicerones, because Tullius Appius, a noble king of the Volscians, had on his
nose a marck like a chiche pease, called Cicer, his death was both marvelous
and miserable. Anthonius, sent one Herennius, whom Cicero had saved before from
death by his eloquence, to pursue Cicero as he fled. In the which flight when
he came to a place named Caieta, a raven in his sight smote the hand of a dial
or clock out of his place, and fourth with came to him and bit the hemme of
his garment, and so held him until the parasite came to kill him. Cicero
lienge in a horse litter for weakness, prepared his throat to Herennius, who
did strike of his head and his hands, and brought them to Anthony, who
caused the^ to be set over the place of civil judgment of Rome, which was
lamented of the Romans. When Fuluia the wife of Anthony held in her hands
the head of Tullie from his body newly cut of and all bloody, she (first
prosequunting the same with tauntes and cruel imprecacions) cursed it, and
cried vengeance upon it, and laying it upon her boosome, when she had
shamefully spit upon it, lookyng upon it with a grimme countenance drew out
the tongue from the mouth, (which sometimes was of an incomparable eloquence)
and with the often pricking of a small pin, wherewith she had trimmed the
attire of her head, did unhonestly, ungently and wickedly tear it in pieces.
(O unspeakable crueltye) (...). As Homere writes both truly and gravely,
nothing is more angry, then an angry woman, and no thing more gredy and
desirous of reuengement, for the fiercenes of a woman being once provoked to
anger, does pass the raging fury of wild beasts. The Lions, Bears, and
such like more fierce then other beasts, do cesse there cruelty upon man, when
they have gotten the victory, in so much that when man is overcome and slain,
they neither tear nor devour him, except they be very houngry. But this
Fuluia being more unmerciful then either Lion or Bear, not being saciate nor
satisfied with the unworthy and miserable death of Cicero, to be pitied and
lamented of all learned men, even after his death (as though she would kill him
again, that was already killed) did spit out her venom, and execute her
boucherly tyranny upon him, wherein she showed a double foolishnes, for she did
not touch him whom she thought to be enemy unto her husband Anthony, but
did prick, rent and cut only a dead carkas, feeling nothing, and void of all
sense. Nor yet Anthonius himself had his purpose or desire, when he thought to
blot out for ever the name and memory of Cicero with proscription and weapon.
For Cicero does yet live eue^ after his death, being Antonius most sharp
enemy, and will live as long as his Orations called Philippicae shall remain
and endure.

Amentatae hastae. 3.
BE darts or iauelings tied about with a thonge or strappe, that it might be
cast or throwe^ the farther of, and the more strongly.

Scopae dissolutae. 4.
SCopas dissoluere is to say or do a thing without any purpose or reason, to
make a thing unprofitable, that it will serve to no use. Cicero in Oratore.
Isti qui dissoluunt Oratione^, in qua nec res, nec verbum vllum est nisi
abiectum: non clypeum (sed vt in prouerbis est) scopas mihi videntur dissoluere.

Lapis Lydius. 5.
SOme think that stone called Magnes, the lode stone, which draws iron
unto it, to be the same stone which we call Lapide^ Lydium, or Heracleum. But
the words of Theophrastus do plainly show the contrary, for it is not
called Heraclius Lapis, of Hercules, but of Heraclea, a City in Lidia. It is
the stone that touches and tries gold, called commonly the touchstone. It
may prouerbially be applied, both to the person and to the thing. To the person
after this manner, thou art the judge of my writing, and (as the saying is)
Lapis Lydius, the true touchstone: To the thing, after this manner, The word of
God, to try out the truth is Lapis Lydius, the very true touchstone.

Tragedia. 6.
A Tragedy properly is that kind of play in the which calamities and
miserable ends of Kings, Princes, and great rulers are described, and set
fourth, and it has for the most part a sad and heavy end. A Tragedy does
differ from a Comedy in those two respects. First a Comedy has in it,
humble and private persons, A Tragedy has in it noble and public persons,
as kings and Princes. A Comedy begins with turbulent and troublesome
matters, but it has a merye end. A Tragedy is all full of heaviness, from the
beginning to the endyng.

Praelectio prima die Martis 13. die Februarij. 1560.
BEfore I attempt an entry to the explication of this Epistle, I think it
very expedient to make a little discourse of the holy scriptures, and of the
holy Church, but yt it may ye better be done to your understanding, I will as
succintly as may be, touch and teach the nature of them both, and to make the
matter more evident, I give this partition.

Partitio.








These things being performed, I will then (by Gods grace) enter to the text
of this Epistle.

In this first Prefectio^, I will deliver to you, as much as time will give me
leave.

The first part is of the dignity and worthiness of the holy Scriptures.
The excellency of the scriptures does consiste and stand in five
circumstaunces.

The first is this.
There ca^ be no greater honor given unto the scripture, then, that both
Christ, his Apostles, the general counsels of the founder sort, and also the
holy fathers do use the testimony and witness of the scriptures, to prove all
things, which they did ever attempt. And we ought always to have in
remembrance how that we are sent of Christ (the only head, and chief master
of the Church) unto the scriptures. For he says (John the.5.) Scrutamim
scripturas, and this honor of the scriptures did Christ him self confirm by
ensample, when he answered and convinced Satan, Satan. 1.
the temptor, by the scriptures.

The Apostles also and the Evangelists do alledg^ almost in all their
writings, the testimony of the scriptures for the verity of the Evangelical
doctrine, to be asserted and confirmed. Whereupon they which heard Paul preach
at Thessalonica, did only search the scriptures, Thessalonica. 2. Canon 3.
whether it were so or no, as Paul preached. As it is written in the Acts, and
this they did not without just ground and good cause, for the holy scripture
is called Scriptura canonica, of this word Canon, Acts. ca. 17
which signifies in Latin a rule. And the use of a rule is, to confer, to
prove, to direct and correct with his rightnes, all things that are measured.

Chrysostom, does measure and prove the Church by no other rule, but by the
scriptures. Heresis. 4. Christiani ratis. 5.
His words be these upon the Gospel of Matthew. Ca. 24. Homilia. 49.
Quia in tempore hoc, ex quo obtinuit heresis ecclesias, nulla probatio
christianitatis, neque refugium potest esse christianorum aliud, volentium
cognoscere fidei veritatem, nisi scripturae diuinae. Antea enim multis modis
ostendabatur quae esset ecclesia Christi, and quae ge^tilitas: Nunc autem nullo
modo cognoscitur volentibus cognoscere, nisi tantummodo per scripturas, that is
to say.

Because in time, since heresies did occupy ye churches, there ca^ be no other
proof of true Christianity, neither can be any other refuge of Christian men,
willing to know the verity of the faith, but only by ye holy scriptures. For
before it was declared by manifold ways, which was ye Church of Christ, and
which was hethenishe ge^tilitie, but now it is known by no other means unto
the^ which be willing to know which is the true Church of Christ, but only by
the scriptures.

Epist. 166
Saint Austen has the like saying, whose words be these. In scripturis
didicimus Christum. In scripturis didicimus Ecclesia^. In the scriptures we
have learned Christ. In the scriptures we have learned the Church. Again in
his book De doctrina Christiana, he says. Titubabit aute^ fides, Fides. 6.
si diuinarum scripturarum vacillat authoritas. Lib. 1. ca. 37
The faith shall fail, if the authority of the holy scriptures, should once
wagge or waver.

Therefore it is not without cause, that the Scriptures are called Canonical,
because they try and rule all things.

The second circumstaunce.
Every faculty, doctrine, art, and science, Art. 7.
does receive and obtain her dignity of the matter and subject, of the which
it does speak and entreat, for of what worthiness the matter is, of the same
worthiness or baseness is the doctrine and science.

Therefore, for as much as the holy Scriptures do speak of no other thing, but
specially and chiefly of Christ, being both God and man, which is the head and
chiefest of all, so much ought the scriptures to be reputed the most honorable,
the chiefest Lady and maistres of all other doctrines and sciences.

The third circumstaunce.
Eras. in similibus.
As the precious stone, called Drachonites, can not be polished, Draconites. 8.
nor needs any art or cunnyng, to make it either trimmer or fayrer, for it is
both pleasant and bright of it self: Even so the holy scripture has her
glory and brightness of her self, and needs not the artificial colors and
shows, either of Philosophy, Philosophy. 9.
Rhethoricke, or any other art.

1. Timoth. ca. 3.
Paul in deed calls ye Church Columna^ and firmamentu^ veritatis, ye pillar,
steye, and foundation of all truth, not because she is Lady, and head, of the
Scriptures, but because she does preserve, imparte, and declare the Scriptures
unto other, and in all her doings specially for the co^firmatio^ of all true
doctrine, does use the testimony of the scriptures, which when she does not,
but trusts to her own inuentio^s, traditions and gloses, she is not to be
cou^pted the Church of Christ, Sinagoge. 10.
but the synagoge of Antichrist. Saint Austen, Contra Epistola^ fundame^ti,
has these words. Definita in sacris literis, omnibus aliis debent preferri.
Things defined in the holy scriptures, Co^t. Epist. fundame^ti.
ought to be preferred and set before all other things.

The fourth circumstaunce.
Al other scriptures and writings are not enobled with any honorable title, but
are called either scriptures simple, or else scriptures profane. But the
scriptures of Gods book, are beautified with a most glorious, honorable,
Epitheton. 11.
and perfect Epitheton and title, for they be called Scripturae sanctae, and
by that title, are separate and distinct, from all other Scriptures, which are
written of matters profane. I call matters profane, not only those things,
which pertain to seculare affairs, Superstition 12. Alcora^. 13. Caan. 14.
and concur to the use of this temporal life of ours, but also the corrupt
doctrines, superstitions and false woorshipinges, erroneous opinions of all
ages, places, and people, when, where, and what soever they be, as the Alcoran
of Machumet, the religion of the great Caan of Cathay, with such like. These
deserve not to be called holy, which only in show and face seem to be holy,
except ye will call them holy in that sense that Virgill calls Auri sacram
famem, Eucid. Li. 3.
and as the Physicians call the disease named saint Anthonies fire, sacrum
ignem. And as Horace calls a flagitiouse man sacrum, saying intestabilis and
sacer esto. The holy scriptures of God have in them three properties, Sacrum.
15.
which be these.

Sunt purae. 1. Sunt integrae. 2. Sunt stabiles. 3.
First they be pure, that is, without commixtion of all falsitie and untruth.

Secondly they be (Integrae) whole, because they show and conteyne in
themselves al things necessary to salvation, as Chrysostom writes, saying. 2.
Timot. ca. 3.
If there be any thing needful to be known, or not to be known, we shall
learn it by the holy scriptures, if we shall need to reprove a falshoode, we
shall fetch it from thence. If to be corrected, to be chastned, to be exhorted
or comforted, to be short if ought lack, ye ought to be taught or learned, we
shall also learn it out of the same scriptures.

Thirdly, they be Stabiles, stable, because they be permanent and endure for
ever, for they differ and are distinct from all other scriptures in four
points. First there is no scripture of any author, be he never so noble and
notable, which has been so reserved and preserved in so many ages, in such
orders, and by such succession, as the holy scriptures of God have been from
time to time.

Secondly there is no other scripture so unspotted, so infallible, and of whose
truth we need not to doubt nor suspect in any point, as the holy scriptures are.

Liberal sciences. 16.
Thirdly other Scriptures, which be called liberal sciences, although they
teach a certain truth, yet they show not that truth, in the which salvation
of the soul does consiste and stand.

Fourthly and finally all the disciplines and doctrines of the Philosophers and
wise me^, Disciplines. 17. Dark. 18.
speaking of virtues, manners, and blessedness, do in deed entreat of many good
things, but they never found out that true light, without the which all the
body is dark and blind. And ye scriptures of Gods book are called holy,
because they are ordained, established, confirmed and written, by the holy
finger of god, that is by the force and virtue of Gods holy spirit, which is
called the finger of God, as it is written in Exodus. Enchaunters. 19. Digitus
dei. 20.
When the enchaunters could not bring fourth lice, they said unto Pharao:
Digitus dei est hic. This is the finger of God, or this was done by Gods power.

The Scriptures after the censure of some learned men, are called Scripturae
sanctae, of this verb sancio, which betokneth to consecrate, and to ratefie,
which verb is derived (after the opinion of some) of this word Sanguis blood,
because that leagues and truces were wont to be confirmed with the blood of
some slain Sacrifice.

Liuius Docet, vetustissimu^ faedus inter Romanos Albanosque initu^, porcae
immolatione sancitu^ fuisse: Liuius. 21. Faedus. 22. Immolare. 23.
that is to say, the old manner of treaty of peace, Lib. 1. ab vrbe co^dita
between the Romans and ye Albanes, was confirmed with the immolatio^ or offering
of a slain sow.

Seruius. 24.
Therefore Seruius upon the Encidos of Virgil ait, sanctum dici, quasi sanguine
co^secratum. That is to say, that is called holy, which is consecrate with
blood. Now because the league, peace, and truce between God the father and us,
was ratefied with ye blood of his son Jesus Christ, slain and sacrificed for
our sins, and the whole course of scripture shoots at this scope, to teach
us that we be reconciled and brought into the favor of God only by the
shedding of the holy and precious blood of Christ, and all the sacrifices and
holy Sacraments mentioned in the Scriptures do importe a mystery of the same,
Mystery. 25. Profane. 26.
therefore the Scriptures, are called Scripturae sanctae, the holy Scriptures,
and so are sequestered and distinct from all other scriptures, which are
called profane, thus have I showed you the exellencie, dignity, and honor of
the holy scriptures.

Now I will show you by the way (and yet nothing out of the way) what sundry
and diverse commodities, the holy Scriptures do exhibit and bring with them,
to the readers and hearers of the same.

Saint Paul writing to Timothy has these words. Omnis scriptura diuinitus
inspirata, ^. Timot. ^.3.
vtilis est ad docendum. Paul. 27.
etc. all scripture given by the inspiration of God is profitable to teach and
reprove (concerning doctrine) it is also profitable to correct and instruct in
righteousness (concerning good life and manners) and least it should seem in any
thing to lack or to be imperfect, Paul adds immediately after, yt the man
of God may be perfect and ready unto al good works. I will examine more
particularly the spices and kinds of ye commodities, which ye scripture here
brings.

First he says that the holy scripture is profitable to teach, now doctrine is
the instruction of the ignorant: for the mind of man is not made so clear by
the light of nature, that he can or is able, to know by his own wit or
understanding, those things that appertain to God, and are necessary to be
known to salvation, as saint Paul writes to the Corinthia^s. 2. Epist. ca. 2
Animalis homo no^ intelligit ea quae sunt dei, the natural man perceaueth not
the things of the spirit of God, but it is need and requisite, that he be
lightened and taught also with a more divine and godly light. This light is
given of the holy ghost, and unto this use be the holy Scriptures given and
applied, by the which the little ones of the Lord may be taught and be made to
understand, Psalm. 19.
as the Prophet David writes. Little ones 28. Simple. 29
Testimonium domini fidele sapie^tiam praestans paruulis, preceptum domini
lucidum illumina^s oculos. The testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives
wisdom unto the simple, the commandment of the Lord is clear, and gives
light to the eyes.

Secondly, it is profitable (says Paul) to improve, especially if any thing in
any cause be erroneous and false, uttered either by word, or committed by
work, and this kind of improuing is necessary to the Church of God,

But you shall observe and note, that there be two kinds if improuinges, one
is, by the which false and erroneous opinions, heresies, false, worshipynges,
and corrupt doctrines are made manifest and improued.

The other is, by the which our works and deeds are known and reproved, by
this kind of improuing, every man may examine, and try his own life. Yea and
the secrets of his own heart, and the studies and endeavor of them, which
being in sheep clothing, does intrude, and thrust in themselves into the
Lords flock, of who^ Christ said. Math ca 7.
Ex operibus eoru^ cognoscetis eos. By their works you shall know them. Again
the tree is known by his fruits. Math. ca. 12
These two kinds of improuing can be no better known then out of the holy
scriptures. Therefore the Apostle said. Omnia probate, 1. The. ca 5
quod bonu^ est tenete, prove all things, but keep that, yt is good. Also
Probate spiritus, 1. John. ca. 4.
vtru^ ex deo sint. Prove the spirits, whether they be of god or no.

Thirdly, the scripture is profitable to correct, that is, to restore to the
pristinat and former state, those things which are swarned and slidden out of
the way, whether it be in doctrine or in life.

Fourthly, the scripture is profitable to instruct in righteousness, for the
holy ghost does teach us in the scriptures to righteousness, Righteousness. 30.
even as a father instructs his children, for the scriptures have in the^
milk meet for children. Whereby the rude and ignorant may be instructed, they
have also whole meat, Rude. 31.
meet for them ye be well exercised and perfect in knowledge. Also an other
commodity and profit we have by the scriptures, ^. ca. 4.
which is, that the holy ghost does not fear to attribute to the scriptures
the power to save us, as Paul to Timothy writes, take heed to thy self, and
to doctrine, and stand fast in them: for in so doing thou shall save thy self,
1. Cor. ca. 4.
and them that shall hear thee. Also in an other place he says. Euangeliu^ 32.
Per Euangeliu^ ego vos genui, by the preaching of the Gospel, I begat you
unto God.

Cor. Confess. lib. 8. ca. 12.
Saint Austen even then came fourth of the errors, in the which he was wrapped,
when he began to read the Scriptures. And he was in a manner enforced and
compelled to the readyng of the same by an oracle of GOD, Oraculum 33.
for he hard certain voices as it had been of children singing and saying.
Toll, Lege, Toll, Lege, Take and read, take and read, which at the last
when he obeyed, taking the holy scriptures into his hands, chanced to read
this place of saint Paul. Induimini dominum Iesum Christum, Put upon you our
Lord. Romans ca. 19
Jesus Christ, and straight way he was thoroughly converted to the faith,
against the which he had striued so long before.

Tripartite. 34. Constantine. 35.
The tripartite history does declare how the Emperor Co^sta^tine ye great, did
exhort the Bishops and fathers of the Nicen counsel, Rufim. hist. li. 1. ca.
102.
that with the oracles and answers of the holy scriptures, they should debate
all controversies, which sprang up concerning religion. And when in the same
counsel, the Bishops (one co^plaining of an other) offered books unto the
Emperor, desiring judgment of him: he burned their books and said unto the^,
that they ought to take ye judgment of God out of the holy scriptures, and not
the judgment of man. For as much then as all these goodly commodities come by
the reading of the holy scriptures, what robbers and thieves, what Antichrists
and incarnate devils were they, which took the books of holy scriptures from
the lay people, and like murderers burned not only ye books, but the owners
of the books also? Do you think yt they would not have burned Christ also, if
he had been here? These be they of who^ Christ speaks: Woe be unto you, you
Phariseis and Scribes, Phareseis. 36.
you take away the keye of knowledge, you shut up the gate of the kingdom of
heaven, you will neither go in your selves, Luke. 1^
nor suffer the^ which would enter in. But no marvel, they thought it not to
be for their profit, if the common people should freely read the Scriptures.
Whereby they might perceive, their hypocrisy, negligence, ignorance and wicked
life.

Chrysostom does teach the^ an other lesson, who judged the reading of the
scriptures to be so necessary to the lay men, yt for the neglecte thereof, he
did rebuke his auditorie in his open sermons, for not reading the scriptures,
his words be these. Quis vestru^ (respondote quaeso) qui assistitis, in Mathe^
cap. 2.
vnu^ (si exigatur) Psalmu^ potest memoriter edicere, aut qua^ libet diuinaru^
scripturaru^ portione^? Which of all you yt stand here (answer I pray you) ca^
say by memory (if it be required of you) one Psalm, or any part, of the holy
scripture without book? Sed horum criminum tande^ illa est defe^sio, Monachus
37.
no^ sum (in quis) ego monachus, vxore^ habeo et filios, et cura^ domus, et ce.

But of these faults at the last, this is their defense, I am no moncke, thou
faist, I have a wife and children, and charge and cure of household. But this is
that whereby you corrupt all things with one certain pestilence and mischief,
because you think the reading of the holy scriptures to appertain only to
the monckes, when it is much more necessary for you then for them: They which
are conuersaunt in the middle of the world, and receive daily, wound upon
wound, have rather more need of the medicine of God.

Upon Genesis also he says. Propterea obsecro, vt subinde huc veniatis and
diuinae scripturae lectioni diligenter auscultetis, non solum qum venitis,
Homi. 2^
sed et domi diuina biblia in manus sumite, Biblion. 38
et vtilitate^ in eis posita^ magno studio suscipite.

That is to say, I beseech you come often hither and harken diligently to the
reading of holy scriptures, not only when you come hither, but at home, take
Gods Bible into your hands, and with great study receive the profit in the^
contained.

Collos. 39.
And in the Epistle to the Collossians. Audite quotquot estis mundani, and
vxoribus prae estis et liberis, Homi. 29
quomodo et vobis potissimum praecipiat Apostolus scripturas legere, idque non
simpliciter neque obiter, sed magna diligentia. etc.

Hear you as many as be of the world, and have government of wife and
children, how the Apostle commands you, specially to read the Scriptures,
and that not simply or slightly, but with great diligence. Here I pray you all
secular persons, prepare and get to your selves the Bibles, the medicines of
the soul. If you will nothing else, get you at the least, the new Testament,
the acts of the Apostles, the Evangelists, daily and diligent teachers. Hec
ille.

What need I to allege, either Origene or Ciril for this matter? the one
saying, Tormentum est diabolo, si quem videat legere sacras scripturas,
possidet enim omnes qui versantur in ignorantia. It is a great torment unto the
Devil, if he see any to read the holy scriptures, for he possesses all the^
which wander in ignorance. The other, that is Cirillus, writes: Pueri nostri
legunt sacras literas, et ex eo fiunt religiosissimi. Our children do read the
holy scriptures, and by that they are made most religious.

I beseech you, what shall we think, this holy man would have answered to
these wise men of late time? which took away scriptures from the lay sort,
that they might lead and hold all the world in darkness and blindness, yea and
committed the monumentes of the holy Ghost to the flames of fire, being in this
no otherwise affected, then Dioclesian was, the most hurtful ennemy of al
Christians, Dioclesian. 40.
which with a public proclamation and law, commanded the holy scriptures to
be burned, Lib 8, cap. 3
as it is written in Eusebius, because he understood that there was not a more
effectual and speedy remedy to extinguish and blot out the faith of Christ,
then if the holy scriptures were not known. But least some might give little
credit to Chrysostom, being a Greek author, I will bring you a latin
doctor, and such a one as is compted the chief among ye latin men, Hierom by
name. He writing upon the Colossians, sayith after this manner: Hic ostenditur
verbum Christi, non sufficienter, Cap. 3.
sed abundanter, Laicus. 41.
etiam laicos debere habere et docere se inuicem et monere. Here it is showed
(says he) that the lay men ought to have the word of Christ, not only
sufficiently, but also abundantly, and to teach and admonish one the other.

Obiectio.
Our adversaries do cry and cavil, that the holy scriptures are more obscure
and dark, then that any certain or sure sentence may be gathered of them by
the unlearned.

Responsio.
Lib. 2. cap. 6
Let them answer unto saint Austen, who in his book De doctrina christiana,
far otherwise judging, gives this note: Magnifice et salubriter, spiritus
sanctus ita scripturas sanctas modificauit, vt locis a pertioribus, fami
occurreret: obscurioribus fastidia detergeret, nihil enim fere de illius
obscuritatibus eruitur, quod non planissime dictum alibi reperiatur. The holy
ghost has nobly and holsomely so measured the holy scriptures, that with
manifest and plain places, it should help and meet the desire of the
Reader, and that with obscure and darcke places, it should wipe away
lothsomnes, for there is no obscure thing taken out of it, which is not found
to be most plainly spoken in an other place. Whereby it may appear, that
nothing is written in the scriptures, but that it may be understand by
conferring of places. Notwithstanding, that thing which unto godly men is as
clear and light as the sun, unto our adversaries is darker then a dim or
mistye cloud. ^. Cor. 4
If the Gospel of God be dark or hidden, it is hidden to them that are lost,
in whom the God of this world has blinded their minds, that the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto them. As Paul says: If the
holy scriptures be darcke in matter of faith and our religion: how then did
Christ embrayde the Saduces, Math. 22.
saying unto them: ye err and are disceaued, not knowing the scriptures? John.
5
^. Peter, 1
Again, why should he give in commandment, search the scriptures, for they
bear testimony of me? Why does the Apostle Peter compare it unto a light, that
shines in a dark place? Let our adversaries therefore cease, and leave to be
great Elephantes, and let them begin to become gentle lambs, Elephants. 42.
and so let them enter them selves, and suffer other to enter (in the fear of
the Lord) into the fluent streams of the holy scriptures, to enter I say unto
the bottom, whereunto the Lamb (that is the humble) does pearse, and in whose
brimme the Elephant (that is the hie minded and proud) does swymme.

Obiectio.
The reading of holy scriptures does gender heresies, specially if it be read
of them that have no great learning and sound understanding, as saint Peter
says of the writings of saint Paul, his words be these.

As our beloved brother Paul, according to the wisdom unto him given, 2.
Epist ca. ^.
wrote unto you. As one that in all his Epistles speaks of these things,
among the which some things are hard to be understand, which they that are
unlearned and unstable, pervert (as they do also other scriptures) unto their
own destruction.

Responsio.
I answer: Think you this kind of argumentation to be formal? Some do
pervert the scriptures to their own destruction, and therefore are to be coerced
from reading thereof, Ergo ought al manner of people to be debarred from reading
of the holy scriptures? I will make the like argument. Some masters of shyps
through their negligence, suffer shipwreck, and therefore ought not to have any
more the government of any ship, Ergo are al ship Masters not to be
admitted to the government of any ship? Or thus, some men are intoxicate with
wine, and become drunk, and therefore are to be forbidden the drinking of wine,
Ergo must all men be forbidden to drink any wine? What fond kind of
argumentacion is this? It is to be laughed at, or rather lamented. Even so if I
should infer after this manner: Some be rash, and pervert the scriptures to
their own destruction, Ergo are al men such as the Apostle does accuse here?
God forbid. But I will desire you, note here what thing these prudent and wise
men our adversaries do call heresy. Heresy unto them is, if a man swerve one
jot, from their accustomed opinions, traditions, customs, rites, and
ceremonies. And because that they which do read diligently the holy
scriptures, do find in the scripture an other manner of vein of true
godlynes, and cannot allow those things which are discrepant from the canon and
rule of Gods Gospel. Our adversaries have attempted to bring a reproach unto
the scriptures, and the readers thereof, and are not ashamed to say that the
holy Bible does gender and beget heresies and heretics. O the subtyl and
crafty devise of that subtle Serpent the devil, which so works by his members
and impes.

Obiectio.
Apologeticus. 43.
Well say they: Gregory Nazianzen in his apolegetico, does recite the law of the
Hebrews, by the which it was decreed, that every age should not be admitted, or
permitted to read every portion of the scriptures, but certain scriptures were
permitted to be red, as common to al men. Other percels of the scriptures not
to be red of any, but of them which were past.25. years of age, and of them
who were of good capacity to attain to the meaning of the same. This law does
Nazianzen commend and praise, Ergo it is not lawful to permit every person
indifferently to read the scriptures.

Responsio.
I answer. I do not improve this caution and law of the Jews, but I pray you,
where might the like law take place in these Churches, in the which all the
people were kept as it were captive and in thraldom under the dominion and
rule of the people, who did and does generally forbid the lay sort from the
readinge of any portion of scriptures? In deed it is to be wished that the
people be enstructed of their Pastors and teachers, according to their
capacity, condition and state of life, and that they might and should read
at home the book of God to receive comfort, for the qualeties of their
temptations, and to learn doctrine how to walk in their vocation. Unwashed
hands. 44
The people are to be admonished and exhorted, that they com not with unwashed
hands, but reverently and devoutly with fervent prayers, to the reading of
Gods oracles and scriptures. And that those books be permitted to be read of
children, which are most mete to teach them their duty to God, and obedience
to their Parents and other superiors.

As for the can ticles of Solomon, the oracles of the Prophets, the revelation
of John, are to be red of them who have had progress and continuance of study
in Gods Bible. And for other works, as the history of Christ's life, the tenor
of his doctrine, which serves both for faith and good life, to be permitted to
be read indifferently of al (as David says) In quo corriget adolescentior viam
suam? Psalm. 219.
in custodiendo sermones tuos. How shall a young man direct his ways? In
keeping thy words and sayings.

Thus have I most amply and at full declared unto you, the first lesson of the
first part of my particion, which was of the excellency, woorthines, and the
commodity and profit of the holy scriptures. Entending at the next lecture to
deliver unto you, by Gods grace, how that the whole religion of Christ does
depend only on the written word of God, commonly called the scriptures. In
the mean time I commit you unto the eternal and almightye God, unto whom be
all honor and glory, world without end. So be it.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea praelectio prima.
Satan. 1.
SAtan is an Hebrew word, and does signify an adversary, a letter, a stopper,
an hinderer, to every good purpose, to be prosecuted, and it is spoken as well
of the devil, as of man. Psalm. 109. Satan stet ad dexteram eius, and let the
adversary stand at his right hand. 1. Samuel. 29. Et non descendat nobiscum in
bellum, ne sit nobis in satanam in bello. Let him not go down with us into
battle, least that in the battle, he be an adversary unto us. David says in
the book of Samuel. Quid mihi and vobis filii Saruiae, nam estis mihi hodie
pro Satan? That is: 2, Samu. 16.
What have I to do with you, you sons of Saruia, that this day you should
be adversaries unto me? That is, hurtful counselours, because you persuade me
to kill Semei. Christ said unto Peter, who dissuaded him from going to
Jerusalem: Vade retro Satana, get thee behind me Satan, Math. 16.
thou art an offense unto me, that is, a letter, a hinderer. Generally al they
may be called Satan's, whosoever do attempt and go about by any occasion, to
alienate and lead us from godliness and truth. The Grecians called Satanam
Diabolu^ which betokens a crafty and disceitful slau^derer, a malicious
detractor

Tradare Satanae, to give over unto Satan, is diversely and many ways expounded
of the learned. Some expound it simpliciter, to be nothing else but to be
excommunicate, that is, to be excluded and shut out of the Church, in the which
when Christ does obtain the kingdom, and the Devil without the church does
play the tirant, it does follow, that all they which are cast from the church,
by the discipline of excemmunication, are made the bondslaues of Satan.

Therefore because we are received into the fellowship of the church, upon this
condition, that we should remain still in the faith, and under the government
of Christ, we do say him which is out of the church, to be delivered unto the
power of Satan, because he is a stranger and a forain from the household of
God, for without the church there is no salvation.

Other expound, Tradere Satanae, to pertain to some notable scourge or plague,
whereby the devil should afflict and vex the person excommunicate, as the
Apostle Paul in his Epistle to Timothe does testify, that he did so unto
Alexander and Himeneus, that they should learn not to blaspheme.

And so God does work together with the judgment of the church, when he does
decree and appoint by the rule of holy scriptures, to send torments and
unclean spirits, to vex them that be excommunicate. We read, that when
saint Ambrose had excommunicate the Scribe of one Stillico, the Scribe was most
grievously vexed of an evil spirit, and this God does, that he might declare
that thing to be ratefied in heaven, which is justly done in earth by his
Church. Chrysostom and other do write, the great power of God to be declared
by some miracle, when any is delivered unto Satan.

But of what great efficacy and strength the power to deliver to Satan is, and
how much it ought to be feared, let us call to remembrance the examples of
Moses, 4. Regum. 2. Acts. 5. Acts. 13.
against the Chorites, of Helias, and of Helizeus, against the false Prophets,
and against the children which were torn of the Bears. Of Peter against
Ananias, of Paul against Elimas and such like But note here, that this
delivering unto Satan is not to the utter destruction of the whole person so
excommunicate, but for the destruction of the flesh for a time, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, that he being vexed and
afflicted, may know his filthiness and his fault, and so may be confounded,
and made ashamed, and so driven to repentance, that he gladlye will return
into the Church again.

It is a very grievous thing, if a man weyghe it well, to be banished and cast
out of a City, that is wealthye, and well institute and governed: how much
more grievous is it to be banished out of the Church, which is the chief
City and common wealth of Christ? How greatly (thyncke you) did it vex the
godly Emperor Theodosius, when he deepelye lamented, because he was
excommunicate of Saynct Ambrose?

And although the church in this our time cannot deliver them that fall and are
excommunicate, unto Satan, to be afflicted and vexed in body, yet God himself
does often execute it with severity. Paul writing to the Corinthians says,
that many of you be sick and weak, 1. Cor 11.
and many are fallen a sleep, that when God does correct and smite us, we be
not damned together with the world. The end therefore of excommunication, is to
procure the health and amendment of them that do so fall, they are not to be
counted and taken as enemies.

Therefore Paul says to the Thessalonians: 2. These. 3.
Quod si quis non audierit, per epistolam notate illum, et ei ne commisceamini,
vt crubescat, non tamen habeatis vt inimicum, sed tanquam fratrem corripite. If
any man obey not our sayings, note him by a letter, and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed, yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as
a brother. Also to the Galathians the.6. chap. be says: Galath. 6.
Si praeoccupatus quis fuerit in aliquo delicto, vos qui spirituales estis,
huiusmodi corripite in spiritu lenitatis, considerans teipsum, ne and tu
tenteris, alter alterius onera portate, and lic implebitis legem Christi.
Brethren, if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are
spiritual, with the spirit of meekenes correct him, considering thy self,
least thou also be tempted. Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill the
law of Christ. This is the note and mark of the righteous, to minister
correction to his neighbor, but yet with mercy. David says in his Psalm. 141.
Percutiet me iustus misericordia, and redarguet me, oleum capitis non
prohihebit caput meum. Let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit, and
let him reprove me, for that is a precious oil, that shall not break my head.
And every man will soon exhibit this mercy, if he consider and weigh his own
imbecility and weakness. 1. Corin. 10.
Paul says* Qui stat, videat ne cadat, he that stands, let him take heed
he fall not; and by this christian lenity, if the excommunicate do repent and
return, the church is brought and bound to forgive him, which Paul does
command. 2. Corinthians. 2 saying: Condonate illi, no possideatur a Satana, 2.
Corin. 2,
which saying saint Austen Contra epistolam Parmenian, does expound after this
manner: Satan does accustom by the color of righteousness, to persuade cruelty,
and that he does for this purpose, to break the bound of unity and peace,
which bond being safe, he is most infirm and weak.

To end, saint Austen declares in his book De heresibus, and so does before
him Epiphanius, that there were certain which worshipped Satan, being moved
thereto, because he being an aduersarye, and having power to do great hurt,
should be sauorable, and do the less hurt. In like manner the Egiptians were
wont to worship Crocodiles and serpe^tes, as the instruments of gods severity,
that they should do less hurt by them.

Now a word or two of certain degrees which were used in the primative
Church, concerning excommunication, and who they be that ought to be
excommunicate.

Saint Ciprian makes mention of certain which were called Abstenti, which are
restrained and put back for a certain time from the sacraments.

Other were called Excommunicati, who as yet took no repentance, and unto
these likewise were the sacraments forbidden, but not for a prescribed time,
as unto them which were named Abstenti.

Thirdly, some were called Anathematizati, who were desperate children, and
without shame or fear, either of God or man.

Chrysostom does write an homely of this kind of curse, called Anathema,
wherein he shows that neither the living nor the dead ought to be punished
with that kind of pain, for we ought always to hope the best of them which
be yet living. As for the dead they be already at the judgment seat of God.

Doctrine, says Chrysostom, and not men, ought to be stricken Anathemate. But
this does not agree with the sayings of other Fathers, or with the sentence of
general counsels, yea it seems also contrary to the holy scriptures, for
Paul, Galath. 1. writes thus: If an angel of heaven preach any other
doctrine then we preach, Anathema sit.

In the Nicen Sinode, there appear certain decrees to be established in the
church. In the first place were Audientes, who were permitted to be present at
sermons, from which none were restrained, unless he were a derider, and despiser
of Gods word.

Secondly, there were Procumbentes, which did ask forgiveness of the ministers
of the church.

Thirdlye, there were Orantes, who although they were restrained from the
Sacraments, yet they were suffered to be present at prayers.

Fourthly and finally, were Co^municantes, which were present both at sermons,
at prayers, and at the receiving of the sacraments.

But many do think these things to be forged, and so to be put into the said
counsel, as lawful decrees.

Notwithstanding it may be gathered out of faint Ciprian, that there were
certain degrees of such as did fall. They (says he) which fell to idolatry,
were not received again of the church, before the hour of death. Adulterers
and fornicators were received after long repentance. Unto them which were
called Libellatici (who were so called, because in time of persecution, they
redeemed themselves from the Judges with money) pardon was easily and soon
granted.

Question.
But by whom shall excommunication be executed?

Responsio.
The society and fellowship of the churches is not simple, but composed of
three parts, that is, Monarchia, Aristocratia, and Democratia, but great heed
is to be taken, that that kind which is called Oligarchia be utterly removed
from the church, which consists in tirannye, and the corrupt manners of the
people.

Monarchia is the rule and government, pertaining only to one man, as to a
King, a Queen, or a Prince of a realm.

Aristocratia, is when the Nobles, the Senators, the Counselors govern and
rule a common wealth.

Democratia, is when the people and commons themselves, bear the rule.

Now if you have a respect in the church only unto Christ, then it is called
Monarchia, for he is our king, which has purchased the church unto himself,
with his own blood. Now he is gone into heaven, but yet he governs this his
kingdom, not with his visible presence, but with his spirit, and the word of
the holy scriptures.

In this church be also his Ambassadors and Legates, as Bishops, Priests,
Elders, Doctors, Pastors, and other, by whose office the church may be called
Aristocratia. These offices are committed, not for riches sake, not for nobility
and bloods sake, not for favor and worldly estimation, but for doctrine,
knowledge, and purity of life.

Again, because weighty causes, and matters of some importance are in the
church referred to the people (as we read in the acts of the Apostles) the
church is called also Democratia. The great matters and causes of weight, are
excommunication, absolution, the election of Bishops, and other Ministers, and
by this may it be concluded, that no man ought to be excommunicate, without the
consent of the people.

The public weal of the Romans kept themself in the same state, for in
times of misery and affliction, they chose and made an officer, who^ they
called, Dictatore^, which was as a monarche, and chief ruler among them.

They had also their Senate house, and their Seniours, who were prudent, wise,
and grave men, and that, might be named Aristocratia.

But in grave and weighty matters, in laws to be confirmed, and statutes to be
made, they referred unto Quirites, that is, to the whole co^minalty, and this
might properly be called Democratia. Saint Ciprian does write unto Cornelius
the bishop, that he took great pain, and labored much to ye people, that
peace and pardon might be granted unto the^, which offended, which pardon if
he could have given by his own authority, he should not have needed so much to
persuade and entreat the people.

Thessalonica. 2.
THessalonica is the chief city of Macedonia, builded (as some write) of
Philip of Macedonia. Other write, that it was called before Halia, and builded
of one Cassander. But because Philip vanquished and ouercam in that place, the
people called Thessali, it was after named Thessalonica.

Lucius Tarraeus (who made a book of this city) writes, that Philip so named
it, of his daughter, called Thessalonica.

The rage of the Emperor Theodosius, who slew in that city the number
of.xii. thousand persons, is well known by that city.

To this city saint Paul preached first the Gospel, as it is in the acts 17.
And unto the inhabitauntes of this City also he wrote from Athens two
epistles. About a hundred and twenty years agone, Amurathes the turkish
Emperor, which killed one Vladislaus, king of Hungary, at a place called
Varna, took this city in battle, from the Venetians, with which slaughter
Theodorus Gasa, a Thessalonian, and other learned me^ being moved, forsook the
country of Grecia, and came into Italye, and there did set forth most
diligently and learnedly, the study and knowledge of the Greek tongue, which
they sent forth throughout al Europe.

Canon. 3.
CAnon est vox polisona, for it signifies many things. First it signifies,
that part of a target or buckeler, wherein the arm and hand is put. Secondly,
it is a yearly tribute of corn, paid to some city or town. Asconius
Pedianus does make three kinds of tributes. The first he calls (Canonem)
which is the fruit paid for passage, or carriage of merchandise, also custom,
tallage, or else a yearly tribute of corn. The second, he calls Oblationem,
which properlye we may call a subsidy of wine. The third, he calls
Indictionem, which is a tax granted by the people: and this last is called of
Cicero, Lib. 2. De oratore collatio and collecta.

Thirdly, Canon signifies a rule to direct and measure things equally, and
rightly, and because that we ought to direct both our faith and life by the
rule of the holy scriptures, therefore the scriptures are called Scripturae
canonicae.

Heresis. 4.
THis word (heresis) signifies in the latin tongue electionem an election or
choice, and it is derived of this Greek verb (...), that is, Eligo, whereupon
Chrysostom does name the election of the Bishops, which then was put in ure of
the faithful people (heresim) and by this it appears that he properly is an
heretic, who does choose any thing to himself.

Saint Hierome, upon the Epistle of Paul to Tite, gives the like note,
saying: heresis in the Greek is said of election, because every man may choose
unto himself, that thing which seems to be best unto his judgment.

And where we use this word (heresis) in the ill sense, it is done per
Chatachresim, that is abusiuely, and improperly. Tertulian lib. De virginibus
vetandis definit heresim after this manner.

Quodcunque aduersus veritatem sapit, heresis est etiam vetus consuetudo,
whatsoever sauoreth against the truth, it is heresye, although it be a long and
an ancient custom. This diffinition is not proper nor necessary, but abusiue.
For if you would use the latin word Electio, and say, whatsoever sauoreth
against the truth, is an election, it were a fond phrase of speaking, but yet
the Catachresis or abuse of this word is not to be condemned, for saint Paul
uses this word in the ill sense saying: Oportet hereses esse, quo qui probati
sunt, manifesti fiant inter vos, That is: There must be heresies among you, 1.
Cor. 11.
that they which are approved among you, may be known. Also in the epistle to
the Galathians. 5. Gala. 5.
he numbreth heresy among the works of the flesh.

Saint Austen seems to use this word heresis for an opinion, and Austen
makes this difference between an heretic and a schismaticke. Ille est
hereticus, he is an heretic, which does corrupt the sincerity of faith, and
the veritye of the Apostles doctrine, with false and noughtye doctrines.

He is a schismaticke, who although he offends not against ye purity of
doctrine, and sincerity of faith, yet does rashlye separate him self from the
church, breaking the bond of unity. And truly he may be called properly an
heretic, whosoever for the hope of some temporal commodity, lucre,
promotions, or glory, does of his own will and head, choose, receive, teach,
follow, and stiffly defend, and sows abroad any manner of strange doctrine
against the scriptures, the articles of the faith, the doctrine of the church
grounded upon Gods word.

The scholemen call him an heretic, which does institute, make or follow, any
new sect, against the foundation of religion, and they say that three things
do always concur and meet together in heresye, that is.

False belief. Perverse will. Obstinacy.
VVherby they signify him not straight way to be taken for an heretic,
which holding false things for true, does err, so that there be not a peruers
will, and an obstinate mind to persist and resist, as the great learned doctor
says: Errare possum, hereticus esse nolo. I may err, yet I will not be an
heretic. It is written in the law. Qui sententiam suam, quamuis falsam atque
peruersam, nulla pertinaci animosi tate defendunt, sed querunt cauta
solicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati, cum inuenerint, nequaquam sunt inter
hereticos deputandi.

Whosoever do defend their sentence and opinion, although it befalse, so it be
not of an obstinate boldness, but do seek carefully and warelye the truth, and
being ready and willing to be corrected, and return when they have found the
truth, they are not to be counted among heretics,

Some derive this word (heresis) of this Greek verb (...), which signifies
inniti and firmare, to lean to, and to make firm and strong.

Christianitas. 5.
SAint Luke does record in the Acts of the Apostles, that this name of a
Christian, was first given at Antioche. Yet it ought not to be so understand,
as though it were utterly unknown to al men before that time, but now it is
made vulgar and common. It was known before, but more in work, the^ in word.

Eusebius rehearses the old fathers Adam, Seth, Noe, Abraham, and all other
like to them, to be Christians, and says that the Christian religion was then
most ancient, and most sound and pure, his words be these.

Non noua, sed coram omnibus hominibus vetustate celebris, ac cunctis nota gens
Haebreorum est. Huius libri ac literae vetustos viros continent, raros quidem
and paucos numero, pietate vero and iusticia omnique virtutum genere
prestantes, ante diluuium differentes: postea alios ex filiis and nepotibus
Noe, vtpote Tharam and Abrahamum, de quo tanquam duce and progenitore, ipsi
haebreorum posteri gloriantur. Quod si quis hos omnes iusticiae testimonio
decoratos, ab ipso Abrahamo ad primum vsque hominem ipsis operibus, etsi non
nomine christianos fuisse dixerit, a veritate certe non aberrauerit.
Christianum quippe nomen virum significauit, qui per Christi cognitionem and
doctrinam, animi moderatione and iusticia, continentiaque vitae, and virtutis
fortitudine, and pietatis confessione erga vnum ac solum omnium deum excellit.
Hoc autem priscis illis non minus curae fuit, quam nobis: nec corporalis itaque
circumcisionis rationem habuerat, sicuti nec nos, nec sabbatorum obseruantiae,
quemadmodum neque nos, nec abstinentiae ciborum, neque discrimimum aliorum,
quae postea Moses primus omnium instituit, ac simbolice perficienda tradidit:
sicuti talia, and nunc quoque Christianorum non sunt, sed ipsum etiam Christum
Dei perspicue viderunt. Siquidem illum and Abrahae apparuisse and responsa
dedisse Isacho, and Israeli, Mosique, and Prophetis post ipsum locutum esse,
iam antea declaratum est. Vnde and pios istos Christi nomen sortitos esse
inuenies iuxta vocem de illis dictam: Nempe ne attingatis Christos meos, Psalm.
10^.
and contra Prophetas meos ne maliciose agatis. Manifestum itaque est hanc
pietatis inuentionem virorum, illorum qui temporibus Abrahae pie vixeru^t,
(quae nuper per Christi doctrinam cunctis est gentibus annunciata) primam esse,
omniumque antiquissimam and vetustissimam.

The nation of the Hebrews is not new, but known unto all men, to be most
famous and honorable. The books and letters of the people do contain old
ancient men, rare and few in number, but in godlynes, righteousness, and al
kind of virtue most excellent, and that before the flood.

And after the floode, they contain other, of the children and Nephews of
Noe, as Tharach and Abraham, of whom, as of the chief and progenitor, the
posterity of the Hebrews do glory and boast. If any man will say, all these men
adourned with the testimonye of righteousness, from Abraham, unto the first man
to be Christians, although not in word, yet in work, he shall not err from
the truth. For a Christian man does signify that man, which by the knowledge
and doctrine of Christ, does excel in moderation of mind, justice, and
continency, in strength of a virtuous life, and the confession of godliness
toward the only God. And the old fathers had this in no les regard, then we
have.

They had no respect of carnal circumcision, as we have, neither of the
obseruinges of the Sabothes, no more then we have, nor of abstinence from
certain meats, nor any other differences, which Moses first did institute and
ordain, and taught them to be done by the way of figure and signification.
Such things also are not now pertaining to Christians.

But they saw clearly Christ the Son of God. For we have declared before,
that he did appear unto Abraham, and gave aunswers and oracles unto Isaac,
Israel, and Moses. And after him spoke to the Prophets, whereof thou shall
find these godly men to have had the name of Christ, according to the word
which was spoken of them: Touch not mine anointed, and do not wyckedly
against my Prophets. Psalm. 10^.
It is manifest therefore, that the invention of godliness, of those which lived
godly in the time of Abraham (which now of late has been showed by the
doctrine of Christ, unto al nations) to be the first, the auncie^test, and
eldest of all others. Hitherto Eusebius.

Now if we would well behold our selves in the glass of a christian name, we
shall see very few at this time worthy this holy name. We desire all to be
called Christians, but in profession of life we be far distant from this
title. We be named Christians, a chrismate sacro, of holy anointing. This holy
anointing is the holy Ghost: the Lord says, Upon whom shall my spirit rest,
Esaias. 66.
but upon the humble and meek, and him that fears my sayings? But we set
little or naught by the word of God, we are corrupted with naughty affections,
we swell with pride, we disdain one the other, and therefore are destitute of
this holy Chrisma, whereby we be named Christians. We be weary of godly
labors, of prayers, fastinges, watchinges, alms deeds, and of all offices of
godly piety.

How many of us do take pain to teach, to exhort, comfort, to admonish,
those that do glory of the title of a christian name? Are we not all slothful,
and loath to take any pain in instructing of our own family, and other of our
brethren? We cast of from our selves this function and duty, and cast it upon
the ecclesiastical Ministers shoulders, as though no such thing should be
required of us. Ob say some men, I am no priest, I have never a benefice, why
should I teach or admonish? why should I preach or exhort? But yet they can
admit all blasphemous filthy and abominable talk. They live only to them
self, they have no care nor regard either of Gods glory, or the salvation of
their neighbors.

What sacrifice worthy of a Christian name, do we offer unto God? where be our
prayers, and thanks giving? where is the mortification of our flesh? where is
the renounceing of this world? where is mercy and pity? where is the innocent
and holy life? Be we not destitute and void for the most part of these godly
dowries? Well, God of his infinite mercy give us al grace, that we may become
in deed, that which we be in name, that is true Christians.

But the chiefest thing of all to be lamented, is this. The true Christians
being contented with this only title and name, do desire nor covet any other
appellation or calling. But certain hipocrites (as though the name of a
Christian were but a base and a light thing) cease not, until they may get
unto themselves other titles and names, as to be called a Dominicke, a
Fraunciscan, a Carmelite, a Carthusian, a Boname, as though they were
christened in their names.

The true christians (cleaving only to their master and teacher Christ) do
not hear the voice of any other, they will not go one jot from the holy
Scriptures. But these hipocrites accuse, and call all men heretics, unless
they receive and embrace all Romish constitutions and ordinances, although
they repugne and be clean contrary to the words and doctrine of Christ.

The Christians do acknowledge themselves to have but one king, one deliverer,
one savior, and one head in heaven.

These do adore the Pope as the chief head here in earth, of the universal
Church. The Christians do confess and affirm, that there is but one
sacrifice for the remission of all sins, which is the death and Passion of
Christ.

These do defend and teach that Christ is offered daily in ye Mass, for the
propitiatio^ of sins, I shall not need to make any more Antitheses, or
contrary Collations. They be known to all the world what they be. Now will I
conclude with saint Austen, his words be these: Filius dei qui fecit nos,
factus est inter nos, and rex noster regit nos, and ideo sumus Christiani, quia
ille Christus a Chrismate dictus est, id est, ab unction, reges autem
vngebantur and sacerdotes, Ille vero vnctus est rex and sacerdos. Rex pugnauit
pro nobis, sacerdos obtulit sese pro nobis. The son of God which made us,
was made to be among us, and being our king, he does rule us, and therefore we
be called Christians, because Christ was named a Chrismate, that is of
anointing, for both kings and Priests were anointed, and he was anointed both
king and Priest, as a king he fought for us, as a Priest he offered him self
for us.

Fides. 6.
CIcero defines in his offices, that faith is a constancy and truth in
sayings and doyngs, Et dicitur Fides vt fiat, quod dictum est, and is called
Fides, that the things which were spoken, may be performed.

Saint Austen, writes of this word Fides, after this manner. Fides appellata
est ex eo quod fit, duae fillabae sonant, cum dicitur fides, prima sillaba est,
a facto, secunda a dicto. Interrogo ergo a te vtrum credas, dicis credo, fac
quod dicis, and credis. That is to say: faith is named of yt which is done,
two sillabes do sound when faith is named, the first is of doing, the second
is of saying. I ask thee therefore, whether thou believe, thou say, I do
believe: do then that thou say, and thou do believe.

I do read in an old Pamphiliona pretty rule concerning this word (Fides.)
And although such Pamphelions (for the most part) do sauer gross and
supersticious doctrine, yet sometime they speak truly and profitably, as the
common proverb runs. Sepe etia^ est holitor valde opportuna locutus. The
gardener sometimes speaks apt and meet things. One demanded of Virgill, what
he did with Ennius works in his hands, who made answer: Ex stercore Ennii
auru^ colligo. I gather gold out of Ennius doung. So one may gather out of
barbarous writers, some profitable lessons. The rule concerning faith is this.
That Christian faith (says he) may be accepted of God, it ought to be perfect,
according to the signification of every letter in this word Fides, which be
five in number.

Romans 2. Matthew. 7.
The first letter is F. which signifies Facere, to do, as Paul says, no^
auditores legis sed factores iustificabuntur. And as Christ himself says, no^
omnis qui dicit mihi dn^e, domine, intrabit in regnum caeloru^, sed qui facit
voluntatem patris mei. Not al, which say to me master master, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my father. Alas, how many
be there, which say with mouth, I believe in Christ the son of God, but in
deed do deny him? What is it to believe in God and Christ his son, but to
grow in virtue and grace, toward God as S. Auste^ says? Were it not (think
you) an horrible thing to hear any man say, I do not believe in Christ, but in
the devil? And yet it is more horrible, to profess it in word, Tit. 1.
and to deny it in work, for works be of greater efficacy the^ words. I
pray God yt the saying of S. Paul may not justly be verified in ye most part
of people. Confite^tur se nosce deum, factis aute^ negant. They confess God
with mouth, but with works they deny him.

The second letter of this word Fides, is I. which signifies integrity and
fulness in faith, yt is, that the Christian man, believe al ye articles of ye
faith to be true, and to doubt and err in none of the^: As to believe in Christ
to be very god, and to deny his true ma^hood, as ye Anabaptists do: Also to
believe Christ to be natural man (sin only excepted) and to deny him to be
god, as ye Arria^s do. But every Christian man must believe fully and wholly
every article contained in the simbole of ye Apostles, commonly called ye
Creed. Other wise his faith is not perfect, for he lacks this letter I, as al
heretics and sectaries do against this letter, and all south sayers and
enchaunters likewise offend, as the saying is in the law: Qui diuinationibus,
credit fide^ perdit, he that believes enchauntements, leeseth his faith.

The third letter is D. which signifies Dilectione^, love and charity, as
Paul says, Gal. 5.
Fides que per dilectione^ operatur, faith which works by love.

S. Bernard writes, yt Mors fidei, est separatio charitatis. The lack of
charity, is ye death of faith. And again he says. Credis in Christum? fac
Christi opera in charitate: vt viuat fides tua, fide^ tuam dilectio animet.
Do you believe in Christ? do the works of Christ in charity and love, yt thy
faith may live, let love give life unto thy faith. The scholasticall divines
have a general rule, that faith without charity, is Fides informis.

S. Auste^ writes. Quod cu^ dilectione fides est christiant, sine dilectione
fides est demonis, na^ demones credu^t and co^tremiscu^t: with love it is the
faith of a christian, without love it is ye faith of the devil, for ye devils
believe and fear. Again upon John he says: Co^fiteba^tur demones Christu^,
crede^do no^ dilige^do, fide^ habeba^t, charitate^ no^ habebant. Ideo demones
era^t. The devils confessed Christ in belief, not in love, faith they had, but
charity they had not, and therefore they were devils. So all christians which
do believe, and not love, as long as they do continue, are not christians, but
in a manner are to be called devils.

The fourth letter is E. which signifies externe, and express, outwardely,
expressly and plainly, for it is not sufficient to have and hold faith in
heart, unless you confess it with mouth and works, as Paul says. Romans 10.
Cord creditur ad iusticia^, ore fit confessio ad salute^, with heart we believe
to be justified, and with mouth we confess to be saved. If at the least
opportunity and time will serve.

Quaestio.
What if a man in the time of persecution, reserve and keep in his heart the
true faith, but for fear of death, loss of goods, or any other like plague,
does consent to heretics, and does conceal and keep close the truth?

Responsio.
All the schole Doctors to this question make this answer, that if by his
silence and ensaumple other take offense, or do swerue from the right faith,
then the said party is in the state of dampnatio^. But after my judgment he
offends, and that greatly without all exceptions, and conditions, because the
confession of faith is necessary, De praecepto, to be declared outwardly,
as well as to be believed inwardly.

The fifth letter is S. which signifies Semper, always that is to have faith
as well in the end, as in the beginning, even to persevere and continue as
Christ says. Beatus ille qui perseuerauerit vsque ad fine^. Matthew. 24.
Blessed is he which continues to the end. And as S. Paul says. Heb. 11.
Heb. 11.
Sine fide impossible est placere deo, without faith it is impossible to
please god. But you must here understand, yt this faith before described, is
not ye justifying faith, but it is yt faith, which does declare a man to be
already justified. Which faith ye schole me^ call Fide^ formata^: but the
faith that does justify, does praecede and go before all manner of good works,
as S. Gregory writes upon Ezechiell. Whose words be these. Nisi prius Fides
teneatur, nullatenus ad spirituale^ amore^ attingitur, non enim charitas fide^
sed fides charitate^ praecedit, quia nemo potest amare, quod no^ credidit.
Except faith be first had and holden, you ca^ by no manner of wise attain to
spiritual love, for charity does not go before faith, but faith does praecede
charity. etc. The like saying has S. Austen writing upon John Sicut in radice
arboris nulla prorsus apparet pulchritudinis species, and tamen quicquid est in
arbore pulchritudinis vel decoris, ex illa procedit sic exfidei humilitate
quicquid meriti, quicquid beatitudinis anima susceptura est, ex fidei
fundame^to procedit. That is: Like as in the root of a tree there appears no
beauty at all, and yet whatsoever ornament or comelines is in the whole tree,
it proceeds of it: So whatsoever merit, whatsoever happiness, the soul shall
receive of the lowliness of faith, it springs of the foundation of faith.

I am not ignorant how the master of the sentence, does restrain the saying
of Gregory, to that faith que no^ est virtus (as he says) which is no virtue:
but how aptely and truly, I refer it to the judgment of the learned, or else
(says he) you may refer it to the act of faith, which naturally does go
before the act of charity.

But of this matter I shall entreat (by the grace of God) more at large
hereafter in that Lecture, wherein I shall discourse the article of
justification.

Art. 7.
THis word Ars (as some do write) is derived, (...). That is to say Virtus,
virtue. Other write that it comes of this verb Arcto, which he tokeneth to
bind straight together, because by art, works are aptely restrained together.

The definition of this word Ars, is diverse. Some define it to be Facultate^
quae preceptis quibusda^ ac regulis continetur, which is contained in certain
precepts and rules.

Diomedes does define art after this manner. Ars est rei cuiuscunque scie^tia,
vsu, traditione, vel ratione percepta, tendens ad vsum alique^ vitae
necessariu^. That is to say, Art is a science or knowledge of any thing
perceived by use, tradition or reason, te^ding to some necessary use of ma^s
life.

Aristotle in the sixte of his Ethickes defines art after this manner. Ars est
habitus quida^ faciendi cu^ vera ratione. That is, It is a certain habit or
doing with true reason.

Diuisio.
Arts are divided three manner of ways: some be called Theoricae, that is,
Speculatiue, which does consist in the knowledge, estimation and speculation of
things as Astrology, which does not require any art, but is contented only
with the understanding of that thing which it does study.

Other arts be called Practicae, that is, active, and they do consist and
stand in doing, whose chief end is to be made perfect in act, and after the
act is done, does leave no sign nor token, as daunsing, wrestlyng, and such
like.

Thirdly other arts be called Effectiuae, that is, which do consist and
stand in effect, which does set fourth ye consummation, and bringing to pass
the work which is set before the eyes, as paynting, caruing, and such like.
Ars signifies sometimes, subtletie and craft, whether it be in the best part,
or in the worst, by the which a man will not lightly be disceaued, but may
rather disceaue other, which is called in ye Greek: (...).

Virgill in his Aeneidos, writes thus of one Sinon. Dolis instructus and art
pelasga: that is, armed with desceit and craft of the Grecians.

Draconites. 8.
DRaconites is a precious stone, which is made of the brain of Dragons, but
the brain does never wax to that virtue, except the head be cut of from the
Dragon being alive, and that is through the envy of the beast, perceauing and
feeling him self to die, therefore the manner is to cut of their heads, when
they be a sleep. The stone is of a wonderful bright color, and ca^ not be
better polished and trimmed, then it is of his own nature.

Philosophy. 9.
TErtulia^ in his book Contra Hermogine^, does call the Philosophers, the
patriarchs of all heretics. Pithagoras was the first that ever named himself
a Philosopher, refusing the name of Sophos, a wise man, as the name of a more
arrogancy, for he had rather be called a lover of wisdom, then a wise man.

Sinagog. 10.
SYnagoga, betokens in Latin a congregation or company of people. The Church
of the Jews which were the peculiar people of God, was sometime called
Synagoga, for Synagoga does signify, that same thing that Ecclesia does, but
for the obstinacy and unplacable hatred of the Jews, which they bare against
Christian Religion, it is become vile, and almost out of use.

Saint Hierome Ad Geronciam viduam: does write, that Lia with her bleare eyes,
and Rachel (whom Jacob loved very well) does signify, the first, the sinagoga
of the Jews, the second, the Church.

Epitheton. 11.
EPitheton, is a figure, which may properly be called a word cast or put unto
a nowne substantive: and that for diverse and soundry causes, either for the
cause of difference, as Ida Phrigia, a great hill by Troy. Which word
Phrigia is an Epitheton and makes the substantive Ida, to differ from an other
hill so called, which is in the country of Creta, now called Candie.

Secondly, Epitheton is added for the cause of some propriety, as Venusta
venus, fair Lady Venus. Coelum profundu^, the great high heaven.

Thirdly, it is put unto a substa^tiue, for the cause of some Emphasis or
vehemency, to make the word seem more, then if it should be without it,
whether it be in the better sense, or in the worse. As O sacratissimu^ dei
verbu^, O thou most holy word of God. O scelus abomina^du^. O most abominable
wicked deed, so in the better sense, is this Epitheton Sacra, holy, put unto
Scriptura, scripture, to make it differ from all other scriptures, in dignity
and worthiness, whatsoever they be.

Superstition. 12.
SVperstition is a false worshipping of God, a mad, and folish error contrary
unto true religion, because it does give yt honor, either to whom it might not
be given, or else after what manner it ought not to be given, and therefore Aulus
Gellius, in his tenth book does call superstition, a folish religion out of
season. Lucretius does think yt it is called superstition, of a vain and
superstitious fear of things, standing upon, or over, that is of heavenly or
divine things, which stand above us.

Cicero in his second book De natura deorum, writes of this word after this
sort. Non solu^ Philosophi, veru^ etia^ maiores nostri superstitione^ a
religione seperauerunt, na^ qui totos dies precabantur and immolabant, vt sibi
sui liberi superstites essent, superstitiosi sunt appellati, yt is to say. Not
only ye Philosophers, but also our au^cie^ts, did separate and divide
superstition from religion, for they which did offer and pray ye whole day, yt
their children might be long lived, were called superstitiosi, superstitious,
of this word superstes, which signifies, to stand ever, or remain still.

Lacta^tius does coumpt the^ chiefly to be called superstitious, which do
celebrate the continual memory of ye dead, or which do worship at home in
their houses, images set up for their parents, as though they were Gods.

Alchoran. 13.
ALchoran is an Arabicall word, and signifies by interpretation Collectaneu^
praeceptoru^, a gathering together of commandments into one book, the
which book Machumet, fained to be sent to him from God by the angel
Gabriell. In the which book are mixed most shameful and abominable lies, with
some part of scripture, and necessary laws (although these be fewest.) And as
the Turks and Sarasens are directed by the Alchoran: So the Jews have a book
called Talmud, which by interpretation, is a doctrine or discipline,
containing all their former commentaries, statutes, laws, and histories, which
were collected into one book by Rabbi, written and made as some say the year
after Christ.CCC. other say.CL. Galatinus writes.CCCC. xxxvi. years after the
burning of the second Temple.

Machumet was first a poor man, and a byer and seller of Cammels. Afterward
he fell acquainted with an heretic moncke called Sergius, by whose means he
declared himself to be a Prophet: and took upon him as well to refourme ye
old law, as the new. He won great realms, and at the age of forty years
died (as some suppose) of ye falling sickness, which he long time did
dissemble, fayning that the angel Gabriell was sent to him in message, whose
brightenes he might not sustain.

Chaan. 14.
CHaan, he is also called the Emperor of the Tartarians, there is under him as
much land (within little) as in the residue of all Asia, Europa, and Africa. He
has under him the great region called Cathay, which is divided into nine
realms. This Cathay, is wonderful rich in gold and silver, abounding in
grain, wines, and all other things necessary for man's sustenaunce. The
people there (for the most part) honor Christ as God, but they are not
Baptized, they are courteous, and reasonable, and very cunnyng artificers.

Sacrum. 15.
THis disease is a vehement inflammation and burning of the body, it is called
in the Greek tongue (...). i. feruens tumor, of this disease Celsus. Lib. 5.
Colum. lib. 1. cap. 5. and Pliny speaks more at large. And here note that
this word Sacer, has many significations: first it betokens venerable or
holy, secondly it signifies cursed and wicked, as in this place of Virgill.
Auri sacra fames etc. In the old time yt man was called Sacer homo, which after
horrible cursings was slain and offered to one of the gods, to cesse the
pestilence, or to put away any other kind of calamity, and it is taken
generally for every naughty and wicked person, as it is taken also in Horace.
Pliny calls this disease Zoster, also the falling sickness is called Sacer
morbus.

Liberal sciences. 16.
THere be seven liberal sciences, of the which three are called Arts
benedicendi, as Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric, and Grammar is called Ars
triuialis, quia in triuiis docetur, because it is taught almost in every
street and place.

The other four are called Mathematical, as Arithmeticke, Geometry, Music,
Astronomy, and they be so called, because they are learned by most firm and
sure demonstrations, and does make the thing to be known by reason, and by
some certain cause.

Mathematicum, is a Greek word, and signifies disciplinall, or doctrinall, or
demonstratiue.

All these seven sciences be called liberal sciences. i. Quod liberu^ hoi^em
potissimu^ deceant, because they be most meet and expedient to be learned of
gentilmen and of free men, for it is illiberall and servile to get the leuing,
with hand labor and sweat of the body. All arts and occupations exercised
and used with travel of hands and pain of body, are called Arts
maechanicae, as carpentrye and smithes work, with such like and they are so
called of this Greek word (...). Which signifies Inuentionem, invention, or
an excogitation, a craft.

Discipline. 17.
THat is called discipline which is learned of ye scholar, and yt doctrine
which is taught of the master. S. Cipria^ writes discipline to be an
ordinary reformation of manners, and an observation of the rules and
institutions of our auncetours, and forefathers. It is properly an order
prescribed for the maintenance of good and honest life, and for the restrainte
of all enormities and disorders.

S. Austen in his book De moribus ecclesie, writes that Disciplina ad duo
diuiditur, ad correctione^ and instructionem, primu^ timore, secundu^ amore
perficitur, that is to say, discipline is divided into two, into correction,
and instruction, the first is done by fear, the second by love.

Again in his sermons: Sermon. 52. he says. Non enim superbia, nisi vbi
negligitur disciplina, nam disciplina est magistra religionis and verae
pietatis, quae nec ideo increpat vt ledat, nec ideo castigat vt noceat, denique
mores hoi^m irata corrigit, infla^mata custodit. There is no pride, but where
discipline is neglected, for discipline is ye maistres of Religion and true
godliness, which does rebuke, not to hurt, and does chasten, but not to anoye,
being angry, it does chasten the manners of me^, being inflamed in love, it
does preserve and keep them.

Darcke. 18.
THe body is darcke, Christ says in Mathewe. cap. 6. If thine eye be wicked,
then all thy body shall be dark. Hilarious upon this text does write, that
Christ did express hereby the office of the light of the eye, the light of the
heart, which if it be clear, it gives unto the body the clerenes of everlasting
life.

And (as Chrysostom says) Quod est oculus corpori, hoc est intellectus
animae. Sicut ergo oculis orbatis, multu^ operationis reliquorum membroru^
amittitur, lumme eis extincto, ita me^te corrupta, multis malis vita tua
impletur. That is, what the eye is unto the body, the same is understanding
unto the soul. Therefore as the worcking of all the other members is lost, unto
the^ which lack their eyes (the light of the^ being put out) so the mind
being corrupt, the life is filled with many evils.

The darckenes of us are the carnal senses, which do always desire and covet
those things which savor of darckenes, as concupiscence, covetousness, and
all other corrupt affections, which affections make the whole man both body
and soul, darcke. And this teach the holy scriptures, who if they be well
read, digested and followed, give light and life to the whole body, which thing
no other scripture could at any time perform.

Enchaunters. 19.
SAint Auste^ in his work De natura demonu^ says, the manner of divination and
enchauntment to have been brought from the Persia^s. Varro nombreth four
kinds of incantacions, of the earth, of ye water, of the air, and of ye fire,
whereof some think Geomancie, Hidroma^cie, and Pyromancie to have taken their
names.

Also in his book De ciuitate dei, he writes. Nec mirum de magorum
praestigiis, quoru^ in tantum prodiere maleficioru^ arts, vt etia^ Moysi in
illis signis restitisse, vertentes virgas in dracones, aqua^ in sanguine^
dica^tur. etc. that is. Neither is it marvel of the delusions and disceit of
the enchaunters, whose wicked arts and crafts went so far, that they
resisted Moses in those great wonders, turning their rods into serpents,
and water into blood. And a little after he says. These by the permission and
sufferaunce of God, do make the elements to shake, and do trouble the minds
of men, not hauingful trust in God, yea and without any taste of poison do kill
men, by the violence and force of enchaunting. Whereupon Lucanus writes.

Men's hausti nulla sanie polluta veneni Incantata perit.

The mind which is enchaunted, does perish and dye, yea being not polluted
with any kind of poison.

Quaestio.
Why could not the inchaunters of Pharao bring to pass this wonder, of
turning the dust of ye earth into Lyce, as well as they did the other three
wonders before, in turning the rods into serpents, the water into blood, and
to bring fourth the frogs?

Responsio.
Certain of the Hebrews do assign this cause: The devils (say they) whose
help and power ye sorcerers do use, have no power upon that body or matter,
that is less then a Barley Corn, which cause is fond, folishe and clean
against reason, for that which has power over great, has power over the
small, but not the contrary.

Therefore the true cause is, because the devils can do nothing, but so much as
the will of God does permit and suffer. And therefore the sorcerers which
resisted Moses, were let of God in this, that they should be confounded and
ashamed, because they could not do so small and so little a thing, for God does
often times confound the wisdom and great authority of the world, in
things most vile.

Two things are here to be observed, the one is this. Satan (by whose power
the sorcerers work wonders) is a mighty and strong spirit if God suffer him,
but if God resist his power, there is nothing weaker then he, fear therefore
the Lord, and thou shall not need to fear Satan.

The other is, although the wicked work miracles and wonders, yet the Lord God
is wont to bring such to good success and end, that ye elect may clearly
understand the disceit and craft of Satan.

Saint Austen in his book De natura demonum, recites the difference and
diverse sorts of sorcerers, his words be these. Incantatores dicuntur, qui
artem verbis peragunt.

Arioli dicuntur, qui circa aras Idilorum, nefarias preces emittunt, and
funesta sacrificia offerunt.

Haruspices dicuntur, horarum inspectatores, dies enim and horas in agendis
negotiis and operibus custodiunt, exta pecudum inspiciunt.

Angures dicuntur, qui volatus auium and voces intendunt.

Pythonissae dicuntur a Pythone, id est, Apoline, quae dicunt se habere
spiritum per quem possunt futura praedicere.

Genesiani dicuntur, qui geneses, id est natiuitates hominum, per duodecem
signa caeli describunt, ac per hoc mortes, actus, euentus predicere conantur.

Salitores dicu^tur, qui alicuius me^bri part offensa, aliquid mali, prosperum
sieve triste, significari praesumunt.

Sorcilegi communi nomine, a sort dicuntur, the whole sentence of S. Austen is
thus much to say in English.

They are called enchaunters or chermers which work by words.

They be Arioli, which send out their wicked prayers, and offer cruel and
bloody sacrifices about altars of Idols.

Haruspices be they, which mark and behold the hours, for in all their
business and works, they keep and observe hours, and look upon the inward
parts of beasts.

Angures are they, which wait and observe ye flieng and crieng of birds.

Pythonissae are so called, of Pithonius, that is Apollo, which (say they) have
a spirit, by the which they can tell things to come.

Genesiani be they which describe the natiuities of men by the twelve signs
of heaven, and by that attempt to foreshew the deaths, the acts, and ends of
persons.

Salitores, be they which by observing of any part or member being hurt, do
presume some evil or sad thing to be signified unto them.

Sortilegi, are called by a common name of casting lottes.

But of what virtue and goodness all these kinds be, S Auste^ in his first book
De doctrina christiana, does most godly declare, his words be these.

Oe^s arts huiusmodi, vel nugatoriae, and noxiae superstitiones, ex quada^
pestifera societate hoi^m and demonu^, quasi pacta infidelis and dolose amici
tia co^stituta, penitus su^t repudia^dae and fugie^dae christiano, that is to
say.

All such crafts and arts of a trifling and hurtefull superstition, which came
by a pestiferous and naughty fellowship and familiarity, between men and
devils, made by the pacte and covenant of an unfaithful and disceitfull
friendship, are to be forsaken, and fled of every Christian man.

God in the.20. ca. of Leuiticus says. If any turn after such as work with
spirits and after south sayers, to go a whoring after the^, I will set my face
against that person, and will cut him of from among his people.

Fulgosus lib. 1. ca. 2. writes of one Misonianus an Hebrew, a noble and
valeau^t horseman, who when he perceived that the whole company of horsemen
were caused to stay and tarry, in the which he was one, with the other
soldiers of Rome, and understood the cause of their tarieng to be, for that a
certain southsayer would first see what divination he could take of a bird,
which he found in the way, Misonianus feinyng him self to do an other thing,
bent his bow and at the first shout, smote the bird through, down to the
ground, and laughing said to his fellows. A man may hope for little counsel
and help of beasts void of reason, for as much as it is now opened that they
know not what pertayneth to the^ selves, by whose deed and word he showed,
what a vain thing, this kind of southsaying is, and what a foolish thing it
is to give any credit unto any enchaunting or southsaying.

Digitus Dei. 20.
SAint Austen says. Dicitur spiritus sa^ctus digitus dei, propter
participationem bonorum, quae in eo dantur vnicuique propria, sieve hominum sieve
angelorum. In nullis enim me^bris nostris magna tam apparet partitio, quam in
digitis.

That is to say, the holy spirit is called the finger of God, for the
participation of the gifts, which in it are given, as proper to every one,
either to men, or to angels, for partition does in no member or part of ours,
more appear, then in the fingers.

Cirillus Bishop of Alexandria writes, Quod filius manus and brachiu^ patris
dictus est, operatur enim pater cu^cta per eum: Sicut igitur digitus non est
alienusa manu, sed ei naturaliter insitus, sic spiritus sanctus
co^substantialiter co^nexus est filio, and per eum omnia filius operatur. Non
est igitur aliud spiritus a deitatis essentia, sed ex ipsa and in ipsa
naturaliter, sicut and digitus in manu, and manus in corpore est, that is to
say.

The son is called the hand and arm of the father, for the father works
all things by him. Therefore as the finger is not diverse from the hand, but
naturally graffed to the hand, so the holy ghost is essentially connexed and
knit to the son, and the son by the same spirit works all things.
Wherefore the spirit is not an other thing from the substance of the deity,
but is naturally of it and in it, as the finger is in the hand, and the hand in
the body, for the finger is of the substance of the hand, and the hand is of
the substance of the body. The like writes Didimus Alexandrinus lib. de
spiritu sancto. Also Hugo Etherianus lib. de processione sancti spiritus.

Liuius. 21.
LIuius being prince and chiefest of ye Latin writers of histories, wrate. 120.
books of histories, which by the malignitie of time are lost, and there
remain only three decades and an half. Decas properly is yt which contains
10. books, or 10. sermons or treaties. Saint Hierome in his Epistle Ad
Paulinu^ says, that many noble men came out of the costs of Spain and
France unto Liuie, who did flow with the milckie fountain of eloquence, and
that the only fame of Liuie, brought to Rome them whom the City her self
could not bring, to behold her: he lived 80. years and died in the.4. year of
the Empire of Tiberius, and was buried at Padwaye.

Faedus. 22.
FAedus is properly a league made between princes, and a truce after battle.
Some men think the etymology of this word originally to be derived of this
word Faeciales, which signifies an Ambassador of arms, which denounces
war or peace.

Other do think it to come of Fides, because in making the treaty of peace,
faith was promised.

Certain other do think it to come of Faede caedendo, that is to kill
cruelly, for two Heraldes of arms were set on either side, and a sow between
them, when they should confirm any league, and with a flint stone did kill the
sow, praying that like end might happen unto him that first did break the
treaty made.

Immolatio. 23.
IMmolare properly is to offer with the sacrifice a cake made of meal and
salt, for Mola, signifies the said cake, and it does differ from Litare, for
Litare, properly is with the sacrifice to pacify the gods, and to obtain
their request, and desire, and (as Festus says) it comes of the Greek
word, (...), which betokens prayers.

Sacrificare, is peterevenia^, to ask pardon and forgiveness, as Nonnius
writes.

Seruius. 24.
THere were two of yt name, one called Seruius Maurus honoratus, which was also
named Marius Sergius, he wrote commentaries In vtramque artem, Aelii Donati,
and commentaries upon Virgils works.

The other was named Seruius Sulpitius, very familiar and well-beloved of Marcus
Cicero, he wrote two books of edictes unto Brutus, he wrote also other works
unto other men.

Mysterium. 25.
MYsterium is a Greek word, it comes (...) and it signifies certain secret
holy things, which ought not to be revealed: we may call it in Latin Seclusum,
shut up. It was not lawful, but very heinous for any man, to reveal and open
the holy mysteries, unless he were one of the religious order. Therefore a
certain Poet was stricken blind, because he uttered and showed forth certain
mysteries

Eusebius libro secundo de preparatione Euangelica writes, that in the holy
feasts and places of the goddesses Isis and Seraphis, the image of Harpocrates
was set, which holding his finger upon his lips, did admonish that there should
be silence kept.

Chrisostomus. cap. 2. 1. ad Corinth, writes that Misterium is taken three
manner of ways. First (when of that thing which we see with our outward eyes)
we behold and judge an other thing to be meant and signified, as our Sacraments
are. The heathenish man, when he sees Baptism to be ministered, he beholds
only the water. But we seeing it, do consider remission of sins, washing of
the mind, regeneration of the soul, and such like matters.

Also in the Sacrament of the Lords table, the Heathen behold only bread and
wine, we consider and behold with the eyes of faith the body and blood of
Christ, which were given for us.

Secondly, a mystery is that, by the which is signified Paradoxa, and those
things which do come besides hope, and not looked for. In the which sense Paul
says: Ecce misterium dico vobis. Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not
all sleep, but we shall al be changed.

Again to the Romans he says: I will not have you brethren to be ignorant of
this mystery, that blindness is chaunsed unto Israel.

In like manner Esaias the Prophet faith: Secretu^ mihi, secretum mihi, Esaias. 24.
a secret to me, a secret to me, he speaks of the euersion and overthrow of
the people, which should come suddenly, and utterly oppress them.

Thirdly, that is called a mystery, which partly is known, and partly
unknown, and in this kind is the wisdom of the Christians set and reposed,
for now we see darkly, as it were in a glass, 1. Cor. 13.
but then in heaven we shall see clearly face to face. And by this it behooves
us Christians to be sturred to render thanks unto God, for that he would have
his mysteries after a sort to be known unto us, when they are concealed and
kept close from other.

Prophanum. 26.
PRophanum has many significations. First, it is that which is not holy.
Secondly, it signifies a temporal, unlearned, and layman. Thirdly, wicked and
ungodly.

The Etimologie of the word is this. Profanum dicitur quasi porro a fano, far
of from the church. Some deriuing this word out of the greek, think, it should
be rather written with (Ph.) then with (F) and the old authors did write Hanum,
for Fanum.

Paul. 27.
COncerning the name of Paul, diverse learned men have diverse judgments.
Saint Hierome thinks that he was called first Saulus, and afterward Paulus,
by converting one Sergius Paulus unto the faith, and received that name Paulus,
tanquam trophaeum, as a victory.

Other suppose, that he being a Pharesie, was called Saulus, but after his
conversion, was called Paulus, so that his religion being changed, he changed
his name.

Origin thinks that he had two names, and was called both Saul and Paul,
as many in the Bible were called by two names, as Levy and Matthew were the
names of one man, Idida and Solomon the names of one man. Unto Paul is applied
the prophecy and blessing that Jacob gave to Benjamin. In the morning he shall
eat his pray, and at evening he shall divide his spoil. For Paul in his
youth, before his conversion, as a ravening woolfe, persecuted and devoured the
faithful, but being made of Saul a Paul, he distributed the food of the
Gospel unto the world.

Of the time of the conversion of Paul, authors do vary, but the better and
auncie^ter sort, as Eusebius, Hieronimus, Euthalius, Diaconus, and other,
judge the conversion of Paul to be done, the year after Christ 34 and of
Tiberius the.19 year.

Euodius (whom Nicephorus does allege) does say that there were seven years
between the ascension of Christ, and the stoning of Steven, and that Paul was
converted.6. months after the death of Steven.

Clemens Alexandrinus writes, lib. 3. Stromatum, that Paul had a wife, whom
he called his faithful yokefellow.

Origin also has these words: Paulus ergo (sicut quidam tradunt) cum vxore
vocatus est, de qua dicit ad Philippenses scribens: Rogo te etia^ germana
compar, adiuua illas quae in euangelio decertaru^t mecum.

Paul therefore (as some write) was called with his wife, of whom he speaks,
writing to the Philippians: I beseech thee also faithful yokefellow, help
those women that labored with me in the Gospel.

Ignatius also in his sixth Epistle to Philadelphenses says: Non detraho
caeteris beatis, qui nuptiis copulati fuerunt, quorum nunc memini, opto enim
deo dignus ad vestigia eorum, in regno ipsius inueniri, sicut Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. sicut Isaias, and caeteri prophetae, sicut Petrus and Paulus, and
reliqui Apostoli, qui nuptiis fuerunt sociati.

Eusebius also lib. 3. cap. 30. makes mention of Paul's wife, alleging both
Ignatius and Clement.

Yet saint Ambrose does write that all the Apostles were married, Paul and John
only excepted.

Chrysostom likewise does dissent from them, which do think that Paul does
make mention of his wife in the Epistle to the Philippians, but he shows no
reason why he does dissent: but whether (I pray you) should we give credit to
Ambrose and Chrysostom, and other which were so long a space after Paul, or
else to Clement and Ignatius, the one being saint Peter his co^panio^, the other
being ye disciple of saint Mark? The stature of Paul is described of
Nicephorus: he had a little body, crouked, and somewhat bowing, asmal head, a
white face, bearing some age in it, his eyebrowes hanging downward, a long
nose, but comelye bowed, a thick and a long berd, and white hoar hears, as well
in his bush as in his berd.

At the last he was beheaded of the most filthy and cruel tirant Nero, the
same year and day that Peter was hanged on a cross, that is the.14. year of
the reign of Nero, which was after the death of Christ 37. year, as Hierome,
Eusebius, and other do write. But the author of the book of the life of
Paul, which is falsely ascribed unto one Abdias, does say that Paul was slain
two year after the death of Peter.

Of the cause of his death, the ancient writers make no record, unless it were
generally for the faith and confession of Jesus Christ. Yet Chrysostom Lib. 2.
Contra vituperatores vitae monasticae, writes after this manner. Paulus
pellicem Neronis (quam deperibat Nero, ac in deliciis habebat) cum ad fidem
inducens religionis sacramenta, suscipire simul etiam impurum congressum
declinare persuaserat, Nero Paulum corruptorem, nebulonem, and flagitiosum
hominem vocans, primum eum comecit in vincula. Deinde poposcit vt puellae
eiusmodi consilia monitaue dare, desineret, quod cum a Paulo impetrare non
poterat necait tandem virum sanctissimum.

That is: Paul alluring unto the faith a certain harlot, whom Nero did
inordinately love, and made very much of, did persuade her to receive the
sacrament of Christ's religion, and likewise to decline and leave the filthy
and fleshly copulation. Nero calling Paul a corrupter, a knave and a wicked
man, did first cast him into prison, and after that did require him to cease to
give any such counsel or perswacions unto the young woman, which thing when he
could not obtain of Paul, he caused that most holy man and apostle to be
slain.

Little ones. 28.
IN the.x. of Matthew Christ says: whosoever shall give to one of these little
ones, a cup of cold water, only in the name of a disciple, verily Isay unto
you, he shall not leese his reward. He calls here them little ones, not in
age, but those which are contemned and persecuted of the proud and arogant of
the world, and are counted vile, and are les esteemed.

Likewise in the.18. chap. Videte ne contemnatis vnum ex pusillis istis. Math.
18.
See that you despise not one of these little ones, which casting of the
hautines of the mind, not standing in their own conceyte, do put upon them
modesty, humility, and meekenes. Little ones also may be taken for the poor,
nedy and impotent persons, which patiently suffer adversity, and are disdeined
as abiectes, of the rich worldlinges.

Simple. 29.
SImple here is not taken for an idiot, or an ignorant man, but for sincere, or
poor, and a true dealing man, and one that is without subtiltye or guile, as
contrariwise, Duplex signifies him which is crafty and deceitful.

Simplex is called in the Hebrew tongue (thom) as in Genesis Jacob is called
(thom) that is, a simple and innocent man, not subtle nor crafty, and such are
called in the Greek (...) unto whom God does reveal his secrets. Math. xi.
Over whom also God has such care and regard, that he will grievously revenge,
if any do offend them. Math. xviij.

Math. 10.
Christ says: Estote simplices sicut columbae. Be innocent as Doves, that is,
not revenging wrong, much less doing wrong. The Doves although they be
fearful of nature, and in much danger of hurt, yet they do fly quietly and
simply, as though they were in no peril.

So does Christ exhort his disciples, to this simplicity, that to much fear
should not let nor hinder them from the course and runnyng of their profession.

Righteousness. 30.
THe name of righteousness is sometime general, and than it does signify all
piety and godliness, as it is written in an old verse.

Iusticia in sese virtutem continet omnem.
Justice in it self does truly contain,
All that to virtue does long and pertayne.
Prouer. 11.
Also in the Proverbs of Solomon, Iustitia rectorum liberauit eos. The
righteousness of the godly shall deliver them. To be short, Iustitia is nothing
else, but a general virtue, and an universal perfection, having in it no kind
of iniquity or sin. VVherof saint Hierome, writing ad Demetriadem, says:
Omnes virtutum species vno Iusticiae nomine continentur. And in this
signification, that which the Hebrews do call zadick, we call Iusticiam, that is
to say, an absolute goodness, a perfect integritye and soundnes, a full
observance of Gods laws. And he properlye is called a righteous and just man,
which observes equitye, and does avoid all kind of iniquity Therefore Christ
requiring justice and righteousness of his, desires nothing else but a sound,
sincere, and pure mind, observing the law, as well inwardly, as outwardly.

Saint Ambrose in his Hexameron writes: Vbi prudentia, ibi and malitia, vbi
fortitudo, ibi iracundia, sed vbi Iusticia, ibi concordia est ceterarum
uirtutum. Non enim per se pars est iusticia, sed quasi matter est omnium. That
is.

Where there is wisdom, there is sometime noughtines, where there is strength,
there is sometime anger, where righteousness is, there is the concord and
harmony of al virtues, for Justice is not a part by it self, but as it were
the mother of al virtues.

Secondly, it is taken specially for one of the four cardinal virtues, whereof
saint Ambrose writing in his first book De officiis says: Iusticia est quae
dat cuilibet, quod suum est, nihil vendicans alienum.

There be four cardinal virtues, wisdom, fortitude, temperaunce, and justice:
of all the which saint Austen writes in lib 14 de trinitate. ca. 9

Iusticia est in subueniundo miseris, prudentia in precaue^dis insidiis,
fortitudo, inperferendis molestiis, temperantia, in coercendis delectationibus
prauis.

That is to say: Justice does help and aid the weak, and them that be in
misery, wisdom does take heed before hand of disceit, or any other in
conuenience, fortitude does suffer strongly al griefs and hardness, temperaunce
does restrain wanton pleasures and lusts.

They be called cardinal virtues, because they be the chief of all other
virtues political, and in them does depend the whole life of an honest civil
man. And even as a door does hang upon an hook, called in latin Cardo, and
moves to and fro: so all the doings of a good, honest, politic man, must be
directed, moved and ordered by these four virtues cardinal, which are so
called of this word Cardo.

The other virtues called Virtutes theologicae, be three in number: that is,
faith, hope, and charity, and they differ from the cardinal virtues in sundry
points: for the theological virtues, do pertain to inward actions and
motions, the cardinal virtues pertain to externe and outward works and deeds.
The theological virtues tend unto God, the cardinal virtues unto our outward
neighbors and dealing. etc.

To end, Iustitia specially is as Cicero writes De legibus, obtemperatio
scriptis legibus institutisque populorum, that is: It is an obedience given to
laws written, and to the ordinances and decrees of the people, and concerning
this signification we have two notable examples, for the preserving of law and
equity. Valerius Maximus does record of one Seleucus, who did defend and
govern the city of the Locretians with most wholesome and profitable laws, of
the which this was one, that whosoever committed adultery, should by a statute
made by him, leese both his eyes. It so chanced that his own son was taken
first with the same fact and fault, and was condemned according to the law, to
sustain the pain that was inflicted to adulterers, but the whole city, for
honor of the father, requested Seleucus to remit the pain unto his son, but
he for a certain time gave them repulse. At the last Seleucus being overcome
with requests and desires of the people, caused one of his own eyes first to
be put out, and afterward one of his sons eyes, and so leaving the use of
sight unto them both, did according unto equity and prescription of the law,
take that due punishment which the law appointed to adulterers, and so, with a
goodly temperature, did show him self both to be a merciful father, and a
righteous judge.

The other examples, Nicephorus does rehearse of Traianus the emperor, who
governing the Roman Empire, was so studious of conseruing justice and good
order, that he did give, in the sight of all the Citizens, asword drawn to the
ruler of the city, saying after this manner. Cape ferrum hoc, and siquidem
recte imperium gessero, pro me, sin aliter, contra me hoc vtere. That is to
say. Take this weapon, if I govern the Empire well, use it for me, if I do
otherwise, use it against me.

Rudis. 31.
RVdis is properlye that which is unpolished, untrimmed, having no artficiall
form, as silver is before it be coined and signed. And as a book which is
not thoroughly nor sufficiently perfited: and by a translation, it is referred
to the mind, and so they be called Rudes, which have not yet beautified and
decked their minds with discipline, doctrine, and with experience and use of
things.

Rude is taken for raw or undressed, as Christ says in Mathewe. Nemo immittit
commissuram panni rudis, in vestimentum vetus. That is: No man peeceth an old
garment with a piece of raw cloth.

Erasmus in his annotacions, does call it in Greek (...), that is, that cloth
which is not yet tucked or fulled, but even clothe as it came from the weauer.

By this similitude Christ does signify, that it behooved him not, in the
beginning of the calling of his Disciples (being yet rude and raw) to lay heavy
and weighty matters, and not so necassary upon the^, as straight fasting and
prayers extraordinarily, which be works more spiritual, then may be at ye
first exacted of the^, which have but newly received religion.

Musculus writing upon the same place of Matthew does disagree and vary both
from Chrysostom and other new writers, which do expound the same place, as I
have said before, for he writes that Christ understood by the old garment and
the old bottels, the Phariseis, and the minds of John's disciples, rooted and
grounded in the traditions of their forfathers, and by the new cloth and new
wine, he understood ye doctrine of the new testament of christian liberty, and
of a sounder righteousness. And Musculus shows four probable reasons, which
moves him so to judge.

Christ does not here (says he) with this parable and similitude defend his
disciples (for that he had done before) but shows a reason, why John did not
commit this doctrine of liberty (as new wine) unto his disciples, not because
this new doctrine was evil, but for that it behooved him to have a regard and
respect of his disciples, being more infirm and weak, then unto who^ this new
and unaccustomed doctrine might as yet be exhibited and given, as though he
should say: That the disciples of Ihon, be not instituted unto this doctrine of
liberty as my disciples are, neither he is in the fault, nor yet this my
doctrine: but the disciples themselves, for they have been so much acustomed
and practiced in old traditions, that Ihon should have been counted to have done
no otherwise (if he had forthwith committed this doctrine unto them) then if
one should sow a piece of raw cloth into an old garment, or put new wine into
old bottels, for your minds may be compared unto the palate and taste of them
which always do use to drink old drink, and can drink no new.

This was spoken against the Phariseis, Scribes, and the disciples of John, and
not to be imputed to the disciples of Christ, neither yet to his doctrine, nor
unto Jesus himself.

By the old bottels, and by the old garment, I understand, not the disciples of
Christ, but of Ihon, and by the new wine, I understand, not the doctrine of
fastinges, but the doctrine of faith and Christian liberty. And so certain of
the fathers do understand this place, as saint Hierome and Hilarious.

Hierome says after this manner: Veteres vtres debemus intelligere Scribas and
Phariseos, plagula panni noui, et vinum nouum precepta euangelica sentienda
sunt, quae non possunt sustinere Iudei, ne mayor scissura fiat. Sermo igitur
euangelicus Apostolis potius quam Scribis and Phariseis est infundendus, qui
maiorum traditionibus deprauati synceri tatem preceptorum Christi non poterant
custodire. That is to say: We ought to understand by the old bottels, the
Scribes and the Phariseis. The piece of new clothe, and the new wine, are to be
understand the precepts and rules of the Gospel, which the Jews could not
sustain nor bear, least there should be a greater breach and rent. Therefore
the euangelical words and works are rather to be poured unto the Apostles,
then to the Scribes and Phariseis, which being corrupted with the tradition of
the Elders, could not observe and keep the sinceritye and pureness of the
precepts and rules of Christ.

Hilarious words be these. Vt autem intelligerent non posse sibi in veteribus
positis perfecta haec salut is sacramenta committi: comparationis exemplum
posuit, pa^num rudem veteri vestimento non assui. That is to say: That they
should understand these perfect sacraments of salvation could not be committed
unto them, being settled in old traditions, he puts an example of comparison,
which is, that raw clothe cannot be sowed into an old garment.

Erasmus in his Paraphrases, writes thus: John endeavored to put no other thing
to old bottels, then old wine, as fasting and such other like, which are far
distant from those things, which ought to be done of men, that preach the
Gospel: but I (says Christ) do not commit the sweet wine of my doctrine
unto any other thing, but unto new vessels, as though Christ should say: It is
no marvel though my doctrine do not please you: for how will you embrace it,
which have so long been accustomed to the traditions of your Elders? In so much
that you think to have life and health by them. And by this it comes to
pass, that you (not knowing the liberty of the children of God) are offended
in this, that I do not institute and teach my disciples the often observation
and keeping of fastinges.

Of this word Rudis, comes Erudio, which signifies to teach, and to make of
a rude person, a learned person, quasi ex ruditate detrahere aliquem, that is,
to draw one out of rudenes.

Rudis, being a substantine, signifies a rod, or a yard, which was given to
sword players, when they came to.lx. years old, in token that they were set at
liberty. It signifies also liberty, as Horace in his first epistle does use
it, saying: Spectatum satis et donatum iam rude, quaeris Mecenas iterum antiquo
me includere laudo? He calls here Donatu^ rude by a translation, to be
discharged of attendance, to be set at liberty.

Euangelium. 32.
EVangelium being a Greek word, does signify good and merry tidinges, and it
comes of (...) which signifies Bonum good, and of (...) nuntio, to show (as
you would say) a good message or glad tidinges. Therefore, that most wholesome
tidinges and message, which was brought unto us by Christ, the true messenger
of the father, we call properly Euangelium, because Christ, according to the
promises of the father, being made man, did pacify his wrath, did satisfy for
our sins, and purchased to us eternal life.

Euangelia, in the plural number betokens supplications and sacrifices,
which were wont to be offered and given for joyful and merye tidinges.

It signifies also the reward which is given to him that does bring the merry
message. So Homerus uses it in Odissea, and Cicero also saying. O suaues duas
epistolas quibus euangelia deberi fateor. O the two sweet and pleasant
epistles, to whom I confess to be due great rewards.

Euangelium generally betokens tidinges, that is pleasant and joyful to the
mind of him to whom they are showed, as if one being captive in prison, does
hear that he shall be set at liberty the next day, audit Euangelium, he
hears glad tidinges, and so like of other.

Oraculum. 33.
ORaculum is properly the answer which the Gods do give, and it is derived of
this word Oration, as Cicero witnesses in his Topices, saying: Oracula ex eo
ipso appellata su^t, quod inest his, deorum oration. That is: Oracles are called
of this, for that the communication and answer of the Gods, is in them.

We call properly Oraculum dei, the oracle of God, by the which god either by
inward inspiration, does comfort the mind of the godly, both in private or
public callamities, or else by the which God does partlye correct the
offenders, by the sending of his prophets, and specially does promise
prosperity to them which do repent.

Oraculum sometime does signify the church or place in the which the aunswers
are given, and so it is taken in Exodus, Exodus 25.
where God does say unto Moses: Duos quoque Cherubin aureos and productiles
facies, ex vtraque part oraculi. That is, thou shall make two cherubins of
gold, of work beaten out with a hammer, shall thou make them, at the two
ends of the mercy seat. In this place he calls Oraculu^ propitiatoriu^,
because through prayers, the oracles and aunswers of God are obtained, which
was herd from that place which was called Propitiatorium, as the Hebrew
Rabbines do declare, and as Lyra also does write upon the same place.

And here note, that this mercy seat was a table of gold, set over the Arc,
of the same measure that the Arc was of, upon the which table God did sit and
appear unto Moses, and talking with him, showed mercy upon the people. The
interpretour tourning the Hebrew word into the latin word propitiatorium, had
a regard unto the word, Chaphar, which does signify remouere iram, placare,
condonare peccatum, to put away anger, to pacefie, to pardon sin.

Thirdly, Oraculum does signify a short and a worthy sentence, as vnum illud
optimum oraculum est, pugnandum esse pro patria, that is, one oracle very good,
and worthy to be noted, we must fight for our country. Oracula loqui, is a
proverb which signifies to speak things most certain and undoubtful. And
upon this comme other proverbs, as Apolinis oraculum, Sibillae folium, ex
tripode dictum, which three proverbs do signify any thing to be as true, as
truth it self.

Tripartite. 34.
THere were three Greek authors, Theodoretus, Bishop of Cyrus, Sozomenus, and
Socrates, which all wrote ecclesiastical histories, almost at one time, the
which Epiphanius the scholeman translated into latin, out of the which
Cassiodorus a Senator and Moncke, made one continual history, which he called
Historiam tripartitam, that is, an history written of three, couched and driven
into one. They began their histories where Eusebius made an end, that is, from
the end of the Empire of Constantine the great, unto the time of Theodosius the
younger, containing the discourse of an hundred and fortye years.

After these succeeded Theodorus, which in two books touched those things
which were done from the time of Theodocius the younger, unto the time of
Anastasius.

Eusebius wrote.xv. books, Socrates wrote seven, Theodoretus wrote v. Sozomenus
wrote nine, and Theodorus two. Euagrius scholasticus wrote also.vi. books,
from the Empire of Theodosius the younger, not only ecclesiastical histories,
but also stories of Empires and kingdoms, unto the.xij. year of the Emperor
Maurice, so that all the histories from Christ our savior, unto the time of
Maurice the Emperor, written by Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus,
Theodorus, and Euagrius, comprehended in.xliij books, do contain the gestes
and doings of things, by the space of 590. years.

Constantinus. 35.
COnstantinus the great was the son of one Constantius a duke of Rome, which
was sent into Britain to recover the tribute that was due. After whose
ariuall, Coill which was the king of Britain died, and the Britains to have
more surety of peace, wylled the duke to take to wife Helena, the daughter of
king Coil, which was a wonderful fair maiden, and therewith well learned. This
Constantius when he had recovered the tribute, returned with his wife Helena to
Rome, as chief governor of Britain, and at the last died at York Yet Julius
Firmicus does record, that Constantine was borne of Helena, being a concubine,
and begotten at Tharsus. Eutropius says that Constantine was borne in
Britain, in an obscure and base matrimonye, of his mother Helena, whom saint
Ambrose in his funeral oration of the death of Theodotius, does call
Stabulariam, that is a woman which kept a vitailing house for wayfaring men.

This Constantine became a noble and valiant Prince, and so mighty in martial
prowess, that he was surnamed the great Constantine. He was first an
idolatrour, and by the impulsion of his wife Fausta, did sacrifice unto idols.
But after he had vanquished Maxentius, he utterly renounced the worshipping of
idols, and became a christian man. But he deferred his baptism until his old
age, because he purposed to take a viage into Persia, and was resolved in him
self to be baptized as he went, in the flood Iordane. In wytnes of his
belief, he caused a book of the Gospels to be carried before him, and made the
Bible to be copied out, and sent into all parts of his Empire.

Some write that, as he went with his army against Maxentius, in his journey he
saw the sign of the cross in the element, shining like fire, and he heard an
angel saying: Constantine (...). Id est: In hoc vince, in this sign overcome
thou, wherewith he being greatly comforted, shortly after vanquished the army of
Maxentius, who flying out of the battle, was drowned in Tiber. He was
Emperor, as Eutropius writes.xxx. years, and as Pomponius Laetus
writes.xxxij. years lacking two months.

He was baptized of Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia, and shortly after ended his
life in the same city, and was buried at Constantinople.

Notwithstanding Iacobus Philippus in supplemento Cronicorum, that Constantine
was christened of Pope Siluester the first. He writes also, that for the great
slaughter of Martirs, and for the tormenting of people innumerable through his
provinces, God stroke him with a kind of leprosy, the which could not be cured
nor helped by his phisicions, nor any other learned men, but the Priests of
the Capitol of Rome, gave this counsel, yt a certain pond should be filled
with the blood of young children, and the emperor to wash and has himself in
it being hot, and so should recover his health. But that this is nothing else but
a fable, not only Valla and Platina, but also Eusebius, Eutropius, Socrates,
Theodoritus, Sozomenus, Hieronimus, Ruffinus, Crosius, and other do
sufficiently testify. For all these, writing most copiouslye, amply, and
largely of his life, do make no mention of this leprosy: but certain late
writers do rehearse it out of an Apocriphall book, written of things done by
Siluester. Also how true it is that Helena after she had found the cross, did
build a temple there in that place, and from thence went to Constantinople unto
her son, and brought with her the. 3. nails wherewith Christ was crucified,
of the which, Constantine put one in his horse bridle, which he used only in
Battle, and did set the second in his helmet, and threw the third into the sea
called Mare Adriaticum, to appease the tempestuous rages of the sea. How true I
say these things be, I refer to learned men's judgments. I for my part
count them fabulas aniles.

Yet I am not ignorant, that saint Ambrose writes almost the like in his
funeral oration, of the death of Theodotius the Emperor. But Erasmus writes
that the orations, the Epistles, and sermons which are contained in the third
tome, be foreged and fained in S. Ambrose name, and that in them there is
nothing of saint Ambrose vein or phrase.

Again, that Constantine was baptized at Rome, of Siluester, it is a very lie.
For Eusebius. lib. 4. of the life of Constantine, does affirm that he was
christened a little before his death, in an assemblye of Bishops, at
Nicomedia, of one Eusebius, bishop of that place. And saint Hierome declares
no less in his cronicle, and says, that this was done in the three score and
fifth year of his age, and the.xxxi. year of his Empire, when Siluester was
dead almost five years before, as Ruffinus, Theodoretus, and other do record
in their histories.

Isidorus in his cronicle does write, that Constantine was rebaptized of
Eusebius, being an Arrian: but Socrates and other more ancient and better
approved authors, do affirm him to have been baptized, but never rebaptised.
And the Arimine counsel, in their letters to Constantius does testify, that
Constantine embracing the true faith of the Nicen counsel, and being baptized,
departed from this present life.

I omit here the saying of Gracianus, who writes that Melchiades baptized
Constantine, when Melchiades was before Siluester his time, and Constantine was
baptized after the death of them both.

I omit also Nicephorum, who affirmed that the Arrians through a devilish
mind, did feign that Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia, and he judges
that he was baptized at Rome of Siluester, and that Constantine made at Rome
Baptisteriu^, that is, a Font, or a place to christian in. But how frivolous
these things be, he that is conversant in the ancient authors, may easily
judge.

De donatione Constantini.
THose things which are written of the donation of Constantine, to be both
feined and foolish, who will or can doubt? or that he with all his nobility
and the whole senate, and all the Peers of the City, and all the people of
the Roman empire, should give unto Siluester all his imperial estate and
honor, should give also the City of Rome and al Italy, and ye three parts of
France, ye two parts of Spain, Germany, Britain and all other places and
Cities, is most discrepant and far from the truth. For the senate of Rome and
the greatest part of ye people of Rome, were most strange from the Christian
religion, not only in the time of Constantine, but also in the reign of
Valentinian, which reigned almost xl. year after Constantine. And therefore if
he would have granted this donation unto Siluester, neither his own sons,
neither his friends, neither his kinsfolk, nor the senate of Rome, would have
suffered him so to do: yea his faith and his own conscience would not have led
him to the same, for being learned in the holy scriptures, he did know that a
Magistrate was the ordinance of God, and that the offices of the Ministers of
the Church, and of the te^porall Magistrate, were two distinct things, and that
they ought not to be confounded and mingled, as he him self was wont to say,
as Eusebius writes: Deu^ sacerdotibus commisisse internam Ecclesiae cura^,
sibi vero externa^, that is to sai, God did commit the inward cure of the
Church unto Priests, and the outward cure unto him.

On ye other side, if ye consider Siluester to have been a true and a godly
Pastor of ye Church, as many were in those days, will you judge yt he would
have suffered Constantine to have given him those things, the use whereof was
forbidden of Christ? for he knew well enough that saying of Christ, Principes
ge^tium dominantur eis, vos autem non sic. Luce 22.
The princes of the gentiles bear rule over the^, which you shall not do.
Again: Date Caesari, quae sunt Cesaris, give that to Caesar, which belongs
to Caesar.

Do you believe, that Peter the Apostle would have received the secular power
with the Empire, if the Emperor Nero had offered it him? no truly. Before Peter
received the holy ghost, he being disceaued with other of the Jews, did
imagine, that the kingdom of Christ should be a terrestrial kingdom, but
after he had received ye holy ghost, he understood, the kingdom and seat of
Christ not to be set in earth, but in heaven, and that his kingdom was not of
this world. He knew, that Christ did flee into the deserte, when the people
went about to make him king. He knew how Elizeus did refuse the donation and
offer of Naman the prince, and how that Geezi his servant, for requiring and
receiving the same, was stricken with a foul leoprie. Peter would not take upon
him the cure and care over the poor, least he should be hindered both to pray
and preach as often as he should. As the act of the Apostles does testify.
And I beseech you, is it like then, that Peter would cast of his Apostleship,
and receive upon him the government of the whole world? He denies that one man
can conveniently Minister the word, and also Minister to the tables. And what
Pope can they give us, which had a better and a more ample spirit, then Peter
had, which could perform that thing which Peter could not? Therefore they be
but toys and trifles, which are written of the donation of Constantine.

Constantine was more sound in religion, the^ to purpose such a grant, which
he knew to repugne utterly against the doctrine of Christ. Siluester also was
more sound, then to receive such agraunt, which he understood that he could
not without the subversion and overthrowing of the word. But if Constantine had
granted it, and Siluester had received it, they had hoth offended against the
word of God.

Obiectio.
Lib. 1. ca. 2.
Ruffinus writes, that Constantine said unto the Bishop after this manner. Deus
(inquit) vos co^stituit sacerdotes, and potestatem vobis dedit, de nobis quoque
iudicandi, and ideo nos a vobis recte iudicamur. Vos au te^ non potestis ab
hominibus iudicari. Propter quod dei solius inter vos expectate iudicium, and
vestra iurgia quaecunque sunt, ad illud diuinum reseruentur examen. Vos etenim
nobis a deo dati estis dii, and conueniens no^ est vt homo iudicet deos, sed
ille solus de quo scriptum est Deus stetit in sinagoga deorum, in medio aute^
deos discernit. Et ideo hiis omissis, illa quae ad fidem dei pertinent, absque
vlla animoru^ conte^tione distinguite, that is to say.

God has made you priests, and has given you power to judge of us, and
therefore we are rightly judged of you, you cannot be judged of men. Therefore
among your selves look for the judgment of the only one god, and let al your
contentions be reserved to the examination and judgment of God, for you are
given as gods unto us of God, and it is vnconuenie^t that man do judge Gods.
But he only of whom it is written. God stands in the assembly of Gods, he
judges among Gods, and therefore omitting these things, discern you those
things which perteine to the faith of God, without contention of minds.
Behold says our adversaries here is the testimony of a christen Emperor, by
the which it may be proved that the Bishop of Rome has power and authority to
judge all Emperors, and he to be judged of none, but of God.

Responsio.
I answer that in these words of Constantine, there is no mention made of
the Bishop of Rome, but he speaks generally of litigious and contentious
Bishops, which accused each other before the Emperors majesty, and those
things which the prudent and christen Emperor did answer unto them, he
spoke for the cause of reconciliation among them selves, not thincking of the
preeminence of the Bishop of Rome.

Secondly he did not send those Bishops unto the seat and jurisdiction of the
Pope, for he said not, you have the Bishop of Rome Christ's vicar, and Peter's
successor, bring the causes of your conte^tion to be judged of him, but he
said, let your strifes be reserved to the trial of God only, look for his
judgment. And by these words it appears that he thought not that the Bishop
of Rome should have any jurisdiction over the other Bishops.

Thirdly, the Bishops themselves did not thinck the judgment of their causes
to pertain to the examination of the Bishops of Rome, but they judged the
power and jurisdiction of the Emperor, to be most auctenticall over them, and
therefore they brought their causes unto him.

Fourthly, it does manifestly appear out of the histories, that the Emperor
did exercise power and authority over ye Bishops, as other Emperors did,
which succeeded him. He did not only judge of every one of them, if they had
offended, but also did use his power over all that were subject unto his
Empire, compelling them by his edict and commandment to come to the general
counsel, prescribyng unto them both time and place.

When the fathers were assembled at Tirus, they did declare unto Constantine
the names of them which were absent, whom they desired to be present and so he
wrote to the^ that they should come to the counsel, and should adioyne their
care and study with the other in the said counsel: he commanded also his
Ambassador, yt he should put to exile and banishment, all them which did
either refuse to come, or else did little esteem the commandment of the
counsel.

Also when the said Constantine understood, that Athanasius was wrongfully
condemned in the counsel holden at Tirus, he sent unto the^ severe and sharp
letters, in the which he commands all those fathers to come unto him to
Constantinople, and there to declare before him, how purely and truly they had
judged: and does openly object unto the^, that they went about nothing else, but
those things which did tend to dissension, debate, hatred, and the subversion
of mankind.

Athanasius also himself being condemned at Tirus, did flee unto Constantine.
Saint Austen also writes, that Donatus being condemned in the counsel
Arelatine, did appeal unto Constantine: which hearing both the parties, did
justify and pronounce Cecilianus to be innocent.

Eusebius does testify, that Constantine did confirm the definitions of the
Bishops concluded in the counsels, and did command the rulers of the people,
that none should infring nor break those things which were decreed of the
Bishops. Also he embraced the decrees of the Nicene counsel, and did protest,
that he would banish all those which would not subscribe unto the^: which also
he did, for he sent Arrius with a.xi. of his fellows into exile, and
commanded the books of Arrius to be burnt. And if any man had been taken to
have kept the^ either privately or apertly, he commanded him to be put to death.

By these examples ye may see, that Constantine did not give over his
authority and power unto the Bishops, but did both intermeddle with spiritual
matters to rule and judge bishops, yea and call general counsels: and not only
he, but also his successors did call by their authority and power, Bishops and
fathers unto counsels.

Leo the Pope, first of that name, with his whole sinode gathered at Rome, most
humbly desired the Emperor Theodosius, that he would command a general
counsel to be celebrated and kept in Italy. And yet the prouide^t Emperor
did not appoint the counsel, in Italy, where there was no contention risen,
but in Grecia in the City called Sedon.

S. Hierome also Ad Eustochiu^, in the Epitaph of her mother Paulae, writes
after this manner. Cu^que orientis and occidentis Episcopos ob quasdam
Ecclesiarum dissentiones, Romam Imperiales literae contraxissent, that is to
say. When the Emperors letters had gathered together the Bishops as well of
the East as of the VVeast.

Also in the Epistle of Pope Agatho, sent to the Emperor, by whose
commandment the sixth counsel was called and gathered together, ye may read
after this manner: Ideoque Christianissimi dn^i, secundu^ prissima^ missionem
ma^suetudinis vestrae, pro obedientia qua^ debemus presents famulos nostros
misimus, yt is to say. Therefore O most Christian sons of ye Lord, according
to ye most godly commandment of your ge^tlenes, and for the obedience which
we do owe, we have sent our present servants.

Note here (good reader) this clause, Pro obedientia qua^ debemus for ye
obedience which we do owe, will the Pope acknowledge ye like obedience unto the
emperors majesty? will he acknowledge the jurisdiction and power of emperors
to be over Bishops? no, no, his Antichristian pride will not suffer him.

Which of all ye Bishops of Rome did govern the Apostolic Church with a
greater care and diligence, then Gregory the great? and yet he writing Ad
Theodorum the Physician, says of the Emperor Mauricius, as follows: Valde
autem mihi durum videtur, vt ab eius seruitio milites suos prohibear, qui ei
and omnia tribuit, and dominare eum no^ solum militibus, sed and sacerdotibus
concessit, that is to say: it seems a very hard thing, that he should forbid
his soldiers from his homage and service, which has both given to him all
things, and also has granted him to have dominion and rule, not only over
the soldiers, but also over the Priests. Again in the end of the Epistle
which he wrote to the Emperor himself, he says thus: Que debui, exolui, qui
and imperatori obedientiam prebui, et pro deo, quod sensi minime tacui, that
is: I paid those things that I ought, which have given both mine obedience to
the Emperors, and also have not hold my peace in Gods cause, but spoke yt
which I thought. Do you not here see that this Gregory being Pope, did not
only obey the Emperor, but also did acknowledge that he ought to show
obedience unto him, And will his successors and ye clergy of ye inferior sort,
pluck their necks out of the yoke of obedience, which by Gods law is due unto
Magistrates, but ye may see, to what disorder pride and ambition has driven
the Bishops of Rome.

One Augustinus Stenchus, is not ashamed to write, that the Bishop of Rome was
called a God, and coumpted for a God, and says, that this was done when the
Emperor did beautify him with a noble title, worshipped him as God, and as
the successor of Christ and Peter, and gave him godly honor, and did reverence
him, as the lively image of Christ. This writes the same Stenchus sexione.
Lib. 67.

O intolerable blasphemy, O unspeakable knauerie, O most sacrilegious and
deuilish flattery, clean repugnant to the most sacred and holy word of God.
What did Peter I pray you, when Cornelius did fall down, and would have
worshipped him? did he not lift him up and say, Surge, Act. 10.
and ego ipse homo sum. Arise, I my self also am a man. Act. 12.
What did the angel say unto John, when he fell down at the angels feet,
to worship him? did he not say, Vide ne feceris, conseruus enim tuus sum, and
fratru^ tuoru^ Prophetaru^. Take heed thou do it not, for I am thy fellow
servant and of thy brothers ye Prophets. And will the Pope be better then
Peter? hollier then John? well he may take an example of Herodes Agrippa, which
gave ear unto the flattering voices of the people, which cried, Vox dei non
hominis. It is the voice of God, and not of man. Act. 12.
He did not stay the people, but took a glory in their words, and therefore
was stricken of the angel, and like a wretch did rot, being eaten of Lice. It
behooves us to know, that Christ the son of god does reign yet in his
Church, as chief head and ruler, unto whom only and alone, all glory and power
is given: and not to think, that he did substitute any man, in whom he would
be worshipped, for Christ only ought they to worship, honor, and to pray unto.
And as for the Pope and all his sacrilegious flatterers, we ought to detest and
abhor as the very Antichrist. To conclude, some writers do record, that when
Constantine gave riches and honor unto the Church, there was a voice heard,
which said, Iam venenum irrepsit in ecclesiam, now is poison crepte into the
Church, he that will know more of the life of Constantine, let him read the v.
books of Eusebius Cesariensis, which he purposly wrote of the same.

Of this man Constantine, the kings of Brittanie had first the privilege to
wear close Crowns.

Pharisees. 36.
THere were three sects or factions among the Jews, ye Pharisees, the
Saduces, and the Esseens.

It appears out of Josephus, that these sects began the years before
Christ. 125.

Pharisei, the Pharisees received their name of this Hebrew word Phares, that
is separation or division, because they would be distinct, and differ from
other profane men.

Or else (as some other write) they are called, Pharisei, of this Hebrew word
Pharasch, Pharasch.
which betokens an interpretacion, gloss, or exposition: As you would say,
expounders and interpreters of the books of Scriptures, which they did chiefly
profess, they were called Doctors and teachers, Mat. 23.
they sat in the chair of Moses: that is, they taught the law of Moses, and
did expound the books of the old Testament. Although they believed In genere,
certain chief points of doctrine, as God to be but one God, and Messiah to
come, and to bring great benefits with him, and the souls after the death of
the bodies to be immortal, yet had they certain horrible spots, and profane
and wicked opinions in many articles of the heavenly doctrine. They were most
cruel and bitter enemies unto Christ and his disciples: And (as Hierome says)
they consented to the death of John the Baptist. They were proud, bosting in
their own works, Mat. 23.
desiring honor and chief rowmes in the feasts and sinagoges: they were
ambitious, desiring to be saluted in the market, and to be called of men Rabbi,
they were covetous, deuouryng widows houses under the pretense of long prayer:
They were mighty and much regarded of the people. Josephus writes in the book
of his antiquities. Phariseos apud Iudeos plurimu^ posse, sieve exosum alique^
cupiu^t ledere, sieve amicu^ iuuare, that is, that the Pharisees could do much
among the Jews, whether they would hurt any man whom they hated, or whether
they would help any man whom they loved. They were superstitious, observing
little things, Mat. 7.
and omitting things weighty. And when they came from the market they would not
eat before they had washed: They were hypocrites, and therefore Christ likened
them to painted sepulchers. They did wear long garments, Mat. 23.
and made the hemmes of them broader then other did: They did make broad
phylactaries, which Epiphanius does say, to have been purple: but Erasmus in
his annotatio^s does call them scroles of parchement, in the which the
commandments were written, and says, that Phylacterium, is a Greek word,
and signifies in Latin, (...).
Conseruatoriu^, because the memory of the law is conserved in them. For the
Pharisees, because they would be seen to be good obseruers of the law, did
write the ten commandments in two pieces of parchement, the one, containing
the first table, they put on their foreheads in stead of a crown: The other
containing the second table, they put upon their arm, that whithersoeuer they
moved their head, or did reach forth their hand, the law should be in sight
before their eyes. They took the occasion of this superstition out of the
sixth of Deutronomie, where God says: Ligabis ea quasi signum in manu tua,
Deuteronomy. 6.
eruntque and mouebuntur inter oculos tuos: that is, thou shall bind the^ as a
token in thy hand, and they shall be moved between thine eyes, partly out of
the.xv. chapter of Numeri where God speaks after this manner: Number. 15.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and thou shall say unto them, that they
make to them hemmes in the four borders of their garments, and put upon the
hemmes of the borders a ribande of blewe silk: that when they look upon them,
they may remember all the commandments of the Lord.

Upon this, these hypocrites, huntyng after popular praise, and sekyng lucre
and gaynes of sely women, did make to them selves great hemmes, and did tie
sharp thorns in them, that they should be pricked with them, both when they
did walk and sit, least they should be counted at any time to forget the law.

Saducaei.
The Saduces did set this name to themselves of this Hebrew word Zedec, Zedec.
righteousness, and so called them selves Zadichim, just and right: Zadichim.
when notwithstanding they were the most wicked of all other. This sect began,
by reason yt the Pharisees did onerate and burden without measure, ye people with
over many rites and ceremonies. Therefore they willing to lose these bounds,
did swerve and dissent from ye Pharisees. They had many corrupt and Epicurial
opinions, which they drew out of Philosophy, and mingled the^ with religion.
They were enemies unto Christ, unto John the Baptist, and unto Christ's
disciples, and did assault the^ with their craft and subtle disputations, as
it appears in the.xxii. of Matthew, Mat. 22.
And the xx. of Luke, demanding which of the seven brethren should have yt one
woman to wife after ye resurrection. They held that both body and soul
perished together, and yt neither the godly should receive, any reward, for his
good works, neither the wicked should receive any pain for his ill deeds,
otherwise the^ in this life. They held, yt there was neither hell nor heaven,
neither angel nor spirit, and that it was in our power to be the authors
unto our selves, either of felicity or else of misery.

They were great enemies to the Pharisees, yet against Christ they agreed
together as one.

The sect of the Saduces was most deuelish, and directly contrary to the
confession of our doctrine, and to the true invocation of Gods name.

Essaei.
Essaei, or as soon call them Essaeni, were the third sect among the Jews,
and they be called Essaeni quasi operatores, workers, for they would be
coumpted doers of the law, and not only teachers or dissemblers. The
original of this faction began of this, because they saw in the Pharisees
nothing but hypocrisy, fained holiness, envy, desire to bear rule, and other
things. Which were discrepant from true godliness, they swarued from them.
They did also abhor the gross and profane Epicurisime of the Saduces.
Therefore that thing which they desired and saw to want, both in the
Pharisees and the Saduces, they endeavored to perform and declare in works.
And that they might the better bring to pass the thing which they did
attempt, they went into the uttermost cost of Jury, to a certain lake, named
Asphaltites, not far from Ierico, where there were most fragrant and sweet
orchardes of baulme, as Pliny writes of them: Josephus De bello Iudaico,
writes thus of them as follows.

The Essens be Jews by nation, and be joined together with most dear and
mutual love, which above all other do shun, and fly all pleasures as most
pestiferous and wicked. They coumpte it the greatest virtue to keep
contine^cie. Therefore they do loath marriage. They take not withstanding other
men's children, and bring them up in learning, and do institute them most
diligently in their manners and trade of life. They do not loath matrimony, for
yt they judge yt the succession of mankind should be destroyed, but because they
thinck the intemperancie of women should be avoided, believing that none of them
do keep true faith unto one man. They be also contemners of riches, so that one
of them is not richer then an other, but have all things in common. They never
change their apparel nor their shows, except they be rent or torn, or else
by long time consumed and worn. Toward god they be very religious: for they
speak no worldly thing before the rising of the sun, but they offer certain
vows to it, as if they prayed that the sun should rise. After that, they go
every one unto their work and business, and after they have wrought to the
fifth hour, they congregate them selves together again. And then being girte
with linen clothes, wash their bodies with cold water. And being so purified,
they came into their supping, or dining chamber, and when every man is set
with silence, the baker does set a lose to every one in order, and the cook
in likewise does give to every one a dishe of potage. And before they eat, the
Priest does call upon God with his prayer, and likewise when diner is done,
does render thanckes, and then they put of those holy vestementes, and go
again to work unto the euenyng. When they dispute, they come together, no
less then a hundred, and whatsoever is decreed of them, stands immouable,
and not to be changed. If any man blaspheme God, they condemn him to death.
To spit before them, or on the right side of the^, they do greatly abhor. On
the Saboth day, they be very scrupulous and superstitious to do any manner of
work, in so much that they will not kyndle the fire that day, nor carry any
vessel, no nor go to the stool to ease the^ selves. In other days, they
dig a pit of a foot deep, and covering themselves with a long garment, do
ease themselves in the same pit. And when they have done, cover it again with
the same earth, and this thing among them is counted very solemn. Their
opinion is, that the bodies be corruptible, and the matter of them is not
perpetual, but they believe the souls to be immortal, and do say, that the
good souls shall live beyond the Occean sea, where they shall have their
fruition and pleasure. For they think, that that region is not subject to
heat, cold, showers, or tempests, but very pleasant and delectable. The ill
souls shall be sent (say they) to tempestuous and cold places, full of
mournyng and pain without end. These words and many other, does Josephus
write of this sect in the same place, and likewise in hiis antiquities.

Monachus. 37.
Chrysostom writing upon the Epistle sent to the Hebrews, does testify that
in the time of the Apostles, there was not one step, or jot of Moncke or
Monckerie.

Also two hundredth years after Christ there is no mention made by any worthy
writer of Monckerie: saving that the Decretal Epistles of ye Bishops of Rome,
do give certain co^iectures, of the Decrees of Virgins to be consecrated. But
of what authority and force those Epistles be, a certain Moncke named
Calthesen, does give judgment, whoses words be these: Nunc meo iudicio illa
de Constantini Donatione Apocripha sunt. Sed fortassis quaeda^ alia longa and
magna scripta, sancto Cleme^ti and sa^cto Anacleto, su^t attributa, su^mis
po^tificibus: in quibus vole^tes Roma na^ sede^ oi^ laud dignissima^, plus
qua^ expedit exaltare, se penitus fundarunt cum tamen omnino non videantur
illorum sanctorum Epistolae, co^sideratis contentis in iis. Scribitur enim in
Epistolis Clementis, quo modo Papa, fuerit and Petri successor, and post Petri
mortem ad sanctu^ Iacobum has fingit scriptor mississe Epistolas, qui fuit
frater domini and Hierosolimorum Episcopus: Et est tamen hoc omnino falsum cum
sit manifestum, prius Petro Iacobum octo annis finiuisse martyrio vitam.
Scribit quoque ipsum Clementem successorem fuisse Petri, sed hoc idem in aliis
quae sancto Anacleto adscribuntur, legitur. Sed si hoc esset verum, quomodo
sancti viri Hieronimus, Augustinus, Optatus, Mileuitanus, and ceteri, qui
omnium pontificum Romanorum catalogum posuerunt, hoc ignorassent, vel saltem
no^ immediate post Petrum ponunt, si ipsas Epistolas ad tunc vidissent, aut pro
auctenticis habuissent? Inuenitur insuper in ipsis Epistolis de Episcoporum a
sacerdotibus differentia, quae tamen longo tempore post Clemente^ hunc, (vt
Hieronimo placet, and Damaso) in Ecclesia orta est: hactenus Calthesen, that is
to say. By my judgment, those things which are written of the donation of
Contine, are Apocriphall, yea and perchance certain other long and great
written works, which are attributed unto Saint Clement, and Anaclete, being
the high Bishops, in the which they do utterly ground them selves, willing to
exalte the sea of Rome, worthy of all praise more than is expedient.

When notwithstanding these Epistles do not seem to be the Epistles of those
holy men, if the contents and circumstances of them be duly considered, for
it is written in the Epistles of Clement, how he was Pope, and the successor
of Peter, and that he sent these Epistles after the death of Peter, to saint
James, which was called the brother of the Lord, and was Bishop of Jerusalem,
but this is utterly false, for it is manifest, that James finished his life
with martyrdom eight years before Peter. He writes also, that Clement was
the successor of Peter, but this is red also in other things, which are
ascribed unto Anaclete. But if this should be true, how do these holy me^,
Hierome, Austen, Optatus, Mileuitanus and other which do write the cataloge
and order of all the Bishops of Rome, not know this? Which do not set in
Clement, or at the least, do not put him immediately after Peter, if they had
then either seen the Epistles, or counted them auctentycall. Furthermore there
is found in the same Epistles, the difference of Bishops from Priests,
which notwithstanding began long after in the Church after Clement, as it
pleases Hierome and Damasus.

There is also the authority of most ancient and great learned writers,
which do declare, that these Bishops of Rome should not be the authors of
these Epistles. For neither Hierome, nor Damasus, nor Eusebius, nor the sixte
counsel of Carthage, do make any mention of the Epistles, nor ye shall find
these Epistles to be cited of any author worthy credit, unto the time of
Carolus Magnus. And it is not unlike to be true, that about that time, when the
West Churches did ask and seek books out of the Library of Rome, that
these Epistles were feyned, forged, and dispersed abroad by the fraud and
craft of ye Bishops of Rome, which then did affecte Empire and rule, not only
over all Churches, but also above kings and princes of the earth.

But to (come to our purpose again) Monckerie began about the beginning of the
four hundred years after Christ, and that in Egypt, where Antonius, Macarius,
Panubus and Paulus, flourished in that kind of life, and likewise in other
places of the world, as Sozomenus does testify. And truly it is marvel, when
that age had so great learned men, that they did not only approve, but also
institute and ordeine those kinds of life, which were not institute, nor
ordained of God. Sozomenus does record, that there were two kinds of Monckes:
the one, which lived in the wilderness: the other, which lived in cities, but
yet separate from the company of other men. The manner of a monastical life,
Basilius does rehearse, and show, In sermon Ascetico, out of the which it
appears, that they which professed Monckerie, did first give all their
goods, before they went into the monastery: his words be these. Oportet
monachum ante omnia id vitae genus amplecti, vt nihil possideat, corpus habeat
quietum, and habitum honestum, vocem moderatam, and sermonem been dispositum,
cibum ac potum sumere tranquille, ac cum sile^tio, apud seniores tacere, that
is to say:

It behooves a Moncke above all things, to embrace that kind of life, that he
possess nothing, that he have a quiet body, an honest habit, a moderate
voice, communication well disposed and ordered, that he take his meat and
drink quietly and with silence, that among his Seniors and elders, he hold
his peace. But of what holiness, poverty, chastity and obedience our monckes
of late time have been, it is horrible to speak. And because their hypocrisy,
superstition and abominable kind of life, is known to all the world, I will
speak no more of them.

Biblion. 38.
blos signifies properly Papyru^, which is a great rush, which groeth in the
fennes and marish ground in Egypt and Syria, ten cubits in height, whereof the
first Paper was made, whereon me^ did write. It betokenneth also a book, whereof
we call the book containing the holy Scriptures, Biblion, or sacra Biblia in
the plural number, and not Biblia in the singular number.

Note that in old time, men did write in the leafes of Palm trees, whereof we
call the leafes of books Folia, which be called also in the Greek (...).
After that they wrote in the rindes of certain trees, which are called Libri,
and therefore our books be named Libri, and by a diminitiue Libelli. They be
called also Codices, of this word Codex, or Caudex, which is ye lower part of
the tree next the root, from the which the rind is drawn. After that,
public and common works were written in volumes of lead, and private works,
were written in clay, and after in wax: for the use of tables to write in,
were before the battle of Troy.

But after the victory of Alexander the great (when the city Alexandria was
builded in Egypt) Paper was invented of king Alexander (as Varro testifies)
which was made of the calls, that grew in the fennes of Egypt.

It is called Charta, of the name of a city of Tire named Charta, from whence
Dido came, and therefore she called the city which she builded afterward
Carthagine^, of the name of the city Charta, from which she came.

Parcheme^t was invented (as Varro writes) after yt Paper was found out by
Alexander, to the use of the libraries of Ptolomie and Emmenes, kings of
Pergamus, and therefore it is called in Latin Pergamena.

It is called also Membrana a membroru^ tectu, that is of coueryng the members,
that is, of the skin, which covers the body, of which skin the Perchement
is made.

Colossis. 39.
COlossae or Colossis, was (as Strabo writes) Lib. 12. a town of Phrigia,
adjoining to Laodicea, which as Orosius, testifies with Laodicea and
Hierapolis, was destroyed, and fell down by an earthquake in the time of Nero
the Emperor.

The inahbitants of this city Colossis, were institute and converted to ye
faith of Christ by one Archippus and one Epaphras. Archippus was Paul's
disciple. Epaphras was borne in ye town Colossis, who afterward was captive
with Paul at Rome: he was supposed to be one of ye.70. disciples.

But the Colossians were auerted from the sincerity of the Gospel by false
Apostles, who persuaded them, that Christ was not come, nor yet should come at
all, but that angels were the auctors of our salvation, beside that, they
preached unto them both Judicial and Philosophical superstitions. Against
those false Apostles, Paul strengthnyng and confirming the Colossians, does
send unto them an Epistle, in the which he shows and proves the one only
Christ, being above al angels, to be ye auctor of our salvation, And defe^ding
his own authority, does admonish them to beware of the false visions,
revelations and doctrines of the false Apostles. And finally does exhort them
to avoid al il things, and to follow good things, and does admonish also every
age of their state, condition, and calling.

Although it seem impertinent to be set among these Miscellanes, yet for the
nerenes of the words Colosse and Colossi, I will not leave untouched what
Colossi be, neither will I omit the nature of the proverb that sprung of them,
nor the discourse of the seven wonders of the world, of the number of whom
Colossi is one. The.vij. wonders be these yt follow.

1. Colossi.
Colossi were images of horrible greatness, like to towers. One of Apollo in the
capital at Rome, was.xxx cubits. Also one made at Tarrentum by Lysippus,
was.xl. cubits hie. But at Rhodes one of the Sun exceeding al other was in
height.lxx. cubits, made by Colassis, scholar to Lysippus. The thombe of that
image few men might fathom. It was in making.xii. years, and the charges drew
to.300. talents, which amounts to.43115 pound. Strabo writes, that the image
was of Jupiter, other write, yt it was of the Sun, and made by Chares
Lyndius, and this is it that was compted one of the seven wonders. Some call it
a brazen pyller, (as Aristotle writes) six hundred cubits hie. Besides this
were an hundred less Colossi in Rhodes, and at Rome were many made of metal.

Of this comes two proverbs: Colossica onera, that is, great and heavy
burdens.

Vir Colossicus, a huge, mighty, and taule man.

2. Templum Dianae.
This temple was edified by all Asia in an. 120. years, and was set in a fenne
or marshe ground, the foundation being first laid with coals, trodden or rammed
hard, then flieces of wool laid thereon, and all this was to save it from
earthquakes. The temple was in length.425. foot, in breadth 220. In it were
a.127. pillars, every of them.60. foot hie, made by kings. The roof was of
cedre trees, and the doors of cipres. A lewd person of purpose to get a
renown in histories (being covetous of glory, and having no excellent quality
to attain thereunto) putting wild fire into the roof, did burn this temple.
His name was Herostratus, as Strabo writes, whereof proceeded a proverb:
Herostrati gloria, applied unto them that do seek for a renown or praise of a
mischeuous act.

3. Piramides Aegiptiae.
The Piramides in Egypt, were nothing else, but a vain and foolyshe ostentation
of the riches of kings, as Pliny writes. The cause of the building of them,
of most writers is reported to be, that they might not leave any money unto
their successors, or to such as should envy them.

There were many every where in Egypt, but there were none more noble and famous,
the^ those three, of the which Pomponius Mela speaks, the which filled all the
world with their fame, being apparent and conspicuous unto all such as should
sail by them, situated in a part of Affricke, upon a stony and barren hill,
betwixt the town called Memphis, and the town Delta. They are towers (as
Solinus says) of so marvelous a high top, as is almost incredible to be built
by man's hand. Under these towers were the kings of Egypt buried.

Cheopes a king of Egypt, was twenty years in building one of these towers,
having three hundred, threescore thousand woorkemen, daily laboring about it.
It was declared in the Egiptian letters, which were written about it, that
there was a thousand, eight hundred talentes, spent in radish roots, garlike,
and onions, which the workmen devoured. Which talentes are in our coin seven
hundred and thirtye thousand crowns, for the talent of Egypt was fifty Minae.
Besides, if thou will make but a mean estimation of all other kind of victual
or meat, of apparel and wages for their work, if thou account also the
iron wherewith the stones were bound together, and the wood whereof the engines
were framed, there will arise in the end above two thousand, two hundred tonels
of French crowns.

Some affirm those Pyramides to have been made by Joseph a Jew, for the safe
keeping of corn, whereof they took their name. For (...), is called corn or
wheat. Other say, they are Sepulchers, builded in the honor of Fire, the
which the Egiptians did woorwip for a God, and therefore to grow four square,
and sharp upward, to the likeness of Fire.

4. Cyri Regia.
Cyrus was a noble King of Persia, the son of Cambyses and Maudanes the
daughter of Astiages, king of Media.

This Cyrus was (by the commandment of his Grandfather Astiages, when he was
borne) cast out, to be devoured of the wild beasts, because he saw in his
dream a vine tree, springing out of the children of his only begotten
daughter, with whose branches al Asia should be ouershadowed. He being cast
forth, was marueilouslye nourished a great while by a Bitche of a dog kind.
At the length being brought up by the kings shepherd (as Gods providence
would) was chosen king of the Persians. Over whom when he had reigned certain
years, he was slain of Tonigris Queen of Scithia, with two hundred
thousand Persians, so that there was not one left to bear home tidings of so
great a slaughter.

The head of Cyrus being cut of, was cast into a vessel filled with man's
blood, with this exprobration: Fill thy self with blood, which thou have
always thirsted after. He was first called Agradatus, and afterward Cyrus, of
a river of the same name, running through Persia, by the which river he was
cast forth.

This man excelled al men of his time in goodly personage, gentleness, prowess,
liberality, wisdom, and memory.

Solinus writes, that of the exceeding multitude of men, which were in his
host, he so retained the names, that he called every man by his proper name,
when he spoke unto them.

Plutarchus also writes, that he made a gallery al of gold and Iuery, he made
also such a costly palace, that for the sumptuousnes thereof, it was counted
one of the seven wonders of the world.

The residue of his wonderful virtues are written by Xenophon, most eloquently
in Greek.

5. Mausoleum.
This was the tomb of one Mausolus king of Caria, the which tomb his wife
Artemisia made, of whom is written this story. Artemisia was of such chastity,
and so excelled in love toward her husband, that when he was dead, she caused
his heart to be dried in a vessel of gold into poulder, and by little and little
she drank it up, saying: Their two hearts should never depart a sunder, and
that she thought there might be no worthy sepulcher made for it, but her own
body. Notwithstanding she made for his body such a sepulcher, that for the
excellent workmanship, beautye, and costlynes thereof, it was taken for one of
the maruels of the world, and for the notable fame thereof, all sumptuous and
great sepulchers were after called Mausolea.

6. Babylon.
Babylon a noble city, being set and placed by the river Euphrates, once head
of all Chaldie, of the which great Mesopotamia, and part of Assyria was called
Babilonia, as Pline writes. Lib. 6. cap. 20.
This city Strabo writes to be builded by Semiramis. But the Hebrews do
refer the original beginning of it unto Nemrothe the Giant, who say that it
was called Babylon of the confusion of tounges. This city being afterward
restawred and enlarged by Ninus or Semiramis, was very notable and famous, for
her walls and hanging gardens, and for her temple and walking places. The
fields were very plain and pleasant, the nature of the soil very fertile
and fruitful, the walls were quadrant with towers and castles in them. Her
walls were of an incredible magnitude and strength, being fifty cubits in
breadth, and.300. cubits in higth The circute and compass of it is said to
be.480. furlonges, the river Euphrates running in the middle of it. The walls
were made of brick, compacted together with lime and pitch, ye which some write
to be so brod, yt.2. waynes meeting together might easily pass. About the
walls there runs abrod ditcheful of water, as though it were a river, which
walls are beutified with an hundred gates of bras. This city being in a time
revolted from her alegiau^ce, Semiramis being occupied about the ornature and
decking of her body, made haste immediately to recover it, one part of her
hear being loose, neither did she make up her head, and bring her hear in an
order, before she had recovered the city into her dominion again.

Here note a worthy example of this valiant woman Semiramis, against
covetousness and greedy desire of money. This woman, when she had made a tomb,
wherein she intended to be buried, being dead, caused this superscription to be
written upon it: What king so ever shall lack money, let him open this
sepulcher, and take as much as he will. Which words, when Darius had read,
being a very greedy person, commanded the grave to be opened, but he found no
money there at all, but he happened upon these words: Ni malus vir fores, and
pecunia prorsum inexplebilis, no^ vtique mortuorum loculos moueres. That is: If
thou were not an evil man, having an insatiable desire of money, thou would
not break open the graves of the dead.

7. Simulacrum Iouis.
The seventh wonder Cassiodorus writes to be the image of Jupiter Olympicus,
which was made by one Phidias, first a Painter, and afterward a Caruer, for the
making of which image, he became exceedyng famous. He made also other excellent
works, as the image of Venus at Rome, in the porche of Octauia, and the image
of the Goddess Nemesis, being ten cubits, at Rhamnus, a famous village in the
countye of Athens, which held in her hand a branch of an apple tree, out of
the which rose a little fold, wherein were written these words: Agoracritus
Parius fecit. He was the scholar of Phideas, whom he so loved, that he wrote
his name in his own work. Of this rises a proverb: Rhamnusia Nemesis.

This Nemesis was a Goddess, whom the Paynims supposed to be the punisher of
grievous offenders. Some call her Fortune.

Suidas says, that Nemesis is Justice, complaint, reproach, envy, fortune. And
Erasmus says, Nemesis is a goddess, the revenger of insolency, and arogancy.
She is called Adrastia, of Adrasto the king, that first constituted to her a
temple, she is called also Ra^nusia, of the town Ra^nus.

But Gregorius Nazianzenus, in the funeral song which he wrote upon Basil the
great, praising the gorgeousnes and costlynes of the hospital builded of him,
said in this manner: I truly (said he) considering this place, being so notable,
for the bigness and fine woorkemanship of it, would count it nothing inferior
unto the seven wonders of the world.

Of the which numbers he numbreth and writes these three following, to be
three of the said seven: that is, the city Thebae, and the Capital of Rome,
and the temple of Adrian in Cyzicke.

Thebe or Theba.
Of this name there were nine cities, one in Beotia, an other in Egypt, the
third in Thessalia, the fourth in Cilicia, the fifth in Iouia, the sixth in
Attica, the seventh in Cataonia, the eight in Italy, the ninth in Syria.

That in Egypt was the most famous, builded of Busiris king of Egypt, in
compass (as Herodotus declares) a hundred and fortye furlonges, called
Stadia. This City had many fair buildinges, both public and private. Pliny
writes that it was holow underneath, and stood all upon vawtes. It had an
hundred gates, and in every gate were two hundred kepers, which excelled in
great horses and chariotes, under the which city kings were wont to bring forth
great and huge hosts of armed men, none of the citizens perceauing it.

There was in this city (says Calliniachus) a cave, which being at all other
times full of wind, yet in that space, which is between the old Moon and the
new, which is called in latin interlunium, there was no air perceived at all.

Because there has been often mention made of a furlong called Stadium, it
shall not be out of the way to declare what Stadium is.

Stadium was properly the place where horses or men did run, or where
wrestlers did strive, called stadium, (...), that is, a statione, because that
Hercules ran that same space, drawing his breathe but once, and then stood
still.

The furlong was first invented of Hercules, and he met it at Pisis, where
Jupiter Olimpius was. The length of that same furlong, was two hundred feet,
whereupon some invented after, other kinds of furlongs in Greece, being likewise
of two hundred feet of length, yet somewhat shorter then Hercules furlong.
Hereof Pithagoras gathered, that the foot of Hercules was so much more long
the^ other men's feet, how much the furlong called Olympicum stadium was longer
then other furlongs.

Stadium properly contains the eight part of a mile, and before the Romans
found out their miles, men did divide and measure the spaces of the earth by
furlongs.

But the Persians did use a furlong, but an other kind of measure, which they
call Parasangam, which contains the space of six miles and a quarter of our
miles. Censorinus writes, that of these Stadia there were three sorts. The one
was of Italy, and that contained.625. feet, which is.125. pases. The second
was called Olympicum, and that was of.600. feet, that is.120. pases. The third
was called Pythicum, which contained.1000. feet, which is.200. pases, which
peradventure was forgotten of Plinius and Solinus, when they wrate the
description of Cicilia, which makes the variaunce between them and Diodorus
Siculus. Of the stadia called Italica, eight do make an Italian mile,
containing a thousand pases, every pase being five feet, we have none other
name to give it, but a furlong.

Capitolium.
Capitolium was a great and mighty tower in Rome, set in the mount called
Saturnius, and builded of the king Tarquinius superbus, as Pliny writes, lib.
3. cap. 5. Some write, that it was the temple of Jupiter, set in the cleue
called Tarpeius. It was called Capitolium a capite hominis ibi reperto, of a
man's head there found, while they dug up the foundation, for before it was
called arx Tarpeia, of the vestal virgin Tarpeia, which was killed of the
Sabines, and there buried. Capitolinus was the name of him that found the head,
when the capitol began to be builded. It must needs be a fair costly and
sumptuous thing, for as much as Nazianzen does number it among the seven
wonders of the world.

Templum Hadriani.
This temple was builded in Cyzicum, a noble City of Bithynia, so named of
Cyzicus a king, as Pomponius Mela writes. It is a city famous and notable,
with castles, walls, towers, havens, and turrets of marbell, as Florus
writes. lib. 2. It was had in great honor, estimation and price of the
Romans, as Strabo writes, lib. 12. In this place by likelyhoode Adriane did
build that sumptuous temple, which is counted of Nazianzen to be one of the
seven wonders of the world.

These (by the testimony of Cassiodore and Nazianzen) be the seven spectacles
or wonders of the world, recorded almost in every place, both of the
Historiographers and Poets. Of the which wonders there remains nothing at
this day, but their vain names and titles, whereby we may understand, that there
is nothing, that can be made so glorious and gallant, by the power and industry
of man, which antiquity and time cannot dispatch and consume.

I would God that the princes, and noble me^ of the earth with others, would
hear and consider these things, and specially they which would purchase unto
them selves perpetual renown, with such outrageous and fond buildinges. For
what is more fond, then to wast and spend out of measure much riches in
unprofitable buildings, that shall do good to no man? And here by the way, I
wish the Clergy and the people would expend with them selves, what they do,
which dispose so preposterously and vainly, the revenues and yearly profits
of the Churches (I mean in building of great and sumptuous temples) with
spires so high and long, yt they may be almost compared with ye Pyramides of
Egypt. For these things cannot be done without the wrath of God. For (I pray
you) what other cause is there why, yt temples builded more curiously and
sumptuously, the^ is convenient to christian modesty, are touched and destroyed
so many times, with so often lightnings? which thing I take to be a warning
from heaven, that we shhould refrain from such fondnes and gasing shows. That
the poor and oppressed with calamities, ought to be relieved and maintained
with the goods of the church, the old custom and manner of the primitive church
does teach and declare. Which you may easily perceive, partly out of other
men's writings, and specially out of epistles of the holy martyr saint Ciprian,
writing chiefly of a certain scoffer to be excommunicated, unless he would leave
his art and facultye. His words be these. Quod si penuriam talis, and
necessitatem paupertatis obtendit, potest inter caeteros, qui alimentis
ecclesiae sustinentur, huius quoque necessitas adiuuari: si tamen contentus sit
frugalioribus and innocentibus cibis. If such a one do make a pretense of
penury and lack his necessity among other, which are sustained with the goods
of the church, may be eased and helped, so that he be contented with sober and
mean diet. And a little after in the same epistle he writes of the same
person, after this manner. Quod si (inquit) illic ecclesia non sufficit vt
laborantibus praestentur alimenta, poterit se ad nos transfer, and hic, quod
sibi ad victum atque vestitum necessarium fuerit, accipere. If the church
(says he) there, be not able or sufficient to give nourishment to such as
labor, and have need, he may come hither unto us, and here receive that which
shall be necessary unto him, both for meat, drink, and cloth. By this place of
Ciprian you may conjecture, that the needy and miserable persons, did not only
make their refuge unto the liberality of the Church, where they dwelt, but also
that one church did communicate her riches unto other Churches, in the
nourishing of the poor, according to the most Christian institution of Saint
Paul.

Neither for any other cause did Basilius Magnus, or other of like pietye,
build hospitales for poor wayfaring men, and houses for beggars and sick
men, but that they might ease with their private expenses, the common charges
of the Church, which at that time was very poor.

If any man be of a contrary judgment, and will prefer the excessive riches of
the church, before the necessitye of the poor, let him consider (whatsoever he
be) what saint Ambrose a noble father and doctor of the church does write to ye
contrary. His words be these in his book of offices Aurum ecclesia habet, non
vt seruet, sed vt eroget: vt subueniat in necessitatibus. Quid opus est
custodire quod nihil adiuuat? An ignoramus quantum auri atque argenti de templo
domini, Assyrii sustulerint? Nonne melius conflant sacerdotes propter alimoniam
pauperum, si alia subsidia desint, quam sacrilegus asportet hostis? Nonne
dicturus est dominus, quur passus es tot inopes fame mori? Et certe habebas
auru^, vt ministrares alimoniam. Quur tot captiui deducti in commercio sunt,
and non redempti? Melius fuerat vt vasa viuentium seruares, quam metallorum.
His non posset responsum referri. Quid enim diceres? Timui, ne templo dei
ornatus deesset. Responderet. Aurum sacramenta non quaerunt, neque auro
placent, quae auro non emuntur. etc.

That is to say: The church has gold, not to keep, but to bestow it, and to
help men in their necessity. What needs to keep that which helps nothing?
Are we ignorant how much gold and silver, the Assirians took away out of the
temple of the Lord? Were it not better that the Priests should bestow it to
the sustentation of the poor (if other succors lack) then that it should be
carried away by the sacrilege of the enemy? Will not the Lord say: why did
thou suffer so many poor men to dye for hunger? And yet truly, thou had gold
wherewith to relieve the^. Why are there so many carried away captive, by the
intercourse of marchaundise, and not redeemed? Why are there so many slain of
the enemy? It were better that the vessels of the living were preserved, then
the vessels of metal. Unto this there can be no answer made. For what would
thou say? I feared, least there should lack to deck the temple of God
withal. He would answer: Holy things do not require gold, neither those
things can be made acceptable by gold, which cannot be bought with gold. The
ornament of the sacraments, is the redemption of ye captive. And those are
truly precious vessels, which redeem the souls from death. That is, the true
treasure of the Lord, that does work that, which the Lords blood wrought. And
a little after he says. Laurentius, qui aurum ecclesiae maluit erogare
pauperibus, quam persecutori reseruare, pro singulari suae interpretationis
viuacitate, sacram Martyrii accepit co ronam. Saint Laurence, which had leauer
to distribute the gold of the church to the needye, then leave them to the
persecutour, for his singular and lively interpretacion, received the blessed
crown of martyrdom. Was it said (think you) to saint Laurence, thou
ought not to do away the treasures of the church, and sell the holy vessels?
To what uses the vessels of the Church are to be disposed, or after what
sort, or for what causes, it is needful only that thou consider this with a
pure faith, and a provident judgment. Truly if a man employ them upon his own
commodity, it is a fault, but if he bestow them upon the poor, it is a deed
of mercy. For no man can say why do the poor live? No man can complain,
because the captive are redeemed. Haec Ambrosius. The which words of Ambrose,
for this cause I have alleged, that it might be understood, upon what uses
chiefly, the ecclesiastical goods ought to to be bestowed. Yea, and to speak
freely the truth, the private money of the christians pertains to none other
use, if any man have more then is sufficient for the maintenance of his life.
It is not to be reproved nor disalowed (after the opinion of some learned me^)
if any do build temples, beutifiyng them with marbel and gold, so that it be
not done to the discommodity of other, but the care and regard of the poor is
to be counted a great deal better, then all such things, yea so much, that if
a man do the other without this, he may be judged rather to offend, then to
profit. For God is not so much delighted, with dead temples made of stone, as
he is with lively temples, made of flesh and bone. Whereupon Chrysostom both
nobly and notably (as he does all things) writes upon Matthew, after this
manner Tu si praeparasse quosdam vasa videris sacra, aut ornatum quem piam alium
circa parietes ecclesiarum, acpauimenta confecisse, nolito reprihendere, aut
iubere vt vendatur quod iam factum est, ne animum eius qui fecit, perturbes.
Sin vero antequam fecerit te consuluerit, pauperibus offerre iubeto. If thou
perceive any man to have prepared holy vessels, or adourned the walls of ye
church, and to have bestowed charges in the making of the pauement thereof,
reprove him not, nor command that which is made to be sold, least thou trouble
the mind of him that made it. But if he ask thy counsel first, command him
to bestow it upon the poor.

These words of Chrysostom do declare, that there were once certain
oblacions made in the church, to ease the inco^modity of the poor. Which
partly saint Paul does plainly show (who does call the^ collectas, gatherings)
partly saint Jerome in his explanations, upon the Prophet Ezechiel, his words
be these.

Justus panem suum esurienti dat. Per hoc docemur elemosinam non saturis
faciendam, sed esurientibus, nec dandum panem his qui ructant plenitudine, sed
his qui inanitate cruciantur: In pane autem omnis continetur cibus. Et
significanter dicitur suum, ne de rapinis and vsuris, and de alieno malo
quaesitum panem vertamus in misericordiam: Redemptio enim animae viri propriae
diuitiae. Quod multos facere conspicimus, clientes and pauperes and agricolas
(vt taceam de militantium and iudicum violentia) qui opprimunt per potentiam,
and furta committunt, vt de multis parua pauperibus tribuant, and in suis
sceleribus glorientur: publiceque Diaconus recitet in ecclesiis offerentiu^
nomina, tantu^ offert ille, ille ta^tu^ pollicitus est, place^tque sibi ad
plausu^ populi torque^te eos co^scientia. etc That is to say: The just man will
give his bread unto the hungrye. By this we are taught not to give our alms
unto the full, but unto the hungery, nor to give bread unto such as belke with
a full bellye, but unto such as are pinched with scarcety of meat. And it is
said very well, his, that we turn not ye bread gotten by extorcion, vserye,
and other men's hinderaunce, into alms. For the redemption of the soul of man,
are his own riches. Which thing we see many to do, which oppress by might
their Clientes, the poor, and husband men of the country (that I may not
speak of the violence of warriers and Judges) and commyt robbery and theft,
that of much, they may give a little to the poor, boasting and gloriyng in
their wyckednes. And that the Deacon recite openly in the Churches, the names
of them that offer. So much he gives, an other promised so much, and they
stand in their own conceit, at the praise and shoute of the people, their
consciences pricking them in the mean while. And they give an occasion unto
wretched men, to rejoice at their gifts, and not contrariwise, to lament for
their spoils.

I have brought in saint Jerome for this purpose, that it might appear, the
custom of offering in the Churches, to be very ancient, but at this time to
be greatly abused, the Pastors and Ministers challenging it wholly unto them
selves, what so ever is offered in the Church. By what right, and how lawfully,
let them take heed. But yet notwythstanding, I doubt not, but that in short
space, all pouertye and beggerye will be expelled out of the commonwealth, if
this custom were renewed and had in ure again.

But (to return from whence we have gone astraye) I think it is made evident
enough, that it is not lawful for Christians so vaynelye to cast away upon
earthly, bridge, and baren works, the riches, due only unto the poor,
whether they be of the Church, or profane riches. For there is nothing more
meet, then that the members of Christ should be relieved with Christ's money.
There is nothing more decent and comelye, then that a Christian man, what soever
riches he possesses, more then necessary, that he restore them unto Christ,
the geuer of all riches and goodness.

The which thing then he shall do most truly, when he shall have regard of
the poor, and (no occasions being let pass) shall help them both in deed
and in will. For whatsoever we do unto the poor, it is accounted and taken,
as though we did it unto Christ being present. All our life is nothing but a
temptacion, and therefore it has need of Gods divine counsel and help.

And we are tempted, not only with afflictions and poverty, but much more
with wealth and riches, the which God is wont to give unto men, as an occasion
to benefit and help the poor. For in this only thing chiefly rich men
excel, because they have a great occasion to help other. It is meet therefore,
that they in their good deeds, agree and answer unto the goodness and benignity
of God, and that they bestow their goods given them by God, not upon high
turrets and mighty images, not upon towers and castles, but in nourishing,
clothing and defending of Christ's body, which is the church. Upon this body we
ought all to attend, unto this body we ought earnestly to stick, providing by
all means for it, of the which body we our selves are also members: and for
this cause if we confer any thing upon this body, that only is kept
vncorrupt, as though it were in a chest of Adamant stone, and does, and shall
remain for ever. We brought nothing into this world with us, nor when we
shall depart, we shall carry any thing away, besides that only, which we send
before by the hands of the poor. VVilt thou erect pyllers which shall endure
and stand a long time, and will thou in building of high Turrets and spires,
purchase unto thee a perpetual memory of thy name with the posterity? Then
follow Saint Laurence, which distributed the churches money unto the church.
Then follow Basil, who builded a fair hospital for the poor. Then follow
Cesarius Nazianzenus his brother, the which dying, said: (...). That is: I will
almine to be the goods of the poor, Finally, follow Hilarious the Bishop, who
was so great a lover of the poor, that although he came of a noble parentage,
yet notwithstanding, he exercised husbandry, more then his body could well
sustain, being tenderly and nicely brought up, that he might minister unto the
poor of his own labors, And (that we may bring the Heathen for an example)
follow Simon of Athens, who did daily feast the poor, and brake down the
hedges and walls of his orchardes and gardens, that the needy might have the
more access to gather the fruietes thereof. To conclude, follow Traiane the
Emperor, who in gathering and choosing five thousand free borne children out of
his whole empire, found them at his own charges, and did cause them to be
instituted with the rules of virtue, under godly and learned masters, whereby
he might provide a number of good men, to serve the common wealth in time to
come. Follow (I say) these men before named, or at the least, one of them, and
choose them, whom thou may est benefit. Bring up the Pupilles, set the Orphans
to learning, and cause them to be trained with the knowledge, as well of the
tounges, as of good literature.

Dioclesian. 40.
THree hundred and six years after Christ, Dioclesian began his most fierce
and cruel persecution against the church of Christ. Eusebius writes, that there
was no persecution so cruel and bloody, neither before nor after. He joined
with him in the Empire, one Herculius Maximianus, a cruel, a fierce, and an
unfaithful man, and yet a fool, and a lecherous man. The seat of the
Emperors at that time which ruled, was in Nicomedia. When Dioclesian was
there, he shot out fires and flames, as it were out of the most fierce and
burning hill Aetna, and there, by chance the Emperors palace was burnt, the
which by and by certain malicious enemies did lay to the Christen men's
charge, and did exasperate and kindle the Emperor against them, and so began
his persecution, and forthwith commanded all the temples of the Christians,
to be thrown down flat to the ground through the whole Empire, which they did
most dispitefully, even upon Easter day. And afterward commanded all the
books of the holy scriptures to be burned, which they did in the market place.

Eutropius writes, that Dioclesian, would be woorshipped as God, and
commanded that men falling down flat to the ground, should kys his feet. Of
this Tirant took the Pope of Rome example, who offered his feet likewise to
be kissed, yea of Princes and Emperors. He reigned.xx. years, and gave over
the Empire at Nicomedia, and lived after as a private man, alleging for his
excuse, the great weight and charge that an Emperor had, and alleged also his
age. But as Nicepborus writes, he confessed unto his friends, that he did it
of a certain desperatio^, because he could not extinguish nor destroy the
religion of the Christians, and saw the noble and constant minds of the
martirs, which dyed so valiantly in the quarrel of their master Christ.
Afterward, as Eusebius writes, he fell into a disease, wherewith he dyed
miserably.

Ruffinus does write, that he was first afflicted with diverse and sundry
diseases, and at the last fell into a consumption, and so into a frensy,
wherewith being taken, he destroyed himself.

Nicephorus says, that Dioclesian being smitten of God with diverse plages, had
first in his body a great swelling, which being broken in diverse places, did so
consume away by title and little, that his most wicked and blasphemous tongue,
which had vomited out such blasphemies against the most high God, did gendre
worms within the jaws: which worms creeping out of his mouth, did infect all
the place where he abode, with most filthy stincke, and at the last barking
like a dog, gave up his wicked and damnable life with great violence.

Diverse others authors write diversely of his death.

Eusebius writes, that in the time of the persecution under Dioclesian, he saw
with his eyes, that beasts most fierce and cruel, (as Bears, Libardes, Bulls
and such like,) unto whom the Martirs were thrown to be destroyed, although
they were sturred with famine and fire unto fury, yet they would not come to
the Martirs. And when they went violently upon them, lept back again from
them, their mouth being stopped.

Nicephorus does add and say, that a certain Bulle did lick the feet of a
Martyr with his tongue, and so departed from him, as it were with a certain
reverence and fear.

Laicus. 41.
(...) comes of this nowne. (...). that is a stone, for some authors report
that Deucalion, and Pyrrha his wife, did procreate and make men by the casting
of stones, as Virgill writes saying, Vnde homines nati durum genus.

Certain do make a difference between these two words, Saxum and Lapis, that
the one (that is Lapis) is more less and more tender, and that the other (that
is Saxum) is greater, sharper and harder, whereupon they call precious stones
Lapides, and not Saxa, as Pliny writes.

Pliny his words be these: Nunquam hic vtilior, Lib. 36. cap. 38.
quam in Italia gignitur, Lapisque no^ saxum est. This stone is no where more
profitablie brought forth, then in Italy, and it is called, Lapis, non Saxum.

The same Pliny writes after this sort. Est and viridis Lapis veheme^ ter igni
resistens, sed nusquam copiosus, and vbi inuenitur, Lapis non Saxum est. There
is a green stone which does vehemently resist fire, but it is no place
plentiful, and where it is found, it is Lapis, and not Saxum.

But this difference does nothing seem to agree with Pliny him self, who
makes no difference between Lapis, and Saxum, in quantity and greatness: for
he affirms that great pillars were made, Ex vno Lapide, and yt the image of
one Laocoon, (who was the first that thrust his spear into the woden horse at
Troy) was cut out Ex vno Lapide. But it is rather to be said that Saxum is
properly that which is cut out of rocks, or quarries: And that Lapis, is yt
which is dug or taken out of the ground.

Also because in old time the end of miles, were signified and showed by the
setting up of stones in the same place, Lapis, does sometime signify a mile,
whereupon we say, Ad tertium aut quartum Lapidem, three or four miles.

Of this word (...), are the common people called Laici, lay men, even as the
clergy are called Clerici, of this word (...).

Clerus.
Clerus signifies Sortem, a chance, a lot, an inheritance.

Basilius Magnus, does use it, Pro ordine sacerdotu^. In my simple judgment
(yet I do refer it to the determination of the learned) the clergy were
called Clerici, originally of the History of Mathias the Apostle, who succeeded
in Judas place, because that Clerus does signify election or lot, for that
Mathias was chosen into the College of the Apostles by giving forth of lots as
it is recorded in the acts of the Apostles, Act. 1.
and this was the manner of the Hebreues. Ion. 1.
For Jonas (sleaping in the ship) was deprehended by lot, that he was the
occasion of the terrible tempests that came upon the Mariners, 1. Sam. 14
And likewise Ionathas was espied, for that he tasted of a little honey contrary
to the edict of his father, And in like manner was Achan espied of his
sacrilege. Iosu. 7.
The Apostles used these lottes for that as yet they had not fully received the
gifts of the holy ghost, and had certain steps of the Iewishe rites
remaining with them, and they thought it lawful to execute that figure until
the verity were accomplished, by the coming of the holy ghost.

Obseruatio.
Note here that the lot fell upon Mathias, although Joseph were commended by
his surre name, and by kindred unto Christ.

By the which we may learn, that in such elections and lots, nothing is to be
attributed to the affections of man, But that where there be two equal and
like in worthiness of life, we should rather favor him, whom flesh and blood
does not comme^de: And yet this Joseph, called Iustus, did not disdain his
equal to be preferred before him. Nor yet Mathias did not flatter him self
for that he was chosen of the.11. to fulfill the holy number of the twelve.

Question.
Here is to be demanded, whether it be lawful or unlawful (as they say
Simpliciter,) to use lottes or no.

Responsio.
You must understand that there be three kinds of lots.

1. Diuisoria. 2. Consultoria. 3. Diuinatoria.
THe lot called Sors diuisoria, whether it be by casting of chau^ces, by
drawing of cuttes, by taking of balls, or any other means, for taking part
of things divided, is not unlawful, so that there be no superstition, no
invocation of sprites, nor looking for any event or effect from the
constellations or power of the Planets above.

Saint Austen in his book De doctrina Christiana, writes after this manner. Si
forte fortuna duos haberes obuios, aequalis piaetatis atque necessitatis, and
tantum haberes quo solum alteri eorum subuenire posses. Ita co^stitutus in
ancipiti, nihil melius ageres, quam vt sortito deligeres, vtri benefaceres. Sic
existimabis, quadam sort hunc vel illum ex dei voluntate, tibi adiunctu^ esse,
aliquo necessitudinis gradu. If thou chance (says he) to meet two persons
equally to be pitied and releaued, and have only so much about thee, wherewith
thou can releaue but one of them, being so set in a certain perplexity and
doubt, thou can do no better then to cast lots, to which of them thou may
dispose thine alms. So shall thou judge as it were by a certain lot, whether
this man or that man be nerest unto thee, in some degree of kindred or friendspip.

Sors consultoria.
The lot called Consultoria, which is practiced to do this, or not to do this
determinatly, as if any man should consulte by lots or by any other chance,
whether he should ride fourth, go to the fair or market, or take any other
journey, is not lawful. As I my self knew a certain man of honor, who being
commanded, by his prince to resist the enemies (who attempted to invade
certain borders of this realm) did retire back to his house, because his
horse stumbled in the morning.

Sors diuinatoria.
The lot called Sors diuinatoria, is that which is exercised to know by it,
what shall come hereafter, which is directly against the word of God.

To end, concerning this word Clerus. It signifies sometime, patrimony,
inheritance or any portion which came by lot. It is sometime taken for an acre
of ground, or an orchard or garden. It is taken likewise for a worm which
hurts and destroys honey combs, which of some is called Pyrausta.

Olephantes. 42.
MAtholus writing upon Dioscorides, declares and describes the history and
nature of an Oliphant after this manner.

Aphrica beyond the deserts, called Solitudines Sirticae. Also Mauritania and
Ethiopia do bring forth and breed Olephantes, but the greatest of all do come
from India.

Aristotle writes that the Olephantes, although they be the greatest of all
four footed beasts, yet they are made so tame, yt no wild beast ca^ be made
more gentle and mild, for they do receive instructions of their teachers and
tamers, in so much yt they understand them and their language, they have
skins like to an Ox, but with hear set very thin, they have a great head,
a short neck, long ears, as long as two spa^nes, a very long snowt or nose,
which they call properly Promuscide^ Elepha^tis, the nose is hollow, like a
great trompet, and reaches down beneath the foreteth, almost down to the
ground, which they use instede of their hands. They bear their mouth nigh to
the breast, which mouth is like a swines snowte, out of the upper part whereof,
two great and mighty lnog teeth do grow up, which teeth be ye very true
^uerie: They have fete round like a dishe, and two or three handfulles broad,
fleshie and hard, and in them five round claws, as big as a good mean
cockell shell. They have great and strong legs, not having one whole bone
only (as certain inexpert writers do think and declare,) but they bow the
knee as other four footed beasts do. And as Aloisius Cadamustus writes, they
fall down on their knees, and receive certain upon their backs, and so rise
again. They have a tail like to an Ox, very thin set with hear, therefore
they cannot well defend them selves from the injury and biting of flies, but
nature has given them another defense, for their skin is cancelled and
wrinckled, which they contracte or draw together, and so kill the flies. They
hurt no man, except they be provoked and styrred to anger, but if they be
moved, they take the man with their long nose, and throw him up so hie, that
before he fall to ye ground again, he is choked and dies. Furthermore there
is no man so swift of foot neither in going nor running, but that the
Olepha^t, not running but going his pase, will overtake, the reason is, because
of their mighty body and long legs. They do feed on the bowghes and fruit of
trees, and there is no tree so great, but that the Olephant will break him,
throw him down, and tear him with his Promusside, that is his long nose.
They grow to ye hight of sixtene handfulles, therefore they which are not wont
to go up upon them, are affected with lothsomnes even as they which be not
accustomed to arrive in the seas. They can suffer no bridle nor halter upon
their heads, therefore they go loose and at liberty with their heads, but
they do greatly obey their governors, they understand their speech and are
easily ruled with their words. They do fear fire so greatly, that if they
once see it, they run away, and cannot be called again. The Olepha^tes do
not couple them selves together, nor gender before they be of the age of.xx
years, as Aristotle writes in his book De historia animalium. VVherin the
error of Pliny is manifestly seen, which wrote, that the Male Oliphant does
join him self to the Female at the age of.v. years, and that ye Female does
bring forth at the age of.x. years. The Olipha^tes abhor adultery, for every
Male Oliphant, does use the company only of one Female. And when she is great,
ye Male touches her no more. How long time the Female does go with her young,
it is not known, because being stricken with a certain shame; they never
couple together, but in a secret and privy place. Therefore some do appoynte
unto them one year and a half, some two years, other three years. The
Females bring fourth their young with great dolor and pain, they lick their
young with their mouth, which as soon as it is brought forth, does both see
and go.

Aristole says, how some think, that Oliphantes live two hundred years, but
are most lusty at the age of threscore, they can suffer no cold, nor abide the
hard winter. They have great delight to be about rivers and floudes, which
they go into after the manner of Oxen and Kie. They seem to show a certain
religion in them, for they worship the sun and moon, as the inhabitants of
Mauritania, can declare. For in those regions there be innumerable, which when
ye moon is new and does shine, do go in a great company together into the
rivers, and there wash the^ selves, and when they be washed, kneling on their
knees, they salute the moon, and so return into the woods. Some do say,
they be so quick of understanding, that when they should pass over the seas
to other regions, they will not go into the ships, before they which lead
them do promise with an oath to return again. When they go into the woods,
they go always in a great flock together, the oldest of them leadyng and
going before, the next of age coming behind and driving them. Some write that
when they be hunted, perceiving that the pray which men seek of them, is
only in their teeth, they strike them with great violence into the trees, and
so pull them out, but this is as vain and false, as the beast called Fiber,
does bite of his stones when he is hunted. The Oliphantes are by nature very
wild and untameable, but they are made mild and gentle by art and policy
as many other beasts be. If they be little and young, they are made tame by
other Olipha^tes, which are already tame, if they be put among them. But Pliny
writes, that the great ones are tamed by honger and stripes. The teth of the
Oliphantes are of a marvelous bigness, and are sold in many cities of Italy,
as at Rome, Venice, Millein, and Naples, of the which teeth are made not only
combs, but many other instruments to the use of man: This Iuery is very good
for the white disease of women, if it be beaten into most fine powder, if it be
dronke with the juice of the seed of Lectuice being laid in water, in the
which steel has been quenched. Hitherto Mathiolus.

Isidorus writes that their cry is properly called Baritus. Solinus writes,
yt they eat great blocks, devour stones, and that they love dates above all
other things. Aristotle says, that some Oliphantes do drink Oil, some do
not, and they which drink Oil (if there be any Iron in their belly) it is
drawn out by the drinking thereof and some do drink wine. And when they cannot
drink it, then they make medicines with Oil, and so give it them to drink.

Apologeticus. 43.
pologa, signifies a defense, an excuse an Oration, or Purgation, in the which
he that is coumpted guilty, does defend him self either by Oration or by
writing. Of this word comes Apologeticus, and certain books of learned
authors are entitled Apologeticus, as the book of Tertulian, which he wrote
against the gentiles in ye defense of ye Christians. Basilius Magnus, and many
other wrote books of ye like title.

Unwashed hands. 44.
THere are two Proverbs; which are necessary to be observed and borne away.
the first is Illotis pedibus ingreda that is, to go in with vnwashe^ feet, and
it signifies no more but rashly, boldly, and vnexpertly to attempt and ente
prise any notable thing. It is translated and borrowed of the ceremonies of holy
things, in ye which all things were commanded to be pure, washed, clean and
fine. Lucianus in his book entitled Rhetorum preceptor, does note them, which
being instructed and armed with no good discipline nor learning, do come and
take upon them the office of a Rhetorician. They come (says he) Illotis
pedibus Macrobius, in his Saturnals does say, Illotis pedibus pretereunt. They
pass by with unwashed feet. He speaks of certain smatterers of learning,
which neglect and despise ye great hidden doctrine in the Poemes of Virgill.
The other Proverb is. Illotis manibus, with unwashed hands and it signifies
irreverently and vnreadily to take any thing in hand. Both these Proverbs may
be used against the^, which either to boldly or rashly, or not being expert in
those things in which it behooves the^, do take any matter in hand. As if any
should take upon him ye office of a prince, and yet is not endewed with any
prowess, virtue, wisdom or learning. Or el^ if any should endeavor to
enterpret and expound ye scriptures being ignorant of ye Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew tongues, and being rude and uncunning of all antiquities, should attempt
to teach the mysteries of divinity, which were not only a foolish thing, but
also a wicked. Notwithstanding certain of late (which being armed with
certain cold Sillogismes and childish arguments) have attempted both to
define and debate almost all matters. But if they saw what laughture or rather
sorrow they minister unto the^ which are expert and cunning, they would be
ashamed of their temeritie and rashness. Men do give a good judgment without
the precepts and rules of Logic. And me^ were both learned and wise before
their great God Aristotle was borne. Saint Hierome, when he went about to
interpret the holy Scriptures, least he should attempt such a great matter
with unwashed feet and hands, did with unspeakable labor and study obtain
and get the knowledge of the three tou^ges, Quas qui ignorant (says Erasmus)
no^ Theologus est, sed sacrae Theologiae violator. Of which whosoever is
ignorant, is not a divine, but a disteiner of divinity, and with vnwashe^
feet and vnwashe^ hands does not entreat ye most holliest thing of al, but
does make it profane, defile it, and disteine it.

Theopompus the historian, that he might cause his writings to be of greater
estimation, intermingled with them a portion of Moses law, for the which cause
he lost his wit, and fell mad for the space of.30. days or therabout. Besides
also in his sleep in the night, he was admonished that if he would not cease
from his attemptate, he should never recover his right mind again. Therefore
being terrified and persuaded yt he ought to credit and obey the heavenly
oracles, revolted from his purpose, and so received again the right use of his
mind.

Theodectes a tragical Poet began to atchief ye same thing, but in yt same
moment and instant he was strike^ starck blind, but acknowledging and
confessing his error, and desiring pardon, received again his sight.

The secrets of Gods mysteries are to be searched with great reverence and
fear.

The Oracles of the heavenly spirit are to be vewed with great sobriety and
wisdom.

Epictetus the Philosopher, took it in very ill part, when he perceived rash
and corrupt me^ (being of sinister and filthy manners) to entermedle with the
study of Philosophy, as Gellius does record.

How much more ought we Christians (who in godliness and virtue of life should
be an example unto all gentiles) to judge it no small unworthiness, if we see
any spotted with vnpure and wicked manners, to dispute of divine mysteries, and
to disteine, with there filthy conversation, the pure Philosophy of Christ?
How much more (say I) ought we Christians to be offended? Yea and as me^ being
desposed to vomit, to require (...) when we see such rash and foul
enterprises.

Gregorius Naziazenus, writes of this, very aptly. Mundificari (inquit) prius
oportet, and ita alios mundificare: sapientem prius reddi, and sic caeteros
reddere sapientes, lumen fieri, and ita alios illustrare: accedere ad deum, and
sic tandem alios quoque ad dominum adducere. We must first (says he) be made
clean, and then to cleanse other: we must first be made wise, and so teach
other wisdom: we must first be made a light, and then to give light unto
other: we must first come to God our selves, and then to bring other unto God.

Praelectio secunda die Iouis videlicet.xv. die Februar. 1560. The Christian
faith does lean and depend only of the written word of God.
I Purpose at this present by Gods grace, to confyrme your minds by the
testimony of the holy scriptures, that our Christian faith is established and
thoroughly proved by the only written word of God, and that all the articles
of religion necessary to our salvation, are wholly contained in the holy
scriptures.

Deuteronomie. 1. To add and take away. 2.
First it is written in the book of Deuteronomie, non addetis ad verbum quod
loquor vobis, nec auferetis ex eo. Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I
command you, neither shall you take ought from it. What man unless he be
void of all sense and reason, will expound this place of the word not written?

I am not ignorant how that certain disceitfull cauillers, would avoid this
sentence, saying: that there be four manner of addicions, that is.

Additio minuens. Additio alienans. Additio amplians. Additio complens.
Addition diminishing. Addition alienatyng. Addition enlarging. Addition
completing.
By the which last addition they understand, that the sentence and sense of the
scriptures, is to be judged and weighed by the commentaryes of men and the
decrees of counsels. Decrees. 3.


But to refell this comment and gloss, manifest scripture written in the.xii.
of Deuteronomy, is sufficient. Quod tibi precipio, hoc tantu^ facito. Non addas
quicquam nec minuas. What soever I command thee, take heed thou do it, thou
shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought there from. And in the last of the
Apocalips. Apoc^^
Qui addiderit ad haec, Apocalips. 3.
addet ei dominus plagas quae sunt scriptae in libro hoc, etc. If any man shall
add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plages that are written in
this book. And if any man shall diminish of the words of the book of this
prophecy: God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of
the holy city, and from these things which are written in this book. Which
place both Scotus and all the schoolmen do grant to be understand of the
holy scriptures. Wherefore they evidently offend against Gods commandment,
which do assent and affirm the word not written to be necessary to salvation,
and who also does judge of the will of God without the manifest word of God.

In Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. ^^
it is written how all manner of blessings are set forth unto them that observe
those things which are written in the book of the law. And in an other place
Moses does evidently say. Ponite corda vestra in omnia verba quae ego
testificor vobis hodie, etc. Deuteronomy. ^^
Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify unto you this day that
you may command them unto your children, that they may observe and do all the
words which are written in the book of this law.

Behold, here is clearly promised eternal life unto them that observe those
things which are written, and Moses does say, that this is the only final
cause why God would have his word written, that all and singular men, of what
state and condition so ever they be, should have and learn the word of God, by
which they might be saved. And here they are convinced of ignorance and
blindne^, which ascribe unto God such necligence and slacknes, as though he
could not or would not commend and commit all things necessary for salvation
to ye holy scriptures.

Furthermore, in the same book of Deuteronomie, the king is commanded to have
always in his hands, Deu. 17.
his heart, and his sight, the book of the law, and he shall read therein all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, that he
may prolong his days in his kingdom, and his sons in the midst of his
Realm. And here I would to God that Christian Kings, princes, noble,
honorable, and men of worship were resolved, that this perteyned principallye
unto their office and duty, I mean the reading of the holy scriptures. And
that they would rather have in their houses Gods book (out of the which they
may learn the will of God) then the book of King Arthur, the book of
Trollous, Arthure. 4. Troilus. 5. VVanton books. 6.
and such other vain, profane vanities, and Wanton books, whereby God may
give them a longer life, and a death and end less tragical and troublous. For
they without doubt which are so cruel against the sacred scriptures and the
readers thereof, that they will execute their cruelty against them, can not
come to a good end: but God will punish them for their tyranny, and oppress
them with violent death, for such is the end of all tyrauntes, as the Poet
says.

Ad generum Cereris sine caede et vulnere pauci
Descendunt reges, et sicca morte tyranni.
Few Kings and rulers bent unto tyranny,
Descend to their grave with death that is dry,
But make their end both miserable and bloody.
Sedechias King of Judah saw all his sons slain before his eyes, Sedechias.
7. Hieremie. 8. Heat and cold. 9. Antiochus. 10.
and had his own eyes put out, and was bound in chains, and carried captive
into Babylon, because he burnt the book of Hieremie: for the which deed he
heard before, that none of his sons should sit upon the throne of David, and
that his carcas should be thrown in the day time unto heat, and by the night
time unto cold.

Daniel. 12. 2. These. 2.
Antiochus which commanded the holy scriptures to be burned, dyed desperately
and miserably, and that he was the very image of the last Antichrist, Daniell
and Paul do testify.

Because it will be to long and tedious to bring testimonies through the whole
scriptures, I will allege only one place more out of the law, and so come to
the testimony of the Prophets, and of the Gospel.

Deuteronomy. 30.
In Deuteronomie it is said. Mandatum quod tibi praecipio, non est supra te,
neque procul positum, nec in caelo situm, etc. This commandment which I
command thee this day, is not hid from thee, neither is it far of. It is
not in heaven that thou should say: who shall go up for us to heaven and
bring it us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do it: but the word is very
nere unto thee, eue^ in thy mouth and in thy heart, to do it.

These things do pertain and may be aptly objected against the Epicures of
this latter time, who although they feign never so godly a show of holiness,
and say that they burn and kill men for no other cause, but to conserve and
defend true faith and the authority of the Church: Yet they do sufficiently
show, that they deny the power of godliness, forasmuch as they be defiled and
spotted with blood, slaughter, lusts, craft, disceipte, and with all kind of
filthiness and impiety, so that it does verily appear, that they persuade them
selves, that there is no god, who will take vengeance of this their wickedness,
Epicure. 11.
but do in all security laugh to scorn with Epicurus true religion.

Leo the tenth called together a counsel to debate whether the soul of man
were immortal: And when he heard every man's sentence, Leo. 12.
it is reported him to have said, Soul. 13.
that this controversy was harder then that he could judge which part had the
stronger reasons. But whatsoever (said he) shall become of the soul, I will
not defraude my soul of the present commodities, delights and pleasures of
this life. And if there be any life after this life, I would gladly rejoice
there with other, if I thought them to be no worse companions there, then they be
here.

This is the voice of that high Bishop, by whose sentence and censure we must
judge of the word of God, and of whose arbitrament does depend and hang our
faith and salvation. This I say is the sentence of that holy Senate, unto whom
we must pass over the seas, to consulte and confer with, to this holy vicare
of Christ, men must come out of Africa, Asia, and Europa, to consulte I say
him, and also his holy Cardinals (which as they say succeeded the Apostles) of
the will of God, Cardinal 14.
and of the right intelligence of the Scriptures.

From this Epicuricall sentence Moses does withdraw us saying, Deu, 30.
Prope est verbum in ore tuo, and ante oculos tuos. The word is nere unto
thee, even in thy mouth and in thine heart, and before thine eyes. Take heed
says he, and remember, that I put before thine eyes, that thou may read in
this book and understand it also, for otherwise it were a madness to write
those things, that cannot be understand.

Serpent. 15. The tree of knowledge of good and ill. 16.
The Serpent did lie and disceiued Adam, when he persuaded to give unto him the
knowledge of good and evil, by the transgression of Gods word. And as the
devil did delude and mock by his sophistical and subtle Amphibologie, even
so he does now when he does promise us by man's traditions and unwritten
verities, the knowledge of good and evil. God will not be worshipped with the
doctrine of the Serpent, and the doctrines of deuilles: God will not be
reverenced and feared with the precepts and doctrines of men, contrary or
besides his word, he does forbid all kind of honoring, he does condemn all
kind, of worshyppyng and service, which he him self has not commanded,
prescribed and appointed. These things are learned out of his word, and the
will of God is known only out of the holy Scriptures, what does please him
and what does not please him. Except we believe this, heaven and earth shall
testify against us at the last day, as Moses says, Testes hodie inuoco caelum
and terram. I call to witness heaven and earth, that I have set before thee in
thy sight, life and death, blessyng and cursyng, not that curse which the Pope
does thunder out under the name of Peter and Paul, but even that curse, which
(if we harken unto, and obey the Pope) we shall hear of Christ. Math. ^
Ite maledicti in ignem eternum, qui paratus est Diabolo and ministris ipsius,
go ye cursed into everlasting which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

Christ also does call upon these witnesses again the unbelieving, saying.
Math. ^
Caelum et terra transibunt, Heaven and earth 17.
verba mea non transibunt. Heaven and earth shall pass, my word shall not
pass, by this saying Christ does warn us to take heed of false Prophets,
and false Christ's, which shall feign a new word, and a new Christ,
appoyntyng and fastening him to certain places, Days, Meats, Oaths, Vows,
and Abstinence from the good and lawful creatures of God.

Esaie. 18.
Esaias the Prophet does likewise thunder against the doctrines and traditions
of men for the defense of Gods word, saying. Omnis caro faenum, et omnis
gloria eius, et cetera. verbum autem domini manet in eternum. All flesh is
grass, Isa. 40.
and all the glory thereof, that is all the wisdom and power of man, is as the
flower of grass, which withers away and falls of: but the word of the
Lord remains for ever. He does menace and threaten also, everlasting
darcknes and perpetual night of infidelity, if we believe new revelations
without the word, or believe the apparicions of ye dead, Apparitions. 19.
saying. Nu^quid populus co^sulet deu^ suu^, an propter viuos petendu^ est
consiliu^ a mortuis, Isa. 8.
an non magis lex consulenda et testimoniu^ dei in consiliu^ adhibendum? si non
dixerit inquit nuxta verbu^ hoc, non erit eis lux matutina. Should not the
people enquire at their God, should they ask counsel for the living, at the
dead, is not the law and the testimony rather to be consulted? if they speak
not according to the word, it is because there is no light in them. Which is
as much to say as thus. Answer the wicked thus, should not Gods people only
seek succor at him? Will they refuse to be taught of the Prophets who are
the mouth of God, and seek help at the dead. Which is the Illusion of Satan.
Seek remedy in the word of god, where his will is declared

Now let us here the testimony of the eternal word of God him self
concerning his Scriptures: for this question was moved in the Church, in the
time of Christ, of the chief doctors which thought not the Scriptures to be
sufficient to salvation without traditions of their fathers.

One of the number of these Rabbines, came unto Christ, and said, Rabbines. 20.
what shall I do to possess eternal life. But Christ sent back this
unbelieving and scrupulous doctor unto the Scriptures saying. Luk 10,
In lege quid scriptum est? quomodo legis. What is written in the law? How
do thou read? As though he had said, do thou think, that God is not
constant unto him self, but that he does often change his mind as men do
change their law, and do always feign new opinions of God? the word of God
does remain for ever, do thou ye only that thou find written, and thou
shall live. Christ did not say to him, do thou as thou shinckest best, thy
self, or as thou do here the Pharisees and Scribes teaching, but he sent
him bark to the Scriptures saying, how do thou read, do this and thou
shall live. Here Christ does manifestly testifye, that this was the mind and
sentence of the old Church, that judgment of the will of God, and of
doctrine pertaining to faith and salvation is to be had only of the
Scriptures. Joan, 5.
And he does bid his preaching to be examined and driven to the Scriptures. He
does evidently show, that the Gospel, was contained also in the Scriptures,
and that they be very dull and ignorant, which deny that the Scriptures of
Moses ought to be herd, and that they do not perteyne to us, because the
Apostles had not as then written their books. Apostles. 21
For this was the rule of the Apostles, when they did testify unto ye Church
of the Gospel, that no book ought to be received which did not consent with
the old Scriptures, and by this rule they did reiecte and refuse Apocripha,
and received the Evangelists, who confirmed their Historyes and wrytynges out
of the Prophets. By this rule Paul does purchase and get authority and
credit of his Epistles sent to the Romans, Romans 1.
when he says. Euangelium suum ante promissum esse per Prophaetas in
scripturis sanctis.

Joan. 5,
To this also perteine these sayengs. Si Moysi crederetis, et mihi vtique
credere it is. If you will believe Moses, you will believe me also: for he has
written of me. Also this saying of Christ. Scrutamini scripturas, quia
putatis in illis vos vitam eternam habere. Illae enim sunt quae testimonium
perhibent de me. Search the Scriptures, because you think to have everlasting
life in them for they be they which bear witness of me. Now in this
controuersye of the word not written and of the traditions of men if we
should consulte antiquity and stand to the judgment of the Romish Church,
we set against it this sentence of the old Church confirmed by Christ.
Joan. 12.
Sermo quem locutus sum iudicabit eos in nouissimo die. The word, which I have
spoken shall judge them at the last day. Now if this word had not been
written, yea and all thoroughly written, who should be sure of his salvation,
and of the will of God. If our faith and the salvation of mankind should
depend only of the relation of men, and if the some of our religion had not
been committed to letters, who could hope one sentence of Christ to have been
left whole and vncorrupt?

But they which be intoxicate and made blind with the devil, do not see this
intolerable blasphemy, they do not consider what sluggishnes, Blasphemy 22.
ignorance and malice, they do impute unto God, when they affirm, that God
had no care nor regard, that his word should be written, by the which he
says we shall be judged at the last day. But the holy ghost did foresee this
malice of the devil, and to repress his cruelty, and to stop the mouths
of other, the holy spirit (I say) did enjoin his Scribes the Prophets,
Apostles and Evangelists, that they should write this word, whereby we might
have a permanent and continual testimony to trust unto. He commanded the
Apostles that they should bear witness of this Scripture, and to reiecte the
writtynges of all other, which did attempt to inserte and put in their lies
and gloses into the Gospel.

Luke. 23.
Saint Luke in the preface of his Gospel, gives a goodly testimony of the
same, saying, for as much as many have taken in hand to set forth the story of
those things, whereof we are fully persuaded, as they have delivered them unto
us, which from the beginning saw them their selves, and were Ministers of the
word. Theophilus. 24.
It seemed good also to me (Theophilus) as soon as I had searched out perfitly
all thing from the beginning, to write unto thee thereof from point to point,
that thou might acknowledge the certeinty of those things whereof thou haste
been instructed, with this clear testimony the holy Ghost has made quiet our
minds and consciences against the blasphemies of Antichrist. Antichrist. 25.
But the holy Ghost, not content with this one testimony, did constrayne him
(I mean Saint Luke) which promised to write all things from the beginning,
to testify also in an other book the same. For in the beginning of the Acts
he says: I have made the former treatice, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus
began to do and teach, until the day that he was taken up. Act. 1.


Obiectio.
How could Luke write of al ye sayings and doyngs of Christ, where John does
affirm, that if all things should be written, which Jesus did, the world could
not conteyne the books that should be written?

Responsio.
Chrysostom makes answer and says, Lucas non dixit omnia, sed de omnibus
ad salutem necessariis. Luke did not say that he would write all things, but of
all things necessary to salvation. But what needs the holy ghost, the help
of man's testimony? for he of him self is sufficient, and having all knowledge
and foreseyng also what the devil would in this point calumpne and cavil,
does make answer by the euangeliste. For when John had said, that Jesus had
done many miracles, John. 26.
which were not written, he added immediately Hae^ scripta sunt vt credatis.
These things be written that you might believe, that Jesus is the son of God,
and that beleuyng, you may have life through his name. Wherefore it is
manifest, that the some of Christ's words, and so many miracles also, are
written, as are sufficient to confirm our faith, John. ^^
and to declare all things, which we ought to believe.

Cirillus writting upon John says: Magna est multitudo signoru^ dn^i and
imme^sus numerus, Cap. 12 Iohan^
sed haec quae retulimus sufficiu^t ad plenissima^ fide^ facie^da^ atte^te
legenti bus: nec accusandus su^ si oi^a non scripsi, na^ si co^sidere^tur
singula nullo praetermisso, orbis librorum multitudinem no^ caperet. Hyperbole
27.
Hyperbolicos au^t dicimus sermonis eius virtutem proferri. Non igitur omnia
quaefecit scripta sunt, sed quae scribentes tam ad mores, quam ad dogmata
putauerunt sufficere, vt recta fide and oporibus ac virtu tibus rutilantes ad
regnum caelorum perueniamus per Christum dominum nostru^. Great is the
multitude and number of the Lords signs and miracles, but these which we have
showed, are sufficient to make a full and perfect faith, to the^ which shall
read them attentively. Nor I am to be accused, if I have not written all, for
if every one should be considered, and none omitted, the world could not hold
the number of the books. We say that the virtue of his words, is uttered
Hyperbollically, therefore all things are not written, which he did, but those
things which they ye wrote, thought to be sufficient, as well to good manners, as
to doctrine, that we shining with a right faith, with good works and virtues,
may come to the kingdom of heaven, through Christ our Lord.

It is therefore a new invention and lie, invented lately in the devils shop,
that all doctrine of religion cannot be proved out of the scriptures, and that
men's traditions without the besides the scriptures, are necessary works to
salvation. The Church in Cirils time knew no such kind of blasphemy.

Saint Austen writes the like upon the same place. Cum dominus Jesus inquit
multa signa fecisset, non omnia scripta sunt, electa enim sunt quae
scriberentur, quae credentium saluti sufficere videbantur. When our Lord Jesus
(says he) had done many miracles, all were not written, but these things were
chose^ out to be written, which were thought sufficient for the salvation of
the believing.

To make an end in citing of testimonies, I will add only two witnesses
more, most approved, and most certain, Peter and Paul by name. For every man
not being at the least void of common sense and reason, may clearly
understand, that Peter wrote the second epistle against those blasphemers,
which do feign a new word, beside the written word of God, for he calls the
scriptures a prophecy, and calls them false prophets, which do teach any
thing contrary and besides the prophetical and apostolical scripture, and does
give this rule, by the which their lies might be avoided, if we expound and
weighe them by the prophetical scripture, to the which he bids us to take
heed, as unto a light that shines in in a dark place. In the third chapter
he writes thus. This second epistle I write unto you, beloved, wherewith I
stir up and warn your pure minds, to call to remembrance the words which
were told before of the holy Prophets, and also the commandment of us the
Apostles of the Lord and savior. This first understand that there shall come
in the last days mockers, which will walk after their own lusts.

Again in the first chapter he writes: A most sure word. 28. Private
interpretation. 29.
We have also a most sure word of the Prophets. And a little after he says:
First know this, that no prophecye in the scripture is of any private
interpretacion. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost.

Note here, yt when Peter had alleged for his doctrine, ye seen majesty of
Christ, the voice of the father heard from heaven, the testimony of Moses and
Helias given to Christ upon the holy hyl, yet he does prefer before al these
allegacions, the firmnes and surenes of the scriptures, saying: we have a most
sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye take heed, but the
holy ghost is always one, and ever like him self, both in Moses, the Prophets,
Christ, and the apostles. Christ does say: search the scriptures, and by those
witnesses examine my preachinges. Io^^, 5. 2. Pet. 1.
Peter does subscribe to the same, saying: you do well, which do examine every
doctrine by the prophetical scripture.

2. (...) 4 (...). 3
Saint Paul in both his epistles to Timothy, and in his epistle to Titus,
Timothy. 30, Tite. 31.
does earnestly admonish us to beware of the blasphemies of the latter time,
and of them which do thrust in new and wicked doctrine, without Gods written
word, and does say, if we shall continue in the word and holy scriptures, and
teach them unto other, 1. Tim. 5.
we shall save our selves, and them that hear us.

So it does appear by the testimony of these two holy Apostles, that the
scriptures only are the pyller and stay, both of our faith, and also the
foundation of the Church.

Obiectio.
The Church was institute and taught after the ascension of Christ, when there
was neither Gospel nor any part of the new Testament yet written, for Matthew
wrote eight years after the Ascension, Marcke.x. years, Luke. xv. Matthew. 32
Mark. 33.
and John long time after, therefore the Church was governed by the unwritten
word and traditions of the Apostles. Whereupon we conclude, that we must not
only stay upon the Scriptures, but also upon unwritten verities, and give no
less credit unto them, then to the words written in the Scriptures, and so
writes Basilius Magnus, Basilius. 34
in his book De spiritu sancto.

Responsio.
When the Apostles had preached certain years, Viua voce, only by mouth,
they committed also unto writtyng those things which they had preached before,
for some of them did write the history of Christ, both of his doyngs and
sayings, other wrote of the doyngs and sayings of the Apostles, other wrote
and sent diverse epistles to diverse and sundry nations. Furthermore, for ye
confirmation of ye truth, they used the testimony of ye old scriptures, both
out the law, and also of ye prophets, therefore the church was institute and
governed with the self same word before ye gospel was written, wherewith it was
directed and ruled after the gospel was written, for it was one and the same as
Ireneus does testifye. Ireneus. 35
Cap. 1. Quae primu^ concionati sunt apostoli, postea per voluntatem dei
scripto nobis tradiderunt, eaque literis erant prodita, quae ad salutem nostram
videbantur necessaria, vt Johannes dicit haec scripta sunt vt credatis. These
things which the Apostles preached first were afterward by the will of God
delivered unto us in writing, and these things were uttered in letters which
were counted necessary for our salvation (as John says) these things are
written yt you might believe. Wherefore the objection is of no force and very
vain.

Obiectio.
The church has a promise of the holy spirit, that she shall be never void
thereof, forasmuch then as she is governed with the spirit of God, she may
walk safely without the written word: Whether so ever she go, she can neither
judge nor speak any thing but the truth, therefore if she decree and command
any thing without or besides the word, it is to be taken for a sure oracle of
God. Whereupon we conclude, that we must not lean only, to the written word,
but to the censures of the Church.

Responsio.
This kind of argmentacion is not effectual, (it has the promise of the
spirit, or the spirit it self) ergo what soever it does or says, it is well
said and done, it is a fallace called Paralogismus accidentis: Paralogismus
accidentis. 36.
For they which have the holy ghost, do not always those things which they
do, by the instinct of the same. As a builder or chief master of any works
does not offend in building, but because il happens sometimes, that being
occupied with other thougsts and fantasies, not pertaining to the building, he
does sometimes slide and fayl in his work: even so it cannot be gathered by
the force of the promise made to the church, that al things always are
rightly defined in the church, for the greater part overcomes the lesser, The
greater part. 37
and the wurst the better. It may be that the church sometimes does labor and is
subject to affections, and sometime holden in dymme mist. How therefore shall we
understand whether the church has decreed well or ill, except we expend and
examine it by the true touchstone of the holy scripture, where nothing is to be
found but truth? Wherefore the church which is the spouse and wife of Christ,
ought to be subject so to her husband, that she depend only on his mouth, and
harken only to his voice, and that house is ever well ordered, where the wife
does obey the voice of her husband: and that schole is well taught and
nourtured, where the doctrine of their master only is heard. Wherefore let not
the church be wise of it self, but place there the limits and bounds of her
wisdom, where Christ does make an end of speaking. The spirit (says Christ)
whom I will send from the father, shall lead you into al truth. But how?
because he shall minister unto you those things which I have spoken.

Chrysostom. 38.
Chrysostom very aptly does write of the holy ghost after this manner. John, 15.
Multi spiritu^ sanctum iactant, sed qui propria loquuntur, falso illum
praetendunt, vt Christus no^ a seipso loqui se testabatur (quia ex lege
loquebatur et prophetis) Ita si quid preter Eua^geliu^ sub titulo spiritus
obtrudatur, ne credamus. Quia sicut Christus legis and prophetarum impletio
est, ita spiritus euangelii. Haec ille.

Many do boast of the holy spirit, but they which speak their own, do falsely
pretend him, as Christ did testify, that he spoke not of him self, because he
spoke not out of the law and the prophets, so if any thing be obtruded, or
brought in besides the Gospel, under the title of the spirit, let us not
believe it, because as Christ is the fulfilling of the law and the Prophets, so
is the spirit of the Gospel. Thus far Chrysostom.

By this we may easelye perceive, how preposterouslye they do, which brag and
boast of the holy ghost, for no other end, but to commend and commit unto us
under the title thereof, their strange doctrines, and very vain traditions,
and thus we may see what fond objections they have.

Obiectio.
Ireneus and others do much magnify and advance the Church against
heretics, and not the scriptures, Ergo we must not leave only to the
judgment of the scriptures.

Responsio.
I answer. Ireneus and others had to do with such heretics, as did deny the
scriptures, and yet did magnify the Apostles, so that they were enforced to use
the aucthority of those churches, wherein the Apostles did preach, and which had
still retained the same doctrine, so that they used the authority of the same
Church, which grounded her self upon the same word and doctrine which the
Apostles had before taught and written.

Obiectio.
Iorn, 16.
Christ said unto his Apostles, I have many things to say unto you, but you can
not as yet bear them, therefore many things may be ordained by the church, of
the worshipping of God and of religion, which the holy scriptures have not
delivered.

Responsio.
I answer, Christ did not in those words, either mean or speak of
traditions, rites and ceremonies, for it were very absurd to gather so of the
words. For could not the Apostles bear such things, in the which they were
conversant and brought up from their childehoode? Moses was able to teach the
rude people the legal ceremonies, and could not Christ teach and instruct
his Apostles in the like thing? O double foolery. Those many things which
Christ had to say, were those things which he had spoken already, and were
more plainly and effectually to be expounded unto them, and more depely to be
printed in their minds, by the vigor and virtue of the holy ghost, Joan 14.
whom he did promise to send unto them, Paracletus. 39.
for he says a little before: Cum Paracletus venerit, ille suggeret quaecunque
dixi vobis. When the comforter shall come, he shall minister unto you althinges,
which I have spoken. Furthermore, Christ does testify that he told the^ all
things which he heard of his father. Joan. 15.
Omnia (inquit) quae audiui a patre meo, nota feci vobis. All things which I
heard of my father, I have made known unto you, therefore there shall be
nothing left necessary to salvation, which either church or man may make,
ordain, or constitute.

Tertulianus in his book De velandis virginibus. Cum venerit (inquit ille)
spiritus veritatis deducet vos in omnem veritatem, and superuenientia
renunciabit vobis, quae est ergo paracleti administratio nisi haec? quod
disciplina dirigitur, quod scriptura reuelatur, quod intellectus reformatur,
quod ad meliora proficitur? When the spirit of truth shall come (says he) he
shall lead you into all truth, and shall show what things shall happen unto
you, what other therefore is the administration of the spirit, but this, that
discipline is directly understand, that the scriptures are revealed and opened,
that understanding is reformed, and that there is proceeding to better things?

Paul came to Jerusalem unto Peter and the other Apostles, not to receive any
doctrine of them, but he came for the commodity and profit of others, that they
should understand his doctrine and preaching, not to be discrepant from the
doctrine of the other Apostles. For if Paul had perceived any thing to be
defined and concluded of the other Apostles, which he himself had not heard
of Christ, he would never have given his assent unto them, no not to an Aungel
of heaven, if they had brought any other Gospel then he taught. Therefore we
ought in matters of faith and salvation, to lean only unto the written word
of God.

Well, I have been very tedious and long, and was minded to retain you a
little longer in the discourse of this matter, but because I would rather edify
then tedify, I will defer the finishing of this, and so of the whole first
part, until the next day, and so shall I make three days work of the first
part, where I promised but two, but I trust it shall not be without profit
unto you, by the aid and help of Gods holy spirit, unto whom with the father
and the son, be all honor and glory. Amen.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea Praelectio secunda.
Deuteronomion. 1.
THe fifth book of Moses is called of the Grecians Deuteronomion (...), which
signifies secundum (the second) and (...), which betokens Legem: the law, as
you would say a second law, not because it is an other law discrepant from
that law, which was given in the Mount Sinai, but because it is repeted again
after a new sort by the ministerye of Moses, before them which heard it not,
when it was first given in the Mount Sinai, for they which then and there heard
it, were al dead in the wilderness. And this book is a commentary or
exposition of the ten commandments. And in it is likewise set forth, the
wonderful love of God toward his Church, for albeit through their
ingratitude and sundry rebellions against God for the space of.40. years,
they had deserved to be cut of from the number of his people, and for ever to
have been deprived from the use of his holy word and sacraments: yet he did
ever preserve certain in his church, even for his own mercies sake, and would
still have his name called upon among them.

To add and take away. 2.
TO add unto the scriptures is, when any worship or service of God is feigned
and invented, which is not comprehended within the compass of Gods book, of
the which crime how guilty the Israelites were, the books of the Kings do
sufficiently show and prove. What need I to make mention of our time, which is
under the lost son that Antichrist, who has added his own traditions,
(besides Gods word, yea and contrary to the word) as necessary things to
salvation? Furthermore it is added unto the word, when rites, ceremonies, and
other ordinances being abrogate, be revoked and called again to use, to the
which fault both the Jews in these days, and also the adversaries of Christ,
are much subject.

The Jews for that they have in reverence, and do yet observe and keep
circumcision and other Mosaicall ceremonies, with new rites of their own
invention. The adversary for that he does bring in and command after the
example of the Leuiticall priesthode, unctions and annoylings, hallowed
churches, altars, salt, coniured water and such other trashe.

Finallye it is added unto the word, when unto the true interpretations of the
holy scriptures, which the Prophets and the Apostles did show them selves, we
bring our own vain, blind, and gross expositions, after the judgment of
worldly reason and blind affection, yet it is not meant, but that men may
enlarge and amplify the holy scriptures with paraphrases and other plain
enucleations, so that they keep the very true sense and meaning of the holy
spirit, speaking in the scriptures.

To take away from the scriptures, is when we make void the commandment of
God through our own traditions, as for example: where God commands the
Parents to be honored and relieved, we think it better to cast our money into
Corban, and to bestow it upon pilgrimages, images, lights, banner clothes, and
such other trumpery. Also it is taken away from the word, when that thing which
God commands to be given whole, is but half given, as the sacrament under
one kind.

Finally, when yt thing which god made free and set at liberty, is restrained
and made bond, as matrimony, meats, and other things of indiffere^cy.

Of this adversary does the prophet Daniel write, saying. Et sermones contra
excelsum loquetur, the beast shall speak words against the most highest. And
John says also: Cui datum est os loquens magna and blasphemias. Unto the which
beast was given a mouth, speaking great things and blasphemies.

Decrees. 3.
DEcretum, does signify a statute, a sentence, as Pliny writes in his
Epistles. Decreta quibus damnati erant proferebantur, the statutes or
sentences, by the which they were condemned, were brought forth. And the
constitutions of the bishops are called Decreta.

Budeus does write, that Decretum does signify, a firm consent in opinion,
which the Grecians call Dogma.

Some learned men make a difference and distinction between decreta, senatus,
and senatus consultum, so that Decretum is but a special part and a portion of
senatus consultum, and senatus consultum, is general. Dies decretorius, is
called, a day of judging: it is also called Dies criticus.

Apocalipsis. 3.
poklupsi signifies the revealing and opening of secret and hidden things.
It comes of (...); which betokens patefacere, detegere, to make open, or to
uncover. S. Hierome denies this word Apocalipsis, to be found in any of the
Ethnicke writers, and says that it is a new word, feigned of the.72.
interpreters.

Eusebius. lib. 4 cap. 24.
Eusebius speaking of his time, writes that some do reckon ye Apocalips of
Ihon, among ye canonical and auctentical books of ye scripture, and that some
other do not number it among those books. And again in the same book, after
yt he had proved by the testimony of Papias that there were two Ihons at
Ephesus, he adds these words. Truly it is like that one of them has seen
that revelation which is carried about in the name of John. But if we give
credit unto them which came before Eusebius (as Justinius, Tetullianus,
Ireneus, Appollonius, Theophilus, Antiochenus, and other,) it may be affirmed,
that it was the very work of John the apostle. For why should these men so
constantly confirm it to be the book of John the apostle, if they had known
any doubtful sentences of their predecessors to be had of the same? Neither he
brings any one witness of any notable authority, or any doctor, either of his
time, either of any other age, which denies the Apocalips to be saint John's,
saving the testimony of Dionisius Alexandrinus, whose reasons are not of such
force, that they seem to exclude the Apocalips out of the number of the
approved books of the new testament. And where they argue and reason out of the
opinion of their predecessors, that Cerinthus seemed to build his doctrine of
the voluptuous reign of Christ upon the earth, by the space of a thousand
years, out of this book, and that ye phrase does not agree with other of Ihons
epistles, and therefore not to be ye work of John ye Apostle: Al these reasons
(I say) be not of such weight to deserve any credit, for their ancestors, who
being of a contrary judgment, may be alleged against the^. As Tertulia^ and
Origin. Cerinthus, and other heretics, has not only abused that scripture,
but other places of scriptures also. As for the phrase, it is not greatly
discrepant from the style of John, if at ye least we will expend and weigh, that
visions ought to be written in one kind of style, In cronico.
and histories in an other kind. Yea Eusebius himself says, yt in the xiiij.
year of Domitianus, the Christians began again after Neroes time to be
persecuted, and under him was the Apostle Ihon banished into the Island Pathmos,
where he saw this revelation, which Ireneus did interpret. Truly the old
writers seem not without good reason to judge the Apocalips to be written by
saint John the Apostle. For they affirm that work to have come forth about
the time of the end of Domitianus his raygne, at what time John was said to
have returned out of Pathmos, and they had the Asian churches for a witness,
unto whom the Apocalypse was dedicated. For Ireneus in the end of his fifth book,
does correct by the authority of them that saw Ihon, the number of the beast
written thus in Greek.(...). declaring that it is thus written.(...). that
is.666.

Furthermore, that periphrasis wherewith John does note himself, in the title,
must needs signify to them which read with attention, that it is John's
work. The title is this: That it is he, the which bare record of the word of
God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and what so ever he had seen. Which
words commonly be ascribed to none other, but to John the Evangelist.

Besides this, if they do well examine it according to the proporcion of faith,
they can find nothing in it, contrary to the apostolic doctrine. For although
some things seemed to be spoken not according to the manner of other scriptures
(as that he does pray for grace of the seven spirits in the first chapter, and
that Christ is called Alpha and Omega, and the beginning of the creature of
God, in the third chapter, and of the thousand years, in the which the godly
shall reign with Christ in the twenty chapter, the which Cerinthus, Papias,
Justinius, Ireneus, and other understood that it should be after the
resurrection) yet they did well perceive those phrases mistically to be
understand, as in prophetical writings.

And it is easy to be perceived, many articles of the doctrine of the Apostles
to be opened in it, as the article of justification by the blood of the Lamb,
of repentance, of the resurrection of the dead, and of everlasting life, but
especially the doctrine of the Church. Whose whole state he does wholye
describe, that it should have persecutours, heretics, and other enemies, and
yet that it should remain and continue with the ministry.

But especially, he does liuelye paynt and set forth Antichrist, of whom
Daniell, Christ, the Apostles, and Ihon him self in his Epistles also do
entreat, expressing his name, the place, and the idolatrye which should be
committed by him, the confusion of his raygne, and the worshippers of the
world, the persecutions, the time how long it should endure, the revelation
of him, and his last destruction.

Furthermore, they might well understand, by conferring both together, that the
Apocalips does not much swerve from the nature of the vision of the prophets,
and especially of Ezechiel. Yea, rather it does open and set them forth, of
what sort the visions of the.4. beasts are, and of Gog and Magog, and of the
measuring of the temple, and other of like sort.

Finally, if they did consider either the present state of the church, either
the state before, they might conjecture of the end, that the Apocalips proceeded
from the holy ghost, and not to be a book unworthy of the Apostle John. For
those things which in the seven first epistles are written unto the seven
churches in Asia, do set forth the present state of those churches, either the
state which followed sone after, which was known to every man at that time,
whereby they might have declaratio^s of things following. For that in those
epistles, the bishops of the Churches are called Angels, it was a declaration,
that by other Angels also, both good and evil preachers were understood and
signified. Furthermore that which follows, the which entreats of Antichrist
and his kingdom, has certain notes, the which declare those monstrous images,
as for example, that he calls the harlot a city, the which bears rule over
the kings of the earth, where he poynteth as though it were with his finger,
unto the city of Rome. Upon this, the city of Rome, or the Roman empire was
suspected, both in the age following, and also in other ages, to be the
receptacle and seat of Antichrist, as it appears by Ireneus and others.

King Arthur. 4.
ARthur the son of Vter Pendragon, a stripling of xv. years of age, began
his reign over Britain, and governed the land.26 years, having continual
war and mortal battle with the Saxons. Of this Arthur are written many
things in the english cronicle of small credence, and far discordant from
other writers. But yet al agree, that he was a noble and victorious Prince in
all his deeds, and they testify that he fought.xii. notable battles against
the Saxons, and was always victor. But notwithstanding, he could not clearly
avoid them out of his land, but they held their countries, of which they were
possessed.

This same Arthur, after he had brought the Realm of Britain into some good
stay, he poynted the rule thereof unto Mordred his Nephew, and sailed him
self into France, where he did many marvelous things.

Mordred, who had now the governance of Britain, in the absence of Arthur, by
treason was crowned king, through the help of Cardicus king of ye west Saxons.
Of which treason, when relation came to Arthur, being the^ in France, with al
have he made to Britain, where he was met of Mordred, which gave to him three
strong battles. In the which many noble and valiant knights perished. And
lastly, in a battle foughten be sides Glastenburye, Mordred was slain, and
Arthur wounded unto death.

Troilus. 5.
TRoilus was the son of Priamus and Hecuba, whose death was the fatal end of
Troy, for as long as he lived, Troy could not be taken, as the Poets feign. He
being a young man, durst to have combat with Achilles, the valiauntest champion
of all the Grecians, but yet was he slain of him, as Virgil writes.

Part alia fugiens amissis Troilus armis. Wanton books. 6.
IT is to be lamented, yt not only in the time of the idolatrous and
supersticious Church, but even in this time also, such lascivious, vnpure and
wanton books, pearce into many men's houses and hands. Alas, what does such
kind of books work and bring with the^? Forsooth nothing else but fire, that
is, eue^ ye burning flames of an unchaste mind, the brandes of pleasure, ye
coals of filthiness, ye fire I say yt does consume, devour, and root out all the nourishmentes of virtue, the fire I say, which is a proheme and entrance
into the eternal fire of hell, what is so expedient unto a common wealth, as
not to suffer enchaunters and witches to live? For so the Lord commanded by
his servant Moses. And (I pray you) be not they wurs, the^ an hundred witches,
which take men's senses from them? not with Magical delusions, but with the
enchau^tments of dame Venus, and as it were do give them Circes cup to drink
of, and so of men do make them beasts. What punishment deserve such, as
either make or print such unsavory books? Truly, I would wish them the same
reward, wherewith Alexander Seuerus recompensed his very familiar Vetronius
Turimus, Vt fumo videlicet pereant, qui fumum ve^dunt, that they perish with
smoke, which sell smoke. And what other things do these set forth to sale,
but smoke, ready to break out into flame? For, that certain persons bequeath
them selves wholly to the reading of such lascivious and wanton books, who
knows not, that thereof, so comes the first preparatiue of the mind, that
when any one spark of fire (be it never so little) fall into ye tinder of lady
Venus, suddenly it is set on fire, as towe or flax. Many do read the verses
which Lycoris the Strumpet, the Paramour of Gallus the Poet did read, and the
verses which Corynna mentioned in Ovid, and which Neaera did read. It will
perchance be replied, that they do read them, either for the increase of
knowledge, or to drive away idleness. I answer. If any do salute Venus but a
limine, as they say, that is, a far of, as it were in the entry, what kindling
and flames will ensue thereof, I pray you, when the coals be once styrred?

It is to be feared, that no small number of them, who profess christianity,
be in this respect a great deal wurse then the Heathen. The people called
Massilienses, before they knew Christ, yea or heard whether there were a Christ,
but were very Paganes, and sacrificers to idols, yet were known to all the
world, to be of such pure and vncorrupt manners, that the manners of the
Massilies (as Plautus testifies) are commonly counted the best and most
approved manners of al other. These among many other good orders of their well
nourtured city, made a severe law that there should be no Comedy played within
the city, for the argument for the most part of such plays, did contain the
acts of dissolute and wanton love. They had also within their City (about.613.
years before the birth of Christ) a sword of execution, wherewith the gilty and
offenders should be slain, but the vprightnes of their living was such, that
the swoorde not being used, was eaten with rust, and nothing mete to serve that
turn.

And alas, are not almost al places in these days replenished with iuglers,
scoffers, iesters, plaiers, which may say and do what they lust, be it never so
fleshly and filthy? and yet suffered and heard with laughing and clapping of
hands.

Hiero Syracusanus, did punish Epicharmus the Poet, because he rehearsed
certain wanton verses in the presence of his wife, for he would that in his
house, not only other parts of the body should be chaste, but the ears also,
which be unto other members of the body, in the steed of a tunnell, to be
kept, sartas tectas, that is, defended and covered, as the proverb says, and
to be shut to all uncomely and ribaudrye talk. Unto this fact of Hiero, the
worthy sentence of Pericles is much consonant and agreeable.

Sophocles, who was joint fellow with Pericles, in the Pretorshyp, beholding,
and greatly praising the welfauoured beautye of a certain boy passing by him,
was rebuked of Pericles his companion after this sort. Praetoris est, non
solum manus a pecuniae lucro, sed etiam oculos a libidinoso aspectu continentes
habere. Not only the hands of him that is a Praetor ought to refrain from
lucre of money, but also the eyes to be continent from wanton looks.

The Athenians provided very well for the integrity of their judges, that it
should not be lawful to any of the Ariopagites, to write any Comedy or play.
And as I said a little before, Epicharmus suffered punishment at the hands of
Hiero, for the rehearsal of certain unchaste verses, (but I speak it with
sorrow of heart, to our vice ballet makers, and enditers of wanton songs, no
reuengement, but rewards are largelye paid and given.) Is not this the
nourishing and feeding of such Crocodiles, which devour the chastitye both of
single and married women? O the noble voice and answer of Hiero his wife, given
unto him. He being in braule and contention with a certain person, was
embrayded with ye unsavory breath of his mouth, did expostulate with his wife
(whom he married a virgin) because she never told him of that infirmity, which
he might have cured. I would (says she) have admonished you, but that I
thought every man's breath to be of the like savor. O what a severe and
straight keeper of chastity was this faithful and trusty wife? O what an
example of continency is given here to all Matrones? O what a president of
chastity is this, not to come so near any other man, that she did never savor
his breath, but only her own husbands?

If she meant truly, as she spoke, there could be no greater argument of a
notable continency. If she dissembled, yet was it a great ciuilitye toward her
husband. It was likewise a marvelous tollerauncye, to suffer such an
incommodity, so long without lothsomnes?

Geradas, a very ancient man of Lacedemonia, being demanded of his host,
what pain adulterers suffered at Sparta, made this answer: O hospes, nemo apud
nos fit adulter, neque fieri potest. O mine host, there is no adulterer among
us, neither can there be any. For this was the manner among them, that they were
never present at any Comedy, nor any other plays, fearing least they should
hear and see those things, which were repugnant to their laws.

In deed that which is wyllingly and gladly heard, is soon embraced and put in
ure, nor it can be far set from will, which is seen with pleasure.
Plutarch in Pelopida writes, that the Lacedaemonians did so abandon all
dishonest pleasure, and followed virtue, with such labor, that one of the
Sybarites denied the Lacedaemonians to do any great atchiefe or act, when they
did in battle so valeauntly offer themselves to death, for they do that (says
he) to be rydde of the travels and base diet, which they used at home.

O shameless wretch, an ill man, a dissolute man, and a ryotous man to presume
to reprove the most valeaunt men, the best nurtured men, the most civil men
of all the world.

What an impudent face was it? Of the Sybarites, and of their disorders there
be large volumes written by men most eloquent. Philo the Jew in the life of
Moses, does call the leudnes of the Sibarites, Lasciua poemata, wanton poemes,
songs and plays: And Martial names impudent and unchaste books Libros
Sybariticos. The Syberites were the first that taught horses to dance, at the
sound of the troumpe. To be short, there is a proverb sprung of them the
proverb is, Sybaritica mensa, by which is signified all notorious riot, far
excessive, gurmaundise, belly chere, al dissolute and wanton manners, and
sybarissare, is nothing else, but to play the Epicure, and to become bond
servants to Bacchus and Venus.

But to reuert to our purpose, concerning wanton books, which can be no other
thing, but the fruits of wanton men, who although they write any one good
sentence in their works, yet for the unworthiness of ye persons, the sentence is
rejected. The Senate of Lacedemonia would have refused a worthy and a very apt
saying of one Demosthenes, for the unworthiness of the author, if certain men
of authority called among them Ephori, had not come between, and caused an
other of the Senators to pronounce the sentence again as his own saying.
Plutarch writes, that there was a law among the Grecians, that even the good
books of ill men should be destroyed, that the memory of the authors also,
should thereby utterly be blotted and clean put away.

Gerson, sometime chauncelour of Paris, speaking of a certain book made by one
Ioannes Meldinensis, the title whereof is the Romant of the Rose, writes of
that book two things.

First he says, if I had the Romant of the Rose, and that there were but one
of them to be had, and might have for it five hundred crowns, I had rather
burn it, then sell it.

Again says he, if I did understand that Ioannes Meldinensis did not repent
with true sorrow of mind, for the making and setting forth of this book, I
would pray no more for him, then I would for Judas Iscariote, of whose
damnation I am most certain. And they also which reading this book, do apply
it unto wicked and wanton manners, are the authors of his great pain and
punishment.

The like Ioannes Raulius said of the book and fables of one Operius Danus,
that he was a most damned man; unless he repented and acknowledged his fault,
for the setting forth of that book. I would God they heard these things whom
it delights to write or read such shameless and lascivious works. Let them
remember the saying of Saint Paul: Quae seminauerit homo, eadem and metet. A
man shall reap those things which he has sown.

Chrysostom a great enhaunser of Paul's praises, writes that so long shall
the rewards of Paul rise more and more, how long there shall remain such,
which shall either by his life or doctrine be brought unto the Lord God. The
same may we say of all such, who while they lived, have sown ill seed, either
by doing, saying, writing or reading, that unless they repented, the more
persons that are made ill by the^, the more sharp and greater grows there
pain. As saint Austen wrote of Arrius, God save every Christen heart, from
either the delighting or readyng of such miserable monumentes.

Sedechias. 7.
SEdechias was the son of Iosia ye king, and the uncle of Ioachim, he was ye
last king of Judah and Jerusalem, being appointed and co^stituted of
Nabuchodonosor, and he reigned.11. years. Nabuchodonosor changed ye name unto
this Sedechias, for a token of his subjection, inioyning tribute unto him by
taking of an oath, co^maundyng him never to presume to make war against him,
and that he should not favor the Egiptians. But when that not only the rulers
of the Priests, but he him self, with all the rest of the people had offended
God in all filthiness of life, and in covetousness and sloth, he was most
shamefully at the last with all his people cast out from his kingdom and
slain. For in the ninth year of his reign, by the suggestion and entiseyng
of the Egyptianes, he withheld the tribute which he promised unto the Chaldies,
and endeavored to recover his liberty again. Wherefore Nabuchodonosor being
in a great rage, with a mighty host marched unto Jerusalem, but first he took
into his friendship and amity all the Cities of Jury. Afterward when
Nabuchodonosor, had spoiled and burned all the villages and suburbs about, he
pitched his camp about Jerusalem, and besieged it the ninth year of the
reign of this Sedechias, the tenth day of the month of Dece^ber, the which
City, when it was punished with famine and pestilence by the space of.18.
months, at the length he wanne it, and the king and his children with the
rulers of the City being taken captive, were brought as prisoners unto
Nabuchodonosor. When Sedechias the king was brought unto Nabuchodonosor, he
called him a wicked, false unhappy man, and unmindful of his oath by which
he swore unto him faithfully to keep his province, farthermore he called him a
chorle and ingrate, because whereas he had received the kingdom at his hands,
he showed himself most unworthy of so great liberality. When he had spoken
these words against Sedechias, he commanded forth with his sons to be
slain in his presence. Afterward plucking out his eyes, led him bound unto
Babylon. For so Hieremias and Ezechiel before had Prophesied, that he should be
carried bound unto the king of Babylon. And the Chaldies when they had taken
the king Sedechias prisoner, slew all the people, such as escaped the sword,
were made bond slaves unto the Chaldies. And so the Jews, hating the
admonition of the Prophets, rejecting the fear of God, and refusing the
Lords benediction, at the last did eat the fruits of their own ways, and
were filled with their own Counsels.

Hieremias. 8.
HIeremias was a very holy Prophet, sanctified from his mothers womb. He was a
Priest borne of ye Priests in a little village called Anatotites, being not
much dista^t from Jerusalem. He began to Prophecy being but a child. And
afterward he did not only foretell of the destruction of the city, and the
captivity of ye people, but he saw it also as it were with his carnal eyes.
He prophesied therefore only in Judah and Benjamin, and he prophesied of the
fall of Jerusalem by the Ebrue Alphabet four times repeted. The which S.
Hierome and Isidore translated into verses and meter. This Hieremias, therefore
after the subversion and captivity of Jerusalem, was violently of his own
countrymen carried into Egypt, and there after many injuries done unto him was
stoned to death by his own people at Taphnas, and was buried in that place
where Pharao the king once dwelled. And because by his prayer, he had driven
away from that place many noisome serpents, and had delivered the Egiptians
from the peril of those venomous worms, they after that worshipped him with
great devotion and religion.

Heat and cold. 9.
THat is, he shall not be honorably buried among his fathers, but as carions
are cast in a hole, because their stincke should not infect. Josephus in antiq.
10. cap. 8. writes yt the enemy slew him in the city, and commanded him to
be cast over the walls unburied.

Antiochus. 10.
THis Antiochus was called the noble Antiochus, he was the seventh king of
Siria, and Asia, and reigned.xi. years, he gave his sister for wife, unto
Ptolomeus Epiphanes, and therefore that he might the better obtain the kingdom
of Egypt, under pretense of affinity, entered into Egypt, and caused his sister
to kill Ptolomie sitting at meat, and being chosen of the Egyptia^s, after two
years he returned to ye siege of Alexandria, unto who^ one Gneius Po^pilius was
sent as an ambassador from the senate, and the^ he departed from the siege of
the city. This Antiochus subdued the Jews, which dwelte in Jerusalem, whose
prowess and power was so great, that they suffered no king of Siria, after this
Antiochus, who by the treason of Menelaus took Jerusalem and spoiled and
profaned the holy City, commaundyng their laws to be burned and destroyed,
and slew many. At this time also it chaunsed (as it appears in the
Machabees) through the whole City of Jerusalem, horsemen having coat armor
of gold to course in the air by the space of fifty days, and the horses to
be set in their rank and array, wherefore all the Jews desired that this
monstrous sight might be turned unto good success. Notwithstanding all these
things were foresignifications of sorrows unto the Jews, for not long after
the treasures being taken out of the Church, this Antiochus sent wicked me^
unto the^, who constrained the Jews to eat swines flesh, and to depart from
the laws of their country, and to defile the holy place and not to call it the
temple of the Lord but the temple of Jupiter Olimpicus. He enforced the^ also
to relinquishe their religion, and to worship idols, and to build in every
City and street, Churches, Chapels, and altars, and to offer and sacrifice
upon them every day a certain number of swine. He commanded also that none
should be circumcised, threatening great torments, if any presumed to the
contrary. It chanced also at that time, the seven brothers with their mother,
to be taken of the soldiers, and to be constrained almost to eat swines
flesh. Who notwithstanding, with constant minds suffered martyrdom for ye
observation of their laws. At the last the Lord God, who beholds all things,
suffered not this man unpunished, but smote him with an incurable plage, for an
intolerable dolor came upon him, worms boiling out of his body, which did so
corrupt his flesh, that no man could abide the stinch thereof. At the last
having some remorse, he went into the mountains where he dyed miserably.

Epicurus. 11.
EPicurus was the author of yt sect, which was called of his name Epicurea. He
did cou^pt the chief felicity to consist in pleasure, but not in the pleasure
of the body, as Aristippus did, but in the pleasure of the mind, that is in the
lack and absence, of all griefs and so rows. He condemned Logike, affirming
that Philosophy might be comprehended in simple and plain words. He said the
gods had no providence of worldly things. This Epicurus, Lucretius so much
prefers and commends, that he sticks not to affirm that he does so
darcken the light of all other Philosophers, as the sun does darcken the
clearnes of the stars. He is said to have been of a most continent life, but
yet it came to pass that through the name of pleasure (in the which he said
man's chief felicity to consist) such as be given to pleasure were called
Epicures. Laertius writes yt Epicurus was a man of a very spare diete, and
that he lived only with brown bread and water. Notwithstanding his disciples
did degenerate from him, and turned their masters opinion to a bodily and
beastely pleasure.

The like happened to one Nicolaus, one of ye seven deacons, as Eusebius
writes, his words be these. There was a certain sect of heretics called
Nicholaites, so named of one Nicholaus, whom they bosted to be one of the
deacons which with Stephen were appointed of ye Apostles to Minister to the
poor. But Alexandrinus Clemens, in his third book, entitled Stromata, writes
thus of Nicholaus.

This man (says he) having a fair woman to his wife after the Ascension of
Christ, being reproved for the fault of jealousy, bringing his wife into the
middle of the congregation, gave any man leave, that would, to marie her. For
they say, that this action was consonant unto that talk, which affirms that
it is lawful to use fleshly lusts, and they which embrace this heresy,
following without consideration both this doing and saying, do give themselves
most impudently and vnmeasurably to fornication and whoredom. But I hear that
this Nicholaus never used any other wife, then her unto whom he was married, and
that of his children the daughters continued virgins unto their old age, and
that his sons remained vncorrupt and unspotted. Which things when they were
so done, the bringing of his wife, of whom he was coumpted to be gelouse, into
the midst of the Apostles, was rather a wipyng away and a purgation of the
fault objected against him. And he taught that the flesh was to be brideled by
continency from pleasures, which is so much used, for I suppose he would not
contrary to the commandment, serve two masters, wanton pleasures, and the
living Lord.

Leo decimus. 12.
LEo the tenth of that name, being a florentine borne, coming of the noble
house of the Medices, and called John Medices, before he was high Bishop of
Rome, he was a deacon, and sometime Cardinal of S. Maria in Dominica. He was
chosen Pope of ye Cardinals contrary to all men's expectation, and placed in
the rowme of Julius the second next before deceased, he was diligently
instructed from his youth with good literature, and used most learned
scholemasters, especially Angelus Politianus being a man excellent in the
knowledge both of the Greek and the Latin tongue, and he exceedingly favored
all learned men. He was made Cardinal by Innoce^tius, the.xiii. year of his
age, and he was elected Bishop of Rome, when he was.38. years old. This Leo
of his own nature was meke and gentle, but he was often times governed and
carried away of unquiet and rough persons, by whose intisement and arbitreme^t
he did many things insolently and proudly. He being given to delicate idleness
of the body, nourished his flesh all unto pleasures, in diverse desires of the
world, and in pleasant and wanton delights. He loved Musicians, wine and
costly fare, to stir his mind to mirth at his table, but he persecuted the
Gospel of Christ, like Caiphas with an insatiable hatred, both against Luther,
and other learned men: for he made this dissolute answer unto a certain
Cardinal named Bembus, proponing unto him a certain question concerning the
glade tidings of God. It is sufficiently known (says he) to all the world how
much that fable of Christ has profited us, and all our company. This most
wicked impe, expressed openly him self to be that Antichrist, whom Paul called
the man of sin, and the child of perdition.

He spread abroad most large and foolish pardons by his friars, running without
number throughout all Christian realms, to get him money, which he might waste
in nourishing of harlots, and in enriching of his Bastards. He made.31.
Cardinals in one day, gathering a great some of money together, many horrible
wonders happening that same time.

In the year of our Lord.1521. (At what time Solimanus wanne the City of
Rhodes) upon Christmas day, while he went out of his privy chaumber to
celebrate the first Mass in the morning, suddenly behind his back a certain
fair house, sumptuously builded of Marbell stone; fell down to the ground,
and many of his guard were slain. By this token God signified that the
Popedom through his wicked and heinous life, should shortly perish. He
maruelously enriched his Bastardes, and did advance them to high dignities,
both spiritual and temporal, doing injury and damage to other me^. For he
made Iulianus whom they called his sisters son, duke of Mutina, and he
created Laurentianus, duke of Vrbine, and gave to one of them to wife, the
sister of Carolus Sabandus, and to the other the douches of Bolonia. For he had
deprived but a little before the duke of Vrbine, from the possession of his
dukedom, that he might place one of these two bastards in his rowme. He
attempted ye like also against the duke of Ferraria, but in vain, but he made
Julius his nephew a Cardinal. In the year of our Lord.1521. and in the first
day of December, when he hard that the Frenchmen were overcome at Millen of the
Emperors soldiers by his means, and that they were slain, taken and driven
out of Italy, sitting at a bancket wonderful merry, and laughing gave up the
ghost, believing that there was neither heaven, nor hell after this life. Some
write yt at the same time he spoke these words. God has given unto me three
benefits, the first is that I being an exile from my country, returned again
with glory, the second is yt I deserved to be called Apostolic. The third is,
yt I have caused ye frenchmen to be put to flight by my means and help, and
so being taken with a merry fever, died.

Soul. 13.
WHat the soul of man should be, the wise men of this world could yet neither
consent nor agree. Lacta^tius de opificio dei, does deny that man, is able to
attain the true reason and nature of the soul, yet some there be which have
said, the soul to be the spirit of life, created after the image of God, and
inspired into the body of man. Other define it after this manner. Anima
rationalis, est spiritus intellige^s, altera pars substa^tia hominis, nec
extinguitur cu^ a corpore discedit, sed immortalis est. The reasonable soul of
man is an understanding spirit, the second part of the substance of man, nor
it does perish when it departs from the body, but is immortal. But the very
true definition of the soul (after the censure of great learned men) is this.
Anima est substa^tia spiritualis, corpori humano a deo infusa, vt ei ciuncta,
ipsum animet and diri, gat, seperata aute^ a corpore, non intereat, sed
immortalis aeternum viuat. The soul is a spiritual substance infused of God
into the body of man, that being joined thereto, may give it life direct and
rule it, and being separate from the body, does not perish, but live immortally
and eternally.

Obiectio.
The soul is no substance but a certain vital power and quality in man.

Responsio.
The Scripture does prove that the soul is a very substantial essence, and
not a quality. Luke. 16.
What do you say I pray you of the soul of the rich glutton, Luke. 23. Apo.
6.
which was tormented in hell? what say you of the soul of ye theif which was
in Paradise with Christ? what say you of the souls under the altar, of them
which were slain for the word of God? did they not cry with a loud voice and
say. O Lord which art holy and true, how long do thou tarry to judge and
revenge our blood upon them that dwell in the earth? All these things did not
agree unto qualities, but unto very being substaunces.

Question.
Here may be demanded what manner of substance, the substance of the soul is.

Responsio.
Cap. 1.
S. Austen in his book De qua^titate animae writes thus. Substantiam anime
nominare non possu^, non enim ea^ puto esse ex hiis vsitatis notisque naturis,
quas istis corporis sensibus ta^gimus. etc. I ca^ not name ye substance of the
soul, for I do not think it to be of these usual and known natures which we
touch and perceive with these senses of the body. For I judge the soul to
consist neither of earth, neither of water, neither of the air, neither of the
fire, neither of any of them severally, neither of the^ all joined together.
The substance and nature of the soul may be called Simplex substantia, simple
substance, because it is not of other natures. Cassiodorus following these
words of S. Austin does say, that the soul of man created of God, is Spu^alis
and propria substa^tia, is a spiritual and proper substance.

Question.
It is wont to be demanded from whence the souls come: when and how they
enter into the bodies?

Responsio.
S. Hierome does declare, that there were in times past, many and sundry
sentences of the original beginning of ye soul. He writing unto Marcellinus
and Anapsichias says. Super animae statu memini vestrae questiu^culae, imo
maxim ecclesiasticae questionis, etc. Concerning the state of ye soul, I
remember your question, yea rather the question moved of the Church. First
whether the soul does slide from heaven as Pithagoras and all the folowers of
Plato, and as Origene does think. Secondly whether it come from the proper
substance of God, as the Stoickes, ye Manichies, and the Priscilians do
suspecte? Thirdly whether all the souls being ones made together, are reserved
in the treasure house of god, and so sent into ye bodies after the perfection
thereof, as some of the Church, by a foolish persuasion do believe?

Fourthly whether ye soul come Extraduce, as Tertulian, Apolinarius and the
most part of the weast Church do suppose? That is as the body comes of the
body, so the soul should spryng of the soul, and so be of one condition with
brute beasts.

Fifthly and finallye, whether that the souls be made daily of God, and so sent
into the bodies, according as it is written in the Gospel Pater meus vsque modo
operatur, and ego operor. My father does now work, and I do work.

But al these opinions being confuted with strong arguments of the Ecclesiastical
writers, yt only is received and affirmed to be most true, which does affirm
the soul to be made by God of nothing, and to be poured of God into the body,
when yt the fruit is made perfect in the mother's womb with shape and al other
parts. For ye Ecclesiastical definitions do pronounce after this manner.
Dicimus creatione^ animae solum creatore^ oi^m nosse, and corpus tantu^ per
coniugii copula^ seminari, dei vero iudicio coagulari in matrice and compingi
atque formari, ac formato iam corpore anima^ creari and infundi. We say yt the
only maker of al things does know the creation of the soul, and yt the body
is ge^dred only by ye copulatio^ of wedlock, and by the true judgment of
God, to be brought together and to be made and fashioned in the womb, and when
the body is perfited, ye soul to be made and so infused: The Prophet Esaias
writes, Qui format spiritu^ hominis in ipso, which makes ye spirit of man in
him. David in his Psalms says Qui fingit singulatim corda eoru^, Psalm. 33.
He fashioneth and makes their hearts every one. Job. 10.
Job does most lively and manifestly set fourth the making both of the body and
of the soul, saying: Thine hands have made me and fashioned me round about,
and will thou destroy me? Remember I pray thee yt thou have made me as the
clay, and will thou bring me into dust again? have thou not poured me out as
milk, and turned me to cruddes like cheese? Thou have clothed me with skin
and flesh, and joined me together with bones and sinowes.

Behold in these words Job describes the conception and fashioning of the
body of man in the mothers womb. Now he speaks of the soul saying. Thou
have given me life and grace, and thy visitation has preferred my spirit. By
the testimonies of these scriptures, it must needs be granted, yt the soul is
created of god, and poured into the body being made perfect in the mothers
womb, look more for this matter in the.28 Epistle of saint Austen sent to
saint Hierome.

Cardinalis. 14.
AFter the institution of Priests was ordered, it seemed good to the ancient
fathers to divide and dispose their offices, that every one might both know his
duty, and do it accordingly. Therefore the chief matter of all, that is the
cure of souls, was appointed unto Priests, and yt especially began at Rome,
where the Apostolic see was now cou^pted to be placed. And least, that
administration should be confused, Euaristus the Bishop first of al, divided
titles unto priests, and instituted.vij. deaco^s, who for the truths sake
should wayt upon ye preachers, following the examples of the Apostles, who did
make so many deacons to Minister unto them. Secondly, afterward in the year of
our Lord.267. Dionisius appointed Churches, Churchyardes and parishes, as well
unto the Priests of Rome, as unto the priests of other countries. Besides he
appointed unto Bishops dioceses, commanding every one to be contented with his
own bounds and limits. These towns in which several Churches of any
diocese are set, we call parishes, having their bounds and limits severed
and set fourth. The inhabitants within the said territories are called
Parochiani, and the said places are called, Parochiae, of this word Parochi.
For Parochi, were certain officiers among the Romans, who did provide wood
and salt for common legates and ambassadors, and because there was no
sacrifice made among the Jews without fire and salt. And as the officers
called Parochi, did prepare things necessary for the use of ye legates: so the
Priests being ye officers of ye church, did provide unto their parishners such
things as are needful for ye soul. Therefore we call the^ not with out a cause
Parochias, yt is parishes. And not long after Marcellus limited into a certain
number, the titles which Euaristius first gave to Priests at Rome, commanding
by a decree yt there should be.25. titles, which in a manner were as dioceses,
to Baptize such as came daily from the ge^tils, into ye congregation of the
Christians, and to bury the dead. These things, I have taken out of Damasus and
Platina and other late writers of the Ecclesiastical history, of whom I
marvel yt they did not either in this place, either in any other, yt I can
read, declare who were the Priests, unto whom these titles were given at Rome,
from whence undoubtedly the Cardinals took their beginning. But they (as we may
conjecture) thought it good to pass over yt matter by silence, being a thing
nothing notable, which certain lawyers endeavored after to seek out. But they
having no certeinty to bring for themselves, went about to show, yt the order
and college of Cardinals did descend from the Jews, and before all other, one
Andreas surnamed Barbatius, made a comment of this matter, whose words are
these: That goodly saying in the first of Samuel, Dn^i sunt cardines terre, and
posuit super eos orbe^. The pillars of ye earth are ye Lords, and upon the^ he
has set the foundation of the world, which authority one Hostiensis, a doctor
of the law, applied unto the Cardinals of Rome. For as the door (says he) is
directed and holden up by the hooks, so the Church of Rome is governed and
ruled by the counsel of the Cardinals.

Will you see here how some of the lawyars does sometimes rack, rent, and
stretch fourth the holy scriptures, even as the shoemakers do draw and stretch
fourth their lether with their teeth? If those words spoken by Anna should be
so applied, that they which be called Cardinals should govern the Christian
public weal at Rome: why should it not rather be referred unto Bishops and
Priests, which were long before the Cardinals, and as chief and principal
governors, did direct and order matters of religion, which thing Andreas
himself does prove by the testimony of one Guido, Archdeacon of Bononie,
whose words be these: In times past the chief priests or Bishops in every
Church, were called Cardinals, that is principal and heads: And then he
proceeds. It is written in Deutronomie. If thou perceive any matter to be
hard and doubtefull to be judged, go unto the Priests of the Leuiticall order,
Deuteronomy. 17.
and unto the judge, that is at that time appointed, for they shall declare unto
thee, the truth of the judgment. And upon this he says, marcke here that the
Leuitical Priests in ye old Testament were counselors, in ye divine law of
God, although they were not called Cardinals, but such Priests, now adays as
are counselors of the Lord, are called Cardinals. Here Siculus Andreas, does
not consider, yt Bishops and other inferior Priests did at ye first occupy yt
place, which now Cardinals do occupy, the which governed the diocese of Rome,
together with the Bishop of Rome, more then by ye space of a.1000. years
before any man obtained yt glorious name of a Cardinal, the which now every
where is of great estimation.

And therefore it may well be said, that these Lords Cardinals began but of
late time, and lately succeeded in the rowme of ye Leuitical Priests. But at
length a long time after, when one Boniface the.iij. had obtained of the
Emperor Phocas to have a prerogative above all other Bishops, and when also
the Roman Bishop, with the whole senate of the Priests of yt city began to
have authority and preeminence above all other, then these Priests unto whom
these titles in times past were given, specially the cure and charge of souls,
began to be adorned with the name of Cardinals, as a proper name of supreme
dignity, and so that function which at the beginning was onerous, at the last
became honorable. In so much that Innocentius the fourth, which in the year of
our Lord.1244. occupied that see, enacted at the last by a public decree,
that the Cardinals riding upon horses, should were a read hat, that greater
renoume might grow to that order. So that he in conclusion made the name and
the order of Cardinals, famous, honorable, and very supreme and high, who at
the first being but of a base calling, and very paynefull in the function, does
now place and set all their sanctimonie, holiness, and labor in vain titles,
of skarlet gowns, and red hattes, and be unprofitable burdens of the earth,
Fruges consumere nati, wastyng and deuouryng those revenues, which should
sustain and maintain a number of godly and learned preachers, Hec pro maxima
part, ex Polidoro and Balaeo.

Serpent. 15.
THere may a question be moved, whether the Serpent which deceived Eve were a
very true serpent, or else some fantastical show in the likeness of a Serpent.
It is to be marueiled, that the serpent did not use a word or two when he
spoke to the woman, but did use a sensible and distinct communication, yea and
spoke not plainly and simply, but demanded suttelie, and answered craftly.
Whereupon suspicion may arise, that this was not a very Serpent in deed, but
feigned, and only apparent, but the words of Moses do reject this suspicion:
for Moses does not say, Simpliciter, that the serpent spoke to the woman these
words (why has God commanded you) but Moses spoke before other things of
this serpent, whereby it is manifest, yt he spoke not of a feined serpent, but
of a very true serpent made of god, with other beasts of the earth, for he says.
Et serpes erat callidior cu^ctis anima^tibus terrae quae fecerat deus. And the
serpent was more subtle then all the beasts of the earth which God made,
behold he says (which God made.) It cannot be therefore a feined serpent, but a
very natural serpent. The pain also which was inflicted to the serpent that
he should go upon his breast, eat earth, and be most odious to mankind, does
declare, that it was no feyned but a very Serpent in deed.

Question.
How could it be that a true and a natural serpent did spoke with the tongue
and voice of man? seeing that the gift of speaking was given not unto beasts,
but only to man, in so much that speech is called, Proprium, ac differentia
hominis.

Responsio.
The serpent did not speak by his own proper faculty and power, but by the
instinct and operation of some other power, that is, either by the power of
man, or by the operation of God, or else by the virtue of the good or ill
spirits. He could not be impelled by the power of man, for Adam and Eve, which
then as yet were only alone, did not know ye thing which was done. Neither is
it agreeable that they could or should give the faculty of speaking unto the
Serpent, for as much as it was in a cause most pernicious and hurtful unto
themselves. Neither can we, nor ought we to ascribe this fact unto the
operation of God: for neither the temptation it self, neither the
transgression of the commandment, neither the pain following, can suffer,
that God might be thought to have spoken unto the woman by the Serpent in so
crafty and gilefull manner. Therefore the opinion which certain persons, called
Ophitae, held of the serpent, is most detestable and wicked.

Thirdly it cannot be said that the good angel did it, for the thing it self
does evidently declare, that it was not an angel, which was the faithful
Minister of God, and a lover of man, but the enemy of God, and adversary of
man, and a very liar and deceauer.

Wherefore it can no otherwise be concluded, but that the Serpent did speak,
by the instinct and instigation of the ill angel.

The slanderous cauillation of Iulianus Apostata, in the which he scoffingly
demands in what manner of speech the Serpent communed with Eve, and wherein
this fable does differ from the fables feigned by the Grecia^s, is most found
and frivolous. For those things which are read in their histories, as of
Xanthus, Achilles horse, which told before his masters death, and of Ca^sus the
flood, which saluted Pythagoras, of the tree which spoke unto Apollonius: of
the oak in Dodona, using the voice and speech of man: and of Jupiter his Bull,
in the I Will of Rhodes, speaking like a man, are no fables, but may be counted
true, as things done by the instincte and operation of the wicked spirits.
Notwithstanding this impulsion of Satan, took nothing away from the nature of
the Serpent, no more the^ the nature of Balaams Ass was diminished, when he
spoke in the voice of a man, by the help of the Angel of God unto his
master, neither those Prophets which being impelled die the inspiration of the
devils, foreshew things to come, cease to be men, but do still retain the
nature of man.

Question.
Why did Satan, in tempting of the woman, use rather the Serpent, then any
other beast?

Responsio.
The serpent was a most mete instrument for Satan, by the reason of the
wisdom wherewith he was endewed, by the which he excelled all other beasts.
Therefore Satan used the serpent to accomplish his purpose, that his work and
enterprise might thereby be less suspected, for that thing which seemed to be
done by ye natural wisdom of the Serpent, might be thought to be farthest
from suspicion and disceite.

Therefore Satan chosed not either sheep or Pigeon or any other beast, but only
the help of the wysest beast, to deceive the woman, and did direct the
Serpents tongue, and did conceal and cover his own act and instinct, under
the nature and wisdom of the beast, that he might thereby deliver himself
from suspicion of his own craft and deceit.

Saint Austen upon Genesis, writes that the Serpent was called wise, not
properly in his one life void of reason, but by the spirit of an other, that
is, the devil which was called the wisest of all beasts. For although the
Angels, which transgressing did fall from the high seats, yet by nature they
be more excellent then all other beasts, by the preeminence of reason.

Again Saint Austen writes saying. Proinde and prude^tissimus om nium
bestiarum, hoc est, astutissimus ita dictus est Serpens propter astutiam
Diaboli, qui in illo and de illo agebat dolum, quemadmodum dicitur, prudens and
astuta lingua, quam prudens vel astutus mouet ad aliquid prudenter astuteque
suadendum. Non enim est haec vis seu virtus membri corporalis quod vocatur
lingua, sed vtique mentis, quae vtitur ea.

Furthermore the Serpent was called the wisest beast of all, that is the
suttelest, through the craft of the devil, which wrought his deceit in him,
and by him, as it is wont to be said of a man's tongue, it is a wise and a suttil
tongue, which a wise and a suttill man does wisely and craftily move to persuade
any thing. This power and strength is not the virtue of the corporal member,
which is called the tongue, but of the mind of man, which uses the tongue as an
instrument.

Question.
It may be demanded, how it came to pass, that the woman did not abhor and
fear to come with the serpent, but did so lightly and so soon make answer to
his question?

Responsio.
It is credibly and most like to be true, that the Serpent had not that shape
of body which he has now, for that he goes upon his breast, and crepeth on the
ground, drawing his body after him, it came not that he was so made at the
beginning, but by the curse and vengeance of God inflicted upon him, for the
tempting of Eve. For God said quia fecesti hoc, maledictus es inter omnia
animantia terrae, etc. Because thou have done this, cursed art thou among all
the beasts of the earth. Thou shall go upon thy breast, and thou shall eat
earth all the days of thy life. Wherefore it is to be gathered, yt the Serpent
at the beginning had an upright body, a fair countenance, and pleasant to
behold. Beda writes, that the Serpent had, before God cursed him, the face of
a virgin. Luther says, that he went upright as a Cock, but to dispute about
this, makes not so greatly to edifye.

Furthermore, it is most certain, that there was not at the beginning such
enmity between the woman and the Serpent as is now, for that enmity was
inflicted after the fall, when God said: Inimicitias pona^ inter te and
mulierem, I will put enmities between thee and the woman. Therefore there is no
apparent reason, why the woman should abhor or fear the talk of the
Serpent: yea, it may be gessed, that the Serpent before this temptation, did
insinuate himself unto the woman, by a singular familiarity, whether this were
done by a natural favor and study, and so by that occasion offered unto Satan,
or whether Satan by his instinct did move the Serpent before, to enter such
familiarity with the woman, that he might be afterward the sooner admitted to
seduce and deceive the woman by his temptation.

Cirillus does suppose, that the woman did not fear the communication of the
Serpent, because through her simplicity she thought it to be given to all
beasts to speak with man's voice.

Nota.
Mark here, that the first Parents were not safe against temptacio^, no, not
in Paradise, being a place of so singular and great prerogative. Let no man
therefore, in what place soever he be set, flatter and promise to himself, any
security, for the respect of any place, be it never so holy. Consider also what
an evil success that temptation brought unto man, which was suggested in the
garden of pleasure. Christ was tempted also of the self same enemy of
mankind, yet not in Paradise, but in a wild and deserte place he was tempted,
but not vanquished. There is great difference between the first man and the
second, there is great difference between paradise and the wilderness, between
the place of pleasure, and the place of abstinence and fasting. The tempter did
practice the power of his malice in both the places, but the event and end was
diverse and sundry. This is not spoken to make any difference of places, but to
exhort men to beware and take heed when they be enhaunced on high, and when
they live in pleasures and al prosperity, as it were in a certain terrestrial
Paradise, to take heed (I say) that their felicitye be not turned by the craft
of Satan, into the occasions of infelicity.

Saint Ambrose does note, that the serpent did rather tempt the woman, then
Adam, because that he knew Adam to have heard out of the mouth of God him
self, the commandment of the tree of the knowledge of good and ill, and the
woman to have received the commandment not from the mouth of God, but from
Adam. But this conjecture of Ambrose is not allowed of certain learned men.

Heaven and earth shall pass. 17.
There are two places of the scripture, which seem repugnant one to the other.
The first is. Psalm. 101. Thou aforetyme have laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the work of thy hands, they shall perish, but thou shall
endure. The other is Ecclesiastis. Cap. 1. The earth remains for ever. But if
thou expend and vewe well these two places, they do not dissent one from the
other. There be many which think and say that heaven and earth shall utterly
perish, Math. 24. Lu. 21.
because they read in the Gospel these words spoken by Christ: Caelum and
terra transibunt, Heaven and earth shall pass. But Christ means no such
thing, but animating and encouraging his disciples minds patiently to sustain
the afflictions to come, does speak of the perpetuity and firmnes of his word,
as though he should say, heaven and earth being most firm and sure, shall sooner
perish, then my word shall fail, which word is so sound, so constant and so
firm, that no age or oldnes shall empeire it, or cause it to perish, no
dangers and tumults shall suppres it, no assaults nor asseiges shall throw it
down.

Terra in eternum stat, The earth stands for ever, and the heaven shall not
pass. That is. The substance of them shall remain for ever, but the form and
shape thereof shall be changed and made new, Apoca. 21.
we read in the Apocalips, of a new heaven and a new earth, and how the first
heaven and the first earth passed away. The heavens at the last coming of
Christ shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with heat. But we look
(says Peter) for new heavens and a new earth, according to his promis, 2
Peter. 3.
wherein dwells righteousness. As gold is dissolved by fire, not to perysh and
to be lost, but that it might be made more pure, the dross being purged from
it, so the elements shall be made more fine and pure. VVherof Tertulian in his
book De ecclesiast. dogma: Cap. 60.
(if at the least he be author of the said book) writes thus: Elementa, id
est, caelum and terram no^ credamus abolenda per ignem, sed in melius
commutanda. etc. We may not believe (says he) the elements, yt is heaven and
earth, to be taken away by fire, but to be changed into a better state, the
fashion of the world also, that is the image, and not the substance to pass.
Even so our flesh also shall be dissolved, not eternally to perish, but shall be
made more holy and more incorrupt. Saint Paul writes to the Corinthians,
Cadit corpus animale, resurgit spirituale. It is sown a natural body, Cor. 15.
it rises a spiritual and an immortal body. In the earth, where we now dwell,
there is no righteousness, but malediction and curse, as it is written in
Genesis.3. Maledicta terra in opere tuo. Cursed be the earth in thy work.
Satan is the prince and God of this world Paul writing to the Romans, says:
The creature is subject to vanity, not of his own will, Romans 8.
but by reason of him which has sudued it under hope, but the creature shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God. But that heaven and that earth in which we shall then dwell,
shall be made new and more perfect, where we shall reign perpetually, all the
wicked being destroyed, and put from the said earth. To this purpose pertayneth
that which is written in the proverbs of Solomon. Proverb.2.
Recti in terra perdurabunt, and probi in ea superstites erunt. Impii e terra
extirpabuntur. The just shall dwell in the land, and ye upright men shall
remain in it, but the wicked shall be cut of the earth, and the transgressors
shall be rooted out of it. Again David in his.27. Psalm, I should have
fainted, except I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord, in ye land of the
living. Again in an other place he says: Evil doers shall be cut of, Psalm. 37.
but they that wait upon the Lord, shall inherit the land, meke men shall
possess the earth, and shall have their delight in the multitude of peace.
Christ in Matthew does say: Beati mites, quoniam ipsi hereditabunt terra^, Math.
5.
blessed be the meke, for they shall inherit the earth. It is aptly said, they
shall inherit, because the saints shall dwell on the land being made new, and
shall live in it eternally, and therefore it is called the land of the living.
Wherefore when Christ said, heaven and earth shall pass, it is to be
understand, that it shall pass to a pefection, that is, they shall be made more
pure and vncorrupt, they shall be changed, that is, they shall have an other
face, form, and show, and there shall dwell righteousness, where now raygneth
iniquity. There shall be peace and joy, where now is deceit and injury, but my
word (says the Lord) remains for ever, it shall never be changed, nor shall
put on any other face, but shall endure one, and the self same word
perpetually.

Of burning and melting of the Elements at the latter day, look upon one
Hieronimus Magius, who has written.v. books De mundi exustione, and de die
iudicii, of the burning of the world, and of the day of judgment.

Saint Gregory writes of the fire that shall come in the latter day after this
manner: Tantum accendet ignis iudicii, quantum ascenderunt aquae dilunii. The
fire of judgment shall burn so much as the waters of the great flood did
occupy in ascending above the tops of the mountains, which saying is to be
understand as touching ye effect of purging, but touching ye effect of
i^nocatio^, it shall asce^d further, as Aquinas does expound it

Some after the gloss of Bid do say, that the two Elements, that is, fire and
water, shall be wholly and utterly consumed, but the other two Elements the earth
and the air, shall remain whole after an other state. Yet it seems more
true, that the whole four shall remayn, concerning their substance, and not
concerning the state of generation and corruption. For then the moving of the
heavenly bodies above, which as a second cause, are the beginning of alteration
and change, shall cease. But concerning their proper substance, they shall
remain, having qualities agreeable to their incorruptible state. The fire and
water shall be wholly consumed, because they be specialiter actiua, yet not by
substancial property, but concerning the property and power of converting other
things into them. The other two which be passiua, because passibility shall be
turned into impassibility, shall be changed into a better face and form. Heat
in the fire, and coldness in the water, shall be utterly consumed. This is the
censure and judgment of Thomas Aquinas.

If thou desire to learn more of this matter, look upon saint Austen De
ciuitate dei, libro.20. cap. 18. and. 16.

Esaias. 18.
THis Esaias was a most holy prophet, borne at Jerusalem of a noble family. He
governed by his learning and counsel, the church of the Jews.80. years, and
at the same time lived these Prophets, Amos, Oseas, Micheas, Jonas. He was the
son of one Amos, not Amos the prophet, for his name is written with Ain,
being the first letter, and Samech, being the last letter of his name. But Amoz
the Father of Esaias, is written with Aleph, and the last letter is Zade. What
manner of man this Amoz was, there is no certain tradition.

Rabbi Kimhi gives this note. Ignoramus familiam eius de quanam sit
tribunatus, patres tamen tradiderunt quod stars fuerint Amazias et Amoz. We
know not his family of what tribe he came, notwithstanding the fathers wrote
that Amazias and Amoz, were brothers. He speaks of Amazias the king, father
to Ozias.

Upon this rose the opinion that this prophet was a noble man borne, and of a
kings blood. Notwithstanding, although this opinion have some likelihood of
truth, yet the prophet has never the more estimation by yt, for he is much
more noble by ye preeminence of visions, the^ any king. For there be many
worthy things to be recorded of him: first, that his prophecy is set before
other prophets in the holy scriptures, which is not so to be understood,
that he was the first of all other, which did either prophecy or write. For
there were many other, which did not only prophecy, in his time with him, but
also before him. As Nathan, Gad, Addo, and Ahias, did prophecy before him. And
in his time did prophecy Oseas, Amos, and Zacharias, not that Zachary which is
the last of the twelve lesser prophets, but an other of the same name, which
was before him. But yet their prophecies are set after, and placed among ye
prophecies of the smaler prophets. The reason whereof is this. Although this
prophet Esaias were not first, neither in order nor time, yet he is had of such
estimation, for the worthiness and excellencye of his prophecies, that he is
worthily set before the other. And truly, those things which he prophesied of
Christ, are so perspicuous and plain, that he was counted of the ancient
fathers, not only a Prophet, but also an Evangelist and Apostle, and as it
were, a present beholder of the cross of Christ. Saint Hierome says, that
Esaias writes not a prophecy, but rather a Gospel. The scriptures of the new
Testament do manifestly declare, of what efficacy and force his prophecies were
in the eyes of Christ, of the Evangelists, and of the Apostles. For there is no
book of the old testament (except the Psalter of David) out of ye which we
read more testimonies to be brought in the new testament, then out of it. If
you number them, you shall plainly perceive that there be.60. places cited out
of that book, and 64. out of the Psalms. Christ himself in the sinagoge of
Nazareth, Lu. 4.
when he rose to read, took the book of this Prophet into his hands, did
read it, and shut it again. Yea, this prophet was had in price among the very
Heathen, as it appears in the history of a certain Eunuch of Aethiopia,
Candaces the queen of the Ethiopians chief governor. At the last when he most
sharply and oftentimes had reproved Manasses the king of Jerusalem, he was by
him caused to be cut a sunder with a wooden saw, and was buried under an oak,
at a place called Rogel, which is a well nigh unto Jerusalem.

Apparitions. 19.
RAbanus Archbishop of Magunce, does show out of the testimonies of Gregory the
first, and of Beda, that the souls of persons deceased, have often times
appeared, and have declared, that sacrifices and prayers of the living, have
much profited them after their death. But it is to be marueiled, that me^ of
such good learning would build upon so weak a foundation. Deuteronomy. 18. Esaias. 8.
For the Lord does forbid in his law, to ask or to seek any truth of the
spirits of the dead. The prophets do send us from such oracles, unto the law
and testimony of Gods word. Luke 16.
You may hear in the Evangelist Saint Luke, how the rich glotton, lying in
torments, does cry and say: O father Abraham, I pray thee, that thou wylt send
Lazarus unto my fathers house, for I have.v. brethren, that he may testifye
unto them, least they also come into this place of torment. But Abraham said
unto him: they have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them. And he said:
nay father Abraham, but if one came unto them from the dead, they will amend
their lives. Then he said unto him: if they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead again. By this
place it is most certain, and evidently confuted, that the souls have not,
nor cannot appear after their death, no not the blessed souls, much less the
souls of the wicked.

Obiectio.
But many partly by art Magic, partly by the power of god, have returned
again into this life, after their departure from hence.

Responsio.
To this objection Tertullianus makes answer in these words. Sed and si
quasdam reuocauit in corpora dei virtus, Libr de anima.
in docume^ta iuris sui, non idcirco communicabitur fidei and audaciae Magorum,
and fallaciae somniorum, and licentiae poaetarum, atqui in resurrectionis
exemplis, cum dei virtus sieve per prophetas, sieve per Christum, sieve per
Apostolos in corpora animas representat solida and contrectabili, and satiata
veritate praeiudicatum est hanc esse formam veritatis, vt omnem mortuorum
exhibitione^ incorporalem praestigias iudices.

Although the power of God has called again certain souls into their bodies,
in token of his might and right, it ought not therefore to be ascribed to the
trust and boldness of the Magicians, neither to the vanities of dreams and the
license of Poets, but rather in the examples of the resurrection, when the
power of god, whether by the Prophets or by Christ, or else by ye Apostles, does
render souls into their bodies: it is declared by the sensible and sufficient
truth, that this is the very form of thy truth, that thou may judge every
incorporall apparition of the dead to be deceytes and delusions.

Chrisostom writing upon Saint Matthew, does demand this question Quid ergo
respo^debimus ad illas voces: Anima talis ego sum? (excipit) Non anima defuncti
est quae ista dicit, sed demon, qui haec vt audientes decipiat effingit. Et
mox: Quare vetularum haec verba, imo desipientium ducenda sunt, and puerorum
ludibria. Et iterum, no potest anima a corpore separata in his regionibus
errare. Iustorum animae in manu dei sunt, in fantium similiter, non enim
peccarunt. Peccatorum vero post hunc exitum continuo abducuntur, quod a Lazaro
and diuite planum efficitur.

What shall we say therefore to those voices which say: I am such asoule? He
answers: that voice which speaks these things, is not the soul of any
person departed, but it is the devil which does feign these things to deceive
the hearers. Wherefore such words are to be counted old wives tales, and
foolish fables of children: for the soul separate from the body, does not
wa^der in this world, for the souls of ye righteous are in the hands of God,
likewise ye souls of infants, for they have not sinned. The souls of ye
sinners after their departure, ar straightway carried to their place, which
plainly appears by Lazarus the righteous, and the wicked rich man.

Obiectio.
It is found in the holy scriptures, that Samuel the prophet did appear after
his death, therefore it may be concluded that souls do return after their
departure, and do inform men of certain demaundes.

Responsio.
That thing which appeared, seemed in show to be Samuel, and therefore by a Trope
is so called, but in deed it was not Samuel, but a fantastical appearance, and
an illusion of Satan, which to prove, I urge this argument. Magic was straightly
forbidden in the law of God, therefore the blessed spirits, which living yet in
their bodies, did abhor and resist all il means, did not obey wicked arts
forbidden, but the damned spirits do exercise themselves in such unlawful ways
and means. It may again be said, that Samuel did foreshew that thing which
came to pas the next day after. What then? what will you gather of that? It was
no hard matter for Satan so to do, who a little before had heard Samuel being a
live, to speak many things unto Saul. Likewise he might know by certain
tokens, as by ye fear of Saules host, he might know before ye judgment of god
against Saul Tertullian says: Absit (inquit) vt anima^ cuiuslibet sancti ne
dum prophaetae a demonio credam a^ extractam, edocti quod ipse Sarhanas
transfiguretur in angelum lucis, nedum in hominem lucis, and iam deum se
asseneraturus signaque portentosiora editurus ad euertendos, si fieri possit,
electos.

That is to say: God forbid (says he) yt we should believe, the soul of any
saint, much les of a prophet, to be brought out by the devil, forasmuch as we
be taught, yt satan does change him self into an angel of light, and not only
into the show of a man, and will affirm himself to be god, and will work
marvelous signs, to overthrow (if it be possible) the very elect.

Saint Austen does judge the like of the apparition of Samuel in his second
book and.3. question, Ad Simplicianum, and ad Dulcitii quaestiones.

Rabbi. 20.
THis word Rabbi comes of this verb Rauau, which has two significations.
First, it signifies to encreace and to multiply, as in the Psalm,
Multiplicati sunt super capillos capitis mei, et in Genesi. Psalm 69. Gene. 1.
Crescite et multiplicamini. Of this verb comes Rau, which be tokeneth
multum, magnum, copiosum, much, great, abundant.

The other signification is iaculare, seu arcum trahere, to shoot, or to draw
a bow. And Roueh Kesheth, is no more but magister arcus. Moreh hachitzim, id
est, habens peritiam multiplice^ eiiciendi sagittas. Having much cunning to
shoot arrows. Of this the Hebrews do cala master and a teacher Rabbi, for
much and great learning which one has, or ought to have. For Rab (as I said)
signifies multus much. The Caldeans and the Sirians do cala master in their
tongue Ribbon, in steed of which in the Gospel is written Rabboni.

The Jews in these days, dare not usurp and challenge to themselves this
name Rabbi, yea although they be never so well learned, except they redeem this
title of their elders by favor and money, whereby it comes to pass, that
they which be rich; and yet slenderly learned, obtain this name and degree,
but the poor, although they be never so well learned, are defrauded of that
name and title. And we learn out of the Gospel, that this ambition did then
reign among the Jews.

The great doctors (which write commentaries and paraphrases) upon ye old
testament, and upon other their books, are called Rabbini, whose names you shall
find in reading their works, and specially in Petrus Galatinus book
entitled De misteriis arcanae veritatis.

Apostoli. 21.
Apoolos comes of this verb (...), which signifies to send out one in
message, or to send in commandment, and so Apostolus signifies him that is
sent, a messenger, a legate, an apostle, whereof be four kinds. Some were
Apostoli, sent of God, without man, as Moses and Paul. Some sent of God, but
by man, as Jesus Naue, and which be ordinarely called, some by man alone, as
they which come to that fu^ctio^ by savor, and for lucre and ease, the fourth,
be they which thrust in them selves, without ordinary calling, of whom the
prophet Jeremy speaks: Iere 23.
Ecce currebant and ego non mittebam eos, behold they ran, and I sent them not.
Apostoli also do signify letters missiue, vt fregit apostolos in senatu, he
rent the letters in the senate house. Apostoli also were certain Magistrates at
Athens, whose office was to rule and ouersee the navy and shyps, properly the
master of the galleys.

Propheta.
PRopheta signifies a foreshewer of things to come, a prelat, a prophecier,
and an interpreter of prophecies (as Plato witnesses in Timaeo:) A poet, as
Paul writes ad Titum. ca. 2. a seer, as it is said. lib. Regum. 1. cap. 9. and
as Hierom writes in.12. chapter of the prophet Oseas.

Prophetare in the scriptures, is taken diverse and sundry ways. First it
signifies the declaration, as well of things past, as of things to come, as
Moses, who wrote of the creation of the world, and of other things past, is
called a prophet, as well as Esaias, Esaias. 7.
who prophesied before that a virgin should conceive, and as all the prophets
which showed things to come. As for example, one wrote of Christ's nativity, an
other of his doctrine, an other of his passion, an other of his kingdom. And so
al other who prophesied of him to come, and to be the redemer of ye world, are
called prophets.

Secondly, prophetare is to expound and open prophecies word for word

Thirdly, prophetare is to sing psalms, and to sing laud and praise to god as
you read of Asaph, Idithum, and Heman, which three sang confession, 1, Para. 25.
praise, and thankesgeuing unto God, with harps, viols, and Cimbals. Heman is
called there the kings seer, that is, a prophet.

Asaph sang, or as some write, made these. 12. Psalms.
49.7^.73.74.75.76.77.78.79.80.8.1.82. And in.1. Reg. 18. prophetare is taken to
sing songs, and to do sacrifice, as there it is said of Baals prophets, when the
midday was passed, and they had prophesied until the offering of the evening
sacrifice

Fourthly, prophetare is to preach ye scriptures, to open ye true sense and
meaning of the^ to ye people, to teach, to admonish, to exhort, to comfort, to
improve and correct corrupt manners by the holy scriptures, 1. Cor. 14. Act. 13.
and in this signification Saint Paul uses it.

Fifthly, some take prophetare to hear the word of god, 1. Cor. 11.
and to be exercised diligently in the law of God, as mulier orans et
prophetans, a woman praying or prophecieng, that is, hearing the word, or else
prophecieng, But prophetare in this place, is to show ye mysteries of god, to
ye edifieng of the hearers. Therefore the words of Paul seem not to make for the
sense of hearing, forasmuch as he speaks of a woman, which did either pray or
prophecy For although weme^ were forbidden to speak in the congregation, whereby
it signified that they ought not to have any publik function in the church,
which is ordinary and perpetual, yet if the spirit of God come upon the^, they
are not forbidden, but yt they sometime may speak. Anna the prophetisse spoke
in the temple, of our Savior, Luke 2. Iudic. 5. Exodus 15.
when the virgin Mary was purified. Debora sang praises to god openly. So did
Maria ye sister of Moses, and there be many places which testify yt women in old
time did openly prophecy, Regu^. 2.
Josias ye king did ask counsel of Holda the prophetisse Anna the mother of
Samuel, 1. Samu.
made a godly song. Mary the virgin, the mother of Christ, Luke 1. John. 20
sang a godly psalm. The Aungel commanded Magdalene to show Christ's
resurrection unto the Apostles. And God says in Joel, 2. Joel.
De spiritu meo effundam super vos, and prophetabunt filii vestri, and fili^
vestrae. I will pour my spirit upon you, and your sons and daughters shall
prophecy. Act. 21.
Philip also had many daughters, which did prophecy. And that it was the manner
in the old time, to prophecy openly in the congregation, Ier 27. and. 28.
it does plainly appear in Ieremye, and many other places. Agabus the prophet,
did openly prophecye unto Paul, that he should be bound and tied at
Jerusalem. Act 2^.


The name of a prophet is taken sometime for a name of honor, as in the prophet
Esaias, Esaias. 8.
where it is said that Esaias came ad prophetissam, he came unto the
prophetisse, which conceived and bare a son. Esaias means it by his own wife
(as Musculus writes) whom he calls a prophetisse, not that she had the gift
of prophecy, as far as we can read, but because she was the wife of a prophet,
whose office was most noble and honorable Notwithstanding some do refer the
name of a prophetisse here, to the virgin Mary, and by this may we see, there
be, tot sensus, quot capita.

Under the name of a prophet are understand sometimes false prophets, as in
Zachary, Zach 13.
and they be known by.3. notes, which do discern the^ from true prophets. The
first note is, if they be taken in lies. Such were they in who^ the lying
spirit spoke, 3. Reg. 22.
sent of God to deceive Achab. The second note is, if they speak truth, and
that in the name of the Lord, which yet they speak, for that end that they may
deceive the people, or if they prophecy openly, in ye name of their false gods.
The third note is, if in a rage, fury, or trance, they foreshew things to
come, and yet understand no part of those things which they utter.

On the other side, the true tokens of godly prophets are three, verity, piety,
and intelligence. Verity consists in this, when those things which they
foreshew, are certainly performed and done.

Piety, is when with their prophecies they do exhort the people unto ye study
of godliness, and induce them to the worshipping of one true God.

Intelligence, is when they understand with a sober mind those things which
they do prophecy. VVher these three things do concur, there is a most sure
argument of a true Prophet, endued with the spirit of God. And such which are
adourned with these three properties, are instructed to prophecy three manner of
ways. First, either by visions and signs seen in sleep, or by expres words,
or else by inspiracion of the holy spirit. Of prophecy by visions, Number 12
you may read in the book of Numbers, where God says. Si quis inter vos
fuerit propheta domini, in visione apparebo ei, et per somnium loquar ad illum.
If there be a prophet of the Lord among you, I will be known to him by a
vision, and will speak unto him by dream. Of prophecy by express words without
figures or shows, is mentioned also in the same chapter, where God says: At
non talis seruus meus Moses, ore enimad os laquar ei. But my servant Moses is
not so, Ibidem.
who is faith full in all mine house, unto him will I speak mouth to mouth, and by
vision, and not in dark words, but he shall see the similitude of the Lord. Of
prophecy by the inward inspiration of the spirit, Number. 12.
we read also in the book of Numbers, where it is recorded, how the.70.
Elders, receiving the spirit of God, did prophecy. In which place, and in many
other, there is no mention made, either of visions, or of expres words. A
Prophet is called of the Hebrews Neuia, of the Grecians Propheta, and of the
latin men Vates.

Luke. 23.
SVch things as pertain to the history of Saint Luke the Evangelist. Hierome
has sufficiently touched, which history I thought it good here to recite. Luke
(as he says) a Physician of Antioch, was not ignorant of ye Greek tongue, he
was ye follower of the apostle Paul, and a companion unto him in all his
peregrinacions. He wrote the gospel, of the which the self same Paul, thus
said: 2. Cor. 8.
We have sent our brother with him, whose praise is in the gospel throughout
all Churches. And to the Colossians: Our dearly beloved brother, Col. 4. 2.
Tim. 4.
Luke the Physician saluteth you. And unto Timothy: Luke only is with me. He
did set forth also an other noble work, which is entitled. The acts of the
Apostles, the story of which endures unto the end of the two years, in the
which Paul abode at Rome, that is, unto the fourth year of Nero, by ye which it
is to be gathered, that the book was made in the same city. Wherefore, that
treaty of Paul and Thecla, and the whole fable of Leo his baptism, are to be
counted among the apochriphal scriptures. For what a likely matter is this,
that Luke being the inseperable companion of the Apostle Paul, among other
acts of his, should be ignorant of this thing only? And Tertullian also,
living not long after that time, declares, that a certain priest in Asia, a
fautor of the Apostle Paul, being convicted of thou, that he was the author
of that book, confessed that he did it for the love that he bare to Paul. And
therefore some think, that as often as Paul in his Epistles says (iuxta
euangelium meum) according to my Gospel, he means the volume of Luke. And he
says, that Luke learned the Gospel, not only of the Apostle Paul (which
lived not with Christ in the flesh) but of the other Apostles. The which he him
self declares in the beginning of his work, saying.

Luke. 1.
Even as they delivered them unto us, who saw the^ from the beginning, and were
Ministers of the word. Therefore he wrote the Gospel according as he heard, but
the Acts of the Apostles, according as he saw. He lived.84. years, having no
wife, and was buried at Constantinople, unto the which city his bones with the
relics of Andrew the Apostle, were removed from Achaia the.20. year of
Consta^tius, but Nicephorus. lib. 2. cap. 43. writes thus of Luke. Luke borne
at Antioch, which is in Celo syria, being a Phicisio^, and also a notable
painter, came unto Paul from Thebe, and there renouncing the errors of his
country, believed in Christ, and became of a curer of the body, a Physician of
the soul. He wrote his Gospel being instructed by Paul, and also the acts of
the Apostles. When he had hene a time at Rome with Paul, he returned into
Greece, instructing much people there, in the knowledge of the Gospel, and at
the last by the enemies of Gods word, he was hanged upon a green Olive tree,
because there was scarsity there of dry wood to make a gallows of. He yielded
his life unto God, when he had lived.80. years.

Platina in the life of Cletus the first, writes thus. In the time of Cletus
was Luke the Physician, well learned in ye Greek tongue, the follower of Paul
the Apostle, and fellow unto him in all his iourneys. He wrote the Gospel,
which is much commended of Paul. Wherefore, not without cause Paul calls it
his Gospel. He wrote the acts of the Apostles, according as he saw with his
own eyes. He lived.83. years, he had a wife in Bithynia. He was buried at
Constantinople.

Theophilus. 24.
ERasmus with others, do suppose Theophilus to be a proper name, and to have
been a very special friend of Saint Luke, unto who^ Luke did dedicate both the
books, written by him, that is, the book entitled, the gospel of Luke, and
the book named the acts of the Apostles. Others judge, that Theophilus is no
proper name, but a general name, signifieng every friend of God, for so is the
etymology of the word, which is compounde of (...) id est, deo: God, and (...),
id est amicus, a friend. Howsoever it be, it is most certain, that saint Luke
in both his books, would not teach only one man, but all men studious of
gods glory, and desirous of eternal salvation, whom we may well call
Theophilos.

Other do think, that this Theophilus was a mighty prince, or some noble man,
because that Luke in the preface of his gospel, does give him this Epitheton,
Prestantissime Theophile, most noble Theophilus. Notwithstanding, this
Epitheton in the Greek, has diverse and sundry interpretacions, as Erasmus
does note in his annotacions. Whose words be these: I marvel, why Lyranus,
did suspecte this Theophilus, to be some prince or noble man, because Luke
says ( Optime Theophile. Luke. 1.
) Is it peculiar and proper only to great men, to be called the best? But it
may be, yt Lyranus, did read this in some gloss, which as he might read, yet
through the ignorance of the Greek tongue, he could not understand for (...),
among the Grecians signifies Robur, sieve imperium, strength, might or imperie,
and (...), is Vincere, to overcome, and one to have his full purpose. Therefore
Paul in the Acts of the Apostles does call Festu^, (...), that is, as you
might say, of great power. And so does ye interpreters, as Origene,
Theophilactus, and Ambrosius, testify. Although (...), does not only signify
a man of might, but also a good man, and a man worthy much to he esteemed: and
of that comes the superlatiue (...), which signifies Optimum. Hactenus
Erasmus.

Other learned men will have this Epitheton, (...), to come of this word (...),
which signifies a superior, mighty, of great authority, whereupon they judge
this Theophilus, to have been some notable prince.

There were diverse other of that name, as Theophilus, Bishop of Antioche
the.vi. after the Apostles. He wrote certain books, Lib. 4. ca. 24.
whose titles Eusebius recites. He lived in the time of the Emperor Marcus
Antonius verus.

There was an other of that name, who was Bishop of Alexandria: he was
immediately before Cyrillus.

Johannes euangelista. 26.
THe history of John before the Ascension of Christ, and like wise of a long
time after, is evidently declared in the scriptures: but what he did at the
last, and what became of him, diverse authors do diversely write. Eusebius does
show that when the Apostles were gone into strange and far countries, the
region of Asia, chanced to John: and many do affirm, that John remained at
Ephesus, as Bishop and Pastor there: but this does not certainly appear, nor
at what time it should be done. For all the time in the which Paul passed
through Assia, and did there accomplish his Ministry, there is no mention
made of John. And it is plain and manifest, that S. Paul did constitute and
make Timothy Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, and that he wrote two Epistles
unto him being there. Therefore it may be, yt John being very aged, after the
death of Timothy, went to Ephesus, when he had before in other parts of
Assia, accomplished his ministry.

Irenaeus writes, that Paul was ye founder of the church of Ephesus, Lib. 3.
cap. 3.
and that John remained there unto the time of Traia^ the Emperor: Lib. 3.
cap. 1.
he also says, that John made his abode at Ephesus, when he wrote his Gospel.
The occasion why he wrote the Gospel, Lib. 3. cap. 11.
was (as Irenaeus, says) to resist ye delusions and heresies of one
Cerinthus, who said Christ, not to be the true son of God, nor coessentiall
with the father.

Saint Hierome in his Cataloge writes, that John the last of all other
Evangelists, wrote his Gospel, at the request of ye Bishops of Asia, against
certain heretics, and chiefly against the doctrine of the Ebionites, which
then began to spring, who did affirm, yt Christ was not before his birth
corporal. Whereupon he was driven to write his Gospel, by the which he
confirms the divine nativity of Christ, which was without beginning.

Lib. 3. cap. 24.
Eusebius shows an other cause, which is this: When John had ouerseen and
vewed the writings of the other three Evangelists, he did allow all things
rehearsed of the^ as most true. Because he saw and perceived certain things
omitted, which were done before ye captivity of John ye Baptist, he thought
good yt they also should be added to them and recorded.

Other learned men do think, that John perceiving the other Evangelists fully
to prosequte the historye of Christ, he therefore in his Gospel did ricite many
sermons of Christ.

The persecutions and conflictes which John suffered of the raging persecutors,
are not al committed to writings: but doubtless he was most cruelly entreated and
handled, he was one of the first that was put in prison, with Peter at
Jerusalem, and (as certain do record) he was banished from Ephesus into the
Island of Pathmos, by the cruel Emperor Domitianus the.14. year of his reign.
Where some write, that John was put into a vessel full of hot scalding Oil,
it is uncertain, in so much yt some doubt of ye place, whether it should be
done at Ephesus, or at Jerusalem. Saint Hierome of this matter makes no
mention. He without question wrought many miracles by his life time, but where
certain of the^ are written and reported of some authors, neither auctentike
nor worthy great credit, it is not best nor most safe to receive every thing
that they write, and specially to give no great faith unto one Julius
Africanus, otherwise named Abdias, who reports, yt John brake precious stones
and made them whole again, that he did turn boughs, trees, and stones, into
gold, and brought them again to their former nature.

Nor it is without superstition which is ascribed to John, yt he should allow
the deed of one Drusiana, who being coupled in matrimony, did withdraw her
self from her husbands company without his consent. And those words ar most
horrible which Abdias, does attribute to John, the words be these. Virtutu^
opes habere non potest, qui vult diuitias habere terrenas. He can not have ye
riches of virtues which has a desire of riches of the world. O saying most
wicked, do we not read in the holy Scriptures of many which were very rich
and notwithstanding were good and godly.

The like doctrine for the space of thirty days to be given for repentance,
is repugnaunt to the words of Christ, who taught to forgive seventy times
seven, if need were, in one day. It seems also a new thing, that John in his
life time should build a Church in his own name at Ephesus, for it evidently
appears, that Churches and temples began not to be sumptuously builded in the
memory of saints, before the time of Constantinus, the great. Abdias, does
also write, that by the prayers of John the temple of the great goddess Diana,
at Ephesus, Lib. 3. cap. 23,
together with the great idol was destroyed, and how that John drank poison
without hurt, these and such other things I refer to the judgment of ye
reader.

Eusebius recites a very elegant history out of Cleme^s Alexa^drinus,
concerning John. Clement (says he) does both note the time, and also declare
the history, being most necessary for all such as are delighted with honest and
profitable matters, which history Sozomenus also touches in his commentary.
The words of Eusebius, are these. Hear a fable, and not a fable, but rather a
true history which is written of John the Apostle, and left to be read of the
posterity. The history is this: When John returned from the Island Pathmos,
unto Ephesus after the death of the tyrant Domitian, he went, being requested,
unto such places and countries as lay nigh about Ephesus, partly that he might
constitute and order Bishops, partly that he might set in an order the
Churches, and partly yt he might choose the clergy by lot, out of the number of
such as were appointed by the holy ghost. At what time therefore he came unto a
certain city not far distant from Ephesus, (whose name also some do
rehearse) and when among other things he had comforted his brethren, turning
his countenance unto him that was appointed head and Bishop over ye rest,
seeing a certain young man there being of a strong body, a comlie face, and of
a fervent mind, I commit this young man (says he) most earnestly unto the, here
before Christ and this congregation. When the Bishop had received him,
promising him all diligence and endeavor, John speaking after the same manner,
requested him again ye second time. The^ afterward he returned unto Ephesus.
But the Bishop had this young man home into his house, and kept him and brought
him up, and won him unto ye knowledge and light of the Gospel: and at the
last he was Baptized, and became a Christian. But when the said Pastor became
over gentle and remiss unto him, he suffered this young man to use the company
of idle and dissolute and naughty persons, to his great hurt and destruction,
who first led him unto sumptuous ba^ketting and feasting, and afterward they
took him with the^ to rob and to steal in the night. After this, they
entised him to attempt more heinous and greater acts, he being accustomed a
little and little, and trained in naughtines according to his stout courage,
like a courageous horse and untamed colte, having his mouth hardened, gnawing
upon the bitte, and leaving the right way, was carried headlong toward hell more
and more. At the last dispairing of his salvation in Christ, he took in hand no
small entreprises. And because he had once perished, he thought to commit some
great and notorious thing, disdaining to have equal lot with his fellows.
Calling therefore his companions unto him, and gathering together a great
company and rablement of thieves, he became a captain and head over the^, and
began to be most cruel and most addict unto manslaughter. It chanced in the
mean time, that through vrge^t and necessary business, the congregation of
Ephesus, sent for John. Who when he had ended such matters, wherefore he came
to them, said to the Bishop. Go to, go to, render again to us that thing which
Christ and I committed to thy charge, in the presence of the congregation,
whereof thou art Pastor and ruler. The Bishop first of all was abashed,
thyncking that certain money which he had not received, should be demanded of
him, and he could not answer for such things, which he had not, and yet did
not discredit John's words. But when John had said, I require again the young
man and the soul of my brother, the Bishop bowing down his countenance, with
sighing and tears answered, he truly is dead. John demanded how, and of what
death. He said he is dead unto God, for he became an evil and a pernicious
man, and in the end he became a thief and a common robber, and now of late
has he remained with his like companions in this hell against the Church. The
Apostle therefore hearing these words, rent his clothes, and with great
lamentation smote him self upon the head, saying. I have left a good keeper of
my brothers soul, let me have a horse and one to conduct me in the way: And so
taking his horse, he made as much have out of the congregation as might be. And
when he came to the appointed place, he was taken of the scoute watches of the
thieves, and neither flieng nor refusing, cried, saying. I am come for this
purpose, lead me unto your Lord and master, who in the mean time looked for
his pray all armed. As Soon as he knew that it was John that was brought, being
ashamed, fled away. Old Saint John followed with all his might, forgetting his
great age, and cried unto him. O my son, why fliest thou from me, why fliest
thou from thy father, a naked and old man, have pity upon me my son, fear
not, thou have yet some hope of salvation. I will render unto Christ^an
accoumpt for thee, yea if need be, I will dye for the, even as Christ died for
us. I will give my life for thee, believe me, Christ sent me unto thee. When he
hard these things. First he stood still: but with a sad and heavy
countenance, afterward he threw away his harness, and forthwith trembled and
wept full bitterly. He embraced John when he came unto him, and aunswering with
weping as well as he could, was Baptized again with tears, having his right
hand only hidden and covered. The Apostle when he had promised him, and had
protested yt he would obtain remission of his sins, and had prayed and
fallen upon his knees, and had kissed his right hand, as purged again by
repentance, he reduced him again unto the Church. And after he had prayed
for him with continual intercession, and had striued with continual fastings,
and had quieted and confirmed his mind with comfortable sayings, he went not
from him (as they say) until he had fully restored him unto the Church. And
so gave a goodly example of true repentance, and a great experiment of
regeneration, and a noble badge of the visible resurrection.

Irenaeus, does recite a story worthy memory: Lib. 3. cap. 3.
there be (says he) which hard Policarpus, say, yt John the disciple of the
Lord going to be bathed at Ephesus, when he saw Cerinthus within, did leap out
of the bathe unwashed saying, that he did fear, least the bath would fall
down upon them, forasmuch as Cerinthus, the enemy of truth, was wtin the
house.

Finally of the death of John there is no certainty. Saint Hierome does say,
that in the.68. years after the death of Christ, he died at Ephesus, and was
buried by the said City.

Other do write, that John went down alive into the grave, which he
commanded his disciples to make, and so bad the^ to cover him with earth,
which being done, there appeared out of the grave a very great brightness, and
manna also flowed out of it. But when these things cannot be certainly proved,
they must be left to them which love to read Legendes.

Some suppose, that young man which followed Christ and was clothed in linen
upon his bare body, (and whom when the young men would have taught, Mark, 14.
S. Mark does write to have left his linen cloth and fled from the^ naked) to
be John the Euangeliste. Other do say, that it was James, the brother of the
Lord, which was named Iustus, and who after the Ascension of Christ was made
Bishop of Jerusalem, but it is an opinion void of reason to think, him to
be John, for what need was it to conceal his name, when that the fall of
Peter, being more foul and greater, was openly declared. Furthermore John did
follow Christ straight way when he was taken, and did help Peter to enter into
the Bishops palace, and how could he have his clothes so sone again, for as much
as he was a stranger at Jerusalem. Again the name of a young man did not
agree unto John, for he was almost of the same age with Christ. Furthermore
John fled with all the other Apostles (as Saint Mark says) Discipuli eius
relinquentes eum, omnes fugerunt. All his disciples leauyng him, did fly.
Others do say, that he was a young man of the same house, in the which Christ
kept his passover. Other do conjecture, that it was a certain young man of
the village of Iessemanie, or of some other house more nygh adjoining, in whose
large orcharde Christ was with his disples. But let every man have his
sentence. It makes no great force who it was. But the holy Ghost would have
this example to be testified, that he might show with what fury and rage the
enemies did flee upon Christ, and that the miracles might be more clear, by
the which he preserved his Disciples that they should suffer no hurt of
their enemies, for when the rage was so great, that they laid their hands
upon an unknown ladde, who will doubt but that all his disciples were
preserved by the hand and power of Christ? forasmuch specially as Peter by
his fighting did provoke the enemies before. And here is left unto us, a
document, that persecution once begone, does spare none, but is fierce and
cruel against all, without exception, against high and low, young and old,
sparyng no sex, man, woman, child or infant.

Hyperbole. 27.
HYperbole is a trope in Rhethorique, and it is a word or a sentence that
passes man's faith and credit: and it is spoken either to augment a thing, or
to diminishe it. To augment, as this: Est fulminis oty or alis. Swifter then
the wings of the lyghtnyng. Niue candidior. VVhiter then snow. To diminishe,
as this: Est tardior testudine. He is slower the^ any snaile. Vix ossibus
heret. The skin scarce cleaves to the bones. To augment also. Jeremy. 31.
Ad caelum vsque peruenit. It came up to heaven. Likewise. Genesis. 15. faciam
semen tuum sicut puluerem terrae. I will multiply thy seed as the duste of
the earth. And in John's Gospel the last Chapter: there are also many other
things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written every one, I
suppose the world could not contain the books that should be written. To
diminishe, as in Leuiticus.26. Terrebit te sonitus folii volantis. The sound
of a leaf that falls shall make thee afraid. And many other sentences in
the holy Scriptures, are full of Hyperboles.

A most sure word. 28.
HAbemus firmiorem sermonem Propheticum, 2. Pet. 1.
we have a most sure word of the Prophets. The testimony of the father from
heaven when he said. Hic est filius meus dilectus, Math. 3. Mat. 17.
this is my beloved son, in whom is my pleasure, hear him. But as yet all
did not believe the Evangelical history, nor the preaching of the Apostles.
Therefore for their cause Peter teaches the certeyntie of the Gospel, to have
his foundation in the oracles of ye Prophets. For the doctrine of the Prophets
was very familiar unto the Jews, and for that cause he calls it a more sure
word. Peter does use here more testimonies to prove the verity of the
Gospel. First, that Christ was approved and affirmed to be God, by the
magnificent voice of the father from heaven. Secondly that all the oracles and
sayings of the Prophets do tend to that end (as Paul writes) quod
(inquit) promiserat per Prophaetas suos in Scripturis sanctis. Rom 1.
That (says Paul) which be promised by the Prophets in the holy Scriptures.

Obiectio.
It seems very obsurde, that Peter does call the sayings of the Prophets
more firm, then the voice pronounced by the very mouth of God. First
forasmuch as the authority of the word has been all one from the beginning.
Again the word was more confirmed by the coming of Christ.

Responsio.
Peter here has a respect unto his country men, and to their nation, which
were accustomed and nousled in the Prophets, of whose doctrine they had no
doubt, but to be infallible and most true. Wherefore when the Jews were
persuaded that whatsoever was written in the Prophets, did come from the Lord,
it is no marvel that Peter said, we have a more sure word. In the which words
this is no question to be moved. Whether the Prophets deserved more faith and
credit, then the doctrine of the Gospel, but Peter in speaking these words,
had a respect only what reverence, honor, and credit the Jews gave to the
Prophets. In whose study the Jews are brought up even from their childhoode.
In fine, Peter calls it a more firm word, for their sakes which were
infirm and weak in the faith, to make the text plain. Because there were
many, which as yet gave no credit to the Gospel, and to the preaching of the
Apostles. Peter willing and wishing to allure and drive them to the light of
truth, he says, that he preaches nothing, but that which was showed before
by the Prophets. As though he should say, that which we speak of the
divinity of Christ, the Prophets spoke the same (As David writes in his
Psalms. Psalm. 2.
) Dominus dixit ad me, filius meus es tu, ego hodie genui te. The Lord has
said unto me: Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. Again. Ex
vtero ante luciferum genui te. Psalm. 110.
Therefore Peter calls it a more sure word, for their cause, which were not
yet confirmed in the faith, and which were newly converted from the Judicial
religion unto Christianity, and who also were wholly bent to the Prophets and
to the study of them. And not that Peter does by these words prefer the
testimomonie of the Prophets before the testimony of God spoken from heaven:
but that he might the better receive them into the faith, he does allow and
commend their diligent study in the Prophets, and so calls it a more sure
word, not because it was so Simpliciter, but because the Jews so counted it.
Where some do say that the comparative is put here for the positive, they do
not thoroughly expound the text and circumstaunce thereof.

Private interpretation. 29.
THere may be two senses and meaninges of these words. For this Greek word
(...), does signify as well violent entrance, as an interpretation. And in yt
sense does ye most part take these words: That is, that we ought not to run
rashly to the readyng of the Scriptures, brynging nothing with us, but only
our own sense and meaning, for the Scriptures are not to be expounded after
every man's lust and fantasy, but as the holy Ghost does require, which
inspired the Prophets, which spirit is the only one interpreter of himself
in the Scriptures, and that exposition does conteyne most true, most godly, and
most aboundaunt doctrine, when we leauyng our own judgments, do submit our
selves to the teaching and exposition of the holy Ghost. On the other side, it
is a most wicked profanation of the Scriptures, when we arrogantly thrust our
selves in, to understand the Scripture by our own wisdom and our own
reason: for the Scriptures do conteyne high misteryes of God, hidden and
unknown unto our heads. Yea it does conteyne the noble treasures of life,
far passing our capacity.

Here may we learn, that the proper and private interpretations of the
fathers are conuelled and quite overthrown, and we be forbidden to trust and
to lean to such expositions. If Saint Hierome, Saint Austen, or any other of
the fathers do expound the Scriptures of themselves or by their own heads,
we must refuse their interpretation. For Saint Peter does here forbid, any
man to expound the Scriptures by his own spirit. The true exposition is
propre, only to the spirit of God. Wherefore, if any of the fathers can
show his enarrations, aptely to be taken out of any part of the Scriptures,
which do allow the place by him expounded to be so expounded in deed, we
ought to embrace his interpretation, otherwise to give no credit unto him nor
his expositions.

The Papists here do show themselves to be twice foolish and ignorant, when
they gather out of this place, that the interpretatation of one private man
ought not to be taken as auctenticall, but the interpretation of many, and
especially of general Councelles ought to be received (say they.) In this
they be childishely deceived: for Peter here does not call a private
interpretation, the exposition of one private man, but does teach, that
whatsoever comes from manne or men, few or many, if they bring nothing
but their own judgment, to be profane, and ought not to be received.
Therefore if all the whole world should conspire together, and all their
wits were laid together in one head, yet whatsoever shall come only from
them, Saint Peter does count it nothing but proper and private. For the
Prophets and other holy men of God being inspired of the holy Ghost, did
write and speak that which they uttered. Without the which spirit,
whatsoever one or many do bring, is nothing else but private, (that is to
say) their own imaginations.

To make it plain, Saint Peter here does put down the pride of certain vain
men, and specially of the Jews, who flattering them selves with the persuasion
of great readyng and much learning, thought they might interpret the
Scriptures as pleased them. God forbid (says Peter,) for then were the gift
of Prophecy, coming from the holy ghost, in vain, which prophecy is so to
be expounded, as the holy ghost does inspire, and not by private interpretation
of any other whatsoever they be, and how many soever they be.

Other learned men do expound this place of private interpretation, to be
nothing else but that the holy Scriptures were not given by man, nor by the
power of man, but by the holy ghost, as Peter says after in the same place,
and when we read them, we must be fully resolved that god speaks unto us, and
not man. To end, Peter therefore does bid, that faith and credit should be
given unto the Prophets, as to the infallible oracles of God, and not as
coming and flowing out of the proper motion of men.

Timotheus. 30.
TImotheus Saint Paul's dearling, having one of Greece to his father, and a
mother of the number of the faithful, whose name was Eunica, was borne at
Lystris, a town in Lycaonia, 2. Timo. 1.
where Paul found him, being then a young man and somewhat sickely, he was
very well learned and brought up in the holy Scriptures from his childehoode.
Act. 16.
And therefore Paul took him with him, 1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 5.
to be a mete companion and fellow for him, and did first circumcise him: that
the Jews who there knew him to be borne of an hethenyshe father, should not
be offended, and that he might also with more fruit have ye function of the
ministry, for Paul (willing to win, as much as lay in him, all unto Christ)
became a Gentile to the Gentiles, and a Jew to the Jews, and so Paul having
obtained Timothy to be his fellow Minister, did in process of time so love
him, that he counted no man more dear or precious unto him, and therefore he
calls him Timothy my well-beloved son, faithful in the Lord. And in many of
his Epistles he does greatly commend him, for the singular and rare gifts that
were in him, as for the constancy of his faith, his integrity and soundnes of
life, and such other notable virtues and qualities. Paul used him his
companion in his peregrinations, in his messages, and diverse and sondrie other
ways. When Paul was by tumulte cast out of Thessalonica, he left Timothy
there with Sila. And when he came to Athenes, he sent a commandment to them
both, to repair unto him. Timothy iourneing with Sila from Macedonia, found
Paul at Corinthe, from whence he sent him again to Thessalonica, Act. 7.
to comfort the Christian brethren, yt they should not be to much troubled and
thoughtfull for his afflictions and persecutions. Act. 18. Act. 19. 1 Thessalonians 3.
And so returnyng from thence, he came to Paul to Corinth, from whence he
followed Paul taking his journey toward Macedonia, even unto Asia, where he
was desired of Paul to stay at Ephesus, where he remained. And as Eusebius,
and Sopronius, and other do write, he was made first Bishop of Ephesus, but
after what sort and how long he was Pastor and governor of that Church, Act.
20.
there is no certeynty to be red in any ancient or approved writter. Lib. 3.
cap. 14.
And it cannot be certeynely concluded, that he suffered Martyrdom, being
beaten with stakes and stones to death at Ephesus, because he repayryng nigh to
the porche of the temple of the goddess Diana, did rebuke and reprehende the
idolatry of the Ephesians, which many do affirm to be so, as Antoninus, and
Vincentius. Henricus de Erfordia do write, Lib. 38. cap. 10.
that he was slain under Nerua. Nicephorus says, Lib 3. cap. 71.
that he suffered under Domitianus. Iacobus Philippus in supplemento
Chronicorum, does say, that he was martyred at Ephesus, and yet (says he) some
write, yt he suffered under Nero, and yt unto him appeared two Angels, when he
was in torments speaking unto him. Erige caput in caelu^ and vide. Lift up thy
head to heaven and see, who so diong, saw ye heavens open, and Jesus holdyng a
Crown of precious stone, and saying unto him: this shall you receive of my
hands. Which thing when one Apollinaris saw, did cause him self to be
Baptized, and that the Liuetenaunt caused both of them, persistyng in the
Confession of Christ, to be beheadded. Unto this Timothy, Paul wrote two
Epistles from Laodicea, which are extant in the new Testament.

Titus. 31.
TItus likewise was the disciple of Paul. Eusebius, writes and Sophronius
also, that Titus, Lib. 3. cap. 4.
was made first of Saint Paul Bishop of Carthage. He was also Bishop of Creta,
where he died, and was buried. But when Paul was captive at Rome the second
time, Titus went into Dalmatia, as Paul writes in his Epistle to Timothy.
Unto this Titus, 2. Tim. 4.
Paul wrote one worthy Epistle from Nicopolis. Paul makes mention of Tite,
in the Epistle sent to the Galathians, his words be these: Neither yet Titus,
Galat. 2.
which was with me, though he were a Grecian, was compelled to be circumcised.
The cause why he would not circumcise him, he renders in the same place,
saying because of the false brethren that crepte in, who came in privily to
spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, to bring us into bondage.
Circumcision being a thing then counted indifferent, was thought either to be
used, or omitted, as edification might rise thereof: And this rule is always to
be respected, that all things are lawful, yet all things are not expedient.
Paul therefore circumcised Timothy, least he should have given an offense unto
the infirm and weak brethren. And than he was conuersaunt and remained
amongst the weak, to whom he ought to give place for a time. And he might
have done the like in Titus, but the state and condition was diverse from the
other, for certain false brethren were there always in a redynes, to slander
him and his doctrine, and would have said: Behold this bold merchant Paul,
which is so stout a chalenger of liberty, when he once comes into ye
presence of ye Apostles, he is sore quayled, and puts down his stoutnes.
And note here, that when Saint Paul denies Tite to be circumcised, by reason
of the false brethren, the words may be taken two manner of ways. The first is
this: They that owe no good will unto my preaching, could not obtain at my
hand, that I would circumcise Titus being a gentile, no not among the Jews,
which were converted unto Christ And this did I to defend my liberty against
them, which thought and taught that circumcision was necessary to salvation.

The second sense and meaning is, this Paul, of a set purpose would not
circumcise Titus: for he knew, that certain thrust them selves into his
company, either to get him enemies among the Jews, if he would freely despise
their ceremonies, or else if he had wholly refrayned from the Christian
liberty, than they would have triumphed against him among the Gentiles, as
against one that being confused, had retracted and revoked his former doctrine.
Therefore as sometime we must bear with the weak in the beginning, so ought we
also stoutlye to defend the christian liberty against the wicked, who will
make a thing of no importance necessary to salvation. Here may be discoursed
the doctrine of scandalum datum, and scandalum acceptum, but that I will
defer unto an other time.

Agrapha.
AGrapha, be called properly unwritten verities, which be most learnedly and
pithely answered, by the most excellent, prudent, grave, and wise counselor,
the Archbishop of Canturburye, who of late sealed the truth of Christ's Gospel
with his blood. He made a little book, which answers unto the enemies,
concerning unwritten verities, where you shall read not only ye authorityes of
scriptures and learned fathers against unwritten verities, as things necessary
to salvation: but also answers and solutions to every objection. As for
Basilius Magnus, who seems to make equiuolent the traditions of the Church,
with the written word of God, you must have a respect when the fathers
write (...), that is, to asserte any doctrine, and when they write (...), that
is, when they fight against heretics for then they be very vehement, and do
urge both unwritten and written verities, to impugn the heretics, and to
convince them, as Basilius does in this place, against that detestable heretic
Enomius, which denied the holy ghost to be God. That the Scriptures only are
sufficient to salvation, I have touched it largely before.

Irenaeus. 35.
EVsebius among all other that lived in his time, gave ye first place and price
unto the great learned father Irenaeus. For when there were at that time more
monumentes, and other infallible testimonies of the said Irenaeus in the hands
of the godly and learned, then are now had or may be had: who could give a more
certain judgment of Irenaeus doings, then Eusebius, above all other that
followed him?

Of what parents, or in what place he was borne, it is uncertain, yet I will
show you hereafter the conjectures of certain learned men. In his youth he was
conuersaunt in the school of Policarpus, who was Bishop of Smirna, and one of
the disciples of John the Evangelist. He heard this reverend, grave, and godly
man with so great admiration and attention, that he most depely engraued in his
breast Policarpus doctrine, and what soever he received of him, kept it in a
most lively memory, until he came to extreme age. Whereupon some write that
Ireneus did describe and set forth, even as he saw with his own eyes, the
gestures of Policarpus, and did declare with what things, and with what words he
was wont to reason.

Of this, conjecture may be made, that Irenaeus was an Asian borne, and not
far from Smyrna. To this opinion is much agreeable that a Greek name was
given unto him: for this word (...) signifies pacem and this word (...)
betokens pacificum. And as good luck is sometimes the insetting of names, so
the event and success did prove in Ireneus, for he was most studious of peace
and tranquillity in the church of Christ. But let it be that he was borne in
Europa, it is the more to be marueiled by what means he came into Polycarpus
schole. He so passed over the studies of his youth, that he knew al liberal
arts, beside christian piety: for these subtle and most constant disputations
which he had against heresies, does manifestly declare that he was not rude nor
ignorant of profane arts, for the monstrous opinions of heretics, were
builded upon the foundation of profane Philosophers, of the which opinions to
judge so exactly, and to confute with such art and strong argument, he could
not have done, unless he had been very expert in profane studies. Nor it is
without cause, that Tertullian did beautify him with his praise, saying, that
he was a most curious searcher of al doctrines, but specially did employ his
diligence and labor in the knowledge of Christ's doctrine, and did chiefly
adioyne himself unto the company of them, who are adourned with the singular
gifts of the doctrine of the Gospel.

He exercised the function of priesthod in the church of Lions, which is a
notable city, and noble Mart in France, in which place without doubt he did
most sincerely, and with singular dexterity, expound the scriptures. He lived
most familiarlye with one Photinus, a reverend, grave, and constant father.

But perchance some desire more to have the knowledge of his public factes
and doings.

The church of Asia was much vexed, as it were with intestine and civil war,
when Montanus, Alcibiades, and Theodotus, did molest the sound doctrine of the
Gospel, with their new prophecies, and vain fantasies. For these fantastical
spirits, did marueilously bewitch the minds of men, and wrapped them in great
errors. The French church therefore, being moved with a certain loving zeal
toward the brethren of the church of Asia, did send their judgment of the
doctrine of their false prophets, unto the churches which were in Asia and
Phrigia, and did communicate their helping hands, against the corrupters of the
Gospel. That this legacy should be the more honest and fruitful, they
persuaded Ireneus, that he as a messenger would carry their letters in so great
a journey, and that he would also comfort with his own voice, the afflicted and
troubled churches, and confirm them in the truth already known, and manfully
confute the errors of these heretics. In this journey Ireneus passed by Rome,
and saluted the bishop there, he had letters also from the French churches, by
the which he was honorably commended unto Elutherius then bishop there: the copy
of which letters, Eusebius does record. The tenor whereof here follows. Lil.
5. cap. 4,
Salutem tibi in omnibus ac semper per deum optamus (pater Elutheri) Irenaeum
fratrem ac consortem nostrum ad hortati sumus, vt has ad te literas perferret,
vt hunc testamenti Christi studiosum, commendatum habeas obsecramus. Etenim si
gradu^ cuiqua^ iustitiam confer, atque asserere sciremus vtpote, quod
ecclesiae presbiter sit, qui et hic est: hoc in eo sanc cumprimis
commendassemus. We greet and wish you well, in all things, and at all times
through god (O father Elutherius) we have exhorted our brother and fellow
Ireneus to bring unto thee these letters, whom we beseech thee gentlye to
entertayne, as one most studious of Christ's testament. etc.

These words are alleged out of that Epistle, which doubtless was longer, and
comprehended more things, which if they were extant, would make very much for
this present purpose.

When Photinus was murdered for the confession of the evangelical truth,
Irenaeus was chosen in his room, who so ruled this church and did instruct it
with such doctrine and integrity of life, that he was beloved and worshipped
both of his own countrymen, and also of strangers. He had great conflictes
with a great number of heretics, but specially with the Valentinians, against
whom he wrote a notable book which is now extant. He had also an action
against Victor then Bishop of Rome, the cause was this. The controversy for
keeping of Easter day, which was before moved, began now to wax hot, and broke
out at this time into a manifest scisme, and there was thrown as it were an
apple of contention, between the two churches, the east and the west. For the
east church was fully resolved to keep their liberty and old custom concerning
the Easter, and refused in any wise the yoke of al ceremonial observations,
whereupon Victor being moved, did excommunicate all Churches dissenting from the
church of Rome. And although the pastors in Asia did teach by most weighty
arguments, that they could not depart from their custom received of the
Apostles them selves, yet they did little preuail therewith. Ireneus therefore
with his brethren of the French churches, not thinking it good to behold this
lamentable contention in the church of Christ, gathered, as it may be
coniectured, a counsel, in the which they made letters, and subscribing them
with their own hands, sent them to Victor the bishop of Rome, having good hope
that they should mitigate and break the rage of Victor, and so bring
tranquillity into the church again. As touching the sentence of the feast of
Easter, to be kept upon the Sunday, they approved Victors mind and judgment,
as pertaining to the west church: but that he should not alienate or change
other churches, observing the custom of their old tradition, they did exhort
him with many profound arguments. He had in his writings certain spots,
whereby he was noted and suspected, not to be of a most sound judgment. First
he seemed not plainly to make a difference between verbum substantiale, that is
Christ, and verbum vocale. Secondly, he seemed to judge, that man in the
beginning was not made perfect, and that sentence which was spoken of man to be
made after the image of God, to be spoken of Christ. Thirdly, he does give unto
man free will, in causes spiritual. Fourthly, he says that Christ was baptized
in the thirty year of his age, and to have begone his preaching at the age of
forty, and suffered his passion at the age of fifty, and does relate that the
Elders of Asia, did learn this of John. Lib. 2. cap. 40 and. 43.
Finally, the errors of ye Millinaries is imputed unto Ireneus, but these
things cannot be gathered expressly out of his books. To end, how he dyed, it
is not noted in approved authors.

Henricus de Herfordia, Ado, and others, which did write the life of Martirs,
do say that he was most cruelly slain with a great multitude of the Church,
for the confession of Christ, under Seuerus the Emperor of Rome.

Paralogismos. 36.
PAralogismos, comes of this verb (...), which signifies to deceive with
false and crafty reasons and arguments, and to dispute with captious
conclusions. The Logitians call such kind of arguments, Paralogismos, or
Elenchos. Aristotle terms the^ modos sophisticos, they be called also
imposturae, frauds, sophismata, and they be called (...).

Paralogismi, be divided of the Logicians into two lymmes. Some be Paralogismi,
in dictione, and some extra dictionem. You may seek the examples of the
Logitians, who do most plainly set them forth. Yet for the ignorauntes sake, I
will give you only two of them.

Omnes gemmae sunt preciosilapides,
In palmitibus inueniuntur gemmae:
Igitur in palmitibus sunt pteciosi lapides.
This argument is Paralogismus in dictione. Again.
Anacharsis est albus.
Anacharsis est philosophus:
Ergo Anacharsis est albus philosophus.


Chrisostomus. 38.
Johannes Chrisostomus was borne at Antioche, at the river Oro^tes in
Coelesiria. He came of a noble house, having to his father one named Secundus,
Lib. 6. cap. 3. Lib. 8. cap. 2. Lib. 13, cap. 2.
and to his mother one Anchusa, as Socrates, Sozomenus, and Nicephorus do
write. He learned Rhethoricke of his scholemaster Libanius, and Philosophy of
Andragathius. At the age of 18. years he went unto the university of Athens,
where he profited so much, Georg. de vita Chrisost.
that all men wondered at it. He was honored of the senate for his humility,
above Anthemius, and the rest of the Philosophers.

Lib. 8. cap. 2.
Hitherto he seems to have been an Ethnicke, for Sozomenus says that Libanius
when he died, complained that Chrysostom was taken away as a pray of the
christians from him, otherwise he might well have taught his schole after him.
Georg. in vita cius.
He was converted and baptized by Melesius at one time, with his father and
mother: he was metely well expert in the knowledge of the law, and would have
been very profitable in judgments, but fearing the molestation of that
profession, did choose to himself an ecclesiastical kind of life, and changing
his habit, did apply his mind to the reading of the holy scriptures, having
to his masters Diodorus and Cartherius, his fellow disciples were Theodorus
and Maximus, which were his companions, under Libanius his scholmaster. He was
also very familiar with Basilius bishop of Cesarea in Capadocia, whom he used
also as his scholemaster. Suidas does say, that Eusebius Emissenus was also his
scholemaster.

Zenon bishop of Gaza, when he was returned from Jerusalem, did constitute
Chrysostom a Reader at the church of Antioche. After that he was ordained
Deacon of Melesius, in the which office he remained almost three years. When
Melesius was dead, Socra. Lib. 6. cap. 3.
he was ordained Priest of Euagrius.

Nicephorus does report, Lib. 13. cap. 2,
that he was made Deacon and Priest of one Flauianus, and makes relation of
the miracle of the Dove, which came fliyng, and did sit upon his head. And
Georgius does triflingly show, besides the apparition of the Dove, that the
angel commanded Flauianus to fetch John Chrysostom out of the Monasterye,
and to make him Priest. He shows also a fable, how Chrysostom did see
Hesichium in his dream, and that John the Apostle did deliver to him a book,
and how Peter brought him the keys.

When Nectarius was dead, Chrysostom was chosen bishop of Constantinople, by
the commandment of Arcadius, Theodoretus Lib. 5. cap. 28. Sozom. Li 8. cap. 2.
and by the consents and voices, both of the people, and of the clergy. He was
had away by the Emperor from Antioche, against the inhabitants will, and was
ordained bishop, by a counsel assembled together very solemnly.

He was endewed with singular gifts: for besides the knowledge of liberal
sciences, of philosophy, and of the toungs, he was very excellentlye seen in
the holy scriptures. He was very apt and ready to teach, and in his words he
had a marvelous faculty to persuade. He was so eloquent, that this name
Chrysostom was given to him, which betokens golden mouth. He was of a stout
and constant mind. Some say that he had the gift to heal all manner of
diseases. In the administracion of his bishopric he behaved him self very
faithful, constant, and like a vigilant Minister of Christ. He preached often,
and in his preaching did apply him self to the capacity of his auditors and
hearers. He rebuked sin so sharply, as though he had sustained some injury
himself. And caused them which were gilty in conscience, to break forth
oftentimes into tears and weeping. He did not only touch the faults of the
common people, Sozo. Lib. 8. cap. 16.
but the sins of all sorts, with great liberty of tongue. He reprehended ye
disorders of ye empress, Nicepho Li. 13. cap. 13.
and did exhort her to restore again ye vineyard which she had taken away from
Calitropa. He did exhort al persons to repentance, and did comfort so greatly
the doubtful and dismayed consciences, Socra. Lib. 6. cap 21.
yt he promised pardon and forgeuenes, to those that fell and sinned, yea
although it were a thousand times.

He did institute and ordain prayers to be said in the night against the
Arrians. If he perceived any unworthy of the office of priesthood, either
through ignorance or filthiness of life, he deposed them, and did substitute
others more mete and worthy. He did profitte the church not only by his
voice, but also by his writing. When he was but a reader, he wrote a book
against the Jews, and certain homelies De vita monastica. When he was
Deacon, he made books and certain dialoges of priesthood, and three books Ad
Stagirium Daemoniacum. When he was priest, he made many commentaries and
expositions upon many books of the scripture, Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 2.
as upon Genesis and other books of the old testament, upon the Gospels,
Socra. Lib 6. cap 4.
upon the psalms. etc. When he was bishop, he made many notable sermons,
partly written of himself, partly of certain notaries.

Al his works which are now extant, are digested into five tomes. In the first
tome are contained the commentaries which he wrote upon the old testament. In
the second, the commentaries upon Matthew, Mark, and Luke. In the third, the
commentaries upon John, and the acts of the Apostles, wherein also are certain
sermons, and certain apologies. In the fourth, the commentaries upon Paul's
epistles. In the fifth are contained.80. homelies Ad populum Antiochenum, and.8.
epistles, with other diverse books.

Although he was very studious of tranquillity, and a lover of peace, yet when
he was bishop, he was much molested and vexed by false brethren, by courtiers,
by heretics, and heathen men.

Concerning false brethren, when he by reason of his office, was careful to
amend the manners and life of his Clergy, some of them took it grievously, and
accused him of to much austerity and rigor, and took an occasion every way to
speak ill of him. Other slaundred him, because Serapion a Deacon did say, that
he could not rule them, except he would beat them always with one staff,
whereupon they called him a proud and an ambitious man. They found fault with
him also, because he did always eat alone without company, as though he did
contemn and loath others. But his adversaries did little prevail with these
reproaches. For all men had him in much estimation and honor, for the singular
gift of teaching, and it was well known, that through his sickly state, and by
the reason of the infirmity of his head and stomach, Nicepho Li. 13. cap 9.
Socra. Lib. 6. cap. 4.
and his great abstinence, he did eschew and avoid all feasts and banckets.

He had great contention with one Seuerianus, who in his absence did much
trouble the church, which contention Serapion did so much augment, that
Seuerianus was expelled out of the city. For this Serapion did falsely accuse
him, and said yt he did affirm Christ not to be made man, when he meant nor
said no such thing. For these were his words: Si Serapion Christianus fuerit
mortuus, Christus homo non est factus. If Serapion die a christen man, then
Christ is not made man.

He was also in contention with one Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, which
rose by this occasion. When one Dioscorus, and certain Monckes, called Longi
fratres, came to Constantinople to the emperor, and to John, and had
complained of the inurye which Theophilus had done unto them, John did receive
them honorablye, and did gentlye entertayne them, and did admit them unto
common prayers, yet did he restrain them from the Communion, until their cause
should be heard and debated.

When the fame and report of this was brought to Theophilus, and that John
also had admitted the^ to the holy mysteries, Theophilus did craftily imagine,
how he might revenge himself of John, and to depose him from his office, which
he attempted this way. Theophilus reconciled him self unto Epiphanius which was
before offended with him, and did provoke and allure him to condemn Origines
books. Epiphanius not perceiving this crafty fetch, did obey him, and wrote
unto John, that he also would abstain from the reading of Origines books,
and that he would call a counsel, and make a decree thereof.

Not long after, Theophilus also did call a counsel, and condemned the books
of Origin: but John not regarding the letters of Epiphanius, took heed to his
own office and charge. Now when they of the Clergy, and of the Emperors
court, understood what Theophilus went about to compass, they also did put
their helping hands, Socrat, Lib. 3. cap. 10.
and caused a counsel to be called to Constantinople. A little after Epiphanius
came to Constantinople, and without the city did celebrate the supper of our
Lord, and ordained a Deacon: and calling unto him certain Bishops, did
rehearse unto them the condemnacion of Origines books. John did inuit and bid
him unto his house, but he answered, he would not come, no not to pray with
him, before he had banished Dioscorus out of the City, and had also
subscribed to the condemnacion of Origines books. John on the contrary side
said, that nothing ought to be done rashlye, before an universal knowledge
might be had therein.

When Epiphanius came abroad openly, and would have condemned Origines books,
and would have drawn Dioscorus out of the city, and have accused John, John
sent unto him Serapion, who said these words. O Epiphanius, thou do many
things against the Canons. First, for that thou have given orders in the
churches within my jurisdiction. Secondlye, because thou have without my
commandment or sufferaunce, celebrated the holy mysteries. Finally, because
being gently bidde^ of me to my house, thou did refuse. Take heed therefore,
least there be a tumult raised by the people, and thou also be wrapped in the
danger thereof.

When Epiphanius heard this, he went out of the Church, and as he was going,
said: Spero te non moriturum Episcopum. I hope thou shall not die a bishop.
Soc, lib. 6 ca. 14
To whom John answered, Spero te non ingressuru^ patriam tuam, I hope thou
shall not return into thy country. The event did approve and verify both their
words: for Epiphanius died in the ship, before he came home, and John was a
little after deposed from his see.

Concerning temporal men, and especially them of the court, he sustained many
afflictions, and much trouble. They were offended with him for no other cause,
but for that he did sharply and freely reprehe^ded their disordered life. He
took up very sharply, and rebuked Eutropius, lying before the altar, because
when he had caused a law to be made, that no favor should be showed unto
offenders, which did flee to the altar, and yet he himself did covet to use
that same privilege, and so to save his life. The nobles of the court took
these words in very il part, and accused him to be an unmercifully man, and
called him (...), that is spiteful and malicious.

Gainas also captain of the host, was much against him, and very infensiue
unto him, because when Gainas did request before the emperor and certain
bishops, that one certain church should be assigned unto the Arrians at
Constantinople, John did plainly and openly say, that his request was wicked,
and that the emperor could not without treason to Gods house, and without
abrogation of certain laws made of the auncetors, suffer any conuenticles of
the Arrians within the city, and did embraid also Gainas with his country and
fliyng from thence, Soc. Lib 6. ca. 5. Sozora. Li. 8, cap. 4.
and did object unto him perjury.

Eudoxia also the Emperesse, was sore set against him, for expelling of
Seuerianus out of the City, and did provoke Epiphanius against him, whereof when
John had knowledge, he made a very sharp sermon against the enormities of
women. His adversaries taking ha^dfast of this, brought it to the court, where
all flatterers made an exclamation, that it was unworthily done of John, and
accused him as one gilty of treason. The Empress her self made her complaint
to the Emperor, that she was very contumeliously handled, and requested him to
have a regard of her state and calling. Whereupon ye emperor consentyng, a
counsel was assembled, in the which Theophilus Alexandrinus and many other,
which bare malice unto John, came to Calcedon, where Cyrinus the bishop did
spread many reproaches and rebukes against John, and said, that he was an arogant
and proud man, and one that would neither bow nor break, which words were
received of the bishops, with great joy and rejoicing. But John refusing to
appear in that synod, and appealing to a general counsel, was condemned, and
sent into exile into a town by the sea side, called Hiero^. But the multitude
and common people, Socrat. Lib. 6. cap. 16.
rising (as it were) in a tumult, John was called again from exile of the
emperor, and restored unto his see.

Not long after, when certain enterludes and plays were practiced at the
silver image of the Empress, which image was set by the Church of Sophia, John
in his sermon did reprehend it Eudoxia the empress, desirous to be revenged,
called again an other counsel. Then John made openly in the church, that
homely or sermon which begins thus: Rursus Herodias insanit, rursus
turbatur, rursus saltat, rursus in disco caput Iohannis accipere quaerit.
Herodias again waxes mad, again she is troubled, again she daunceth, again
she seeks John's head in a dishe. But when the bishops were come together, he
desired that inquisition might be made of the crimes objected against him of
his adversaries: but they neglecting al other things, went about that that was
more plausible and pleasant unto them, that is to say, they laid to John's
charge, that after he was deposed, he entered again into his bishopric, of
his own authority, without the sentence and consent of any counsel. And
although John did reply, that he was restored again of.v. or.vi. bishops,
and did show that ye canon which they alleged, was a canon of ye Arrians
against Athanasius, yet he was condemned and removed from his ministry, and so
banished at the last by the instaunce of Seuerianus Porphyrius, and other
Bishops of Siria, unto a place named Pitymita, Sozo Lib. 8. cap. 18.
situate in the uttermost coast of all the Roman Empire. And as he was in his
journey going thitherward, and came unto the sea called Pontus Euxinus, Socra.
Lib. 6. cap. 21.
being grieved with great pain of the head, and taken of a fever, dyed. After
his death great dissension followed among the bishops, of whom some condemned
him, and some did defend his cause and innocence. His bones at the request of
Proclus, were translated to Constantinoble.

That Peter and John the Apostles did appear to him the night before he died,
and did show to him the victory against the devils, Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 37.
Basiliscus.
and that Basiliscus the martyr did foreshew him, that he should be buried in
his own church, sauoureth of a fable, rather then of truth. He dyed at the age
of.lii. and when he had been bishop five years and a half.

Concerning the sanctimony of his life, he lived chaste, and did utterly
abstain from al feasts, and was very liberal toward the poor, and was in
great estimation among the learned.

Theodoretus does call him Magnum Iohannem, Lib. 5. cap. 28. et. 32.
and doctorem orbis terrarum. He wrote a very eloquent style, and did very
strongly fight and write against heretics, namely against the heresy of
Martion, Valentinus, Arrius, and against the detestable doctrine of the
Nouatians. He does pithily confute, writing upon the second chapter to the
Philippians, these heretics, Paulus Samosatenus, Marcellus, Sabellius, Manes,
Appollinarius, Photinus, Sophronius, and others.

Homil. 3.1 in cap. 4 et. 3. et. 4. concione de Lazaro.
Yet he himself was not without his errors in his writings. He affirmed, that
in what house soever the book and history of the Gospel was, that ye devil
durst not enter into that house. He did attribute to much to allegorical
interpretacion. For he says: non historiam negamus, sed spiritualem
intelligentiam praeferimus. In Matheum hom 10. In prolo. in Iohannem.
We do not deny the historye, but we prefer the spiritual understanding. He
writes also, that the angels did learn much of John the Baptists sermons,
and out of the sermons of other preachers. Homil. 70. cap. 3. John.
He does not most purely entreat of justification, for he expressly says, that
faith only is not sufficient to salvation.

Hom. 48. in, 7. cap. Johan. Ho. 1 in acta Apostolo. In T^tu^. cap. 1.
Furthermore he says, that the only virtue of the soul may save us, and
deliver us from eternal fire, and send us to the kingdom of heaven. His
opinion is, that sick men ought not to be christened. Although he does not
condemn second marriages, yet he seems to will, that none should be taken into
the ministry of the church, if they have twice married. Ho 4 in Marcu^ et. cap
16. in Lucam.
He affirms, that the fathers were in hell before Christ rose from death. But
in this opinion, he has the most part of the Fathers of both the churches
consenting with him. He died about the year of our lord, as Socrates and
Sozomenus do write 408. Lib 6. cap. 21. Lib, 8. cap. ^8.
Yet he himself in his third oration against the Jews, does say: Nunc agitur
annus quinge^tessimus.

Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is an hebrew word, and it signifies Doctrina^ pacis, the doctrine
of peace, and that comes of the radical Iarah, Iarah.
id est, docuit for it was the seat of the true doctrine of god, or it may come
of this radical Raah, Raah.
that is, to see with eyes, and that Jerusalem is as much to say, as visio
pacis, the sight of peace, for Shalom Shalom.
betokens pacem, peace.

Lib. 1. cap. 18. Lib 7. cap 3
In the time of Abraham it was called Salem and Solyma (as Josephus writes in
his antiquities.)

Joshua. 18. Iudic. 19.
After that, it was called Iebus. And when it was conquered of David, it took
the name of Ierosolyma. At the last, when it was vanquished and destroyed of
Titus, Vaspasianus son, and after restored and builded again by Aelius
Adrianus, it was named Aelia. But tha^ the place where Christ suffered and rose
again, was enclosed within the northwall, where before it was all without, and
no part of the city.

Lyranus in Genesim, writes upon these words (Appellauit nomen vrbis Bethel)
has these two verses concerning the name of Jerusalem, which was a city of
many names.

Solyma, Luza, Bethel, Hierosolyma, Iebus, Aelia.
Vrbs sacra Jerusalem, dicitur atque Salem.
Melchisedech was the first founder thereof, and called it Salem pacificam. ^udi
18.
After that the Iebusites did inhabit it, and then it was called Iebus. Not
long after, it had an other name compounded of both the words before mentioned,
and so it was called Jerusalem, B. turned into R.

The Hebrews do assign an other reason of this name, which say, that first it
was called Salem of Melchisadech. After it was called Hiere, Hiere.
hoc est, videbit, because that Abraham, when he would have offered his son
Isaac, called the name of that place dominus videt, Dominus videt.
and so of these two were made one name Jerusalem, E. turned into V. It was
named also Luza, hoc est, Amigdalus, an Almond, Luza.
because those kind of trees were there very plentiful. After that, it was
named Bethel of Jacob. After that Salamon had made it more large, and wholly
fortified it, it was named Solyma, quasi Salomonia, and so by composition of
the names before, it is called Jerusalem. Hitherto Lyranus. Why it is called
Aelia you have heard before.

Praelectio tertia habita die Sabbati.xvii. die Februarii. Anno. 1560.
I Will (at this present by Gods grace) entreat whether the judgment of the
ex^ounding of the scriptures does perteine only unto the church, that is (as
they expound it) unto cou^sells and unto their approved doctors and fathers.

Although every man ought to confess and acknowledge the manner of his faith,
and to hear the church, teaching and monishing the word of God, as Christ and
Paul do command, and also to render great thanks unto the fathers, who have
expounded unto us many hard and unknown phrases of the scriptures, nor did
suffer ye heretics for their pleasure to rack and rent the^ for the defense
of their wicked opinions, Opinio. 1.
but did most sharply resist them and confute the^ by the conference and
manifest sentences of the scriptures: yet it is far from Christian modesty,
and most contrary to the mind of Christ and Paul, Modesty. 2
that we should receive or embrace any doctrine made by man's authority, as
necessary to salvation, without the testimony of ye scriptures. For ye
authority of Gods word ought always to remain as chief maistres in all
judgments. For of the word the church has her authority, and by it only
ought to pronounce and give sentence of all controversies. (...). 12 (...). 2.
As both Moses commands, and Christ confirms, saying: the word which I
speak, shall judge you in the last day. Again, that which I command, yt only
do, and you shall not add one word to ye which I speak unto you.

(...). 2.
Also, S. John says. If any do not remain in the doctrine of Christ or do
bring any other doctrine, receive him not into your house, nor bid him God
speed, for if it were lawful, either for man, be he never so holy and well
learned, or to the Synodes of Bishops, to expound the scriptures as they would
after their own judgments, not being able to render ye reason of their doings,
out of the manifest scriptures, why, then by this pretense and means they
might make daily new articles of the faith, and wrie the scriptures to their
own pleasures. I will give you three or four examples of their expositions.

Origin does expound this sentence of Paul ( Arbitramur hominem iustificari
fide absque operibus legis. We suppose man to be justified by faith without ye
works of the law) that is, Ceremonies. 3.
of ceremonies. And this interpretation do the scholemen follow with their
whole assent. But Saint Paul speaks of ye works of the whole law, as it
shall plainly appear unto them that will thoroughly expend and weigh the
circumstances of Paul's writing.

Tertullianus does condemn second marriages, because it is not lawful to
mary the brothers wife, Brothers wife 4. Iouinianus 5. Not good to touch a
woman 6. Of one wife. 7.
for says he, all Christians be brethren: what a fond and far fette
exposition is this?

Hierome disputing against Iouinian, writes after this manner. 1. Cor. ^
Bonum est mulierem non tangere, igitur coniugiu^ est malu^. It is not good to
touch a woman, therefore marriage is naught. O affectate and gross ignorance.

How much detorted is this saying of Paul, Episcopus sit vnius vxoris vir. Let
the Bishop be the husband of one wife, that is (say they) let not him that is
Bigamus or has married a widow, be admitted to the ministry, but he that has
had a virgin, and now is single, may be ordained.

Other do refer it to the plurality of benefices, as though this word, vxor,
did signify Sacerdotium.

The Pope himself does reason after this sort, the priesthode being translated,
it is necessary that there be also a translation of the law. Heb. ^.
Therefore it perteyneth to me to make new laws, by the which the Christians
should be restrained and ruled as the Jews were by the prescription of Moses.

To be short, and to speak summarilie, what abuse so ever there be, or
Idolatry in the church, they do defend it by the commentes and gloses of the
fathers, and detorted expositions of the counselles.

They allege for the invocation of saints and worshipping of images, this
verse out of the Psalm, Laudate dominum in sanctis suis, praise the Lord in
his saints, Psalm. 1^
what is that say they, but by invocation and calling upon them, with prayers
and by manifest idolatry in worshipping their images. And yet when they be
convinced by manifest scriptures of their impiety and ignorance: then they
defend them selves by the authority of the church, and have nothing else to
say, but, thus ye church expounds it. But it is written in the Hebrew,
Laudate dominu^ in sanctuario suo, praise the Lord in his sanctuarye, that is,
in his church, and the Hebrew word is Kedasch, which signifies sanctuarium.
Keda. ^1.


They allege for images the seventh Synod holden at Nice, for it was decreed
ye images should be retained in the church, The. 7. Synod holde^ at Nice. 8.
as books of lay men. And when there is laid against this Synod the Counsel
of.330. Bishops, which Constantine held at Bizaunce in the which Counsel
images were utterly abolished, then they answer, that, that Counsel was not
of so great estimation and price, as ye Counsel holden at Rome by the Bishop
there. And so it is brought to pass, that the exposition of the scriptures
which was committed to the judgments of the true church, and of the whole
multitude, to course, wild, and wanton wits, whereby every fantastical head
should not wrie the scriptures to the maintenance of their wicked doctrine:
Now at the last does serve the arbitrament and pleasure of one Bishop, that be
may turn it whether he will, for the benevolence and love of a supersticious
woman, Hirene by name. For this seventh Synod was solemnly kept of the Bishop
of Rome at the request of one Hirene a Queen, who would have the image of the
Virgin Mary to be worshipped, that women might have also their goodesse, even
as men had Christ their God. So that there is nothing so well constitute and
ordained of God, which the devil does not abuse, to the provoking of Gods
wrath, and the destruction of man.

To be plain, there is no man so holy, nor so well learned, but yt he may and
does err, some more daungerously and more erroniously, then some, as Origin,
Tertullian, and Ciprian, which did openly defend wicked opinions.

Other have brought into ye church, chafe, haie and stuble, which they have
mingled to the exposition of the scriptures, and yet have kept and left the
chief articles of the faith vncorrupt. But after the Bishop of Rome occupied
the chief place in the church, and that the judgments of fathers and Synodes
was committed unto him, he has tempered and framed all religion, to his own
pleasure and lust. But christ says: Oues meae voce^ meam audient, my sheep will
hear my voice. Therefore they which do acknowledge any other doctrine, ^^hn. 10,
then yt which is delivered of Christ in the Gospel, do not perteine to the
church, because the sheep of Christ do not hear the voice of strangers, but
to this I know what they have to say.

Obiectio.
If it be lawful for every man to expound the scriptures, License. 9.
Platonical. 10. Residue shall judge. 11.
then there will be an infinite license given to rack and rent the scriptures
at liberty, and to despise the church: Yea the church then should be no other
thing but a platonical, and immaginarie common wealth, and so Christ should in
vain command us to hear the church, and Paul also should command without a
cause, that two or three Prophets should speak, and the residue should judge.

Responsio.
There has been always some church and company of godly men in the world,
which ever held the pure word of god, who were worthy to be heard, because they
taught the word, not for their own authorities sake, but for the words sake,
of which they have their authority, but this church has ever been oppressed
of the wicked and of the greater multitude: which ever had the title, the
swaie, and rule of the church, as Christ speaks to that false church. Ve
vobis qui occiditis prophaetas et sapientes, qui ad vos mittu^tur, vt veniat
super vos omnis sanguis iustus, qui effusus est super terra^ a sanguine Abel
iusti, vsque ad sanguine^ Zachariae filii Barachiae. Zacharias. 12.
Woe be to you which kill the Prophets and wise men, which are sent unto you,
that upon you may come all the righteous blood, that was shed upon the earth:
from the blood of Abell the righteous, unto the blood of Zacharias the son of
Barachias, whom you slew between the temple and the altar.

In the death of Abell began the combat, and persecution of the church, and
shall endure unto the general judgment, nor any other thing is to be looked
for, of the godly, then that which hapened unto Abell, to the Prophets, to
Christ, to the Apostles, Martyrs, and other godly confessors. But in this
conflicte, Christ does always remain a marvelous conqueror, which by his
death does overcome the world and the devil: (...) 16.
Nolite (inquit) metuere, ego vici mundum: Fear not, I have ouercomed the
world. The church therefore is no platonicall and imaginary commonwealth, but
it is a congregation of the godly, which does retain the word of God. And
there has been always some good doctors and teachers in the church, although
oftentimes they have been so few, yt the church could scarcely be known.

In the time of the general flood, there were only eyghte souls as Peter
does testify. And in the great multitude of the people of Israel, that is,
six hundred thousand, which heard God speak from heaven: only two persons,
Iosue and Caleb, kept their faith sound and unshaken.

In the time of Helias, there seemed only a platonicall cominaltie, when he
said: Helias. 13.
They have overthrown thine altars, they have killed thy Prophets, and I am
left alone, (...). 17.
and they seek my life also.

In the time of Hieremie: The king, the people with the priests did aduouche
and affirm the^ selves to be the church, and yt the law should not peryshe
nor depart from the priest: and that the temple of the Lord should not be
destroyed, when they cried, Templum Domini. 14.
Templum domini, Templum domini, Templum domini, Iere. ^
the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, and
therefore they set themselves against Hieremie, they laughed to scorn his
prophecy, and burned his book.

The Church in Christ's time began in the Maunger, and then there was a very
small multitude of the godly, as only of the shepeherdes, of Joseph, of Mary,
Simeon. 15 Anna. 16.
of Simeon, and of Anna the Widow, and a few other. And yet the Aungells did
acknowledge ye slender multitude for a church, Luc 2.
and song to the^ their hymns when the high priests, the princes, and the
people did sleep, but not so much rocked a sleep, as fully buried in
infidelity. Then did the prince of this world keep his hold in peace, but
when he saw a stronger then him self to have entered, he began straightway to
rage, and fell to murdering and killing infantes. And this is most certain,
that Christ is not there where the devil does not exercise his tyranny and
cruelty: When the church is void of persecution, then all things are in
peace, which that strong harnessed person does profess. But to our purpose
again. The judgment of the exposition of the scriptures is given of the
church, of counsels and holy fathers, when they confirm their sayings and
doings by the manifest word of God written in the scriptures.

Bishops and counsels ought not to have rule over faith, and therefore ought not
to be believed when they propose new doctrines, without the authority of the
Scriptures.

Constantine the great (which is reported to be the first) that richlye endowed
ye Church, and gave to her great authority and many privileges (but of this I
spoke before) did plainly refute this gloss in the Nicene Counsel, with the
consent of all the Bishops there. His words be these. Euangelium and Apostolici
libri, nec non antiquorum Prophetarum oracula, plane instruunt nos quid de
voluntate de^sentiamus. Quare hostili posita discordia, sumamus ex dictis
diuini spiritus questionum explicationes. The books of the Eua^gelistes and
Apostles, likewise the oracles of the ancient Prophets, do plainly instruct us
what we may think of the will of God, wherefore all hostile discord set a
part, let us discuss and expound al questions out of the sayings of the holy
spirit. And by this it evidently appears that it was than the judgment of
the Church to give sentence in all controversies out of the Scriptures, and to
refuse those (which wrested obscure and darcke places, to confirm their
wicked doctrine) by other manifest and plain places of the Scripture. Arrius.
17.
Arrius him self that great heretic was not so impudent nor so much past
shame, that he durst to thrust in his doctrine to the Church without the
authority of the Scripture, Anathasius 18.
but did contend and object against Athanasius, and others, that they did not
righly understand and expound the Scriptures. Yet the said Arrius, was
convinced and confuted, not by the authority of Athanasius, and of other
Bishops, or by the power of the Emperor, but by manifest Scriptures.

Ciprian. 19
Saint Cyprian has a notable sentence of the authority of the Scripture, and
how much we ought to credit the fathers speaking without Scriptures. His words be
these. Mandant martyrs aliquid fieri, si iusta, si licita, si non contra
dominum, a dei sacerdote facienda sunt, si obtemperantis facilis and prompta
consensio, si petentis fuerit religiosa moderatio. Mandant aliquid martyrs
fieri, sed si scripta non sunt in domini lege, quae mandant, aut ea sciamus
illos de deo impetrasse quod postula^t, and tunc facere quod mandant. Neque
enim potest statim videri de diuina maiestate co^cessum, quod fuerit humana
pollicitatione promissum. Ita martyrs nihil possunt, si Euangelium solui
potest, aut si Euangelium soluere non possunt qui de Euangelio martyrs sunt.
When the martyrs do command any thing to be done, if they be just, if they be
lawful, if they be not against the Lord, they ought to be done of the Lords
Priests, if the consent of him that does obey, be easy and ready to do them,
and if the religion of the commander be mean and reasonable: if the martyrs
command any thing to be done, and if the things which they command be not
written in the law of the Lord, let us first know, that they have obtained of
God that which they command, and then let us do their commandment, for it
cannot seem straight way to be granted of Gods majesty, which was offered by
man's promise. So the martyrs, etc. Here you see how this godly martyr and
Bishop, saint Cyprian does clearly affirm, that no doctrine is to be received
in the Church by the authority of the Bishop, or for the holiness of martyrs,
without the scriptures, but they must prove their doctrine to be sound, out of
ye word, before they put it to the Church. Therefore it may be concluded, that
they which attribute unto the Church and to the fathers, authority to ordeine
any thing without the scripture, and to define of controversies of religion,
without the word, do offer great injury and wrong to the primative Church.
And what can be more clearly spoken, then that which was alleged before in S.
Peter, which is that the prophetical Scriptures (to the which he bids us
to take heed) is not, (...), of our private interpretation, or to be comparde
with the commentaries of men? Saint Peter will in any wise these two, to be
distinct one from the other, even as the judge and the thing to be judged, as
light and darkness to be lightened, are distinct things, even so Peter does
not make our private interpretation judge of the Scripture, but contrary,
makes the Scripture judge of our interpretation. He does not say that the
interpreters give light unto the Scripture, but the Scripture to be a Lantern
and Candle to discuss and shake of the darckenes of all private
interpretation. This cauillation therefore of the devil is most vile and full
of poison, by the which he would persuade the word of God to be so obscure,
darcke, ambiguous and doubtful, that it can not be understand without the
commentaries of men, and the exposition of the Church. But what is the devils
drift I pray you? forsooth nothing else, but to drive every man from readyng of
the scriptures, and to make the word of God odious to all men. But will you
have the truth? The aunswers of the devil him self are so obscure and
doubtful, that no man almost is able to understand them. What say you to the
oracles of Appollo? by the which he deceived him, to whom he spoke these
words.

Aio te Aecida Romanos vincere posse, which words are so perplexe, that it ca^
not evidently be gathered of them, whether he meant that the Romans should
overcome Achilles, or Achilles, them. So he likewise dalied with the woman in
paradise, when he did promise unto her the knowledge of good and evil, which
she understood of the divinity and Godhead, and not of the knowledge of
misery, and of the experience of eternal dampnation. It is Satan's property to
lie and to murder, which things to be performed, Nothing is of more value then
doubtfulnes and obscurity. On the contrary side, it is Gods property to
teach ye truth plainly, and to give life, to which appertains light,
certeinty, affiaunce, trust, and perfect faith. The first suggestion of Satan,
is to make a man to waver, stagger, and doubt of the will of God, and of his
word, that he might make us to think God to be a liar. On ye other part, it
is the proper action of god, to make us assured of his good will toward us,
that we might ascribe unto God the glory of all truth. Christ and the Prophets
does call the word of God, the truth, the way, the light, the life, as Christ
him self says. Ego sum via, veritas, and vita, ego sum lux mundi, qui ambulat
in tenebris, (...). 14.
nescit quo vadat. I am the way, the truth, and the life, I am the light of the
world, he yt walks in darkness, knows not whether he goes.

Antithesis. Antithesis. 20.

The devil calls ye word of God, dark and doubtful, which causes men to
err from the true faith, and does lead to eternal death.

Christ says, Manifestaui nomen tuum hominibus, I have made thy name manifest
and open unto men. (...) ^7.
The devil says, the Gospel is not manifest and easy, but very obscure and
hard.

Christ says: Woe be unto you Scribes and Phariseis, which take away the key of
knowledge, and shut the kingdom of heaven before men, Luke. 11. Math. ^^.
that they should not enter in.

The devil says, and curses all those which dare read the holy Scriptures
without the gloses and commentaries of men, and causes the books of God to be
burned.

The spirit of God speaks by David, saying: Psalm. ^^
Vestubulum verborum tuorum illuminat, and dat intellectu^ paruulis. The entry
into thy words does give light, the testimony of the Lord is sure and gives
wisdom to the simple.

The devil says, not the Scriptures of the Lord are not mete for lay men.

Thy word says David is a Lantern unto my feet, Nay says Satan, The holy
Scriptures, without the Popes Canons are mere darcknes, and can not be
understand without the Popes Decrees and Decretals.

Paul says, persiste and continewe in the holy Scriptures, 2. Tim ^
which may instruct thee unto salvation thorough faith, and make the perfect to
all good works.

No says Satan. The Scriptures be not sufficient without unwritten ver^^es and
constitutions of Synods, and Counselles, and without traditions excogitate and
invented by men.

Christ says: Vos amici mei estis, si feceritis quae ego precipio vobis. John
^^.


No says Satan, with the Pope, except you observe and keep my constitutions
and traditions, you shall have the eternal curse of God.

Christ says, I am the light of the world. No says, the Pope, John. 8,
There be two lights in the world. The Pope and the Emperor.

Here may you see what a great conflict is between these two princes, Christ
and Satan. Christ, being the prince of light, life and truth. Satan being the
prince of darcknes, lies and death. Which conflict began in the beginning of
the world, and shall continewe to the ends of the same.

Again, God is not to be had in admiration and reverence only for his
majesty, by the which be passes infinitely all creatures, and their
understanding, but also for his humility, by the which he abased him self
under all men, as saint Paul says, he humbled him self and became obedient
unto death, Philip ^
yea unto the death of the Cross. Satan despised this humility of Christ, and
did set^ him self against Christ, trusting in his own wisdom, power, might,
and glorious show, unto this proud devil, what soever is written in the
Scripture of the humility and pains of the son of God, is counted
foolishnes. But peradventure you will say: What is this to the purpose? I
answer. Christ the son of God does so abase him self in the Scripture,
that there may be seen in him no craft, no color, no arrogancy, but all
things most plain, most clear, simple and most familiar. In so much yt he
compares him self to a self hen, and to other inferior things. He uses not
a proud or high kind of speaking, no glorious phrase, but short, easy,
plain, simple, homely, and common. And therefore may the better be understand
of the poor simple and sely people, he sent his word immediately after his
birth, not unto kings and princes, but unto poor and plain shepeheardes. To
whom he spoke, not in a glorious, eloque^t, and hard phrase, but plainly and
simplely. He entered not into famous Cities and princes palaces, but was borne
in a pore cottage, or rather a stable. He those not to his disciples.
Emperors, Dukes and Lords, but a sort of poor fishers, and by them
dispersed and spread his Gospel thorough out the whole world, signifying, that
the simple, make and abased people were very were, both to teach and understand
his words.

Aristotle. 21. Galenus. 22
Aristotle, Demosthenes, Cicero, Lucian, Galen: in sum, all the wise of ye
world derided and contemned this homely kind of speaking of the scriptures,
As saint Paul complains, writting to the Corinthians. 2. Co^ ^
The wise and eloquent did not despise the Scriptures for the majesty of the
Oration, but for the baseness and rude style, for the scripture is familiar, and
not to hard for the capacity of fishers, merchants, artificers, husbandmen,
and other rude people. Unto such the scripture does appertain, as Christ said
when he gave thanckes to the father, because be had hidden those things from
the wise, ^ath. 11.
and had reveled them to the simple and little ones. The devil has engraffred
into man's mind, to marvel at and to have in great admiration, glorious,
gaye, hard, and doubtful matters, and to contemn vulgar and easy things. And
thus may you learn, how impudent Satan is to drive men from the Scriptures by
two contraries: first he says, they be so hard and obscure that they can not
be understand without man's gloss. On the otherside he says, they be so base
and so rude, that they be scarce worthy the readyng and loking on. Oh subtle
Satan, the father of al lies, the murderer of souls, the sclau^derer and
defiler of the most pure and sacred word of God, the peruerter of all truth,
who always labored, and yet does labor, to destroy the true and pure
doctrine of God, and establishe and set up man's traditions and doctrines of
devils. As forbidding matrimony and meats, and mainteinyng works of
supererogation, to satisfy for the sin of man, defendyng of monckishe vows,
popish pardons, massing Sacrifice for the quick and the dead, invocation and
merits of Saints, redeming souls out of purgatory, the worshipping and
gross ydolatrye, of Images, pilgramages and such pelferie. And for these
things and such like to be defended, what contention, what disputing, what
persecution, what murdering has been of late days? for these things fathers
are brought forth, the authority of the Church is alleged, cursinges, and
excommunications have been thundered out, O horrible blasphemy and unspeakable
blindness.

Is this the true doctrine of Christ's Church? did they learn these things
out of the mouth of Christ? (...) 10. (...) 14.
Christ says, Oues meae vocem meam audiunt. My sheep hear my voice, they
know and understand my words. And he that has my words and does keep
them, he it is which loves me.

Paul says, if any preach any other Gospel than that which I have preached,
yea though it be an Angel of heaven, ^^lat. 1.
cursed be he.

^oh. 1,
Saint John says. Si quis in doctrina Christi non continet se, sed diuersam
affert doctrinam, non recipiatis eum in domum, Neque aue ei dixeritis. If any
do not continewe in the doctrine of Christ, but brings a contrary doctrine,
receive him not into your house, nor bid him good speed.

Pet. 1.
Peter commands, that we examine and try every doctrine by the Scripture,
given by the holy ghost.

Paul writting to the Ephesians, defines the Church to be the congregation,
which Christ has sanctified by the lauer of water in the word of life,
wherefore it appears, the word of God to be the life, and as you would say the
soul of the Church, which without the word is but a dead body.

Saint Austen does say the Church to be that congregation, which does hold
the words of he bread Christ. His words be these. Question est vbi sit
ecclesia, quid ergo facturi sumus? In verbis nostris, an in verbis capitis
domini nostri Jesus Christi quaerimus? puto quod in illius verbis quaerere
debemus, qui veritas est, and optime nouit corpus suum. There is a question
where the Church is, what shall we therefore do? shall we seek it in our own
words, or in the words of our head our Lord Jesus Christ? I think we ought
to seek it in his words, which is truth it self, and does best know his body
the Church.

Saint Paul does call them the Church, which are builded upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets. (...) 2.
But what the Church is, and whereupon it is builte, I will entreat more at
large in the fourth and last lymme of my general particion. And will here make
an end of this lesson, saving that I will answer to one or two objections of
our adversaries.

Obiectio.
The Church beside the word and without the authority of the Scriptures,
has altered and abrogate the Sabb^th day, which is received universally of the
whole Church, Ergo the Church may constitute, prescribe, appointe and order
without the Scriptures.

Responsio.
The Schole men the^ selves do coumpt this argument to be a very blind and
unlearned comment and gloss, for as they say Genus, in this precept is not
altered nor abrogate, which is the chiefest point of this commandment: for
God does always require a conservation and obseruau^ce of such ceremonies as
he him self has appointed, and would that certain days should be prefixed
and appointed to the Ministry of his word and Sacraments, and this part of
this precept is immutable, and can not be abrogate or changed, but that part
which is called Species, that is, that the seventh day and none other should
be kept, is abrogate, because the Christians should be free from the
Ceremonies of Moses. As Paul writes to the Collossians. And thus you see,
that the Church in this has done nothing but by ye authority of the word.
Furthermore the Sabbath of the Jews was abolished by the Apostles them selves,
and so it is recorded in the Scriptures, as in the Acts of the Apostles, it is
written that the first day of the week the disciples came together to break
bread. The first day of the week, we call Sunday. And by this place and many
other mo we gather, that the Christians used to have the solemn assemblyes,
layeng asside the Ceremonies of the Jews Sabbath. And because the Jews were
so superstitiously wedded and addicte unto the sabbath day, the Apostles did
abrogate it, and place in the stead thereof the Sunday, because the
resurrection of the Lord (which was done that day) brought an end to all
shadows of the law. And that day does admonish us of our Christian liberty.
For as by the disposyng of the law, the Sabbath was celebrate and kept, to
keep in remembrance the making of the world. So the Sunday is now observed
to put us in remembrance of the resurrection of Christ, and to confirm the
hope of our resurrection. In this day Saint Paul ordained at Galatia and at
Corinthium, that collection and gatheryng for the poor should be used. Of this
day Saint John speaks in the revelation saying, Fui in Spiritu in dominica
die. I was ravished in spirit on the Lords day.

Obiectio.
The Apostles did altar the form of Baptism, because they baptized only in
the name of Christ, where Christ commanded them to Baptize, in the name of the
father, of the son, and of the holy ghost. Ergo the Church which is signified
by the Apostles, may dispense and altar the Scriptures.

Responsio.
Saint John says. Qui confitetur Iesum Christum esse filium dei, 2. John. ^
is habet patrem and filium. He that confesses Jesus Christ to be the son of
God, he has the father and the son. And Saint Ambrose in his book De
Spiritu Sancto, does refute this calumnious cauillation saying. Ambrosius 23.
Si fide mysterium Trinitatis tenetur, and vna tantum nominetur persona, plenum
est Sacramentum. If the Mystery of the Trinity be believed, and one only
person named, it is a full and a perfect Sacrament.

And under the name of Christ is comprehended the mystery of the Trinity. For
when Christ said: Ego et Pater vnum sumus, I and the father are one, John ^
he therefore that is Baptized in the name of Christ, is Baptized in ye name of
the father, and in the holy ghost, which is not divided from them.

Other expound to be Baptized in the name of Christ, to be no more but to be
baptized of the Apostles, after the institution and commandment of Christ.

Other do say, that Christ is Complementum et proprium obiectum baptismi. for
all the mysteries of Baptism, are set forth unto us in Christ the only son
of God. Christ says, Qui credit in me, non credit in me, sed in cum qui misit
me, He that believes in me, does not believe in me, but in him that sent me.
Whereupon it may be concluded, that be which is baptized in Christ, is baptized
also in the name of the father: To be baptized of Christ, is to be made the
anointed of God the father, which has anointed him, and in the holy ghost,
by whom he was anointed of the father. Besides this, the name of Christ in the
Hebrew, is Messiah, which signifies anointed. Lyranus says, Messiah. 24
Liranus, 5
that the Apostles and other of the primative church, by the instincte of the
holy ghost, did baptize only in the name of Jesus Christ, to make that man
more amiable, and to be had in more price and honor which was than odious and
hateful to the Jews. And Christus, in greek is Vnctus, anointed, and in that
name the holy trinity is understand, the father who does anoint the son
which is anointed, the holly ghost which is the unction it self And Christ
can not be conceived and apprehended by faith, without the father, of whom he
was given unto us, nor without the holly ghost, by whom he does renew and
sanctify us. Therefore, this objection of the papists is nothing worth, by the
which they chalendge autoritye to change the institution and order of Christ.
And when they make a distinction inter substantiam et formam, saying, that
nothing ought to be altered concerning the substance, but the concerning the
form they may altar and change the Ordinance of Christ. It is an argument sone
refelled, for Christ did not give to the apostles magical words to use
incantation, as they dream, but did comprehend in a few words the sum of the
whole mystery. And Peter here does not speak of the form of baptism, but
does show simpliciter the whole virtue of baptism to be auaylable in Christ.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea. Praelectionis tertiae.
Opinio. 1.
OPinari, is (as Donatus says, to be in doubt of a thing. His words be
these: Quae opinamur, putamus: quae putamus, incerta sunt. Those things which
we suppose, we think or deny them: And of things which we deny, we are
uncertain.

Cicero dicit sapientem nihil opinari, lib. 4, Acado
id est, nunquam assentiri rei falsae vel incognitae. A wise man (says he)
does never suppose any thing, that is, he does not give his assent to any false
thing, or thing unknown.

Lacta^tius dicit. Id opinatur quisque quod nescit. Illi au^t, libro. 3.
qui de rebus naturalibus disputa^t, opina^tur, id esse vt disputa^t. Nesciu^t
igitur veritate^ quonia^ scie^tia, certi est: opinatio, incerti. That does
every man (says he) suppose, which he knows not. They which dispute of
natural things, do suppose the^ to be so as they dispute, therefore they know
not the truth. For science and knowledge, is of a thing certain: opinion and
supposition, is of a thing uncertain. And so the Philosophers and the
scholastical divines do define Opinionem.

a ^. q, 79 ar, 4.
Aquinas dicit, quod opinio est actus intellectus, declinantis in vnam partem
contradictionis cum formidine alterius. An opinion is an actio^ of the
understanding, declining to one part of the contradiction, with fear and doubt
of the other part.

There is much difference, Inter opinione^, fide^, scientia^, and scrupulum.

Opinio.
Opinio, is the assent of the understanding to some thing, not because it is
sufficiently moved by the proper obiecte, but by a certain election seming
reasonable, declining to the one part, more then to the other: yet with
doubting and fear of the other part.

Fides.
Fides, is with all certainty, and without all fear and doubt.

Scientia.
Scientia, is the assent of understanding moved by the object, and known by it
self, as, In principiis: or else known by an other thing, as, In
conclusionibus quarum est scientia.

Scrupulus.
Scrupulus is when understanding is moved by light co^iectures and weak means
to the one party. Haec exscholasticis.

de vtilitate credendi, cap, 11,
S. Austen does write. Tria (inquit) sunt hominu^ genera, profecto improbanda
and detestanda. Vnu^ est opinantiu^, id est, eoru^ qui se arbitrantur scire
quod nesciu^t: Alterum, coru^ qui sentiunt quide^ se nescire, sed no^ ita
quaeru^t, vt inuenire possint. Tertiu^, eoru^ qui neque se scire existimant,
nec quaerere volu^t. There be three sorts of men (says he) which are utterly
to be improued and detested. The first is of supposers or demers, which think
themselves to know yt, which they do not know. The second, is of the^ which
suppose the^ selves to know nothing, and yet do not so seek, that they may
find knowledge. The third is, of them which do judge themselves to know
nothing, nor yet will seek any knowledge at all. Here may you see by Saint
Austen, that Opinio, is of things uncertain.

dialo, 3
Origene, in his dialoge De christo homine, does take Opinione^ for a show or
a fantasy. He brings in one of the interlocutors, speaking these words:
Ille ne^pe xp^s pastus est opinione, id est, specie and pha^tasia, ac non
veritate. He suffered in opinion, that is in show and pha^tasie, but not in
truth, against who^ he brings in an other speaker, which answers thus: Si
opinione, no^ veritate passus est, opinione Herodes iudicat: opinione Pilatus
manus lauat: opinione Judas tradidit, opinione and Cayphas, opinione eu^ and
Iudaei co^prehenderu^t, opinione and illi era^t Apostoli, opinione, sanguis
ipsius est effusus, opinione Eua^gelistae predicaru^t Eua^geliu^, opinione
desce^dit de caelis, and opinione ascendit, denique and salus hominis opinione,
no^ veritate constant. If he suffered by opinion, not in verity and truth, then
also Herod judged him but by opinion, then Pilate washed his hands but by
opinion: the^ Judas betrayed him but by opinion, then Cayphas did examine him
but by opinion, the^ ye Jews did apprehend and take him but by opinion, then
he had Apostles but by opinion, then his blood was shed but by opinion, then
the Evangelists did preach and write the Gospels but by opinion: the^ he
disce^ded from heaven and went up to heaven but by opinion, finally the
salvation of man does stand in opinion, and not in truth. By these words
Origene does refute the Martionistes, which held, that christ suffered but by
opinion, which is an heresy: for as Herod did judge him and as Judas did
betraye him in very deed, even so did he suffer in very deed. And here you may
learn, that Opinio is taken, not for a thing certain, but uncertain.

Tertullian also calls him that is of a sinister opinion, Opiniosum. Opinio,
sometime is taken for estimation or co^me^datio^, as Cicero writes Ad le^tulu^.
Magna est hominu^ opinio de te. Me^ have a great estimation of thee. Lib. 1.


Modestia. 2.
MOdestia est (inquit Cicero) in animo continens moderatio cupiditatum.
Modesty is (says he) in the mind, a contine^t government of desires and
lusts.

By Modesty, all things that appertain to man, are governed and driven to a
certain moderation, which are in number these four.

(...). 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). 4.
(...), are the inward parts and motions of ye mind, which when they intend to
clime high, ar governed and moderated by humility, whose contrary is pride and
arroga^cy. Also the fervent desire of such things as pertayne to knowledge and
lernyng, is governed and moderated by earnest and diligent study, whose
contrary is curiosity.

(...), are the motions, actions and doings of the body, that all things may
he done comely and modestly, as well in serious and earnest matters, as in other.
Which doings or motions are governed and moderated by three virtues, that is
per (...), by the which it may be discerned, what ought to be done, and what
ought to be omitted, in what order and in what sort things may be put in ure.

The second is per (...), by the which, decency and comelines is observed in
all actions and doings.

The third is per (...), by the which there is a certain gravity and
moderation in talk and communication, and in other familiar affairs.

(...) is that which does moderat ma^s doings about iocund recreatio^s, merry
words and pleasant deeds with the observation of three circu^sta^ces.

The first circumstance is, that the words and deeds be not obscene, filthy,
or noisome.

The second is, that the gravity of the mind, be not wholly turned to a
certain loosnes.

The third is, that merry words or deeds be convenient, agreeable, and mete to
the person, time, and place.

(...), is the outward decking, and furniture of ye body, as in apparel, and
buildings, and diet, and other lawful prouisio^s. This part also is moderated
by three virtues: The first is (...), yt is humility, which refuses all
superabou^daunt and superfluous costs and charges, which also does wholly
exclude the intention of glory or bravery.

The second is (...), which is frugalitie, when a man is contented with that
which he has, and does not desire any other thing above his state and
calling. It is called of Macrobius, Parcitas.

The third is (...), which is prudent simplicity, which does exclude all
superfluous carefulnes, and causes a man to be content with that whatsoever
happens unto him. It is called of Macrobius, Moderatio.

Of modesty much me^tio^ is made in the holy scriptures, as in ye epistle of.
S. Paul to the Philippia^s. cap. 4.
Modestia vestra nota sit oi^bus hominibus. Let your modesty be known to all
me^. Modestia, is called in ye Greek (...), which word. S. Ambrose does
expound to signify a conversation reasonable, when one does not contend or
strive for the maistry, chief right, or title, but when one does give place to
an other for the time, which thing humanity does require.

cap 3
Again in the epistle to the Colossia^s. Induite vos ergo, sicut electi dei
sa^cti and dilecti, viscera misericordiae, benignitate^, humilitate^,
modestiam, patie^tia^. Now therefore as the elect of god, holy and beloved, put
on tender mercy, kyndnes, hu^blenes of mind, modesty, long suffering. S. Paul
in this place does mean by modesty, where one does lay aside and put down all
hawtines and pride of mind, and does humble him self, chale^ging nothing to him
self arroga^tly, we have not a more expres example of modesty in all ye
scriptures, Math. 11.
then Christ himself, which did abase him self under al men, and commanded us
to learn of him, which was meke in heart.

To be short Paul in his epistle to the Galathia^s, does number modesty to be
one of the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5.
saying, the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, modesty, temperancie, against such there is no law.

This modesty is a virtue, by the which a Christian is not lightly moved to
wrath and anger, but takes all things in good part. It may be called
tractability, contrary to contention and varia^ce, it does throw out of the
mind, all fearcenes, and cruelnes, and does engraffe therein, mildenes and
humanity.

Such modesty was in David: who when he was cast out of his kingdom, and
reviled and railed at with tau^ts by one Semei, 2. Reg. 16.
yet he was nothing moved to anger or reue^ging, but took it in good worth, and
did forbid yt any man should hurt Semei. The like virtue was in Moses. The like
virtue also was in Paul. The like modesty was in one Onias, Lib. 2. cap. 4.
of whom record is made in the Machabees, where it is written thus:
Contristatus itaque est animo Antiochus propter Oniam, and flexus ad
misericordia^ lachrimas fudit, recordatus defuncti sobrietate^ and modestia.
Therefore Antiochus was sorry in his mind, and he had compassion and wept,
because of the modesty and great discretion of Onias, that was dead.

Solomon in his Proverbs does say, the reward of modesty, Prou. 22.
and the fear of God, is riches, glory and life.

Modesty (says Lyranus) does signify every moral virtue, which does
consiste in the moderation of man's doyngs and suffraunces.

S. Hierom does call Modestia^ in this place, Co^sta^tia bonoru^ operu^, the
perseuerau^ce in good works. It is called in ye hebrew Gnanuah which does
signify, not only modesty and mekenes, but also affliction (as in the Psalm)
Gnaniti Id est, afflictus sum; or (as other do expound it) afflixi me. I
punished my self. Psalm. 116.


To make an end, you shall understand, yt te^pera^cy does differ from modesty.
For te^pera^cy is an abstine^ce and mean using of al things, as of meat,
drink, clothes, sleep and such other like things. It is a virtue contrary to
surfeting, riote, pleasure, wantonness, vncleanelines, prodigality, and to all
other abuses.

What modesty is, it is sufficiently declared before.

Examples of Modesty.

When one Lucas a phisitio^, among al orators of yt time most eloquent, had
with a most absolute oration set forth the virtues naturally engraffed in king
Alphonsus, the king hearing his words, said: Si vera sint quae de me
predicasti, diis immortalibus merito gratias ago, surminus vt isthaec facia^t,
oro and obsecro. If those things, which you have reported of me be true, then I
render thanckes unto the immortal gods: If they be not true, then I pray and
beseech them, that they may be true. O modesty most worthy in a prince to be
praised.

When Agesilaus also adourned his journey toward his country out of Egypt,
he was stricken with a mortal disease, when he came to the port of Menelaus.
And at the very instant of his death, he commanded, that they should not
erecte any image in his honor or memory. Si quod (in quit) praeclarum facinus
gessi, hoc erit monumentum mei. Sin minus, ne omnes quidem statuae illustrabunt
mei memoria^. If says he, I have done any noble acts, they shall be a monumente
of me. If I have done no such things, all the images in the world, neither will
nor ca^ennoble my memory.

Caeremonia. 3.
THis word Caeremonia, is diversely written some write it with a diphthonge,
other with a single e. The etymology of the word is also diverse. Lib. 2. cap.
3.
Macrobius and Sulpitius do say, that this word Caeremonia, is derived of
Carendo.

Festus, and other do say, that it took this name of a certain town called
Cere. For when Rome was expugnat and taken of the frenchmen, the virgins named
Vestales, took the images of the gods, which they had reserved from the
hands of their enemies, and went into the town Cere, bringing thither their
gods with them, where they were gently received and entertained, and where they
made their abode until ye City of Rome was delivered again from the
frenchmen by one Camillus. And in the memory of this benefit, the Romans
ever after that, called the manner of the worshippyng of their gods and their
whole religion, Ceremonias, of the town Cere.

Lib. 5.
Liuius does write, that Lucius Albinus one of the commons, did bring the
virgin Priests and all the holy things unto the town Cere in a carte or wayne
(whereof sprang this name Caeremonia) which name we Christians do now retain
and use, calling the rites and forms of our religion ceremonies, yet we do
make a difference between the ceremonies appointed by God, and other prescribed
by man: of the which later sort, there has been a great heap, not only
vain, foolish and superfluous, but also blasphemous and injurious to the blood
of Christ.

Saint Austen in his Epistle Ad Ianuarium did take it in very ill part, that in
his time the Church of Christ, which God of his mercy would to be free with
a few ordinances, was Priest with so many servile burdens and bondages, in so
much that the condition and state of the Jews seemed more tolerable and more
easy, then the Church of the Christians.

Diuisio.
The law is divided into three parts, Videlicet, to the law moral, ye law
judicial, and the law ceremonial. The law moral, which pertay-to the law
of nature, is not abrogate, for it respects the inward man, and the will of
God is eternal, and the law of nature cannot be changed. This law is
contained in the Decalogo, that is, the ten commandments.

The law judicial, which respects civil affairs, and politic order, for the
defense of the good, and for the suppressing of the wicked for public peace.
etc. although it be abrogate in form and circumstance, yet it remains in
force concerning the substance, which is, that the sword be drawn upon
malefactors, that public peace and tranquillity may be kept and maintained.
Notwithstanding no public weal, no city, no nation is bound, or ought to be
constrained to receive and obey the qualitye of those judicial laws, appointed
by Moses, but is set at liberty and made free to use such laws, such time,
such place, such punishments, as it will and seems best, so yt the substance
thereof be not rejected and abrogated.

The law ceremonial did contain certain externe ceremonies, which (as Rabbi
Solomon writes) were.600. in number, and were only figures, and not ordained
to remain for ever (as Paul writes to ye Hebrews) Ad tempus correctionis,
which was a figure, and they were carnal rites, until the time of reformation,
that is until ye new testament was appointed.

Iacobus de valentia does say, that the old law was nothing else but a certain
way directing and leading unto Christ, tanquam in finem immediatum, as to the
very end. Et ideo (inquit) nunquam petit regnum coelorum, sed semper petit
messiam, qui doceat viam in regnum caeloru^. John. 10.14.
Christus ostium, via and veritas dicitur. And therefore (says he) the law
never asks the kingdom of heaven, but always desires Christ, which
teaches the way to the kingdom of heaven. For Christ is the door, the way,
and the truth.

Saint Hierome is very sore against the obseruers of the ceremonies of the
Jews. His words be these: Ego libera voce pronuncio, caeremonias Iudeorum and
pernitiosas esse, and mortiferas Christianis, and quicunque eas obseruanerit,
sieve ex Iudaeis sieve exgentilibus, eum in Barathrum diaboli deuolutum. I do
freely pronounce and say, that the ceremonies of the Jews be pernicious and
most deadly unto Christians, and that whosoever do observe them, whether he be
Jew or Gentile, shall be thrust down to the gulf or dongeon of the devil. But
some suppose Hierome to have spoken this in his collar against saint Austen.

For great divines hold, that to observe a ceremony with a Jew, is not mortal
of it self, but the opinion that persuades a man to put hope or confidence in
the work, as a thing helping to justification, is pestiferous and eroneous. If
circumcision in the new testament had been mortal, why did Paul circumcise
Timothy? why did he make a vow, in cenchreis? why did he shave his head? These
works be not mortal simpliciter, but by opinion of justification. For nothing
does justify, but only faith, which is sufficient of it self without any
work, as concerning the justifying before God. Therefore when Paul did put in
ure those legal rites, he did it only to serve the charity of the brethren,
and to give place for that time, to their infirmity, that he might wyn them, as
he says himself: Iudaeis factus sum Iudaeus, to the Jews I became a Jew.

Iouinianus. 5.
IOuinianus, who was first a solitary monk, and afterward becam one of the
clergy, being but a base man of birth, but rich, neither learned nor yet
eloquent, endeavored to renew the heresy af Basilides, being of long time
before buried and extinguished, writing commentaries upon the same matter, in
the which he went about to prove out of the testimonies of the scriptures, ill
understood, that such as were truly baptized, could not falagaine into
sin. The which error saint Austen ascribes unto Pelagius. Those things
when he taught at Rome, he was able to draw into his error none of the
Priests, nor any of the Clergy, being of any name or estimation: he only
corrupted certain simple women, in so much that when this was heard of
certain sacred virgins, being stricken well in years, married husbands. But he
him self would not mary a wife, not because he hoped to receive any reward for
it, but because he would not be entangled with the troubles of matrimony, and
because he would be at more liberty. Saint Auste^ does lay certain errors
unto Iouinianus his charge, which notwithstanding Hierome does not impute unto
him. That is, that the virgin Mary, the mother of Jesus, was defiled in her
childbirth, and that al offenses were equal, as the opinion of the Stoickes was.
But it does appear, that saint Austen never red either the books of
Iouinianus, or the book of Hierome against Iouinian, but did only learn of
the rumor of the people. But he declares notwithstanding, that there was no
mention made of Iouinianus, either of Epiphanius, either of Philastrinus in his
Cataloge of Archheretickes, but that he found in a certain book, without any
title of the author of it, that Iouinianus was numbered among the
Archeheretickes. He says furthermore, that this heresy spranke up, he being
but a child, and that it was forth with repressed, infecting none of the
priests. But it does appear, that his heresy was condemned by the means of
one Victorinus and Pammacbius, and before that Hierome wrote against him.
Notwithstanding Hierome gladly and willingly took that argument, always
earnestly favoring virginity, and for that cause was more bent against
marriages, then certain bishops would be.

There was also an other Iouinianus, who was the fourth emperor of
Constantinople, next after Iulianus Apostata, he reigned eight months. This
christian emperor was borne in the country of Pannonia, endued with all virtues
from his youth vpwardes. Wherefore being scarce yet come to man's state, the
host did create him Emperor, because they had an opinion, that he would do
many noble acts. When he was called of the whole host Augustus, that is to
say, imperial, he would not profess that name, until the whole number had
proclaimed themselves to become christians, and then he took upon him the
Empire, and delivered the host from the hands of the Barbarous. But necessity
constraining, he delivered Nisibni, and a great part of Mesopotamia, unto one
Sapor, king of Persia, which thing never happened before, by the space of.300.
years. At the last he died, being ill affected with much crudity and rawnes of
the stomach, or (as some write) by the evil savor of coals, whereof he
commanded a great fire to be made.

Bonum mulierem non tangere. 6. It is good not to touch a woman.
BOnum here, is taken for commodum, that is commodious, and not for that which
is contrary unto evil, as commonly that is called good, that profits a man,
and Horace calls him Malus bello, evil for war, which is unmeet for war.
Neither is it thought, that this was demanded of the Corinthians, whether it
were lawful to mary a wife, but whether it were expedient, as their state was
then, to be entangled with the bonds of marriage. Saint Hierome does reason
after this sort against them, who did attribute to much unto matrimonye. Si
bonum est mulierem non tangere, ergo malum est ta^gere, If it be good not to
touch a wife, then it is evil to touch one, since that good and evil be
contrary.

This argument saint Augustine thus refuteth, In Epistola aduersus Hiero. de
medio inter bonum and malum
who had read the predicaments of Aristotle, saying: there are some things
indifferent, which are neither good nor evil, as for to wipe the nose, or to
spit. For where as he did place three commodities in marriage, he would not make
any mention of evil, and therefore says saint Austen, bonum, here is taken for
melius, better, least any man should think it a filthy think to mary a wife,
as though bonum, good, in this place, were contrary unto, turpe, filthye. If
that in the words of Hierome malum and bonum good and evil be taken a like in
both places, his argument is good, according to the question proposed of the
Corinthians. If it be commodious not to mary a wife, for the burden of cares,
and the bonds of affinitye, then is it vncommodious to mary. As if one should
be demanded, when a man should enter into along journey, and shall pass by
many theuish places, whether it be good to take money with him, and should
answer it is good not to carry money, it does well follow, therefore it is evil
to carry money. For that which here is contrary unto good, saint Paul a little
after calls a tribulation and affliction of the flesh. Neither does he simply
and flatly say: It is good to tarry and remain as I am, but it is good for the
urgent necessity. Wherefore, that which is good for the time, and for the
present state, is not by and by simply, and universally good. In the time of
saint Paul, when amongst a great sort of Ethnickes, there were but a few
Christians, perchance it was then more requisite to abstain from marriage: but
now the state of things being altered, it is not only expedient, but also
necessary, for all men of every degree, whether they be priests or laymen,
votaries or not votaries, especially if they have not the gift of chastity to
enter into the honorable state of matrimony. This place of saint Paul may be
expounded also after this sort: It is lykely, that the false Christians
endeavored them selves to make all men afraid of taking a wife, by rehersing
many incommodities of wedlock: and contraryly to persuade the^ to live
singlye, for the commodities belonging thereto, as in time past also the Monks
and Prelates being defenders of the Romish chastity, were wont to do. But the
answer of the Apostle is contained in two parts.

In the first part he teaches, that it is good for all men if they may, to
abstain from women.

In the second part he adds a correction, because that the imbecility of the
flesh, is a let unto many men, they ought not to despise the lawful remedy
ordained by God.

There are many things to be observed in this place. First this word bonum in
Greek (...), is used for commodious, quiet, honest, and pleasant, and for
bonum, which is contrary, to vice and evil. He makes therefore a false
argument, which disputes after this sort: If it be good not to touch a woman,
it is evil therefore to touch a woman, where as good and evil are contrary.

But Paul only shows what is expedient, because of the troubles and cares
which commonly married men have. For it was said unto Jeremy, because of the
tempests of war to come, Noli vxorem ducere, marry no wife, not because it
was an offense, but because it was vncommodious, then to marry. Wherefore
there can be nothing else gathered out of the words of Paul, but that it is
expedient for a man not to be coupled with a with, if he can be without her.

Even as if a man should say: It is good not to eat nor drink, nor sleep: he
will not condemn meat, drink, and sleep, as things hurtful, but because
so much goes from the spirit, how much more is given unto them He means
that we should be more happy, if being free from these things, we could wholly
give our selves unto ye meditation of heavenly things. Therefore because there are
in matrimonye many impedimentes, by the which a man is let and troubled, by
this reason it were good not to marry. Wherefore this proposition must be
indefinite, where as it cannot be true in all kinds of men. The which is plain
in the first man Adam: for this proposition could not agree unto him, neither
can it be said unto the^, who either burn or live incontinently, whom Paul
does command to marry. Therefore he corrects this proposition, least any man
should judge evil of matrimony. But because there semes to be a contrariety
in these words of Paul, with the words of Christ, where he says, Gene. cap, 2
it is not good for a man to lack his wife. These places may easily be
reconciled, if that we can distinguish between the pure ordinances of God, and
the punishments of sin, which afterward followed. For whatsoever evil and
incommodity is in marriage, that comes of the breaking of Gods commandments.
According to this distinction: At the beginning it was good to have a wife
without any exception, but now it is good in such sort, that sorrow is joined
with pleasure, by the curse of God. But they that have not the gift of
continency, unto those it is a necessary and a lawful remedy to marry.

Husband of one wife. 7.
IT is a childish gloss, to interpret the husband of one wife, to be the
pastor of one church. The Apostle does simplye command, that a bishop have not
two wives together at one time, as certain of the Jews, and also of the
Gentiles, being newly converted, then had, which was a suspicion of much
vnchastitye, and great wantonness. Therefore (says Paul) let a bishop be the
husband of one wife. It makes no matter, whether he marry twice or thrice, one
after an other, or whether he do marry maid or widow, so that he have but one
at one time. And here may you see that Poligamia is condemned of Paul by name,
which Poligamie was then amogest the Jews counted almost lawful: but Paul will
have this spot far from a bishop or priest.

Note also, that he makes mention of an husband, least through superstition,
matrimony should be forbidden to the Ministers of the Gospel, as it happened
afterward most ungodly, and most unlawfully. And truly there is no doubt, but
that the holy ghost here would meet and come against this diabolical
superstition, as though he had said: bishops and ministers of the Gospel, are
not to be enforced to single life, but much more it behooves the godly to
marrye. But yet he to whom it is given of God to lead a single and pure life,
is not to be rejected, but the more to be beloved. It is written, that every
man should have his own wife, 1 Cor. 7
to flee fornication. Heb. 13
Also it is better to marry, then to burn. Furthermore, wedlock is honorable,
and a bed undefiled among al men, yet this is always to be excepted (except
one have the singular gift of continency.) Wherefore, it was most tirannical
to interdict marriage to spiritual me^, yea, although they lived most vnpurely
and filthily, as Gratianus and certain bishops after him, have decreed against
all laws, both of God and man, contrary to custom and to nature. Siricius
endeavored to break the marriage of spiritual men in Spain, so did Gregory in
Sicilia, and many other attempted the same in Germany. But the bishops of
Angusta, of Magunce, and of Curia, did always gainsay and resist the edict and
decree of Hildebrand, and did always permit and suffer spiritual Ministers to
have their wives.

I am not ignorant, what Chrysostom does say: who interpreting this place of
one wife, which a Bishop should have, yet does add, that some do expound, the
husband of one wife, to be him, which has only once already married, although
now he have none. And Chrysostom seems to be in doubt, whether that Paul
does exact and require of a Bishop, that he have one wife, or else whether he
may have many at once, after the example of the Jews.

Other do very straightly urge also, that in that age, in the which there was a
rare number of priests, Paul did institut, that no bishop or priest which have
had two wives, should ascend to that honor, that is to say (as they term it)
if he were bigamus.

Some other do affirm, that if any had a wife before his baptism, and had
married an other after his baptism, the former wife being dead, he should be
restrained from the ministry. But saint Hierome to this does greatly reclaim
and gainsay.

One thing is much to be marueiled at, that when Paul does require here so
many noble gifts and dowries in a bishop, all other clauses and parts set
apart, this clause (the having of one wife) is only urged. He that committed
incest, is admitted, the murderer may be admitted, the pirate may be admitted,
the sacrileger may be admitted. Finallye, who not admitted? But he that has
had two wives, or has one, or intends to have one, is only excluded from
this honor. O double ignorance and blindness. Mark here, how narrowly and how
straightly they urge some things, utterly wincking at other things.

It is to be feared, that a great number be made chaste, more for fear of
losing ecclesiastical livings, then for any pietye or godlynes, being in
fear, least that thing that they have (if they marrye) should be taken from
them.

Obiectio.
I know the banbery gloss of the Sarbonistes of Paris, and other schole men,
who do say, that they have read of married priests, but never of priests
married, that is to say, that married men having wives, and ruling well their
family, have been chosen unto the ministry, as one Germanus Antissiadorensis
was chosen. And yet Hierome would have them after they are married, to
abstain from their wives. But neither the Grecia^s nor any other say, that
they did ever marrye after they were made priests.

Responsio.
That spiritual Ministers after they entered into the ministry, did marry
wives, I will prove it both by counsels, and also by their own scholemen.

In the counsel called Synodus Amyrana, it was decreed, that when the Deacon
was ordered, if the vow of co^tinency were required of him, and he do make
protestation that he will not live without a wife, and does resist their
request, and do marry after he is ordered, it is no hinderaunce unto him,, but
that he may lawfully and freely live in the function of the ministry. Out of
the which place we are evidently taught, that it is lawful to marry after
orders received. Of this Gratianus was not ignorant, and therefore he writes,
that concerning that Synod, we must respect the time and place, for it was
kept in the east church, which in ordering of ministers did not exact of them
any promise of chastity. Concerning the time, he says, that the continency of
ministers, was not than brought into the church. This Synod was kept under
Syricius, which lived in the time of Hierome, and Austen.

Notio.
But I pray you let us consider how this tirannie did grow, and what root it
had. In the beginning ministers that had contracted matrimony, were not so
severely and rigorously handled. Destincti, 28 ca. presbate
For the counsel called Sinodus Naeocesariensis, did depose them only from
their office, and not from their benefice, but were norished and took their
stipende of the Church. After that they began to remove them not only from
their office, Did 33. Eos et. cap, Decreueru^t
but also from their office, but also from their benefice: yea and those which
did so contract, they did shut into some monastery, or into some strait and
narrow places to do penance. But our holy father (thanks be to god) does make
a clean dispatch of them by faggot and fire.

Not long after they began to practice their cruelty upon the women, Did. 81.
ex quo dam concilio Toletano cap, quidam.
with whom the ministers had contracted, whom they commanded to be sold, and
to become the servants of ye church, in the which the priest was, which
contracted with them And if the bishop could not drive them to that servitude,
the^ they committed the same to the prince, or to the lay magistrate. Yet their
tirannye did not here stay, but would their children that were begotten in such
marriage, to be made the servant of that church, in the which their fathers
were, and to be deprived of al their fathers inheritance. O double and triple
cruelty, and preposterous pains and punishments, wherewith they punish
priests, lawfully married, and their lawful children, sparing adulterous
priests, hooremongers, and their hoores, and their bastards. But to our
purpose again.

Caietanus the Cardinal does affirm, that the Pope may dispense with a priest
of the west Church to take a wife, after that he is made priest, and does say
furthermore: Nec ratione, nec authoritate probatur, quod absolute loquendo,
d^stinct, 3^ cap, alite,
sacerdos peccet contrahe^do matrimonium, nec ordo in quantum ordo, nec ordo,
in quantum sacer, est impeditiuus matri monii. It cannot be proved, neither by
reason, nor yet by authority, that to speak absolutely, a priest does sin in
contracting matrimonye, nor the order, in that it is order, nor in that it is
an holy order, is a stay or let of matrimony. As for the gloss which does
expound Copulantur, id est, copulatio vtantur, is vain and folish, for the
very order of the text does speak of the contract of matrimony. Also he says,
that priesthood does not dissolve nor break matrimony contracted, whether it
be before or after, if we (al other ecclesiastical laws being set apart) stand
only to those things, which we have received of Christ and the Apostles.

The same Caietanus does allege out of Thomas, that the church may dispense in
both the vows, that is, in the solemn vow of religious men, and in the vow of
secular priests, so that it be for some great necessity, or some urgent cause:
and that he proves by the fact of the Pope, which did dispense, yea rather
compel the king of Aragonia being a Moncke, to forsake his religion, and to
mary a wife, for the disposition and ordering of that kingdom.

Yea, and furthermore he does say, that the high Bishop may in some other cause
(though it be not for public ciuility, nor ecclesiastical vtility) with a
safe conscience dispense with a priest of the west church to contract
matrimony without sin, and says, that that matrimony is of force.

To be short in this, I could bring a number of examples, that priests after
they were ordered, did marrye, not only in other places, but also in this
realm of England, which were dispensed with by the Pope.

Question.
Now I ask whether his dispensation were lawful, then I ask again, why it
is not lawful as well for one, as for an other, and why the Pope does by his
laws restrain yt liberti, and free use of those things which god has
permitted and set at liberty to al men? If he have a respect to some, and not
to other (for whose infirmity God has provided a lawful remedy) he shows
him self, to be a tyrant, a thief, and a murderer of souls. If his
dispensation be unlawful, than he shows him self to be a very Antichrist,
which turns the roots of trees upward, and does transuerte all godly order.
But that every man having not the gift of continencye, may lawfully marry
without his dispensation, the holy spirit does give forth in many places of the
holy scriptures: as in the Epistle to the Corinthians, in the epistle to the
Hebrews, in the epistle of Paul to Timothy, in the epistle sent to Tite, and
in other places. As for the vow which they do so greatly urge, is soon
refelled. If chastity be the gift of God, what needs any vow of that which
is already given? If it be not the gift of God, than the vow is wicked,
blasphemous, and contrary to the word of God. For what is he, that will
presume to promise that, which he is not able to perform?

Again, every Christian man ought to be persuaded, that he is the son of
God. For otherwise how does he call God father in his prayers, whose son he
does mistrust him self to be? Therefore, if he be Gods already, why does he vow
himself to God? Is not he that does vow, in that opinion, that he is not Gods
before his vow? And if he be resolved that he is Gods son, let him know,
that he cannot vow that thing unto God which was Gods before. Those things
which thou do vow, either they be commanded of God, or not commanded. If
they be commanded, why do thou vow those things which thou art bound to do?
Does the son vow to accomplish his fathers commandment, or is he bound to
do it? If they be not commanded, why do thou invent a proper worshippinge
of God of thine own head, as though the holy ghost had not sufficientlye taught
by the holy scriptures, by what means God would be worshipped? Bernard does
call his votarye life, a lost life. But I shall hereafter make more full answer
to all objections of votaries and vows.

VVher they say, that the apostles and other, did put away their wives, after
they were made priests, let us somewhat examine this cause. Saint Paul in the
first epistle to the Corinthians has these words. 1, Cor. ^
Have we not power to eat and to drink? Or have we not power to lead about a
wife being a sister, as well as the rest of the Apostles, and as the brethren of
the Lord, and Cephas?

This text is of diverse diversely interpreted. Some do say, that as certain
women did follow and serve Christ, which followed him out of Galile, so did
certain godly, honest and rich Matrones follow the Apostles, which Matrones
did minister of their goods unto the Apostles, that they might more
expeditely apply the preaching of the Gospel.

Lib. 3.
Of this mind is saint Ambrose, saint Austen, and Chrysostom. Other do
understand this sentence of the wives of the Apostles. Of this mind is saint
Clement an old writer, whose words Eusebius records in the ecclesiastical
history, which be these: Paulus quidem vxorem habuit, qua^ tamen, vt Petrus and
alii, minime circumduxit. Paul had his wife, whom notwithstanding he led not
about, as Peter and others did. Ignatius also in one of his epistles, does
testify Paul to have had his wife.

Now I ask: whether better credit be to be given to Ambrose, Austen, Hierome,
and Chrysostom, or else to Clement and Ignatius, who lived in the Apostles
time? Let other judge.

Valla, a man of asharpe judgment, brings in a reason, by the which he
seems to convince, these words of Paul, to be understand of the wives of
the Apostles. His words be these: Satis fuisset dicere sororem circumducendi,
neque addendum erat (...), quis enim ignorant sorores esse mulieres? etc. It had
been sufficient to say, to lead about a sister, and not to add a woman or
wife, for who does not know sisters to be women: For there was never any
sister found, which was man, but contrariwise every wife is not a sister,
because an infidel in wedlock, may be a wife: but because she is not of one
religion with her husband, she cannot be called a sister. Therefore it behooved
Paul, when he named a woman or wife, to add to, a sister, that thereby it
might be understand, the Apostles wives, which were led about, to have been
Christians.

To this argument of Valla, two other arguments may be coupled, the one may
be brought of the signification of this word circumducendi, to lead about. For
this word cannot be understand of them, which do follow of their own accord. For
these honest matrones, whereof saint Ambrose speaks, were said in the Gospel
to have followed Christ from Galile, that they might minister unto them, and not
to have been led about. For they are counted to lead about women, which have
power over the^, as the husbands over their wives, and maistresses over their
maids.

Secondly, Paul in this place does contend, that he gave place to his own
right and interest, least he should burden the church, in taking costs and
charges of the church toward his finding. But if rich women had followed him,
and had ministered unto him of their goods, truly the church had not therewith
been burdened, but rather relieved and eased. For that which the Church was
bound to do, those Matrones being thereabout should have done.

To prove that Paul had a wife, saint Clement does bring in the words of the
Epistle written to ye Philippia^s, where it is written in Greek after this sort
(...), Lib. 3 cap. 4.
Rogo te quoque germana co^iunx. I pray thee faithful yoke fellow: The latin
interpreter does say, germane compar, in ye masculine ge^der. Theophilactus
also does say, yt (...), is put in the masculine gender, as though Clemente
and other which were Grecians, understood not the Greek phrase, as well as
Theophilact For the Grecians in certain phrases do sometime abuse the
masculine ge^der, to expres the feminine. For example, Paul in the epistle to
Titus, cap. 2.
when he had put this word (...), which is the feminine gender, he added unto
it a masculine Epitheton (...). Furthermore, this word (...) may properly
signify an husband or wife.

Over and besides these, Paul here does commend women, which does most aptly
agree, if ye understand it of Paul's wife. And where he writes to the
Philippians, and does expres there no proper name, who should be understand to be
that yoke fellow, except ye will say with Lyra, compar to be a proper name,
which sauoureth to be far fet. And where some do judge, not to be likely that
Paul's wife should remain at Philippos, but rather at Tharsus, which was
Paul's city, I answer, there might happen many occasions, through the which at
that time she should make her abode at Philippos. But let it be as some will
have it, that Paul had no wife, it follows not therefore, but that this place
to the Corinthia^s, may most aptly and likely be understand of the Apostles
wives, which if it be granted, as the text does enforce the same, the papists
may evidently se, yt the apostles kept their wives after their calling, and
after they were made priests. Saint Clement does affirm, that Peter's wife was
with him in his peregrination, and when he did perceive his wife to be led unto
death, for the profession of her faith, he cried out with a loud voice unto
her, calling her by her name, saying: O consu^x, meme^to dn^i. O wife remember
ye lord.

Paphnutius, in the counsel of Nice, not willing to consent to the decree of
the whole counsel, that priests should put away their wives, and live sole,
obtained that they should keep their wives still, and that the liberty of
marriage should be restrained from no man, and that cohabitacion with a man's own
wife, was chastity, and said that the counsel in going about to displace
priests wives from them, opened a wyndow to scortation and whooredome. The
whole counsel reuolting from their former decree, did consent to Paphnutius.
Saint Hierom him self, which was so stout a defender of virginity, and an
utter ouerthrower of matrimonye, writes upon the epistle to the Ephesians
after this sort: Legant episcopi atque presbiteri, qui filios suos secularibus
literis erudiunt, and faciunt comaedias legere. Let the bishops and priests
read, which instruct their children with profane literature, and cause them
to read comedies. By these words of Hierome it may appear, that the Bishops
in his days did keep both their wives and their children.

Hilarious the bishop had a wife. Saint Austen in his book De bono coniugali,
does say, Quidam nubentes post votum asserunt adulteros esse^ego autem dico
vobis, quod grauiter peccant, qui tales diuidunt. Certain do affirm, them to
be adulterers, which do marry after they have vowed: but I do say unto you,
that they do grievously offend, which do separate such. By this ye may see,
that saint Austen wills, not only priests, not to put away their wives, but
also does greatly burden them with sin against God, which do put them apart.

Consilium Gangrense, made this decree: Si quis nuptias in accusationem
duxerit, and mulierem fidelem and religiosam cum viro suo dormientem
abhominandam crediderit, aut etiam accusandam, tanquam non possint comugati in
regnu^ dei ingredi, anathema sit. If any man shall blame marriage, and believe a
faithful and religious woman sleeping with her own husband, to be abominable,
as though married persons could not enter into the kingdom of God, cursed be
he.

Huldalrichus bishop of Augusta, writes an whole epistle unto Pope Nicholas,
the first of that name, what a dangerous thing it was to separate priests
from their wives. In the which epistle among al other things, these words
following are contained. Sunt vero aliqui qui sanctu^ Gregorium suae sectae
sumu^t adiutorium, quorum quidem temeritatem rideo, ignorantiam doleo. Ignorant
enim, quod periculosum huius haeresis decretum a sancto Gregorio factum,
condigno paenite^tiae fructu, post modum ab eodem sit purgatum. Quippe cum die
quadam in viuarium suu^ propter pisces misisset, and allata inde plusqua^ sex
millia infantum capita videret, intima mox ductus paenitentia, ingemuit, and
factum a se de caelibatu decretum tantae caedis causam confessus, condigno
illud (vt dixi) paenitentiae fructu purgauit, suoque decreto prorsus damnato,
apostolicum illud laudauit consilium: 1, Cor. 7
Melius est nubere, quam vri. Addens ex sui part: Melius est nubere, quam
mortis occasionem praebere.

There be some which take Gregory for a mayntainer of their sect, whose
temerity I laugh at, whose ignorance I lament. For they do not know, that the
perilous decree of this heresy established of Gregorye, was afterward purged
of him, with the worthy fruit of repentance. For upon a certain day, he
sent unto his pondes for fish, and when he saw six thousand childrens heads
drawn out of the same, being stricken with a very inward and earnest
repentance, did much lament it, and confessing the decree which he made for
single life to be the cause of so great slaughter, did purge the same, as I
said, with the worthy fruit of repentance, and utterly condemning his decree,
did praise the counsel of the Apostle, saying: It is better to marrye, then to
burn. Adding of his own part these woods. It is better to marrye, then to
minister occasion of death.

The second Synod of Nice, 8. being the seventh general Counsel.
Sunodo Synodus, comes of this praepositio^ (...), which he tokneth Cu^ and
this word (...), which betokneth Via, away, and the whole word signifies a
Counsel, a couenticle, a congregation: which if it be general, it is called
Synodus (...), of the which, this second counsel of Nice was coumpted one:
which, how it was called and gathered, and by whom, I will declare anon. But
first I will show you the very sum and argument of the said Counsel, which
consists in these two verses.

Nam deus est quod imago docet, sed non deus ipsa,
Hanc videas, sed mente colas quod cernis in ipsa.
ALthough the image it self be not God (as they say) yet God is the self same
thing, that the image does teach us, neither is the image it self to be
worshipped, but that which thou see in the image. But some man perchance
would marvel, whether these fathers wanted discretion and judgment, or
(according unto the saying of Terence) An cum ratio ne insanierint, were mad
with reason, or else if they went about, malapertly to lay a mist, and to blind
the eyes of the whole Church. I truly utterly persuade my self, that to be
verified in those fathers, which Christ in the Prophet does threate^ unto the
dispisers of his word. The words are these: Facite vosmet ipsos stupidos, and
obstupescite ex coecati su^t and exoecant ebrii sunt, and non a vino, commoti
sunt, and non a sicera. Quoniam operuit vos dominus spiritu soporis, Esaias, cap.
27.
and obstruxit oculos vestros quin and prophaetas and praecipuos vestros
videntes operuit. Make your selves dull and wonder: they are blind, and do
blind others: they are dronck, but not with wine: they stagger, but not by
strong drink. For the Lord has covered you, with the sprite of slo^ber, and
has shut up your eyes, the Prophets also and your chief seers has he covered
etc. Who at any time, which has had but a taste of Gods word, did ever
affirm, that to be God, which the image does teach: and that to be worshipped
in spirit, which is seen in the image? O shamelesnes. What other thing can a
man see in an image, but matter and form? The form of an image does represent
a man, has therefore God a shape and members like a corruptible man? why
therefore were the Anthropomorphites condemned of heresy? The matter of an
image is either gold, silver, stone, or wood, and sometime earth and clay: but
who would say, that God is either like unto earth, a stone, wood or metal?
how therefore is that God which the image does teach? Again if he be to be
worshipped in the mind, which is seen in the image, then some earthly thing is
to be worshipped. For we see nothing in an image, but that which is earthly and
corruptible. By this it is evident, that blind bussardes have gone far out of
the way, definyng and constitutyng that which is against true religion and the
infinite and unmeasurable majesty of God. Saint Paul is clean contrary
against them, Act. 17,
saying: Since that we are the generation of God, we ought not to think, that
the Godhead is like either unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by art, or
invention of man. Neither do they only offend against the divine Scripture,
but also they have forgotten what the holy fathers before have written. For
Athanasius against the gentiles writes thus: If they think God to be of a
corporal shape, giving unto him hands, feet, neck, breast and all other
members like a man, see unto what impiety they are brought, which are not
afraid to have so fond a cogitation of God. For then it would necessarily
follow, that it should be thought to suffer all things pertaining to the
imbecility of the body, if it be circumscribed after the manner of the bodies
of men. It will follow also, that it may be cut and divided, and wholly perish.
But who is so mad to think, that those things happen unto God? for these
things are proper only unto earthly bodies. For God is without a body and
incorruptible, immortal and everlasting, who has need of nothing. But these
things are corruptible, and the lineamentes of their bodies has need of man's
aid and art. For we see them oftentimes to be renewed, when they are old,
and that which either the length of time, rain, or any living best by chance
have destroyed, to be made new again by man's help. But Lactantius writes
more plainly of this matter, lib. 2^ instituti ^^am. cap, 2
saying: After yt God began to be present with us, we have not now any need of
the image of him. I ask this question, whether if a man continually behold the
image of him yt is absent, and is gone into far countries, that he may take
comfort of him being away, shall this man appear to be in his wits, if he shall
co^tinew still in beholding the image of him who is now returned again and
there present, and would rather enjoy the sight of ye image, the^ of the man
himself? no truly. For the image of a man then seems necessary when the man
is absent and far of, but it is superfluous when he is present. But the image
of God is always superfluous and vain, whose spirit and Godhead being every
where diffused and spread, ca^ never be absent. What ca^ be more plain and
perspicuous against ye decree of these fathers? The same author has words not
unlike to these, saying. But they are afraid, yt all their Religion should be
void, if they should see nothing which they might worship, and therefore they
ordein images: which because they are the images of ye dead, they are dead
themselves, for they are destitute of all sense and feling. But ye image of God
which lives for ever, ought to be sensible and lively. If an image took his
name of likelines, how ca^ those images be judged like unto God, which cannot
move or feel any thing, therefore that is not the image of God, which is made
with man's hands, of gold or stone, or of any like matter, but man him self
is the image of God, because he feleth and moves, and does many actions. etc.
And there is no cause, why our adversaries should tra^sferre the state from God
unto the saints: for as concerning the pictures and images of God, they are
manifestly found to be in a wicked error. Now as concerning the images of the
saints, let the images of the saints tell, whether they be the images of the
souls, or of the bodies. The souls, because they are without a body, ca^ not
be expressed in images. For we believe, that the souls live in felicity with
God in heaven, and the bodies rot in the earth, until the resurrection. For
this cause you will say, that you represent the bodies by bodily images. But
how is it, that they do not behold and worship lively bodies, rather then the
shadows of bodies rotten? do not these foolish men perceive, that if the
images could feel or move, they would worship their makers, of whom they were
polished and decked? who if they had not so been formed, they had remained
undoubtedly a rude stone or block, man therefore is, in a manner the father of
images, by whose hands they were framed, and by whom they began to have their
shape, figure and beauty. And therefore he is better that made them, than they
which are made. And no man does worship the image makers, wherefore Seneca
wrote worthyly in his mortal books against the gentiles. They worship the
images of the gods, they humble them selves unto the^, bowing their knees,
they fall prostrate before them, they sit or stand by them the whole day, they
offer rewards, and burn sacrifice unto them. Finally, whereas they so much
wonder, at the^, yet notwithstanding the caruers that made the^, despise and
contemn them. The Christians likewise, wonder at images, they beholding them,
praising and extolling the curious worckemanship in them, do in the mean time
despise the workmanship of God. For very few do consider the beauty and
comelines of the things in the world, and do set forth the praise of their
maker, as it is worthy. They are occupied in the beholding of the fond and
trifling toies of man, whereas the divine providence has exhibited more art,
cunning, and wisdom to be seen and perceived of us in the little Emmet or in a
small flower of the field, or in one leaf of a tree or herb, then we can find
in all the pictures or images of all the paynters and caruers, being never so
finely wrought. And these foolish fathers, be not ashamed, to send the simple
people unto the vain and fond works of men's hands. Let them therefore believe
these Counsels, unto whom it is a pleasure and delight to err, stomble, and to
fall. They which are wise, believe the Scriptures, and therefore they believe,
that these Counsels were mad and out of the way. For the Counsels which were
after gathered by the authority of the Church of Rome, were nothing better,
yea rather more fond and foolish. But they say, that in all these general
counsels the heresy of not worshipping of images, was condemned: For now they
boldly and rashly call that heresy, which hitherto in the Church of Christ was
called Orthodoxum, that is, of sound and right religion. Surely they have in
their Councels defined and decreed those things, which are contrary to the law
of God, which neither was observed of the Apostles, nor the Apostles disciples,
nor can be showed or proved by any Scriptures. Let them therefore see by what
spirit, or how catholikly they have intruded into the Church of God the use
of images. Saint Austen writes, In catalo. 8 hereseon
that there was a certain woman named Marcellina, of the sect of the
Carpocratianes, which worshipped the image of Jesus and of Paul, of Homer, and
of Pythagoras, humbling her self unto them, and offering incense. What will our
adversaries say here? Marcellina is set in the Cataloge of heretics, because
she was a fellow unto the Carpocratians, and worshipped ye images of Jesus and
Paul, and the images of the chief Poets and Philosophers. Ye call us
heretics because we oppugn the images of the saints, and teach with all the
Catholics and faithful, that they are not to be worshipped, that no kind of
adoration is to be done to them, no incense to be laid before them. Lactantius
also judged, that there was no religion, wheresoever images were set up. We
are called the subuerters of religion, because we endeavor to overthrow the
destruction and pestilence of all religion. If any man desire to know the
words of Lactantius, they are these: There can be nothing greater then man,
but that which is above man, therefore God is above man, and not under man:
neither is he set in the lowest region, he is to be sought in the highest
place. Wherefore it is not doubtful, but that wheresoever any image is, there
is no religion. For if religion do consiste only in divine things, and there is
no divine thing but that which is heavenly, therefore all images ar without
religion. For there can be nothing celestial in that thing which is of the
earth. Libr, susti. cap. 19.
And for this cause the ancient and catholic Church did utterly avoid all
images. For we can bring proof out of one Aelius Lampridius, an Ethnicke
writer, that the primitive Church did abhor images, In vita imper Alex, Seueri
for Lampridius writes thus: Alexander Seuerus (says he) ascended into the
Capitolle the seventh day after he had been in the City, he frequented the
Churches, and he would have a temple erected unto Christ, and receive him among
the gods. The which thing al so Adrianus is said to have minded, who
commanded Churches in every City to be builded without images, which at this
day, because they have no gods, are called Adriani, that is the Churches of
Adrian, which he was said to have made for this purpose, but he was forbidden
of the^ Asking counsel of their gods, learned, that all men would become
Christians, if that should come to pass, and that all Churches would be
forsaken. Hitherto Lampridius: manifestly declaryng, that it was the use of the
christians to have no images in their churches. This thing Seuerus ente^ded to
have don, and Adrianus already had builded such churches every where, that he
might give an occasion to induce the manner of the christians, except the
devils had persuaded the contrary, that is, yt images should be set up in the
churches, least their religion should decay. If our adversaries refuse the
testimony of an Ethnic man, let them hear Erasmus Roterodamus, writing in
this sort: until the time of Hierome, In Catachesino,
the christians were of a good and sound religion, who suffered no image in the
church, nor painted, nor graue^, nor wrought, no not ye image of Christ which
way as I think, to stay the heresy of the Anthropomorphites. But after that,
the use of images crept into the churches by little and little. Thus much
Erasmus. Saint Hierome lived almost. 400. In proemie, lib, 3, continent, in
Amos,
years after the Nativity of Christ, as he him self does witness. Wherefore
it is manifest, that the primative church of Christ was without images by ye
space almost of 500. years. Therefore it may not hereafter seem grievous unto us
to be condemned of heresy, and blamed with the primitive church. Thou
understand therefore (gentle reader) how unworthily and without a cause, our
adversaries endeavor to condemn us of heresy, whereas it manifestly appears,
all our endeavor and labor to tend to this end, that (all heathenishnesse and
heresy being taken away) we may bring in again, and restore the ancient
orders of the Apostles, and of the Apostolic Churches.

Now will I declare the cause, why this council, and by whom this counsel was
called and gathered. There was one Irene, wife unto the Emperor Leo the.iiij.
of that name, who was the son of Constantinus the fifth, being son to Leo
the third, whom they called in derision I conomachus, that is to say a wrestler
and fighter against Images, and called Constantine his son Copronimus,
because, when he was christened, he defiled ye font with his dung. But other
do say, yt when he was oftentimes washed of his nurse, he would handle his own
doung with his hands, and therefore he was called Copronimus. These two
Emperors Leo and Constantine his son commanded images to be taken out of
the church, and to be utterly defaced.

Now this Leo the.iiij. Irenes husband, begat a son of her, who also was
called Consta^tinus. And when Leo was dead, and Constantine his son very
young, Irene thempres took upon her ye government of thempire. Under this Irene,
images were restored into ye churches. She also being accompanied with a great
guard upon the feast of the Nativity of our Lord, went into the great church
of Constantinople, and restored again the crown of gold adourned with
precious stones, which her husband Leo, had before taken from thence. At this
time in the country of Thracia, when a certain man had dug up a certain
piece of ground, there was found a certain coffin of stone, in the which was
buried a certain man, and a certain plate or piece of Brass was found upon
the dead man having these words written in it: (...). Christus nascetur de
virgin: and credo in eum. Sub Constantino and Irene Imperatoribus, o sol,
rursus me videbis. That is to say, christ shall be born of a virgin. I believe in
him, under Constantine and Irene themperous, O sun, thou shall see me again.
But whether this be true or no, Aliorum iudicium esto. By the commandment of
this Irene a council of.iij. hundredth and fifty Bishops was celebrate at the
town of Nice. The cause of this Synod was this. One Paulus was then Patriarch
of ye Church of Constantinople, he being taken with a fervent sickness, left the
cure and charg of his church, and lay in his bed, as it had been a man in
dispayr, to who^ thempresse Irene made her repair, and comforting him, did
inquire the cause of his departing from the Church. To whom he answered,
saying, I would to God, O Queen I had never entered into this see, which being
oppressed with Tyranny, has in it so many divisions, and none obedience. But
when he would utter no more of his mind unto the Queen, she sent unto him the
wisest men of the Senate, which required of him the cause of his pensifnes.
Unto who^ he answered, except there be a general council called to redress
disorders, and to unite all Churches together, all things would come to wrack
and confusion. To who^ the Senators said again. Why did thou promise thy
prince, when thou came to thy See, that images ought not to be worshipped.
That thing says he, caused the madness of the rulers and your cruelty. So
speaking these words, with a few mo, he departed out of this life. After him
was chosen one Tarasius to be Patriarch, but he could not be constrained,
neither by prayers, nor by manacies to take upon him this dignity, except they
would promise a general council, which being granted, he became Patriark went
to Rome to Adrianus ye bishop to have conference with him. Which Adrianus did
write to al Patriarks and bishops, yt they should assemble to the city of
Nice, to celebrate a general counsel, which was accomplished. And those things
which were there agreed upon were written in a certain brief, and brought to
Co^sta^tinople, where they were openly red and subscribed unto of ye princes
and gouerners. The images were restored again to ye temples, and al Churches,
united in one. This was the course of yt noble and worthy (Si diis placet) vii.
general counsel, which sat only to maintain ye honoring of stocks, blocks,
and stones. But as yt Proverb says. Dignum patella operculu^. Such a cup,
such a cover. Similes habent labra lactucas. Such lips, such lettasses, such
council such doctrine. But I pray you mark ye charity of this stout and
idolatrous dame, which being moved with ambition to bear rule, moved a
conspiracy against her own son, and did hire and allure her Dukes and Lords
with fair promises and large gifts, to kill him. To the which conspiracy they
all did assent, and hastening into the court, took him being alone, and most
cruelly did put out his eyes. O bloody fact, worse then any Tyranny committed
by Phalaris, which for the love she bare to images and idols, did not stick
to murder her own son made after the similitude and likeness of God. Thus
much for the second Council of Nice, and for the author and fautor of the
same, is sufficient.

Licentia. 9.
LIce^tia and Libertas, differ in signification, for Libertas, is an honest and
mean liberty, to do things comely not to pass the bonds of honesty, Lice^tia,
is an vnmoderat and dissolute manner of saying or doing, as Tere^ce uses it,
saying Omnes deteriores sumus lice^tia, we are all made worse by to much
liberty. And Quintilia^ says: Quae in aliis libertas est, in aliis lice^tia
vocatur. That which is called liberty in some, is called license in other:
and he that runs to much at liberty, is called Licentiosus.

Plutarch does report, how that Cato the elder, was wont always most earnestly
to admonish the Magistrates, seuerly to punish the offenders in a common
wealth, judging nothing to be more pernicious in a public weal, then
license, which he thought not to be born within a City, in so much, that he
judged the Magistrate which could restrain the offenders, and would not:
worthy to be stoned to death.

Xenopho^ in his work of ye sayings and doings of Socrates. Lib. 4.
Dic mihi (inquit) o Euthy deem, putas ne bona^ magna^que possessioue^ homini
atque ciuitati libertate^ esse. Maxima^ (inquit) Quicu^que igitur corporeis
seruit libi dinibus, et ob eas nequit quae su^t optima exequi, putas ne tu hu^c
esse liberu^ minime (inquit) Tell me (says he) O Euthydome, do thou think
liberty to be a good and great possession to a man and to the City? Very
great (says he) whosoever therefore does serve bodily pleasures, and through
those cannot execute those things that be good, do thou coumpt him to live
at liberty? no verily says he.

Demochares, being one of the legates, sent from Athenes to king Phillip, showed
forth the license of his tongue. For when king Phillip had ge^tly entertained
the^, and said say on you ambassadors, tell me, if I may do any thing to
gratify the city of Athens. The^ said Demochares, Suspe^de te, hang thy self,
which words sauoured of to much liberty of speech. This Demochares was called
for the malapertenes and sawcines of his tongue Thersites.

Platonicall. 10.
OF Plato I have written before, what he was: yet I thought good in this place
to note two things. The first is of Idea, which Plato does call the first
shape or intelligence of things. Which Plato denies to be gendred and made,
but does say, that they be always and are contained in reason and
understanding. These were named first Ideae by Plato. And they be the eternal
exemplars of those things, which be naturally made: they be immortal,
immutable, and inviolable. And that the matter may be made more plain, it is
needful beside all men, to understand and conceive in reason and
understanding, an other certain man, and beside al horses, to conceive an
other horse: and besides other beasts, to conceive a beast unbegotten. And as
of one seal there be made many printes of the same seal, so of one man there
comes six hundred thousand men. This is the Idea, of Plato, from whom
Aristotle does dissent, and does think, that there be no such Ideae. If you
will more of these Ideae, red S. Augustine, who writes of them at large in
diverse and sondrie places.

Secondly although the Academickes (of which sect Plato was author) were
coumpted more modest then other Philosophers, yet not all which were called by
the name of Academickes, did observe the rule of modesty, but some of them did
show forth both their great follye and their great error. For what is more
foolish, then to have the name of a Philosopher, and to doubt and waver in
every thing, and to have the certaynty of nothing? for they that doubt of all
things, are very far both from faith and knowledge. Man is more noble then all
other beasts by reason and understanding, but in certain senses, he is
inferior unto certain beasts. For the beast called Linx, is of a quicker
sight then man, the Sow of a quicker hearing, the Dog of a perfecter sent and
smell, the Ape of a better taste, and ye Spider of a readyer touching. etc. But
for as much as man does excel all beasts by the power of discerning and
understanding, who does not coumpt that man more brutish then beasts, which
thincketh him self to have no reason to judge things, and none understanding
to savor things. In so much yt we do perceive, certain brute beasts almost to
embrace the image of reason. For the dog has his affections, and is mindful
of the benefits done unto him: he knows his master with who^ he is
familiar, and as though he were enobled with some wit and reason, he returns
to his masters house, when he has lost him, yea although the dog be.300.
miles from his home, as I my self knew a dog of a certain man's in Cornowall
dwelling almost by the mount, being lost in London, beyond the temmes came home
again a fourthnight before his master came out of London. The Camel is very
mindful of injuries and wrongs done unto him: the Unicorn does know the
integrity of his virgin femall, in so much that he is delighted only with the
embracings of her, and none other. All other beasts have a marvelous delight
in the sweet savor, that comes from the Panther, and in beholding of him.
Therefore feling by the sweet air where the Panthers have their resort, thither
will all beasts come. The fishes being in the deep streams, do come to the
show of gold, whereupon that prodigal and lascivious Emperor Nero did fish
with golden nets. What need many words. Torua Leona lupu^ sequitur, lupus
ipse capellam. Flore^te^ cithisum sequitur lassiua capella. The cruel Liones
does chase the woulfe, the woulf him self does chase the goat, and the wanton
goat does follow the grene herb called Trifoly. So after this sort is every
beast drawn and led with his pleasure, which cannot be, if they should doubt
of their affections. They therefore which doubt at all things, by what temeritie
or by what impudency do they challenge the profession of Philosophy? Look
more for the folly of this sect in Saint Austen, and in Cicero, who both with
strong reasons do dispute against these kinds of Academickes.

The residue shall judge, 11. 1. Corinthians. 14.
THe Apostle Paul will have.ij. or.iij. Prophets to speak in the
congregation, meaning, that one should speak after an other. For if.ij. iij.
or more should speak at one time, one should let ye other and so there should
arise a great co^fusio^, By this place of Paul it appears, that it was not
the manner at yt time, that one alone should make a sermon by the space of.ij.
or.iij. hours unto the people. But certain which were chose^, did propose unto
the congregation such things as they had before purposed, giving place in order
ye one to the other, for then through the abou^dau^ce of the sprit many might
be chosen, the no^bre of who^ at this day is not so plentiful. Therefore to one
alone is committed ye prophecieng and preaching unto the people. It follows in
Paul: Et ceteri di iudice^t, and let the residue judge. Paul does command, 1,
Cor. 14.
that the hearers do expe^de and weigh what is spoken, how aptly, and how godly
things be expounded, whether the interpretation of the preacher do correspond
and be agreeable to ye analogy of faith. And here he shows, yt it is lawful
to use ye gift of God to the edifieng of the congregation in keeping of silence,
yt is, if dilligent head be taken what is said of others. Yet notwithsta^di^g
here is not to be gathered, yt the word of god is subject unto ye judgment of
man, but yt by the sprit of god it be well vewed, whether it be gods word or no,
that is proposed. For the Prophets and holy men did not always speak by ye
instinct of the holy sprite, nor did always utter their minds out of gods
word, for they were sometimes destitute of gods spirit, and therefore we read
oftentimes in the prophets these words. Et factu^ est verbu^ dn^i ad me. And
the word of the Lord said to me. VVherby we might understand, those things that
be written there, to have proceeded from the spirit of God. The son of god
beco^ming man, had only this prerogative that he had the spirit of God always
remaining in him, which was declared to John the Baptist, when it was said unto
him: Super que^ videris spiritu^ desce^de^te^ and manente^ super eu^, John. 1
ipse est, qui Baptizat spiritu sa^cto, Upon whom thou shall see the spirit
discending, and abidyng upon him, he it is which does Baptize with the holy
ghost. Mark here this word, Manente^, For the spirit of God descends upon
other, but it does not always remain with them. And many of the holy fathers
did often admonish the readers of their books, not to give honor to their
writings, which is due only to the holy Scriptures. If this judgment which
Paul would to be observed, had been warely and wisely practiced in the
Church, we should not have had at this day so many foolish traditions and
wicked decrees of the Bishop of Rome. But this servitude wherein the Church
has been lately wrapped, came partly through over much flatteryng of the
Bishop of Rome, and partly through his violent tyranny, by the which he
decreed it to be an horrible sacrilege, to judge and make inquisition of his
rescriptes and constitutions.

Furthermore, sluggishenes and idleness has so invaded the mynds of men, that
they had rather trust to other men's judgments, then to their own. But if God
would have us to be judge of his Prophets, why may not the like be done of the
Pope and his decrces. Yet men ought not here to take an occasion of contention,
and to vex and to disturb the church. For Paul does not say, let other make
altercation, let other contend, but (says he) let other judge. It is one
thing to hear him, that teaches, and to understand and to judge, and an
other thing by the spirit of contention to call all things (be they never so
well spoken) into question and disputation. For to judge, it needs not nor
behooves, that the hearer do gaynesaye the teacher in the open congregation:
but it is sufficient if he judge in his heart of those things which he
hears. And when the congregation is dissolved, if he desire any thing, to
ask it of him, when they be alone, for except this modesty be kept and
observed, we should look for nothing else but a vain, hurteful, and uncomely
altercation in the Church.

Zacharias. 12.
THere were many of this name. The one was a Prophet, raised up of God to
comfort the people of Israel, when they were returned from Babylon, and to
tell them that they should renew again their temple and political government,
and that they should certainly know, yt God would defend their common wealth
until the coming of Christ, cap. 9. 12. 13 1. Esdras. 5. 3 2, paral. 24
of whose passion and benefits he does Prophecy in many places of his book.

An other was the son of Ioiada the high Priest, who was slain of Ioas the
king of Judah.

An other was a Prophet very familiar with the king Azaria. 2. paral 26. Esaias.
cap. 8


An other called zacharias was father in law to king Ezechias.

An other was the son of Hieroboam the.xiiij. king of Israel, 4, Reg. ca. 15
who reigned six months.

An other was a priest of ye course of Abia (of ye which course there is
me^tio^ made in the first book of Paral. cap. 24. Luke, 1
) he was ye father of John Baptist Which zacharias (Basilius writes) was
slain betwixt the temple and the altar, because he said yt Messiah was come,
and was borne of a virgin. Math, cap 23.


Some do not allow this opinion, nor yet the opinion of them which refer
this to that zachary, which exhorted the people being returned from exile out
of Babylon, to the reedifieng of the temple, who also is cou^pted one of the
smaller Prophets, for although thinscription of the book does show him to be
the son of Barachias, yet it is no where read, that he was slain. Of the
other zachary, the son of Ioiada the whole Scripture does report that thing
which is most agreeable to this place. That is to say, when after the death of
his father, the religion decayed by the wicked apostasy of the king and the
people, zachary being endued with gods holy spirit, did very severely, sharply
and openly rebuke their Idolatry, and therefore they slew him in the court of
the temple. Nor it is any absurdity, for his father Ioiada to have had ye name
of Barachie. 2. paral. 24
For in so much he was all the days of his life a maintayner of Gods true
religion, he ought worthyly to be called Barachias, that is, the blessed of
God. But whether he had two names, or whether there be an error in the word,
as Saint Hierome does think, there is no doubt of the matter, but yt Christ
does note the sacrilegious and bloody stoning of zachary in the place above
alleged. He names this zachary, not as the last martyr yt was killed: for ye
posterity of the Jews did ingurge the^ selves with ye blood of martirs, of the
which their fathers before had but a taste, for there was great slaughter under
Manasses. Who knows not how cruelly they murdered the Prophet Jeremy? The
Lord does not imbrayd them with latter slaughters, but laid to their charge
this one murder of zachary, which was as it were the very beginning of their
wicked and bloody licentious doings, which afterward came to an unspeakable
cruelty. Christ did comprehend under this slaughter of zachary, all other
slaughters, which were or should be done by them.

In Hebrew zachariah signifies, Memor dn^i yt is, mindful of the Lord.

Helias. 13.
HElias Thesbites, was the greatest Prophet of his time, he was rapte and taken
away from men, whose end no man knew. He did many miracles while he lived, and
was like unto a burning fire, in so much that his words burned like a torche.
This Prophet first of al came unto Achab, and spoke unto him in the name of the
lord, for he had forsaken the commandments of the Lord and followed Baal, and
he foreshewed him the great drouth and famine, which should follow and continue
for three years in Samaria. Which when he had told him, he fled, and hid
himself three years in a cave by a river, where continually every day a raven
came and brought him meat. After when the river waxed dry, he departed into the
city of Sarepta, where he was nourished of a certain poor widow, during the
time of all the drouth. And after it chanced, that the son of that woman
which gave him meat, dyed, who had no more children, and he was restored unto
life again by the prayer of the Prophet Helias, who as some say, was the
Prophet Jonas. After three years ended Helias prayed in the sight of Achab the
king, and there came forthwith, abundance of rain and hayle from heaven.
Wherefore when Helias had slain.450. Priests which deceived Achab and the
people, he was persecuted by the queen Iesabel, in the reuengement of them.
But he at the length departing into Oreb, the hill of the Lord, from thence
came to Damascus, where by commandment of the Lord, libr. 3. Regum, cap. 18.
et 19
he anointed Azael king of Siria, and Iehu king of Samaria. From thence
returning unto the country of Jews, and finding Helizeus at the plough and
twelve other, he cast his cloak upon him, and began to Prophecy. Afterward
when he had caused the Lord to burn with fire sent from heaven the two
capitaynes of Ochozia the king, Lib. 4. Regum. cap. 1
with their hundred men, he was carried up into heaven with a hurl wind in the
sight of Helizeus, leauyng him to Prophecy in his place. He governed the
common wealth of the Jews about.20. years.

Luk, 1 Math. 11.17, Mark 9,
Where Malachias the Prophet does write, that Helias shall come again before
Christ, that the angel Gabriell does expound of John Baptist. Eliah in
Hebrew, is as much to say, as Deus meus Iehoua, my God Iehoua.

There be two places in the Scripture concerning Helias, which seem one
contrary unto the other. Matheum, 11 cap. 4. John, 1.
The one is this. Ipse est Helias. The other is, Non sum ego Helias. In the
Prophet Malachie Helias is promised in these words: behold I will send unto
you Helias the Prophet before the great and horrible day of the Lord come, and
he shall convert the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of
ye children unto the fathers. etc. That Helias is John Baptist, may be proved
by the interpretacion of the Aungel, saying: he shall go before, in the spirit
and power of Helias. And Christ in Mathewe: This is he, of whom it is written,
cap. 11.
behold I send my messenger before thy face, Mark. cap. 1. Luke, 17
which shall prepare thy way before thee. And if ye will receive bym, he is
that Helias which should come. And in Mark, as before in Luke: Behold I will
send. etc. And in Matthew: I say unto you, that Helias is already come, and
they knew him not. etc. lib. 4, Reg. ca. 2,
John therefore is that Helias of whom Malachy prophesied. But that John denies
him self to be Helias, he does not deny him self to be that Helias, of whom
Christ spoke, but that Helias Thesbites, one of the citizens of Giliad, who was
in the time of Achab, king of Israel, and taken up into heaven in a fiery
chariot, of whom the Jews dreamed that he should come again into the earth
before the coming of the Messiah, he denies him self to be that Helias,
aunswering to their opinion, or else he answered per (...), by this figure
tapinosis, not arogating unto him self any dignitye, in the which he
confessed him self to be lesser then Helias, as he did also when he should
have baptized Christ, as though he himself had much need of the water of
regeneration. For this is peculiar unto the holy fathers, that they will not
acknowledge in them selves any justice, or many virtues, nor stand in their
own conceit, but will abase and humble them selves, which thing appears in
John:

To be short, John was not Helias proprie, but significatiue.

Templum domini, templum domini. 14. Ieremiae. 7.
FOr the better understanding of this clause, I thought it expedient first to
show the cause why these words were spoken, and to make discourse thereof from
the beginning of the chapter. The Empire of Assiria utterly fell and was
destroyed under Sardanapalus, a most lascivious and dissolute king, but it was
mightily restored, and repaired again by one Nabuchadonozor Priscus, who was
father to the great Nabuchadonozor, and even then also it began to be called
both the kingdom of Chaldea, and the kingdom of Babylon, not many years
before Manasses (graundfather to Josias the king) was taken of the Babilonians.
Therefore, when the Jews saw the prowes and strength of the Chaldies to grow
more and more (when Josias raygned) they did greatly fear their might and
power, and did by diverse and sundry ways consult between them selves, both of
the wealth of their kingdom, and also of the preservation of the church. One
was in one mind, and an other in an other mind. This man trusted to one thing,
and that man trusted to an other thing, and so the minds of the whole people
were diverse, and did greatly varry: but the bounteous Lord in these their
doubtful cares, comes in very good season, and helps at a pinch. He does
exhibit unto them certain good counsels, and sends unto them the prophet
Jeremy to instruct them, how they might be delivered out of these dangers, and
how they might preserve their kingdom whole, and keep the integritye of
religion. First, he does greatly urge all estates and persons, of what age so
ever they were, to confirm themselves to the good counsel of god, and (leaving
al their vain hopes) to trust only to the Lord God, to put away their corrupt
manners, and to fashion them selves to the will of God. There were seven things,
in the which specially they did put their affiaunce. First in the temple, in
intercession of saints, in manifold sacrifices, in man's wisdom, in the large
promises of false prophets, in mutual consent, finally in the abundance of
riches. Al these things does the prophet most strongly confute, and does
utterly manace unto them a most sure and horrible destruction, except they
would amend in due time.

And I beseech you, what have our men done of late days? Have not the counsels
been their refuge? Have they not there often consulted how to preserve the
church and the common wealth? And what do their counsels bring forth? Nothing
else but Cockatrice eggs. For all the counsels which have been assembled under
the Romish bishops, these. 500 years, have discoursed and bebated nothing but
these clauses following. First to extirpe all the Popes adversaries, that is (as
they call them) heretics. To make reformation of ceremonies in all churches To
have gorgious altars, great number of Masses, fine chaunting and singing, to
have images in every corner of the church, to dissolve and break the lawful
state of marriage of the spiritual ministers, to have sumptuous and rich copes,
sensers, banner clothes, basins, cruets, and what not? Finally, to set forth an
army against the Turks, to win the city of Jerusalem out of their hands.
But what commodity and profit have issued from such counsels, histories, time,
and daily experience can declare. But for the extirping of idolatry, for the
purity of preaching Gods word, for the right admistration of the sacraments,
for the clean life of the clergy in putting away their hoores, and marying
lawful wives, no reformation. These things be bugges to them, with these
things they will not meddle, least their glory should be defaced.

But the prophet here does command the Jews to hear the counsel of God, and
to redress their lives, and to forsake their hill alters, their idols, and
their hie groves, which in deed they did in part, but not in the whole. For
their corrupt manners remained uncorrected, and the woorshipping of Baal, was
not utterly abolished and left. The prophet therefore was commanded, to stand
in the gate, and to preach to the people. Some write, that there were in the
city seven gates, three on the North side, three on the South side, and one
which was most famous on the East side, in the which the prophet is reported to
have stand, and to have said thus: Because ye come to the temple to woorship
the Lord, hear what the Lord speaks to you. And here by the way note, that
although God be in every place, and is included in no place, and ought to be
woorshipped in every place, in spirit and truth, yet specially and
singularlye he ought to be worshipped in the temples, and in the holy
congregacions, which temples were instituted and ordained for that end: that
is, that worship and honor might be given unto God openly, and in some certain
place, as ecclesiastical discipline does require. Out of the words of the
prophet may be learned also, what all faithful ought to do, when they come to
the temples. Nempe vt adorent dominum, forsoothe that they worship the Lord. To
worship the Lord (I say) and not dead stocks: to worship the Lord, and not to
garnish images with rich coats, with silver and gold, with burning tapers and
candels.

After this, the prophet does show them the whole counsel of God, saying:
Emendate vias vestras, and studia vestra. Mende your ways and your studies. By
ways and studies, he understands althoughts and inventions, and (as Hierome
says) al their sayings and doings, which be amended and reformed, when we omit
those things which god forbids, and do those things which God commands.
But the most part of men do contemn or little set by, this wholesome counsel of
God, and do consult of other inventions. Now follows the vtility and profit
of this counsel, which the prophet gave them. Et faciam vos habitare in loco
isto, and I will make you to dwell in this place, that is, you shall not be
devoured in battle, you shall not be beaten with calamities and miseries, but
you shall be happy and blessed in your country, out of the which you shall
never depart into captiuities, nor into the lands of your enemies.

But because the foolish people tha^ took no great regard of the wholesome
counsel of God, because they had utterly conceived vain hope and trust in
vain things (as in figures and shadows) the prophet goes forth to open
their folly, and to refute them, as it is the part of a good teacher, utterly
to take away those things, which did let and hinder obedience and reformation
of life. Jeremy therefore says: Nolite fidere verbis mendacibus, dicentes:
templum domini, templum domini, templum domini. That is: Trust not in lying
words, saying: the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, this is the
temple of the Lord. He repeateth this word three times, to signify the sure
trust that they had in the temple and in their sacrifices, as though they
should have said: Is it like, that we should be cut of by the battles of
strange nations, which have here with us the temple of the Lord? Yea, the
temple which is the noble work of Solomon. Which temple has these great
promises, that is, if there come either battle, famine or pestilence, yet they
shall not anoy us, if we go unto the temple to crave pardon. Who therefore would
believe us to be destroyed of the Heathen, as the prophets do triflle?

In the like madness are they, which in these days cry and say: Neither Turk
nor Sarasen can overcome us Christians, for we have Abbeies of both the sexes,
in the which both men and women do serve the Lord, we have Colleges, we have
temples, in the which there is singing and reading day and night, in the which
we have mattensing and massing, ringing and piping. It cannot be, but God will
hear us. But let those hipocrites persuade them selves, that God did not
ordain by his word any such kind of worshipping, any such kind of praying
and prating as they use.

But to the prophet again. Are ye not ashamed (says he to the Jews) being
defiled with so many horrible sins, to enter into the temple of the Lord,
which is called by his name, and consecrated unto him, and to persuade your
selves to be delivered from all manner of calamities, only for that ye enter
into my temple, and are beholders of holy things? And yet notwithstanding you
steal, you murder, you be adulterers, you commit perjury, you offer incense
unto Baal, you follow those Gods whom you know not. What do you mean? Is my
house in your eyes nothing else but a den of thieves? I know that you resolve
your selves, that your doings are hidden, and that with your hipocrisy you may
deceive both God and man. You are deceived, for I know (says God) the very
secrets of your minds, I understand all the wicked imaginations of your hearts.

It shall be best to excusse and examine certain singular words of this
sentence going before, and so to apply the^ to our erudition and doctrine, with
out the which the words of the prophet are not so much auailable.

The prophet here does recite certain received and common kinds of sin.

By theft, he understands fraud, guile, disceite, usury, and such other
unlawful and ungodly crafts and means.

By murder, he understands wrath, hatred, striuings, envy, stripes
slaughters and unlawful wars.

By adultery, he understands voluptuous lusts, inordinate pleasures, and al
uncleanliness in mind, word and deed, filthiness, fornication, hooredo^e, and
such other impurities. By perjury, he understands lies, unfaithfulness,
breaking of oaths and couena^ts, execratio^s, cursings and blasphemies.

By insense offered to Baal, he understands and comprehends all unlawful
rites and ceremonies, idolatry, apostasy, and unlawful worshippings. And yet
the supersticious and proud Jews, being corrupted with all these spots, came
unto the temple, and stood without shame in the sight of God, saying: Although
we have done al these abhominacio^s, yet are we delivered and made free, only
because we visit the temple. Iere. 7.
For if there be need of any expiatio^ or purging, we be made clean by visiting
the temple. But the Lord says unto them: Thieves and robbers, after they have
spoiled and robbed waifaring men, use their dens and caves, lying lurking
there, thinking to escape unpunished. And do ye (says God) endeavor to abuse my
house, as thieves do their dens? For ye go through all kinds of mischiefs, and
then run to my temple, as though you might (by that) take your pleasures and
live without punishment. You are foully deceived. What deserves he, that
abuses the court of a prince, as it were the stews? Truly, not to much
punishment.

This place may be somewhat applied against the abuse of our temples. Temples be
not vain and unprofitable, but ordained for the holy assemblies, to hear the
word of God, to pour out their public prayers before God, to receive the
sacraments, to learn righteousness, and to live godly. The abuse therefore of
the temples is, if we persuade our selves to be accepted of God, if we enter
once into the temple, and do no more. For it is not sufficient to hear, and
see only, except we believe in God, and walk in the integrity of life also.

Saint Hierome expounding this place of the Prophet, writes after this sort.
Praecepit (inquit) and tunc populo Iudaeorum, and hodie nobis, qui videmur in
ecclesia constituti, ne fiduciam habeamus in aedificioru^ splendore, auratis
que laquearibus, and vestitis parietibus, marmorum crustis, and dicamus:
Templum domini etc. Illud enim templum domini est, in quo habitat vera fides,
sancta conuersatio, omniu^que virtutum chorus. Et mox: Quid enim prodest,
audactar ingredi domus dei limen, erecta stare ceruice, and no^sosum cor, sed
and manus habere polutas furto, homici dio, adulterio. etc. Haec ille. God then
commanded the people of the Jews and now us, which are constitue in the
Church, that we have no trust in the beautifulnes, and golden beams, and
gilted roofes of buildinges, and the walls decked and pargetted with shardes
of marble, and that we say not: The temple of the Lord, the temple of the lord,
the temple of the lord is here. For that is the temple of the lord, in the
which dwells true faith, holy conversation, and the quier of virtues. What
does it profit to enter boldly into the house of God, to stand bolt upright,
and to have not only the heart, but the hands also embrued with theft,
hooredome and murder? Let us apply these things to our temples and our
manners, and let us learn not to trust in temples, but to flee all impiety and
hypocrisy, and to serve God in truth and verity.

To make an end. Note here, that as the Jews did trust, call, and cry: Templum
domini, templ m domini, so our Papists have nothing in their mouths, but the
church, the church, the church. And if the holy scriptures be alleged against
them, and their adulterous doctrine: tush (say they) howsoever ye understand
the scriptures, we will expound the^ after the sensure of the church, for the
church is lady and judge over the scriptures. These may be well compared to the
parish clarks wife, which made answer to one, that, howsoever the sun went,
her husbands clock went true. So whatsoever the scripture says, be it never so
strong and pithy, for the confutacion of their errors, yet their church must
needs be true, with the parish clerks cloak:

Anna. 16.
^, Reg. 1.
There were three of this name. The first was Anna the wife of Helcana, the mother
of Samuel the prophet, which of a long time was barren, and derided by Peninna,
the other wife of Helcana, yet at the last God did visit her, and made her
womb fruitful. This Anna may be an image of the true church of God, which
before the world is barren, that is comfortles, and destroyed with the cross
and many calamities, which cross does fear away many from the doctrine of ye
gospel

The true church therefore seems to be barren, that is, to have a few
disciples, yea almost none, in so much that it seems utterly to perish. It has
not those worldly praises, those magnificent braueries, which the hipocritical
church has. It has not these corporal commodities, and gaye glitterings, it
has not that great multitude and number as well of subjects as of princes. But
as Peninna did molest and vex poor barren Anna, with sharp checkes and
tauntes: so the church of Antichrist does lay and heap al manner of opprobries,
upon the true church of Christ.

The second Anna was a prophetisse, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of
Aser, and did with her confession and testimony answer unto Simeon, confirming
Christ to be given, and did render thanks unto the Lord, that Messiah the
redemer was exhibited. If this Anna were.xv. years of age when she was
married, and lived 7. years with her husband after she was married, and
than.84 in her widowhood, we must needs confess that she was.106. years old.
She might therefore in her youth have seen old men, which were familiar with
Judas Machabeus. The Evangelist saint Luke declares the genelogy of this chaste
widow, Luke, 2
saying, that she was the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser. This Anna
took her name of the thing which she had, that was the grace of the
prophetical spirit, being called the daughter of Phanuel of the tribe of Aser,
did after a certain secret manner signify the blessed resurrection. For Aser
betokens in the Hebrew tongue beatum, blessed, whereof we read in Genesis,
when Zilpha the handmaiden of Lia, had borne an other son to Jacob, then said
Lia: blessed am I, Genesis 30
for the daughters will bless me, and therefore she called his name Aser. Genesis
49
And Jacob before he departed out of this life, blessed Aser, saying: his bread
shall be fat, and he shall give pleasure for a king. This Anna I say, gave
likewise testimony of Christ. Note here, that Jesus took testimony of Zachary
the priest, of Elizabeth his wife, of the angel, of the shepherds of Bethlem,
and of the wise men of the east, that is, of al persons, of what state, what
age, what sect soever they were. Now that nothing might want, Luke does bring
in here the testimony of Anna the widow, whereby it may thoroughly be confirmed,
yt God had sent his son, the savior of the world, into the world.

The third Anna was, as Epiphanius and Procopius writes, the mother of the
virgin Mary, yea and the nurse of Christ also, as one of them says, she was
the daughter of Isachar, of the tribe of Leui, or as it pleases Damascene, she
came of the tribe of Judah, being married unto one Ioachim of her own tribe.
When she had remained barren a certain time, at the last she conceived and
brought forth Mary the mother of god. After Ioachim her husband was dead, she
married Cleophas, of who^ she bare an other daughter called Mary. Cleophas
betrothed Mary the virgin, unto his brother Joseph, and coupled Mary his own
daughter, unto one Alpheus. Of this Mary was borne Iacobus Alpheus, Simon
Cananeus, and Judas Thaddeus, who also was called Barsabas. When Cleophas was
dead, this Anne married the third husband, whose name was Salome, of whom she
bare the third daughter, called by name Maria Salome: who being married to
zebedeus, did bear James the greater, and John the Evangelist. Of this Anna,
these verses following were made.

Anna so let dici tres congenuisse Marias,
Prima parit Christum, Iacobum secunda minorum,
Et Joseph iustum peperit cum Symone Iudam
Tertia maiorem Iacobum volucremque Iohannem.
This Anna also is said to have had a sister, whose name was Emeria, of who^
Elizabeth John the baptists mother was borne. And therefore ye a^gel said to
Mari, Ecce Elizabeth cognata tua, Luke ^
behold thy cose^ Elizabeth has conceived. Anna is written in ye hebrew Ha^na,
which betokens gratiosa.

Arrius. 17.
ARrius (as Epiphanius writes) was the son of one Ammonius, who being at
Antioch, having to companion Eusebius of Nicomedia, heard Lucianus the priest
and Martyr, of whom he was instructed in the holy scriptures.

By what occasion he came to the dignity of priesthood at Alexandria, it is not
known, except that the interpretation of the scriptures was committed unto him
above the other priests, because he was very expert in the arguments of
Dialect, and well exercised in such disciplines. Of the stature and habit of
his body and mind Epiphanius reports this: He was of a very long stature, of
a countenance somewhat sad, figured like a subtle Serpent, which could deceive
every innocent heart through his crafty pretense. He always did wear his
mantle or robe but half upon the one side. He was pleasant in talk, a fair
and flattering perswader, by the which crafts he allured and brought in a short
space.700. Virgins (which had professed chastity) into his sentence and
opinion, besides.7. Priests, and.12. Deacons.

His heresy was, that Christ concerning the godhead, was not of one substance
with the Father, with many other errors. Nicephorus writes, that one
Alexander Baucalis the second Priest next under Arrius, the author of this
dissension, who (disdaining that Arrius should be preferred in honor before
him) did cast this new doctrine upon Arrius, as the author thereof. Saint
Hierome does say, that Arrius, Euzoius, Diaconus and Achillas the Reader, were
authors of this heresy, but emulation and envy toward Alexander, Bishop of
Alexandria, stirred and moved Arrius to utter this new doctrine. For he thought
him self nothing inferior in doctrine and learning unto Alexander, for he
thought by this means to come in estimation, and to be in every man's mouth.
Ruffinus writes, that other Bishops and Doctors of the Church (who had
great delight in subtle and crafty questions) spurred forth Arrius to this
fury. Zonaras does write, that Origin was the first author of this heresy,
for he was the first that affirmed, the only Son of of God to be made, and
to be diverse from the nature of God the Father. But these things lay hidden in
papers, covered with scilence, and not yet published, but Arrius brought them
forth into light, preached them openly, drawing many unto this his impiety, as
is said before. This his heresy being deprehended and known, Alexander the
Bishop did confer with him very familiarlye, endeavoring to wythdrawe him
from his wicked and bold enterprise, but al was in vayn. Therefore he removed
him from the dignity and function of priesthood. Arrius being thus removed and
confused, fled into Palestine, and there labored with flattering and fair
means to get unto him, companions to be partakers of his error. He coming to
Nicomedia to his old friend Eusebius, was very gentlye entertained of him in
his house, and when he had remained there a good space, he allured Eusebius
fully and wholly into his sentence: And using that for a chief help, he and
his companion Eusebius, sent letters to Alexander. When the fame and talk of
Arrius came to the ears of Constantinus the Emperor, he much desiring to
heal this pestilent and heretical contagion, which had infected not only the
city of Alexandria, but also many other cities and provinces beside, commanded
a general Counsel to be kept at Nice, in the which Counsel Arrius was
convicted, rejected, and condemned. A certain Priest receiver of Constantia
(who was the sister of Constantine, and the wife of Licinius the tiraunt)
favoring the doctrine of Arrius, talked oftentimes by occasion unto Constantia
of Arrius, excusing Arrius cause, and that he thought not so, as was laid to
his charge, and that he was unjustly condemned of the counsel, and so had
soon persuaded the woman, being light of credit. It happened, that this Queen
fell into a deadly sickness, and the Emperor came to visit her, she having
opportunity, commended this Priest unto him, as a godly and diligent man, and
one that wyshed well to the Empire, and a little while after she dyed. The Priest
being thus commended unto the Prince, began not long after to entreat of
Arrius cause unto the King, and said, that he was oppressed with slanders
against all right and reason. Then answered the King, saying: If Arrius does
consent and hold with the Synod, I will cause him to be restored unto his own
place and dignity at Alexandria. And so directed his letters to Arrius, written
in this manner.

Victor Constantinus, Maximus Augustus. I am olim soliditati tuae significatum
est, vt in castra mea venires, quo conspectu nostro frui posses, vehementer
vero admiramur, quod id non confestim feceris. Quapropter iam ascenso publico
vehiculo, ad castra nostra propere venias: vt clementia ac prouidentia nostra
potitus, ad patriam reuerti queas. Deus te custodiat frater.6. Calend.
Decembris.

The conqueror Constantine, and mighty Emperor. We did signify unto thy
soundnes heretofore, that thou should come to our court to appear before us:
but we do greatly marueyle, that thou have not so done forthwith. Wherefore,
even now taking the common chariot, come unto our castle with expedition,
that having obtained our clemency and providence, thou may return to thy
country. God keep thee brother. The.6. Calendes of December.

Besides these letters, ye diligent endeavor of Eusebius and his companions,
moved Arrius to go to ye Emperor, of who^ when he came, being commanded to
declare and protest in plain writing his sentence and mind of the Christian
faith, did exhibit unto the Emperor, a writing of his faith, agreing to
the words of the faith of the Nicene counsel, notwithstanding he meant
simulation, craft, and disceite. The tenor of the writing was this.

To the dear and beloved in God, our Emperor Constantine, Arrius and Eusebius
Priests, send greting.

We do expound in this writing, O Emperor, unto thee our faith, as thy
holiness beloved of God has commanded. We, and all that be with us, do
confess to believe as follows.

We believe in one God the Father almightye, and in the Lord Jesus Christ his
son, begotten of him before all worlds, true God, by whom al things were
made, as well things in heaven, as things in earth, which came, took flesh,
suffered, rose again, ascended into heaven, and shall come again to judge the
quick and the dead. And in the holy ghost, and the resurrection of the flesh,
and the life of the world to come and the kingdom of heaven, and one holy
catholic church, dispersed from one end of the world unto the other ends of
the same.

This faith we have taken out of the Gospel, the Lord saying unto his
Disciples: Go and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost. If we believe not these things, and truly
receive the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, as the whole catholic
church does believe and receive, and the holy scriptures do teach, according to
the which we believe al things, let god be our judge, both now, and in the day
to come.

Wherefore we desire and beseech thy pitiful goodness (O Emperor) that thou
wylt unite and join us as ecclesiastical persons, holding the faith and
judgment of the church, and of the holy scriptures, to our mother the church
again And that al superfluous questions and words issuing out of the same,
being cut of, we and thy church may peaceably be reconciled and restored again
each to other.

After that Constantine had taken notice and knowledge of these writings and
words, Sozom Li, 2. cap. 7.
he asked Arrius, whither he had any other thing in his mind or no, and
whither he truly believed yt which he had professed? Arrius answered, yt he
would affirm by an oath, that he holds the faith of the catholic Church,
and does rightlye believe. The Emperor then did absolve and acquit him,
saying: Si recta est fides tua, probe iurasti: sin impia est fides tua, and
iurasti: Iudicium dei de te erit de caelo. If thy faith be right, thou have
sworn well, if thy faith be wicked, and have sworn, the judgment of God
shall be upon thee from heaven.

Lib. 1. cap 38.
Socrates says, that Arrius carried his doctrine written in paper under his
arm, and so did craftily and falsely swear, that he truly believed as he had
written.

Constantinus does send Arrius with his adherentes to Jerusalem, and the
Bishops, who than by chance were there gathered and assembled: and wrote
also, that they should view well and consider the writing of Arrius, and whither
he had truly repented or no, and to examine diligently whither he had sustained
injury at Alexanders hands or no. The bishops, because they would do
nothing contrary to the Emperors mind, did receive Arrius and his fellows
into their communion and fellowship again. And they sent forthwith, letters to
the Emperor, to the church of Alexandria, and to the Bishops and Clergy
throughout al Aegipt, The baida and Lybia, exhorting to receive Arrius and his
company with a willing mind, and said, that the Emperor had hy himself given
testimony unto their faith, that it was right and true, and that the whole
Synod had subscribed to the Emperors sentence.

Arrius being glad of this judgment, Sozo Lib. 2. cap. 27
and of the success of his dissimulation and deceit, after the Synod holden
at Jerusalem, was dissolved, returned into Aegipt. And remaining at Alexandria
for a certain space (but yet in vain) when Athanasius would suffer by no
means him to be admitted to the communion, he departed to Consta^tinoble, where
when they would have brought him in by a certain violence, Alexander, who at
that time had the government of that church, did resist him with the like
violence, and said, yt it behooved not the author of heresies, and the troubler
of so many churches, to be received. The matter at last grew to great
contention and strife, the Eusebians manacing and threatening, that except
Alexander would admit Arrius, he should be cast out of the church and live an
exile, and that his successor should receive Arrius unto the communion and
fellowship of the church again. The Eusebians the next day following, purposed
to bring in Arrius into the church. Alexander reposing greater trust in the
armor of godlynes, went into the Temple with two of his familiars, and lying
prostrate before the altar or table, weping all the night, poured out prayers
to God the Lord of churches, that he would not suffer the woulfe to be mingled
with the sheep, and that he would not admit him, who entending to play the
woulfes part, had covered him self with a shepes skyn. He prayed also as some
write, after this manner: If Lord thou wylt permit him, who endeavors thus to
creep into the church, I beseech thee by thy unspeakable counsel, that thou will deliver me thy servant out of this present life. After he had thus prayed,
he returned home weeping.

The next day following, Arrius comes forth with a great pomp, being proud
and malapert, through the trust which he had in the Eusebia^s, by whom he
thought, or rather dreamed, that he should be placed forthwith in the bishops
throne. But mark a marvelous example of Gods judgment: Arrius was led with a
great and solemn triumph, when he came unto the court of Constantine, a great
fear wounding his conscience, came suddenly upon Arrius, and the losenes of his
belly constrained him to desire some secret place out of the way, where he
might ease himself. The train which came with him, to bring him to the temple
with a pomp, looks in the mean time when Arrius would come forth, but he
was thought to have tarried very long. Certain therefore of them went in, and
found Arrius sitting dead upon the draught, al his guts and bowels being
dissolved and gone from him by the nether parts.

This was the miserable end of Arrius, whom although they which were of his
judgment and mind, labored to deliver from such a foul shame (some saying
that he was suddenly taken about the heart) other saying that overmuch joy and
mirth killed him, some affirming that he was poisoned, yet many judged, that
Arrius through his impiety and wickedness, suffered pain, sent of God worthy
his deserts.

Athanasius does write in his epistle Ad Serapionem, that by the sudden and
miserable death of Arrius, many which before were deceived by him, were
converted again to the faith.

Saint Austen does say, that the pain of Arrius in hell does increase, as
often as any one in the church is infected with his heresy.

Sulpitius does write, that there were two of the name of Arrius, which were
as two Serpents hissing with one mouth.

Athanasius. 18.
AThanasius bishop of Alexandria was a famous man in holiness and knowledge: he
suffered many and grievous persecutions of the Arrians. For he being constituted
against the Arrians, in the counsel of Laodicen, with most evident reasons and
very strong arguments affirmed, God the son to be of one substance with the
father, which thing Arrius and his adherents could not refel. Therefore stirred
up almost the whole world to persecute Athanasius: who flieng away (as Hierome
says) did hide himself.6. years continually, in an empty and dry Cestern,
where he never saw the sun. Which years being expired, when a certain
wench had uttered him to be there, by Gods providence he fled from thence. For
then al princes, countries and kingdoms with their hosts, came together to
pursue him, by means whereof he wandered about the world, insomuch that he could
find no place to hide him self safely. At the length after many vexations and
sufferinges, he dyed in the time of Valentinianus and Valens the Emperors, in
the year of the Lord.379. the syxt Nones of May, and in the.46. year of his
priesthood.

Ruffinus writes in his Ecclesiastical history, that the Arrians fearing
lest Athanasius should have occasion of access to the Emperor Constantine, did
accuse Athanasius of Magic and murder, and said, that he had cut of one of
the arms from the body of one Arsenius to practice Magic. Which thing the
Emperor hearing, commanded a council to be gathered at Tirus, where he bad
Athanasius to be condemned. Athanasius was led thither, and one of the
Emperors noble men was sent thither to be as Lord judge and examiner of the
said cause. Now this Arsenius whose arm was said to be cut of, had sometime
been Athanasius his reader, which Arsenius, fering lest he should be corrected
for some fault, withdrew himself from Athanasius, and fled away. Whose
running away (the wicked taking to be a just occasion of laieng the fore said
crime to Athanasius charge) took Arsenius, and kept him close in a certain
man's house, who was of the same conspiracy with them against Athanasius. And
whither it were by the conte^plation of his own humanity, or by gods
providence escaping, privily in the night out of the prison arrived by ship
unto Tirus. And the day before Athanasius should be arreigned, Arsenius came to
his master Athanasius, and opened all the matter unto him, how his enemies
went about falsely to accuse him of murder. Athanasius commanded Arsenius to
keep him self close within the house, that no man might know of his return
again and presence there. The council did sit, to the which al they which
were of a malicious and spiteful mind against Athanasius, did repair. At yt
time one Paphnutius a confessor of God, was present with Athasius, who knew
very well Athanasius innocence and giltlesnes. When he saw Maximus Bishop of
Jerusalem (who had his eye cut out, and his hamme cut of, as Paphnutius had
for the confessing of gods truth) to sit with other of ye Arrian faction, came
before the midst of the counsel, and said: O Maximus, with whom I have one
and the same badge of Christian confession, with whom also one of my bodily
eyes being put out, has purchased a more clear sight of heavenly light, I
will not suffer the to sit in the council of the wicked, and to enter in with
them that imagine mischief. And so casting his hand unto him, did lift him up,
and took him from the midst of the council. And giving him instructions of
the whole matter, coupled him ever after to the communion and fellowship of
Athanasius.

But in the mean time the cause against Athanasius went forward. First of all
they brought in a certain woman (whom they had suborned to exhibit false
accusation and testimony against him) who said, that upon a certain night she
received Athanasius into her house to lodging, and that she suspecting nothing
less, was violently corrupted and ravished of Athanasius the same night. The
judges commanded Athanasius to be brought forth, who coming in, admonished
Timotheus his Chaplayn, that as soon as the woman had told her tale, he should
answer and speak unto her, for he would hold his peace. Now when this woman
had finished her Oration, as she was taught, Timotheus turnyng unto her, said:
Was I ever received into thy house, O woman? and did I ever oppress thee, as
thou have said? then she (as the malapertnes of women is shameless, speaking
sharply unto him. Thou, thou (says she) eue^ thou have defiled my chastity,
and turning unto the judges made obtestation of her faith in God, that she had
spoken nothing but the truth. Then were they all ashamed, and laughed at the
matter, that the faction of this forged crime was so evidently and manifestly
known.

Notwithstanding the judges could not be suffered to examine this woman, where
and by whom she received the lesson of this forged slander, for the accusers
did usurp to them selves the whole liberty of geuyng judgment. Well (this
pageaunt being played) they objected against him an other crime. They brought
forth such a wicked deed, as was never herd of before. They set before the
judges a coffin, upon the which lay a dead man's arm. This is that, said they,
that cannot be colored by crafty words, the matter is apparente, you may see
it with your eyes, although words cease. This is the right arm of Arsenius,
thy servant, which how thou did cut it of, or wherefore, now show and
declare.

Then said Athanasius: which of you all here did know Arsenius, that you do
know so well his right arm? Certain arose up, who were not of this faction
and said, that they knew Arsenius very well. Then Athanasius requested the
judges: that they would be so good, as to command his servant whom he had
sent out for certain business, to be called and brought thither. And when
Arsenius came in, Athanasius lifting up his head, said to the whole counsel
and to the judges: there is Arsenius, this is even he, and lifting up his right
hand, behold said he, here is his right hand, and this is his left hand.
Now inquire you, whose arm this is, which they have brought here before you.
Then a certain mist and darckenes came before the eyes of the accusers, not
knowing, what they might do, nor what way to turn them. For sure testimony
was brought, that this was very Arsenius, who stood there.

Nevertheless, because the council was not kept for right judgments sake, but
only to oppress an innocent man, forthwith, they al made a great shout and
cried, saying, that Athanasius was a Magitian, and that he had deceived their
sight, and therefore was a man not worthy to live any longer. And coming upon
him with great violence, would have torn and rent him with their hands. But
Archelaus, who was president of the said counsel, at the Emperors
commandment, took him out of their hands, conueighed him into a privy way,
and bad him save him self by flight, and depart from thence. Notwithstanding
the counsel sitting again, as though nothing had been perceived of their
malice and despitefull slau^ders, condemned Athanasius of the crimes before
laid to his charge, and did send the acts thereof through all the world, Lib. 1.
cap. 15.16 and 17.
and allured all the Bishops by the Emperors commandment to consent to the
same. Haec Ruffinus.

Cyprianus. 19.
CEcilius Cyprianus, does seem also to have been called Statius, as the history
of his martyrdom does declare, which was written by one Pontius a deacon: how
be it the inscription of the.9. Epistle of the.4. book, does name him
Thascius. He was borne in Africa, in the City Carthage. For Hierome writes,
that he was both Priest and Bishop there. Of what parents he came, or what
kind of study he used in his youth, it cannot be gathered in any place out of
his writings, but Hierome in his Cataloge and in his commentes upon Jonas,
writes, that he professed Rhethorique, with great commendation in Africa,
while he was yet a gentile and an idolatour. At which time Nazianzenus
affirms, that he was given much to the study of Magic, who names him a
Magitian and a witch, whereas both Hierome and Augustine write nothing of him.
Other write of one Cyprian a Magitian, which being a child was consecrated of
his parents unto the devils, as Iacobus de voragine, Henricus de Eufordia, and
Volateranus, do write But this Cypria^ they say, either was borne at Antioche
or else at Nicomedia, yet notwithstanding they affirm that he was converted,
and became at the length both a Bishop and a martyr.

Saint Hierome writes that this Cyprian of Carthage in Africa, In catal
viroru^ illustrium et co^me^tario in lonam.
was first persuaded and converted unto the Christian faith through the
conversation, which he had with one Caecilius a Priest (whose name he afterward
took unto him self) and especially through the reading of the Prophet Jonas.
And he him self wrote the history of his conversion and Baptism in a
flourishing and an eloquent style, that it did well appear, Lib. 2. epistola 2
that he came out of the schools of the Rhethoritians.

Also Hierome declares, that as soon as he was converted, In Catalogo
forthwith he bestowed all his goods upon the poor: and not long after he was
chosen Priest, and last of all made Bishop of the Church of Carthage. But it is
uncertain, whither he succeeded Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage, of whom he
makes often mention, and who also was the first author of rebaptizing, or
whether he succeeded some other. But it is most certain, yt in his dignity and
office he excelled in virtue and in sundry godly qualities, but especially in
authority, by ye which Nazianzenus writes, that he governed the Churches of
all the oriental parts and of all Spain. And in the form of his
proscription he is called the Bishop of the Christians, which form he him self
recites. Lib. 4. epistol. 9
He was also a most diligent and faithful ouerseer of his Church, being
always very careful and pensive for it, he being both present and absent, as
it does appear by many of his Epistles. He writes thus of him self, that he
was gentle, meke, patient, and liberal, Lib. 1. epist. 3.
and that he was also severe and stout in matters pertaining unto his office.
Sondrie of his Epistles also do testify, that he was most loving unto his
brothers. He took great pains in delivering and helping of martyrs, for being
absent he would write unto his Priests and Deacons, that they should with care
and diligence embrace and make much of the martyrs, which were captive. The
fortitude and godly stoutnes of his mind in executing of his office, the.iij.
Epistle of his.1. book do declare. Neither did there lack in him wisdom and
circumspection. Besides this, he was of a singular modesty, for he would take
upon him to do nothing of his private council and judgment, without the
consent of his fellows in office. He was very beneficial and kind toward
his poor brethren, and such as were strangers. For how oftentimes in his
absence does he commit ye cure and charge of the poverty, unto his fellows in
office? yea being absent, he does command them, to give of their own proper
goods, to the necessity of their brethren being in exile. Lib. 3. epist. 24


He him self also does recite his singular revelations and other gifts, as his
visions and his warnings from heaven, Lib. 1. epist. 3. et Lib. 4. epist. 4.
of his persecutions to come, and of other things perteining unto the
government of the Church, he had also before knowledge of things that should
after happen. Lib. 4. epist. 6


Saint Austen also (who does greatly praise him) does attribute unto him
certain noble virtues, Contra Donat. Lib. 2. cap. 4
as humility of sprit, reciting these words: let us not think our own wit
and judgment to be best, but whatsoever profitable and good counsel shall be
given unto us of our brethren and fellows, let us embrace and follow it: he
sets forth also his long suffering and patience with his great courtesy and
gentleness, through the which virtue he kept nothing privy that he thought,
but would utter it peaceably and quietly. He commends himself also, for that
he would not bear malice against any man, that was of an other judgment then
he himself was, but would notwithstanding keep peace and concord with him.
Finally, Co^tra Donatist lib, 5. cap. 17
that he would prescribe and appoint no man, to follow any other thing, then
that which should seem best unto him self.

Neither this is to be omitted, that saint Hierome does write of him, that he
was given always unto reading, and specially of Tertullia^. For he says, that
one Paulus told him, that he heard of Cyprianes notarie, whom he saw at Rome,
that Saint Cypriane suffered no day to pass, in the which he red not somewhat
of Tertullian, and that he would oftentimes ask of his servant for his
master, saying, Da Magistrum, give me my master, signifieng Tertullian.

Of certain faults of doctrine in Cyprian.
HE calls repentance oftentimes, satisfactions and open confessions,
following Tertullia^, unto the which he does attribute the cause of absolution
and remission of sins, as in one of his sermons he says: In sermon de lapsis
The Lord must be appeased and pacified through our satisfaction.

In an other perilous doctrine he uses this ambiguitie: he bids the^ which
are fallen, not to despair of the mercy of God, and yet would not have the
penitent, to promise himself forgeuenes of sins. What other thing is this,
but that it is to be doubted, In sermon de lapsis.
whither God forgeueth the penitent sinner, or no?

He goes about to prove very rigorously and unmercifully (out of this place of
Saint John: Ecce sanus factus es, noli amplius peccare, Ioannes, 5
behold you art made clean, sin no more) yt there is no hope of pardon left
unto him, yt does offend, after that he has once known God: And that,
whatsoever sin is committed against the Lord, cannot be absolved of the
Priest. Sermo. 5. de lapsis
In all his writings he is a vehement maintainer of frewill. Hereof he
attributes to much unto good works, as of alms, he says, that almesdedes
are the way unto salvation, In Sermo, de elecmosina
and that it washes clean away all spots and filthiness gotten after
baptism.

He borrowed also certain ceremonies out of Tertullian, and out of the
traditions of Montanus, as the consecration and unction after Baptism, for he
says, the water must first be made clean, and consecrated of ye Priest, that
it may wash away the sins of him that is Baptized. Again it is also
necessary, that he that is Baptized, should be anointed, that the unction being
received, he may be anointed of God, and have in him the grace of Christ.

Of the conflictes of Cyprian.
HE suffered many and great conflictes, which most commonly did exercise and try
the true and constant professors of the pure and sincere doctrine. First,
against the Ethnickes, which thing his hook written against the slau^ders of
Demetrianus does testify, who imputed the cause of all the evils and
calamities of the world unto the Christians, because they did not worship the
gods of the gentiles. The which slander S. Cyprian examining, does so
regester, that he proves calamities therefore to be multiplied in the world,
because the gentiles worshipped idols, and would not acknowledge the true God.

After this he striued with the Jews, setting forth two books against them,
in the which he proved evidently, that the Jews did incur the anger and
offense of God, because they despised Christ, and killed the Prophets, and that
they could not understand the Scriptures, except they believe in Christ, that
the circumcision, that the old law, that the temple, that the sacrifice of the
Priests, that the Prophets are ended, and yt they being rejected ye kingdom of
heaven did more appertain to ye ge^tils. etc.

Lib. 1. epist. 8. Lib. 3. epist. 5
He strives against the five false brethren, who laid counterwatch unto his
Bishoppricke, while he was in banishment, he answers in many words unto the
reprehensions and slanders of the backbiters, for the which cause he
vehemently rebuked one Pupia a martyr, Lib. 4. epistol. 9
because he gave credit unto their backbitings.

So likewise had he a long and painful fight with the heretics, as with
Nouatus, whom he had once excommunicated in Africa, and with the^ which were of
his sect, the which would have the Churches to be shut against them that
returned home after they had offended and gone astray. Through this occasion,
he wrote certain godly and learned Epistles, and a sermon of the receiving
again of the offenders.

His next conflict was with Nouatianus and Faelicissimus, and with their
adherents, who contrary unto Nouatus did receive again and did absolve without
respect, all such as were fallen, and also heretics (no discipline of
repentance going before) only for that they might displease the Bishops.

Against the same men that is, Nouatus, Nouatianus, and Faelicissimus he
defends Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Lib. 4, epist. 4
whom they slanderously affirmed to be unlawfully created Bishop, and did
alienate the minds of his brothers from him. He striued also very manfully in
many general counsels against all heretics and scismatikes. But his greatest
conflict of all (I know not by what authority or reason he did it) was in
defending the cause of rebaptizing against Stephen Bishop of Rome.

He inueighed also learnedly against idols, yea rather he destroyed them (as
Hierome says in his treaty of the vanity of idolles) he was a help also unto
diverse other Churches, but not without strife with his authority and censure,
Lib 3. epist. 5.
especially unto the Church of Rome, unto the which Church he sent in his
persecution.13. Epistles.

Of his kind of style.
Hierome attributes unto him in his writing a perspicuitie and majesty of
sentences And in an other place he writes, yt his style does run swetely and
stilly, like unto a most pure wellspring.

And Lacta^tius says, Cypriane was of a ready and prompt wit, copious and
pleasant, and (which is the greatest comme^dation of all) in talk or writing,
he was so perspicuous and plain, that a man could not discern whither there
were any man, either more eloquent in vtteryng, either more plain in
expounding, or more earnest in persuading.

Of the banishment and martyrdom of Cyprian.
THat he was a banished man, many of his Epistles witness, which he wrote unto
his brethren, and unto his Church living in exile. In which thing he performed
this virtue worthy of a faithful pastor, that he had no less regard of his
own Church and of other Churches being absent, thru if he had been present He
declares him self yt in a sedition and stu r moved of the raging people, he
willingly gave place and departed, Lib. 3. epist. 5
least yt through his presence he should more hurt then profit the Church. For
so he writes unto the Priests of Rome, saying immediately in the beginning of
the tumult, when the people with a violent cry had oftentimes called for me,
not so much respecting my own sauegarde as the common quietness of my brethren,
I departed in the mean while, least through our intempestiue presence, the
sedition begone should be more provoked. In like manner he writes unto his
brethren of his corners and dens, Lib. 3. episto. 10
in the which he was oftentimes sought. The which thing seems to have been
done in the years of Decius and Gallus. For from that banishment, he returned
unto his Church: but being banished by Valerianus, he was called home again
of Paternus proconsull of Africa into the City Thurbis. Cyprian him self
declares, that either in this his last exile, or in the former, he with all
his goods was proscribed, so that it was lawful for any man to slay him that
met him.

Paternus the proconsull being dead, Galenus maximus who succeeded Paternus,
commanded his servants to carry Cyprian in a carte to the place of
punishment, where the liefetenaunt being about to do Sacrifice unto his gods,
brake out into these words.

Thou have lived a great while being of a pestiferous mind, and have gathered
unto the me^ of a wicked conspiracy, and have been an open enemy unto the
Roman gods and their holy laws: neither could the godly and sacred princes
Valerianus and Galenus reduce thee by any means unto the sect of their
ceremonies. After which words he was slain with the sword, unto the which
(as Hierome says) he willingly bowed his nacke. At this time Sixtus was Bishop
at Rome (as Eusebius writes) in the year of our Lord.259.

What things Nazianzenus writes of his burial, and the miracles about it,
both Hierome and Austen, and they which lived in that time, and after, either
they were ignorant of them, or they cou^pted them as vain tales unworthy to
be recited. That is praise enough to him, that S. Austen calls him a
catholic bishop and a catholic martyr, so much the more humbling him self
as he was great and noble. And the same Austen says in an other place. I
cannot attain unto the praise of Cypriane. I do not compare my writings unto
his great learning. I love his wit, and am delighted with his style. I wonder
at his charity, and worship his martyrdom. I do not believe, that he was of
that opinion, that heretics and scismatiques should be rebaptized.

Antithesis. 20.
ANtithesis signifies in Latin Contrariu^, contrary. It is a figure by the
which we amplifi by co^traries. It maybe in single words, as Seruaui no^
extinxi. I saved him and not destroyed him. Also in whole sentences. Vt habet
assentatio iucunda principia, eadem exitus amarissimos adfert. Assentation or
flattry brings pleasant and sweet beginnings, but the same brings most
bitter and sour ends. Also, Inimicis te placabile^, amicis inexorabile^
praebes. Thou behauest thy self to thine enemies placable and tractable, but
to thy friends inexorable. In Paul this is Antithesis. If you live after the
flesh, you shall die, if after the sprit, you shall live. Romans 8 1. Cor. 3
Again, the letter kills, the sprit quickneth. Cicero. In pace bellu^
quaeritas, in bello pacem desideras. In time of peace thou sekest war, in
time of war thou desire peace. Also in idleness thou make tumultes, in
tumultes thou art only idle. In refrig idissima cales, in referuentissima
friges. In a cold cause thou art hot, in a hot cause thou art cold. This is a
very apt Antithesis. Non obruisti me muneribus, sed sceleribus. Thou have not
ouerwelmed me with rewards, but with wickedness. Finally Tacito cum opus est
clamas: cum loqui conuenit, obmutescis. When silence needs then thou criest
out, when speech is required, thou art dom. Ades, abesse vis, abes, reuerti
cupis. When thou art present, thou would be absent, when thou art absent,
thou would return. Note that there is no figure so elegant and apt, as
this is, to amplify and vary any Oration.

Aristoteles. 21.
ARistotle the prince and monarch of all the Philosophers, was very famous in
his time, who had to his masters and teachers Socrates, and Plato, as
witnesses S. Austen in his book De ciuitate dei, saying. Aristotle was the
disciple of Plato, being a man of excellent wit, not only equal to Plato in
eloquence, but otherwise far exceeding him: when he had instituted the sect of
Peripatetikes, his master being yet alive, he gathered many scholars to be of
his sect. Among whom for his renown he had Alexander The Emperor also to his
scholar, and lived.23. years after the death of Plato, sometime teaching
Alexander and sometime composing and making books, and other whiles applyeng
doctrine. In his seal (as it is said) he caused this to be engraued. Sapie^tior
est qui quod nouitabscondit, quam qui propalat quod nescit. He is more wise
which does hide that which he knows, then that man which utters ye thing
which he knows not. Aristotle was very eloque^t in vtteraunce and (as Saint
Hierome says to Eustochius) he was (without question) a great and marvelous
miracle in nature. At the length when he had taught very excellently in Licium
many years, and was accused through envy that he did not judge right of the
gods, fearinge least he should be adjudged to death (as Socrates was) forsakyng
to purge him self, went into Calcis, where he was of very good liuelines of wit
while he lived, and did live.62. years and dyed there (as Leonardus Aretinus,
fully declares in his life.) He treated of all the parts of Philosophy, and
gave precepts to every part. He was called Philosophus the Philosopher, by the
figure Antonomasia. Laertius witnesses that there were.viij. Aristotle's. The
first was this before rehearsed. The second ruled the common wealth at Athenes,
whose very elegant orations are exta^t. The.iij. wrote upon the Iliades of
Homere. The.iiij. was the orator of Sicilie. The fifth was called Mintheus the
familiar friend of Eschines. The.vi. was of Siren, which wrote Poetry.
The.vii. was a scholemaister, of whom Aristoxenus made meant you in the life of
Plato. The eight was an obscure and base Gra^marian. And it is said, that
Aristotle ye Philosopher wrote many works, who surely (if he were alive again)
he would deny many of them to be his, which we now attribute unto him. And he
was in better case then other were, whose works were utterly abolished, and he
him self was the cause why many of his works were lost, because he took unto
him other men's glory and praise.

Plutarch writes, that some report, that Aristotle was the author of Alexander
the Emperors death, for that he gave counsel to Antipater, and brought poison
for to poison Alexander. Plutarch also writes, that there was a suspision of
poisonning Aristotle, but some did write, that he drancke a very exceeding
venomous herb called Aconitum, and so perished, but that is false (says
Plutarch) for what need he to fly from Athenes, if he would have wyllyngly put
him self to death. Again, the order of his testament which he made in Euboea,
is very much discrepant from a voluntary death. For it began thus: Erunt omnia
recte. Si tamen quid contingat, Aristoteles Testamentum suum in hunc modum
fecit. All things shall be well: yet notwithstanding if any thing happens,
Aristotle made his testament after this manner: who does not perceive, that the
very beginning of the Testament does not savor of a man desperate, but rather
of one desiring life? for he says, all things shall be well, if life do remain.

His sect was called Peripateticorum secta, because he taught Ambulando, for
(...), betokens to walk.

Plato was wont to name Aristotle a mule, because a mule, when she has filled
her self with her mothers milk, she will beat her damme with her heles.
Plato signified by this the ingratitude of Aristotle, for when he had received
of Plato the principles of Philosophy, and the encreace of knowledge therein,
he became enemy to ye schole of Plato, and with his familiars and scholars did
always contend and strive against Plato.

Gallenus. 22.
GAlenus was a noble Physician, borne in Pergamo, son of Nicon a great
Geometricia^. In the art of Physic he excelled all other before his time,
and sense: In so much, as in his ministration, counsel, or doctrine, he never
had reproach, as he him self writes. Also, living (as some do write) as good
as an hundredth years, after he passed the age of eightene years, until the
time of his death, he was never vexed with any sickness, except the grudge of a
a fever of one day, as he says in his work, De sanitate tuenda, and that
happened only by to much labor. He flourished in the time of Marcus Comodus,
and dyed only for feablenes of age, after the incarnation of Christ about.160.
years. He was famous at Rome, and is thought to have excelled all men in that
art (Hippocrates excepted) for that he composed many books, and with a
wonderful wit expounded all Hippocrates works. For the Grecians do say, that
he put forth.150. books of that faculty, and therefore this sentence was very
notable. Scientia in insensato non prodest, nec ei qui non vtitur prodest
sensus. Science in a senseless man, does not profit, nor sense profits him
that cannot use it.

Lib. 10.
Galen in his book of simple medicines speaks of a strange experiment which
he practiced by a piece of old chese. When I had (said he) in times past
chese brought unto my table, which was of a very tarte taste, I cast it away,
and my servants spente it, and did eat it among them. But they being wont to
save such meats, brought within short space after out of the spence or buttry,
of the same chese again, and asked what I would command to be done with it.
And because it could not be eaten, for the tartenes thereof, we merely being
disposed, did propose to what purpose or use any man could put it. In the mean
time of our talk, a certain man diseased with the gout, was brought unto me
in a chariot, having goutishe knobbes upon his joints. It came to my mind to
prove a practice. I commanded the chese and a gambon of bacon to be sod
together, and to be pou^ded well in a mortar, that it might be plaisterlike,
and to lay it on the parts grieved. And truly the sickeman was very well
helped by this medicine, for the skin being broken of it own accord, that
is to say, without cuttyng, the pieces of the knottes fell of daily with out
grief. And when all the chese that I had was spent, the sick man bieng him an
other chese of the same taste, saved it, for to occupy afterward about his old
disease. And when he took the same commodity thereby again, he perseuered to
occupy the same oftener, and taught it certain of his friends being likewise
diseased. And that thing truly did we invent newly, which experience proved
and confirmed afterward to be good.

Ambrosius. 23.
AMbrose Bishop of Millayn, and spiritual father to Saint Austen, was a Roman
borne, and ennobled with the dignity of a Consul. He being a very godly man,
and the chief of all the doctors in his time, was sent from Rome of
Vale^tinianus the Emperor, to govern the provinces of Liguria and Aemilia:
where shortly after the death of Auxe^tius Bishop of the Arrians, a very great
sedition arose among the people, the which to repress according to his
office, when he had entered into the Church, and like an eloquent man had
reasoned for the agreement of both parties, suddenly there was heard the voice as
it were of an infant, saying. Dignus est hic Ambrosius vt sit Episcopus. This
Ambrose is worthy to be a Bishop. At the sound of the which voice, the
people did rejoice, favoring him, and crying aloude, that the Bishoppricke
ought not to be committed to any other man, but to Ambrose, the which thing was
done by commune consent and peace of them all, who being forthwith made a
Christian, of one that before learned the principles of his faith, and having
taken orders, was created the ninth Bishop of Millaine, in the tenth year of
Valentinianus his Empire. Who being placed in the Sea, all France on thisside
the the Alps forthwith embraced the Orthodoxe faith. Whose gentleness truly
was so great, his manners and conditions so holy, his wit so prompte and sharp,
and his knowledge was so godly, that not only while he lived, but also being
dead, he brought Italy and all the world into devotion, charity and
veneration of him. Who also besides the grace of holiness, was very like Plato
the Philosopher, both in his birth, in his infancy, and also in doctrine. For
like as the Bees did put a great deal of honey into Plato his lips, as he
slept in the cradle, so also there chanced unto Ambrose a wonder very like to
this, yea and a greater. For as the sacred history tells of him, when he lay
a sleep in the cradle, being a little infant, sodeinly a swarm of bees did so
cover his mouth and face, as it were entering into the hiue, some going in, and
some going out by course. Which wonder has been declared of all the
interpreters, to have signified none other thing, but that the swetenes of
eloquence should flow out of his mouth sweter the^ honey. The which Prophecy in
the end was declared to be true, if that ye will respect and view the
subtility and strength of his disputing, reasoning, and the swetenes of his
speaking and writing. He wrote vncorrupt, and many pure books, whose sentences
(says Saint Hierome) are the most firm pillars of the faith of the Church,
and of all virtues. In which books also (says Saint Austen) the true faith
does appear, because he (as a flower) did shine among Latin writers.

In the City of Thessalonica, a great sedition being moved, certain of the
Magistrates being slain with stones, were handled despitefully. The Emperor
hearing these tidinges, and being overcome with great coler, could not
restrain the same, but with a furious mind, suffered the arbitrament of
reuengement to take place. And he having gotten this power (like a Tyrant, and
one that would rule the matter as him self lusted) slew unreasonably the
innocents and the giltlesse together with the unjust persons. For it is
said, that there were slain. 7000 men, not being adjudged by the law to
death, neither was there any judgment given against the wicked offenders, but
they were all hewn down like unto the Stalks of corn, which are cut down
in harvest. Now when Ambrose heard of this lamentable calamity, he met ye
Emperor entering into Millayne, which would have gone into the temple (as he was
wo^t to do.) But Ambrose would not suffer him, to go any further the^ the
Church porch, saying unto him. O Emperor, thou semest to be ignorant, how
great a slaughter thou have committed. Nor (as I suppose) thy reason having
appeased thy wrath, did weigh and consider what thou have boldly done. Also
peradventure thine Imperial principality does not suffer thee to acknowledge
thine offense, but power resists reason. Yet nevertheless thou ought to
know, that we are by nature mortal and transitory men, and that we were at ye
beginning dust, unto the which we shall return again. Nor it is mete thou that
being deceived with thy beautiful purple robe, should not know the
imbecillitie of thy body covered with the same. Thou have O Emperor subjects
joined with thee in kin, yea in service also, for there is one Lord and emperor
the maker of the world. Therefore with what eyes will thou behold the temple of
God; which is Lord over al, or with what feet will thou tread upon the sacred
pauement? will thou hold forth these hands yet dropping with the blood of an
unjust slaughter, and with them will thou receive the body of the most holy
god. Or will thou put that most precious blood unto thy mouth, which have
shed so much blood in a short space in thy furious stomach? Wherefore depart,
neither will thou to increase thy former iniquity with this an other iniquitye:
nor refuse thou the bond which the Lord of all (which is above) does allow.
This truly is but a small thing, and it gets health. The Emperor having
been brought up in holy doctrine, and knowing what was the duties of Priests
and Emperors, with sighings and tears, returns into his palace. But a long
time after (for eight months were expired) the feast of the nativity of our
Lord came. But the Emperor sat in his palace lamenting, and pouring forth
great drops of tears, the which thing when Ruffinus the Emperors master
understood (who through familiarity had free liberty to speak his mind to the
Emperor) he went unto him, and asked the cause of his weping. Then the emperor
sorowfully crying out, and pouring forth tears more and more, said: O
Ruffinus, thou mockest me, for thou art not moved with the feeling of my
harms: but I do sigh and lament, whilst I consider my calamity, forasmuch as
the temple of God is open for servants and beggars to go in freely, for to pray
to god, whereas both it and also heaven is shut up against me. For I do remember
the words of the Lord which says plainly, whomsoever thou shall bind upon
earth, the same also shall be bound in heaven. Than said Ruffinus: I will therefore
run to the bishop, if it please you, and will move him by petition to loose
your bonds. He will not be turned, said the Emperor, for I know the justice
and equity of Ambrose sentence, neither will he transgres the law of God, for
the imperial power. But Ruffinus instantly urging him, and with long talk,
persuading the Emperor, that he would pacifye Ambrose, the Emperor bids
him to go with expedition, and he himself induced with hope, follows a little
after, trusting to Ruffinus his promise. But saint Ambrose anon beholding
Ruffinus, said unto him: O Ruffinus, thou do imitate the impudency of Dogs,
for thou being a councealer of so great slaughter, have put on thy brazen face,
and casting away shame, neither art abashed, nor yet fear the image of God
in committing so great a slaughter. Ruffinus besought him, and said, that the
Emperor would come unto him. But saint Ambrose burning with godly feruentnes,
said: O Ruffinus, I tell thee truly, that I will not admit him to the church
door. And if he will change the Empire into a tyranny, I also will suffer
pains of death willingly. When Ruffinus heard this, he certified the Emperor
of the bishops mind, by some man, exhorting him to keep himself within his
palace But the Emperor receiving the message in the midst of the way, said:
I will go and suffer deserved checks and tauntes. And when he was come to the
church, he would not enter in, but going to the bishop, which sat in a little
oratorie, prayed him that he would loose him out of bonds. But Ambrose said,
that Theodosius his coming was tirannous, and that he waxed wood against God,
by violating and breaking his laws. The Emperor answered: I do not offer my
self to stand against the sanctions of laws, nor to enter unjustly within the
holy temple: but I pray thee release me out of bonds, and that thou have in
mind the clemency of the Lord toward us al, and that thou will not shut up
against me the gate which the Lord has opened to al those that do repent. Then
said the bishop, what repentance have thou showed since yt thine so great
wicked slaughter was don? or with what medicine have thou healed thy most
grievous wounds? It shall be thine office (said the Emperor) to temper the
medicine, and to heal my very grievous wounds, and it shall be my part or duty,
to use those medicines, that thou shall lay unto them. Then said Ambrose:
because thou committest thy judgment to coler and anger, and not to reason,
but a raging and furious mind does pronounce and give sentence: write thou a
law, by the which the consent of thy iracundious mind may be made frustrate
and vain, and let there be thirty days prescribed to give sentence of any
murder, or confiscation of any goods, that those days might tarry and expect
the judgment of reason. And when those days be past, let the writers of thy
sentence exhibit unto thee ye work yt is commanded. Then when thine anger is
appeased, only reason with judgment shall be able to weigh, consider and
perceive, whither that sentence be just or unjust. And if reason shall prove it
to be unjust, truly the writing shall be torn in pieces. But if it shall befound
a just sentence, than it shall be established, nor the number of the days shall
hinder or annoy the right sentence. The Emperor admitting and allowing his
order, commanded forthwith a law to be written, which he confirmed with
subscription of his own hand. So at the last saint Ambrose did absolve him. And
the Emperor than being bold to enter into the church, not standing, nor upon
his knees kneling, did pray unto God, but lying flat and prostrate upon the
ground, did utter forth this voice of David: Adglutinata est pauimento anima
mea, viuifica me, secundum verbum tuum. My soul is glued and fastened to the
pauime^t, revive me according to thy word. Thus tearing his hear with his
hands, smiting his forhead, and watering the pauime^t with many drops of tears
desired pardon and forgiveness to be granted unto him.

Messiah. 24.
THe radical of this word is Mashah, which signifies vngere, to annoint,
Exodus 10,
as in Exodus: Et vnges eos quemadmodum vnxisti patrem eorum. And thou shall
annoint them, as thou have anointed their father.

The participle of the preter tence is Mashuah, id est vnctus, anointed, as in
Samuel: Ego autem tener sum, and vnctus rex. I am this day weak, and newly
anointed king. It is sometime red Mashoah, for a difference of the other
vnctio^, or rather painting me^tiond in Jeremy. 2. Sam. 3 Iere. 22
Et vnctum sinopide, and painted with vermilion, for colors wherewith they
paynt, are mixed and seasoned with oil.

Of Mashah comes this nowne Mashiah, which is called in Greek (...) in Latin
vnctus, in enlish anointed. And because as well kings as priests were anointed
with oil, therefore they, and all that were consecrated to God, were called
Messiae and Christi. Exodus 30 1. Samu. 1
And the kings and priests anointed, were a type and figure of the true and
only Christ our Sauiuiour, and our chief Monarche and priest: our Monarch to
vanquish Satan, our priest, to offer sacrifice for the sins of the whole
world.

Also in the plural number as in the.cv. Psalm. Ne ta^gatis christos meos.

The Chaldeans do name it Mesicha. Damascenus has a sentence worthy to be
noted concerning this name of Christ. His words be these, translated out of the
Greek into Latin. Christus nomen suppositi dicimus, non solitary quidem, sed
duarum naturarum significatiuu^ existens, Ipse enim seipsum unxit, vngaens
quidem vt deus, qui corpus diuinitate sua vnxit vnctus vero vt homo, Ipse enim
est hoc and illud, vnctio autem humanitatis diuinitas. We will call Christus a
name of the person, not simply alone, but signifieng two natures, for he
anointed him self, annoynting as God, which anointed his body with his
diuinitye, anointed as man, for he is this, and that, and the diuinitye is the
annoynting of the humanity.

Nicholaus Lyranus. 25.
NIcholaus Liranus was borne in England, of the stock of the Jews, as
Tritenius and VVermerus do testifye, and being instructed of the Rabbines from
his childhood, in the Hebrew letters, had that holy tongue at his fingers end
(as we commonly say.) This Lyranus, as soon as he had been conversant in the
public schools, and had heard ye sermons of certain gray Friars, which were
of a sou^der judgment the^ the rest, he began to abhor the doctrine written in
the Talmud, and all the rest of their most fond madness Being converted therefore
unto the faith of Christ, and being baptized, he became one of the Friars
called Franciscani, where being very studious in the scripture, and expert
thorough long exercise, he maruailously encountered, both in disputacion and in
writings with the Rabbines at Oxford, and at Paris, who inueigled the common
people of the Jews, with the vain promising of the coming of the Messiah.
Finally, he expounded both the old Testament and the new very learnedly,
against their most manifest blasphemies. If in any things (as it is said of
him) he erred, it is to be imputed unto the corrupt time, in the which althings
were darkened with the clouds of the hypocrites. Truly, he did more good in
the scripture, than any other at yt time. There is no cause why a man should
find fault with the simplicity of his words, forasmuch as the truth of the
eternal God is not to be esteemed and wayed by words. He wrote many notable
works, by the which his name is famous and renowned in his posterity.

Doctor Martin Luther says, that he therefore loved Lyranus, and counted him
among the best interpreters, Luther in. 2. c^. ^. cap. in Gene.
because he prosecuted the history more diligently, then the other
interpreters. He lived in the year of our Lord.1327. in the which year he
expounded Daniel, and dyed at the last at Paris.

At that time the tyranny of the Papists did so much prevail against the holy
scriptures, that it enforced them, which otherwise were good and learned men,
and diligent searchers of Gods word, to fall into most absurd interpretations.
The which thing happened also unto this Nicholaus de Lyra, unto whom the
students of the scriptures are not a title beholding. cap. 16, Apoc. 30
As for example in the Apocalips, Lyranus expounds the vyal of Gods anger and
reuengement poured out upon Euphrates, to be spoken of Carolus Magnus, as who
being desired of saint James, made ready and plain the way unto his sepulcher
in Spain, which before was unknown, he expounds the text after this manner.
Sextus Angelus, that is S. James, poured out the power of Carolus Magnus, whom
he procured to punish the Saracenes, who are called a great flood, for the
multitude of that people. And he dried up the water of the flood, that is, by
va^quishing the might of the Saracenes: that the way might be prepared unto
kings, that is, to the pilgrims of saint James. etc. In like sort he expounds
the aungel which had the key of the bottomless pit, to be Innocentius the third,
who allowed the orders of the graye and of the black Friars. I saw an Angel
says Lyranus that is, the Pope Innocentius the third, who allowed the orders
of the Graye and of the black Friars. I saw an angel (says Lyranus) that
is, the Pope Innoce^tius the third, discending from heaven, that is, from the
high pontifical honor, and condescending and meting with saint Fraunces and
saint Dominick, having the key of the bottomless pit, that is, the power to
allow the foresaid orders of Friars, and to subdue the power of the devil, and
having a great chain, that is, the multitude of the brothers of both orders.
And they apprehended the Dragon, because by their life and doctrine the power of
the devil is restrained, and shall be restrained until Antichrists coming etc.
Some other papistical expositours do affirm, this angel to signify the Pope, and
they say the chain to be the order of Cardinals and Prelates, and that the
Emperor is meant by the Devil and the Dragon. By these subtle means, they draw
and stretch the word of God unto their own lust, ambition and profit. These
men have broken the eggs of the Aspes, and have weaued ye web of the spider.
He that shall eat of their eggs, shall die. The persuasions of the traditions of
men against the word of God, is the egg of the seven headed Dragon, which was
great and read, which was a murderer, and the father of lies from the
beginning, out of ye which he hatched the Cockatrice, the king of the Locusts,
the aungel of the botomles pit, which in Hebrew is called Ahidon, in latin
pernicies, in English destruction.

Articles of the faith.
THe twelve articles of the faith, are the very subject of the true faith, and
the matter about which the faith is exercised. Which faith, for as much as it
is a substance of things hoped for, it is expounded simply and briefly in these
articles, what things they be which are to be hoped for. Who was the first
that ordained and wrote those articles as an abridgement of the Christian
faith, it is uncertain, nor it is expressed in the holy scriptures. Certain
do ascribe this to the Apostles, and therefore call it the Symbol of the
Apostles. Saint Ciprian concerning this matter, writes thus.

Tradunt maiores nostri (inquit) quod post ascensionem domini, cum per aduentu^
sancti spiritus super singulos quosque postolos igneae linguae sedissent, vt
loquelis diuersis variisque loquerentur, per quod eis nulla gens extra, nullae
linguae barbarae inaccessae videre^tur, et in via praeceptum eis a domino datum
ob praedicandum dei verbu^ ad singulas quasque proficisci nationes: discessuri
itaque ab inuicem normam praedicationis in commune constituunt, ne forte alius
ab alio abducti, diuersum aliquid, hiis qui ad fidem Christi mutabantur,
exponerent. Omnes ergo in vnum positi, and spiritu sancto repleti, breue istud
futurae sibi, vt diximus praedicationis iudicium, conferendo in vnum quod
sentiebat vnusquisque, componunt, atque hanc credentibus dandam regulam esse
statuunt.

Our Elders do declare, that after the ascension of the Lord, when by the
coming of the holy ghost, fiery toungs did sit upon every of the Apostles,
that they might speak with diverse and sundry tounges, by the which no
foreign nations, no barbarous toungs should be strange unto them, and because
they were commanded of the Lord to go to every nation, to preach the word of
God: they therefore, being ready to depart one from an other, did constitute a
certain brief rule of preaching, to be had in commune among them, least one
being separate from the other, should expound any thing contrary unto those
which pertain to the faith of Christ. All they therefore, being assembled
together, and full of the holy ghost, did constitute and ordeine, that this
abridgement should be the note and sum of their preaching hereafter to come,
and also that it should be given as a rule to al faithful beleuers Haec
Cyprianus.

This abridgement and rule was called the symbol of the Apostles. It is called
Symbolum, because it is a collation and a true mark. It is called a collation,
because the articles were composed, written, and made by the conference of the
apostolical doctrine, that there should be an Epitome of the whole christian
faith, both preached of the Apostles, and also received of the universal church.

It is called Iudicium, that is, a show or note, because by these twelve
articles, as by a sure mark, the true Christians might be discerned and known
from the false.

To make the matter more plain, Symbolum is a greek word, which comes of
this verb (...), which signifies the same that confero, does in the latin
tongue, that is, to bring together. This word Symbolum the Greeks have used many
manner of ways, and in diverse significations, for other whiles they do call
Symbolum the seal or mark which is imprinted on letters or vessels, to the
intent that they should not be opened of such as were not mete and convenient.
Sometime again they do call Symbolum a gage, whither it be money or a ring, or
any other thing, that they gave from them, as many as were appointed, and had
made promise to have a common bancket or feast together, to the assurance,
that every one of them should keep his appointment, and no man withdraw and
absent him self.

Thirdly they do call symbolum the token that is given between the spouse and
the spousesse of their consent each of them to other: to the end that neither
of them may shrink from their promise and bargain.

Fourthly, they call symbolum that token or cognisaunce, that was given to the
soldiers, as many as fought under one and the same standerd and banner, which
sometime was a watch word, sometime it was without words, and therefore of
them it is called (...) which is as much to say, as a dombe token without any
voice or sound. And this was done, to the end that the soldiers, which were
all under one captain, should know each other, and that if any person would
attempt or go back (when they were grown in age, and did take this mark and
token) that they might have perceiving and knowledge of him.

Al these four significations of symbolum, do agree unto the symbol of the
Apostles, commonly called the Creed.

First, saint Paul calls the Corinthians, which had professed the Gospel,
his epistle, not written forsooth, with yncke in parchment, but in their hearts
with the spirit, 2. Cor. 3
which spirit is called the finger of God.

Secondlye, the mind that is once sealed and marked to God, it is not lawful
to break up, or open to the Devil. And the same Paul speaks in this wise to
the Corinthians: we have this treasure in earthen vessels. The mind therefore
of man, through baptism, 2. Co. 4
is made the vessel of the holy ghost, which vessel is sealed or marked with
the signet of faith, yea more over Christ has sealed it with his own blood.
And in the Gospel, Luke 14
our Lord compares the kingdom of heaven, that is to wit, the grace of the
Gospel, unto a feast royal, unto which all men of al nations are called. Now,
whosoever has professed Christ in baptism, he has given a gage to come unto
this noble feast, so that it is not lawful for him now to start back.

Thirdly, we do read often times, that Christ is called by the name of a
spouse, as the church likewise is called by the name of a spousesse, Cant. 3
Ioh. 3
as in the mystical Canticle, and in John, yea moreover, the soul of man in
the profession of the faith, is wedded unto Christ her spouse. Saint Paul
declares this writing unto the Corinthians, saying: 2, Cor. 11
I have married you unto one husband, that you should show your self a
chaste virgin to Christ. Therefore a token is given of both parties, that it
cannot be lawful for either other at any time to go about a diuorcement. Christ
gives the earnest or pledge of his spirit. Man believing with his heart to his
justification, and confessing or acknowledging with his mouth, to his health and
salvation: does again of his part, give a token or pledge to Christ. Ephesians. 5


Great is the mystery (as saint Paul says) of this marriage, which is made
and knytte with a fast and a sure vnloosable bond, between Christ and the
Church.

Finally, and last of al, they which are new borne again by the holy bathe of
baptism, they do profess the euangelical chiualry or war, and do become
servants and soldiers under the immortal captain Jesus Christ, and are
bound with his military sacraments, and do receive the gift or reward of the
sprit. So that it is a point of extreme unfaithfulness, and also unkindness, to
forsake this captain, and run from him to the tyrant the Devil. Now al they
do forsake him, not only which do deny Christ, and do run unto the Turk or
unto the Jews, but also which with their whole heart and mind are given to the
world and worldly commodities and pleasures. For the righteous man also
falls even seven times a day. But he rises anon again, by the quicknes and
strength of faith, which like fire does always labor upward unto heavenly
things.

Symbola also, does signify by an allegory, some secret thing, as the Curlew
is called symbolum pietatis, because Curlewes have a certain natural affection
and love toward their Parents, in relieuing and susteining them in their age.

Also in the sacrifice of Bacchus, when they bare about a sieve, they signified
thereby drunkards to be blabs, and that they could conceal nothing

Furthermore, certain sentences comprehending some mistical and hidden sense,
were called by an allegory, Symbola, Symboles. As the symbols of Pythagoras,
whereof this is one. Ne gustaris quibus nigra est cauda, taste not of those
things which have a black tail. This symbol by an allegory does teach us,
that we should beware to accompany with the wicked, and with them that be
infamous, or (as Triphen says) that we should utter no lieng communication,
because a lie in the end of the tale waxes black, and is espied.

An other of them is this. Ignem gladio ne fodito, stir not the fire with thy
sword, that is, provoke and stur not him, which is already angry.

An other is. Aduersus solemn ne loquitor, speak not against the sun, by
which is meant, that we should not repugne or gaynsaye the open and manifest
truth.

If you desire to learn mo of these, look in the Chiliades of Erasmus.
Symbolum also signifies a shot, yt a man paieth for his dinner or supper.

It is also the money, that diverse persons lay together, as in a common purs, to
make good cheer withal. It may be called the banketting money.

Symbolus in the masculine gender, is a signet, seal or sign manuel.

Symbulus with v, betokens a good and wise counsailer.

Trinity.
SAint Austen in his book De Trinitate, has a most godly and profound saying
concerning the Trinity. His words be these. Vbi quaeritur vnitas trinitatis,
patris, filii, and spiritus sancti, nec periculosus alicubi erratur, nec
laboriosius aliquid quaeritur, nec fructuosius aliquid inuenitur. Non pigebit
me sicubi haesito, discere. Quisquis ergo audit vel legit, vbi pariter certus
est, pergat mecum: vbi pariter haesitat, quaerat mecum. Vbi errorem suum
cognoscit, redeat: Vbi meum, reuocet me. Ita ingrediamur simul charitatis viam,
tende^tes ad eum de quo scriptum est: psalm. 105.
Quaeritefaciem eius semper.

When the unity of the trinity, that is, of the father, of the son, and of
the holy ghost, is searched, there is no error more dangerous, neither is
there any thing sought with more labor, nor any thing found with more fruit and
profit. I will not be ashamed to learn when and where I doubt. Whosoever
therefore does hear or read, where he is certain with me, let him go forward
with me, where he doubts with me, let him search with me. When he knows
his own error, let him return, where he knows mine error, let him call me
back. So let us both together enter in to the way of charity, repayring to
him, of whom it is written: Always seek ye his face.

Saint Bernard has not the unlike worthy sentence. Inquirere de trinitate,
peruersa curiositas est: and credere, and tenere, sicut sancta ecclesia te net,
fides and securitas est, videre autem eam, sicuti est, perfecta and summa
faelicitas est. To enquire of the Trinity, is a perverse curiosity: to believe
and to hold as the holy church holds, is faith and security, to see it as it
is, is most perfect and chief felicity.

I remember an old report, which is told of one Alanus, who promised his
auditorie to discourse the next Sunday following, the misterye of the Trinity
It chanced, that walking by the sea side, he saw a young boy lading water of
the sea into a little hole, Alanus demanded of him, what he meant. I entend
(says he) to bring all the whole sea into this hole. Why thou go about a
thing impossible, answers Alanus. So do thou (says the boy to him) for
it is as possible for me to bring all the whole sea into this hole, as for thee
thoroughly to discourse the mystery of the Trinity. Alanus was very much
dismayed, and when he came into the pulpit, his auditory looking for the
perfourmaunce of his promise, he was silent for a pretty space, and at the last
said no more, but this: Sufficit vobis vidisse Alanum. It is enough for you to
have seen Alanus. For to utter that which I promised, is above my reach, and
so came down.

The Hebrew Rabbines do assign and express ye mystery of ye Trinity by this
name of god, Jehovah which the Greeks call Tetragrammaton, yt is, a name of
four letters, which are but three in deed, but that one is put twice, that
is, in the second place, and in the fourth place, yt is, this letter He. These
three letters, say they, do express the three persons of the Trinity. For the
first letter Iod, betokens principium, a beginning, which letter does most
aptly signify the Father in divinity, which when he comes of none, and the
other persons do flow from him, is called principium sine principio, a
beginning without beginning.

The second letter He, which signifies to be, or to live, does express the
son in divinity, by whom althings that were made, had their being and
beginning.

The third letter Vau, which is a conjunction copulative, most aptly signifies
the holy ghost, which, forasmuch as it is the love of the father, and the
son, wherewith they love each other, is called rightly copula, because it is
the knitting together of both.

This letter He, being put twice in this name Jehovah, does signifye only the
son, which is the second person in Trinitye. For the Father which is the
first person, has only one respect, that is, he is produce^s, et non
productus. The holy ghost also has only one respect, yt is, he is productus,
and not producens. But the son, which is the second person, has two
respects, that is, he is productus a patre, and vna cu^ patre producens
spiritum sanctum.

This name Jehovah, is found written in the ancient books of the Hebrews
with three Iods, which are enclosed with a circle, and the point Camets set
underneath them, after this manner. (...) By the which two mysteries are
signified. The three Iods are the three persons, one camets underneath, is the
divine nature, which is wholly proper unto every person, the circle is the
unity of the divine Essence.

The second misterye is this, the three Iods being equal, betokene the
equality of ye three persons. One camets does signify one divine substance in
Trinity. The circle betokneth the Identitie of ye same divine Essence,

The Jews had this name, Jehovah, in such reverence, that whenever it did
occur in reading, they would not read it nor name it, but expressed instead
thereof, this name, Adonai, and therefore this name Jehovah, was called of them,
nomen ineffabile, a name not to be spoken. It is written In libro Sanhedrin
thus: whosoever pronounces the name of the.4. letters, as the letters them
selves do sound, shall have no part in the world to come. Therefore, whersoeuer
they found this name, they durst not pronounce it, but in steed thereof
uttered this word, Adonai, Dominus, the Lord. Notwithstanding the Priests
did pronounce it, when they blessed the people in the sanctuary. For out of the
sanctuary it was unlawful for any man to utter it.

The blessing with the name of four letters, was given with the lyftinge up of
three fingers of both hands, two fingers being pressed down, to signify the
Trinity of the divine persons. This benediction utterly ceased after the death
of Simeon, who took Christ in his arms, being presented in the temple.

There be great learned men, which do account this invention of the Jews, to
be but invented of their own brains, and do count it but an explication of
subtilties. For Jehovah is derived of this word houah, a verb substantive,
before the which Iod being put, is made the word Jehovah, that is, a being or a
substance of him self, lacking nothing, but giving to al things, without
beginning and end, in whom we live, move, and be.

I do not a little maruayle, that the Papists are not ashamed to say, that we
have not this name Trinity in all the scriptures, and by that would prove, that
unwritten verities are necessary to be believed to salvation, beside the
scriptures. But if they would put on their spectacles, and look better on
their books, they should find the whole mystery of the Trinity, in diverse and
sundry places of the scriptures.

But to aduoyde prolixitie, I will bring only but three or four places. 2.
Cor. 3


First, in Deuteronomie it is written: Audi Israel, Deus, Deus noster, Deus
vnus est, God, our God, is God only. Why did Moses in this place put the name
of God thrice, but to signify distinctly the Trinity of the divine persons? And
why is this word, vnus, put immediately after, but to signify the three divine
persons, not to be three Gods, but one God.

Note well, how that place written, Deuteronomy. 6. is read in the Hebrew, namely thus:
The Lord our God, is Lord only.

Question.
But here may be demanded, why this word noster, is not as well put to the first
word, and to the last, as unto the second only, which is Deus noster.

Responsio.
By this it is manifestly declared, that neither the Father, which is first
person in Trinity, neither the holy ghost, which is the third person in the
same Trinity, but only the son, which is the second person of the Trinity,
should become ours by the partaking of our humane nature. To the which, well
agrees that, which is written in the.67, Psalm. Benedicat nos Deus, Deus
noster, benedicat nos deus, psalm. 67
and metuant eum omnes fines terre. God, even our God shall bless us, God shall
bless us, and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Here is put thrice Deus, which signifies the distinction of the three
persons. And where in the second place this word noster is put, it betokneth the
son only to become ours, by the taking of our nature.

VVher it is said in the last place, metuent eum, non eos, fear him, and not
them, the unity and identitie of the same persons is showed and expressed. By
this it is plainly declared, that the three divine persons, are not three Gods,
but one only God.

Thirdly, it is written in the prophet Esaias: Sanctus, sanctus, cap. 6.
sanctus Deus exercitum, plena est omnis terra gloria eius. Holy, holy, holy is
the Lord of hosts, all the earth is full of his glory. In that he says
Sanctus, three times, the three persons are expressed, the Father, holy, the
son, holy, the holy Ghost, holy. And for that after he had said three times
Sanctus, he adds immediately the name of God Jehovah, which imports the
divine substance, and does clearelye express, that those three persons are
not three Gods, but one God. For this cause the old Thalmudistes, which were
not ignorant of this mystery, ordained, that as well those words of the
Prophet Esaias, as those written in Deuteronomie, should be spoken of every Jew
twice a day, morning and evening.

Fourthly, in the Epistle of saint John it is written: Tres sunt qui
testimonium dant in caelo, pater, verbum, et spiritus sanctus. There be three
which give testimony in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy ghost, and
these three are one.

If these testimonies both of the old testament and of the new, be not
sufficient to prove, not only the matter and mystery of the Trinity, but also
the name, I cannot see what may be sufficient. But what cauillations and
causations will not captious heads invent, against the verity? Unless they be
(as the proverb says) (...), Caeciores Leberide, they may find the Trinity
fully expressed in the scriptures.

To make an end, although earthly things are incomparable to things caelestial,
and especially to the majesty of God, yet for the infirmitye of our capacity,
I will bring in one example or two, in some part to express the mystery of the
Trinity.

Saint Austen brings a goodlye similitude, which is this: Videmus solemn in
caelo currentem, fulgentem, cale^tem. Similiter ignis tria habet, hoc est,
motum, lucem, and feruorem. Divide ergo si potes Ariane, solemn, vel ignem, and
tunc demum divide Trinitatem. We see the sun in heaven running, shining, and
giving heat. Likewise the fire has three properties, moving, light, and heat.
Now thou Arrian, if thou can divide the sun or the fire, than divide thou
also the Trinity.

The soul of man being really one thing, has three powers, Memoriam,
intellectum, and voluntatem, memory, understanding, and will, which three make
one essential soul, but in property they are distinct. For the property of the
memory is to remember, the property of understanding is to perceive and
understand, the property of the will is to choose. Out of the memory springs
intelligence, out of both springs the will. So the divinity has three
persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, which three constitute one
essential God, yet every person has his property. From the Father comes the
Son, and from both comes the holy Ghost.

Johannes Fissherus.
Johannes Fissherus, sometime bishop of Rochester, and high Chauncelour of the
University of Cambride, was commended of Erasmus Roterodame, to have been
beautified and adourned with all sorts of bishoplike virtues. He was (says
Erasmus) endued with a singular grace of eloquence, and therefore he was in
very great estimation with the lady Margaret, grandame to king Henry ye eight.
For at his instant request (as Polidore says) she erected. 2 goodly Colleges
in the said university, and dedicated the one to our savior Christ, and the
other to saint John the Evangelist. She gave them to their finding large and
great lands. But when the eternal veritye of Christ's Gospel began to
shine in Germany, no man was more wood and cruel against it, than this
pratlyng and popish deceiuour.

He did not only write against the sincere preachers and Ministers of the
word of God for the advancement of Antichrists evil doctrine, but also
seditiously withstood king Henry, which labored to expel the pernicious yoke
of the purpled harlot out of his realm. Wherefore let all godly me^ judge,
what ingritie of life that was, what great learning, what holiness of blameles
life, what purity of mind, with other dowries of Bishoplike virtues (which
his fauters so greatly, but falsely do brag of) was found in him. At the last,
almost he was beheaded doting, at what time a Cardinals hate was sent to him
from Paul the third, the Romish Pharao for the reward of his pains, the year
after the nativity of Christ. 1533. and the.22. day of June. Haec Baleus.

Manicheus.
MAnes was a Persian by his country (of whom the heretics called Manichei,
did spring) he began to dispute among his scholars of a certain new and
strange doctrine. And when no man gave him credit, and his auditorye was
displeased with his doctrine, and every manne alyenated from him for his
innovation, his horrible fablinge, and his vain fraud, he saying the craft
of his feined words to be overthrown, inverted a way whereby he might
establish his deuelish doctrine, for hearing the kings son of Persia to be
very sick, he came unto ye king, promising to heal his son in short space,
trusting to his enchauntment, by the which he hoped to bring this weighty
matter to good effect. But the child being taken away from the Physicians which
had him in hand, and delivered unto Manes, perished in his hands, wherefore he
was forthwith cast into prison, out of the which he being delivered either by a
sum of money or by flight, came into the middle of Persia and Mesopotamia, and
entered the castle or town of Arabion. The which thing the king of Persia
understanding, sent for him, and took him, and skinned him alive, and took
his skin, and filled it with chafe where it remains at this day in Persia.
6. tomo operu^ Augustini


But his sect was spread abroad in Arabia, Aegipt, and Africa, almost 206.
years after his death. And Saint Austen him self continued in the heresies of
Manes.9. years, but afterward acknowledging his errors, refuted the
Manichies, as namely, Faustus, Faelix, Fortunatus, Adima^tus, and others of
that sect. These following were the chief opinions of the Manichies.

They feined that there were two Gods: The one a good God which was the author
of good things, whom they named (...), that is, light. The other an evil God of
like power, whom they called Hyles, of whom he said, marriage, government, and
all evil things sprang. Therefore they absteined from marying and politic
government. They bosted that through their ceremonies, they attained unto the
sprite of God. They affirmed, that the son of God took not upon him man's
nature truly, but feinedly and imaginatiuely. They utterly took away fre will
in all points from man, as well in outward actions, as in inward motions. They
feined, the law of Moses to be given of an evil God, and therefore to have been
abrogated. They abstained from flesh and from killing of beasts: Finally, there
was a great confusion of their fantastical opinions, which he that will, may
read them in Epiphanius and in Saint Austen.

Catholic.
Katholk, in the Greek, is in Latin, Vniuersalis, in English universal, or
all (as though one would say) occupied about all. It is compounded of (...),
which signisieth Circa, about, and (...), which betokens Totum, all.
Therefore the Church is called Ecclesia Catholica, because it does extend and
reach through all places, and through all times. For all holy men are so united
together in the Church, as members in one body, which depend of one head.
Therefore the whole multitude of all faithful, is called the Church. And
because the Church of Christ should not be restrained unto one corner of the
world (as the Donatistes do restrain the Church of Christ only into Africa)
it is called Ecclesia Catholica, the universal Church, dispersed throughout
the whole world.

But yet we must not stay here only upon this word Catholic, for then we
must grant the Church of the great Turcke to be a Catholic Church. For
his Church has an universal multitude, and a Catholic number. For this
word Catholic may not only be applied to the Church, but also to other
profane things, as that medicine which is profitable to euacuate al humors,
is called Catholicum medica mentu^. Also those precepts which are given to al
me^ to be observed, are called, Catholica praecepta. And those sins which
are usually committed of every man, and coumpted in a manner for no sin, are
called, Catholica peccata. Therefore we must add to our Catholic Church,
this Epitheton, Apostolica, and say with the Symbol made at Constantinople,
Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam and Apostolicam. I believe the Catholic and
Apostolic Church, or else this, Epitheton, Orthodoxam, and so term the
Church to be, Catholicam and Orthodoxam, that is, to be universal and of a
right and sound doctrine, that is, not swaruing from right faith, true
opinions, and good judgments.

Therefore ye may see, how the Papists did cast doung in their own eyes, when
they thought them selves to be of a true church, in naming them selves
catholics, that is, universal men, yet they neither embracing the right
faith, nor setting forth the purity of the apostolic doctrine: behauyng them
selves more worthy to be called, (...), then (...), that is, ill, bloody, and
devouring woulues, the^ true catholics. For what blood have they spared
vnshed, either of high or low, poor or rich, young or old? whereas Christ him
self being the head of the Church did say, Filius hominis non venit perdere,
sed saluare. Luke 9
The son of man came not to destroy, but to save.

Bishops.
WHat difference is between a Bishop and a Priest, Saint Hierome writing Ad
Titu^, does declare, whose words be these: Idem est ergo Presbiter, qui
Episcopus. etc.

A Priest therefore is the same that a Bishop is. And before scismes and
factions by the instinct of the devil begone in religion, and before it was
said among ye people: I am Paul's I am Apollos, I am of Cephas, the Churches
were governed with the common council of the Priests (or Elders. 1. Cor. 2
)

But after that every one thought those whom he Baptized, to be his, and not
Christ's, it was decreed throughout the whole world, that one of the Priests or
Elders should be chosen to be set over the rest, unto whom all the cure (or
charge) of the Church should apparteine, and that the beginnings of scismes
should be taken away. Some do think, that it is not the sentence of the
Scriptures, but ours, that a Bishop and Priest (or Elder) are one thing, and
they do also think, the one to be a name of age, and the other to be a name
of office. Let them read again the words of the Apostle to the Philippians,
saying: Paul and Timotheus the seruau^ts of Jesus Christ, to all ye Saints in
Christ Jesus, which are at Philippos, Phil. 1
with the Bishops and Deacons, Grace and peace be with you. etc. Philippi, is
one of ye Cities of Macedonia. And truly there could not be many (as they are
called) bishops in one City. But because at yt time they called those bishops,
which they did also call Priests (or Elders,) therefore indifferently he spoke
of bishops as of Priests (or Elders.) It may yet seem doubtful to some, unless
it be approved by other testimony. In ye acts of thapostles it is written,
that when the apostle came to Miletu^, he sent to Ephesus, and did call the
Priests or Elders, of the same Church unto whom among other things he said
thus: Attend to your selves. etc. Act. 2.
And here mark you diligently, how that he calling ye Priests or Elders of
that one city of Ephesus, did afterward call them Bishops. etc. And Peter which
took his name of the firmenes of his faith, in his Epistle says: I your
fellow Elder do beseech the Elders which are among you etc. Haec Hieronimus.
These words are alleged, that it may appear, Priests among the Elders, to
have been even the same that Bishops were. But it grew by little and little, that
the whole charge and cure should be appointed to one Bishop within his
precinct, that the seeds of dissension might utterly be rooted out.

Cerdon.
CErdon was borne in Siria, from whence he came to Rome, at the same time that
Valentinus came thither, Ireneus lib. 3 cap. 4 Eusebius Lib. 4 cap. 10. 11
Antoninus Pius being then Emperor, and Higinus the Bishop. This thing does
argue that he had a variable and subtle wit, for that he sometimes endeavored
to spread abrod his errors privily, and fearing nothing, did sometime openly
teach them. But he being sometime reproved of the brethren, came again to the
Church, feining repentance and amendment. The which unsteadfastness being at
length perceived of the brethren, he was repulsed and put back from the
communion of the Church. Of this Cerdon the heretics called Cerdoniani,
took their name, whose heresy was this, that the holy ghost was not sent unto
the Apostles, Cant. 24. q. 3
but to him alone. He did also affirm, that there were two gods, one good an
other ill, which gave the law and the Prophets. He taught furthermore, that
Christ did appear only in fantasy and show, and not in substance. He
denied the resurrection of the dead. He rejected Moses and the Prophets. Look
more for this Cerdon, in Epiphanius, Ireneus, and Tertullian.

Marcion.
MArcion the heretic was the disciple of the foresaid Cerdon, a Stoike
Philosopher, and born (as Epiphanius writes) in Sinope, which is a city in
Po^tus of Galatia, or of Paphlagonia says Ptolomeus. Ireneus writes, that
Marcion did succeed Cerdon, and waxed strong under Anicetus then Bishop: Lib.
3. cap. 4.
the which Marcion did not begin his heresy first at Rome, whether he came
after Cerdo^, but a long time after, he sowed his strange heresies in other
places. For Philastrius writes, that he was at Ephesus in the time of Saint
John the Apostle, of whom Marcion being overcome, and being driven from
Ephesus, fled to Rome. Albeit Epiphanius does plainly declare, he did apply
his mind to the heresy of Cerdon, first at Rome. And when Marcion came
thither, he was excommunicate of his own father, a very godly and honest
bishop, because he committed whordome with a virgin.

Eus. Lib. 4, ca. 11
Furthermore Eusebius says, that Justinius in his books against Marcion did
write, that he did know him alive, when he wrote his books against him. Upon a
certain time Marcion did mete Policarpus, and asked him, if he knew him?
Policarpus answered, I know thee to be the first begotten son of the devil.
His heresies were these. He feigned, that there were to gods, the one the maker
of the world, and of the law, and the Prophets, (...), the causer and author
of evil, a bloody God and unsteadfast. The other God, he feined to be superior
and mighty. (...), the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which did dissolve and
break a sonder all the works of the other gods. He taught, that only the souls
are saved, and that ye bodies do not rise again: He did not allow wedlock. etc.

See Ireneu^, and especially Tertullianu^, in five boks against Marcion. Lib 1
ca 29. lib 2. ca. 1. lib. 3. cap 3, 4. and alibi.


Praxeas.
PRaxeas against whom Tertullia^ wrote a special book, affirmed, that there
is only but one divine person, as also Sabellius after him affirmed the same.
Also he did contend about the year of Christ.250. that God the father was
Jesus Christ which suffered and was crucified. Of this heresy, his sectatours
were called Patripassiani.

Proscriptions.
PRoscribo has diverse significations. First it betokens to proclaim any
thing to be sold by writing: Therefore houses, when they should be sold, having
an inscription upon them, were called Aedes proscriptae, (as Cicero writes.
Itaque Calphurinus, Lib. 1, officio Chrisost.
quum cogno uisset Claudium aedes postea proscripsisse. Therefore when
Calphurinus had knowledge yt Claudius had put forth the houses to be sold). In
Greek it is. (...), Mulctatus bonis.

Secondly it signifies to banishe out of the country. Vlepianus says, that
they are said properly to be proscribed, whose names are written in fair,
plain and legeable letters, and set before some shop or place of marchaundise,
to give notice, that they are exiles.

Macrobius says. Non est facile scribere aduersus eum qui potest pro scribere.
It is no easy thing to write against him, who has authority to proscribe.

Thirdly it signifies, to cause by ordinance, that whosoever finds one, he
may lawfully slay him, and have a reward for his labor. And Proscriptio, is
that manner of commandment. Proscriptio, may signify also an ateynder.

Strangled meats.
BEfore the law, in the time of Noe, God did forbid the eating of blood, and
flesh, with the blood of any dead thing, either being killed of wild beasts,
or else being strangled. The fathers did eat herbs and fruits of the earth
before the drowning of the world. And after, God granted them liberty to eat
of the beasts, and commanded to kill them, and to shed their blood.
Furthermore in the law, God with a great severity, says: whosoever of the
house of Israel, or of the inhabitaunts which do dwell amongst you, shall eat
any blood, I will set my face against such a soul, and I will put him out from
among the people. Nor it was without just and very great causes, yt God did
forbid with so great severity the eating of blood. For at the beginning after
the words recited, he adds: For the soul or life of the flesh is in the
blood, and I gave it you upon the altar to purge your souls. For the blood
shall cleanse the soul. And therefore I said to ye children of Israel: let never
a soul among you eat blood. etc. Lo, a very clear and manifest reason is
here rendered in these words, why it is not lawful to eat blood, seeing that
blood is a most excellent thing, being appointed for the sanctification of men.
For God gave blood to be as it were a price, whereby sins might be cleansed, a
reward, (I say,) for their redemption, by the which they might be absolved
from their sins. Furthermore, blood is life, that is, the nourishment of
life. The blood therefore signified, Christ's blood to be shed upon the Cross,
by the which as a most full and perfect propitiation, the faithful beleuers,
are purged and sanctified, and in the which is the nourishment of the soul
unto everlasting life. And as it was not lawful to eat of the flesh of the
Sacrifices, the blood whereof was brought into the holy places, for sins, but
the Sacrifices were brent without the court: so like wise, it was unlawful to
eat blood, as though it were a purging for sin. He therefore did eat blood,
which attributed the perfect clensing of sin by the blood of Christ, to his
own strength and works, or else, thought Christ's blood to be profane and
unholy, not ascribing unto the same a full sanctification of all sins. He did
not eat blood, but poured it out at the altar, who soever ascribed the
benefit of our redemption to the only merit of Christ, and esteemed it so
much as it ought worthyly to be esteemed. Moreover God would have this thing
depely imprinted in the minds of men, that no man should shed ma^s blood, or
live of the blood and bowels of man, the which thing the hired and wicked
soldiers do, covetous men, vsurars, and deceyuers also commit the same,
shedding or devouring the blood of sely wretched men, by crafty means and
injurious dealings with them.

Genesis 9
Also God, when he spoke and communed with Noe, by fearful and very grievous
means, manaced them, saying: I my self, (if men be slack) will take
vengeance for the shedding of blood, for man is made and created like to the
image of God. Therefore God does account that contumely and reproach to be done
to him, which is done to man being his image. For who soever throws down
the image of a king, he offends the king him self, and is accused of treason.
Furthermore this law was made of strangled meats: Thou shall not eat with
blood.

Also do you not eat of any carkeis or slain thing, killed of wild beasts,
etc. By straungled meats and dead carkesses, are signified dead works, from
the which he is commanded to purge him self by the grace and mercy of God,
which desires to please God. Therefore he did eat straungled meats, which
lived in his wickedness without repentance, nor greatly cared for Christ's
blood.

Praelectio quarta habita die Sabbati.xv. die Mensis Februarii. Anno. 1560.
Concerning the second general part. By whom and after what manner
the holy scriptures were first written

(...)
WE read not of any scriptures given by the inspiration of god before the time
of Moses, Moses. 1.
which was borne after the creation of the world.2368. and died before the
incarnation of Christ.1462 his eien being never dim nor his toeth loose. I will
not contend with any,. (...) Eccle ^ 6: ca. 13 1 cap. 2. ^quitat.
whether there were any holy writ in the church of God before that time or no.
Notwithstanding Eupo^lemus (as Eusebius testifies) affirms that Moses was
the first, that ever delivered letters to ye Jews. Although Josephus writes,
that Seth the son of Adam did first, engraue in two pillars the discipline
of heavenly things which pillars (the one being of stone) the said Josephus
affirms to have continued in Siria unto this time. Seth. 2.
But whether this be true or no it is out of question, that there came to our
hands and knowledge no scriptures of more antiquitye, then the writings of
Moses. For otherwise Christ himself would not have begone with the books of
Moses, when he did expound the scriptures unto Cleophas, (...). 24
and his fellow, Cleophas. 3. Emaus. 4 Enoch. 5 Saba. 6. Tertullian 7: Arca. 8
Cataclism 9. Esdras. 10 Babylon. 11 Hebrews. 12. Origenes 13.
whose name (as Ambrose says was Ammaon) when they went to Emaus being about
seven miles from Jerusalem: for if any scripture had been of greater
auncientnes, then the books of Moses, he would have begone at them. As for the
book of Enoch they may affirm it to be before Moses books, which saw Enoch
writing it, or did see Noes librarye in ye Arc. It is of no great force what
other affirm saying that this book was reserved and kept in the church of
the queen of Saba, and had in greater price then the books of Moses. I am not
ignorant what Tertullian which lived about, ^de ha^ mulie cap. 1
230 years after Christ wrote of Enoch his book, saying, that this book was
either reserved in Noah's Ark in the time of the general flood or else being
lost by violence of the Cateclisme, was restored again by Esdras (Jerusalem
being vanquished by the Babilonians). Other there be whose censure and judgment
is, that this book remained unto the time of the Apostles. And that the
Hebrews after the peregrination and going about of the Apostles throughout the
whole world, did either conceal and keep it priuelye, or else did commit it to
the fire because it did contein urgent and vehement authorities and testimonies
of Jesus the true Messiah which should be condemned of the Jews.

Origenes upon the book of Numery writes quod libelli Enoch non videntur apud
Hebreos in authoritate haberi. 4, hom,
That the books of Enoch are coumpted among the Hebrews of no authority.

Saint Austen in his book, de ciuitate dei, Lib. ^^.
writes Scripta Enoch vt apud Iudeos, ita apud nos in authoritate non esse,
quod fecit nimia antiquitas, propter quam videbantur habenda esse suspecta, ne
proferrentur falsa pro veris. That is to say, the books of Enoch are of no
authority, neither among the Jews neither among us by the reason of long and
great antiquitye for the which they are coump^ed suspecte, least false things
should be uttered instead of true

Beda. 14.
Beda affirms this book to be falsely ascribed unto Enoch.

Obiectio.
Why then did saint Jude in his epistle allege this book, if it be apocryphal,
and and not canonical?

Responsio.
There is nothing in the Epistle of Jude which is not consonant, and may not be
found in the holy scriptures, if you do diligently inuestigate and search them.

In deed the most part of writers do hold, that this testimony of Jude is cited
out of some book which was the^ numbered inter libros apocryphos: Judas. 15.
Apocrypha 16 Menander. 17
But yet this is no good sequel nor argument, these sayings are brought out
of the Apocriphals, therefore they must be rejected. Saint Paul allegeth
testimonies out of very profane authors, as out of Menander of Epimenides and
out of Aratus. And here by the way we may gather the^, to be precise and very
supersticious, Tite cap^ Act. 17
which dare not nor will borow or cite any testimonye out of profane writers,
for when all truth is of god, if any good or godly thing be spoken well and
truly yea though it be of the wicked, it ought not to be forsaken or
neglected, so that it be applied to the glory of God, and to the furniture of
good and godly manners. But of this thing Basilius magnus entreats more at
large in his oration, Basilius Magnus. 8.
In oration ad nepo^^
ad nepotes. Wherefore this testimony of Enoch produced by the apostle Jude, is
not to be contemned: for it may be, that the books Apocriphal were then had in
some price and estimacion, especially of them to whom the apostle Jude wrote.
To our purpose again. It is neither without nor beside reason, that there was
from the beginning of the world unto Moses, no scripture by ye inspiracion of
god exhibited to ye church of god, which did teach man the knowledge and true
worshipping of god.

A declaration.
WE do evidently se, that it was gods will, both before the flood unto the time
of Moses, to reuele and declare those things (which were pertinent and
profitable to faith, to godly religion and to al piety) to certain holy
fathers, partlye by nightly visions, and partly by daily apparitions. By the
which oracles, visio^s and apparitions it might be believed, that God had a
care, and a fatherly regard to mankind, and that they who^ he did vouchsafe
to instruct of the will of his heavenly grace, might also institute and bring
others to the knowledge of God, and to the studying and following of godlynes.

Proves, reasons, and ensamples for the same.
We read in Genesis, how the Lord him self spoke unto Abraham: Number celabo
(inquit) Abrahamu^ quae egofacturus sum? Gene. ca, ^
Shall I hide from Abraham those things which I do? seeing that Abraham shall be
in deed a great and a mighty people, and all the nations on the earth shall be
blessed in him: for I know him, that he will command his sons and his
household after him, that they keep the way of the lord to do righteousness and
judgment. Now before the flood, the world had these 9. Adam. 19 Enos. 20
Mathusale^. 21. Lamech. 22
holy and worthy wise men.

1. Adam. 2. Seth 3. Enos 4. Kenan. 5. Malalihel 6. Iared 7. Enoch 8.
Mathusalem 9. Lamech
THe chiefest of these were Adam and Mathusalem, who did begin and conclude all the years of ye age before the general deluge: which years were in number.1656

The years of Adams life were.930. He died in the year before the flood.726.

Mathusalem, his years of his life were.969. He dyed the self same year that
the flood did ouerflowe all the whole world, and he lived together with Adam
243. years, so that he might and was aboundauntly instructed by Adam of the
beginning of the world, of the word of God, and of his holy will, of the fall
of man, and of his restitution, and of all things pertaining to religion, as
far as Adam him self was instituted and taught of God.

Those.ii. Patriarchs with the other.vii. before named, cold and did
sufficiently teach to all that age, true salvation, and also the most godly
ways to serve the Lord.

(...)
Now after the flood God gave unto the world, other famous and renowned men, in
number.12. Patriarchs whose names follow. Noe. 23 Sem. 24 Abraham 25 Isaac. 26
Jacob. 27.


Noe. 1. Sem. 2. Arphaxat. 3. (...). 10
Sale. 4. Heber. 5. Pale. 6. Reu. 7. Nachor. 8. Their. 9. Abraham. 10. Isaac.
11. Jacob. 12.
OF these.12. Noe, and Sem, were the chiefest, and next unto them of most fame
were Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. All the years of Noes life in number were.950.
and in the year of the inundatio^ of the flood, he was.600. year old: he
therefore did know and see all the holy fathers which were before the flood
(three only excepted) that is Ada^, Seth, and Enos, but he lived many years
with others, which did both hear and see those three, in so much that he could
be ignorant of nothing wherewith Adam did instruct them. Noe dyed that year in
the which Abraham was.59. years old, so that Abraham did learn of Noe, those
things which Noe received of Mathusalem.

Now Sem, Noes eldest son, was before the flood.96. years old, so yt he both
saw and heard not only his father Noe and his grau^d father Lamech, but also
his great grau^dfather Mathusale^, with whom he lived before the flood almost
four score sixtene years, of whom he might be and was instructed, of al
things which Adam delivered to the former Patriarchs.

Sem lived in all.600. years, and died after the death of Abraham. 37. years,
and in the year of Isaac.112. and in the year of Jacob.52. so yt these three
Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob might have learned of Sem, the whole and
true divinity which Ada^ taught Mathusalem, and which Mathusalem taught Sem,
being the third witness and master, after Adam.

Now Jacob delivered to his children likewise al these things which he had
received of his forefathers. Jacob had a son borne unto him in Mesopotamia,
whose name was Leui. Leui had a son whose name was Caath, who also saw and
herd Jacob. Caath was Moses grandfather and father unto Amra^, who begat Moses.
And thus to conclude this supputatio^, Moses learned of his father Amra^, Amram
of Caath, Caath of Jacob, Jacob of Sem, Sem of Mathusalem, Mathusalem of Adam,
so that Moses does stand in the world, the seventh witness from Adam. All the
years of the world from Adam unto the birth of Moses were.2368.

Now when ye time was come, yt the knowledge and religion of god should be
known, set forth and declared not only unto private families and households,
but unto a great populous number thorough ye whole world, god raised and
ordained this singular and famous man Moses, yt by him al such things yt were
delivered, as it were by ye mouth and hand ye fathers, should be brought into
letters and writings, and yt he should also write those things which were done
all ye time of his own life, which was.120. years.

And because the people, over who^ he was made governor, was a stiffnecked
people and greatly corrupted in Egypt with the gross idolatry of the land,
Egiptus. 28
he wrote not only all the gestes before said, but also what soever the Lord
revealed unto him, least they might perish and be out of memory through the
oblivion of a dull people, and by improbitie of time.

But you must understand that although Moses is said to have written the words
of the Lord in the volume of yt law, Tables of stone.29.
which God made unto the people, yet he by his own hand did not write in the
two tables of stone ye rules of ye moral law called Decalogus, but took them of
God, not only miraculously made by ye work of God, but also written by the hand
and power of God. So that Moses (I say) did not write out of the mouth of God,
but God him self wrate the worlds. For as God gave the way and use of the
Hebrew tongue to speak and talk with, so God him self first of all others,
wrote the figures and forms of the letters. For Moses had never written any
thing when God spoke unto him saying, come up to me into the mount, and I will
give thee two tables of stone, Exodus ^
and the laws and commandments which I have written. So Moses in deed was
the first after God that ever wrote Scriptures, but the first author of the^
was God him self. He was the first inuenter, actor and writer of the law
contained in the two tables, and Moses receiving them of God, delivered them to
the people.

Notwithstanding after that the holy Scriptures were written and delivered unto
the people of god by Moses, yet al revelations, visions, and apparitions, did
not cease in Israel.

After the time of Moses, Prophets were sent, unto who^ also god gave his
oracles and answers by visions and revelations. But the Prophets did commit to
writing what soever they dispersed and taught in Israel before by the word,
least their posterity might have had some excuse of ignorance, but God
prevented al such causatio^s (as it is written in Luke,) habent Moysen and
Prophetas, they have Moses and the Prophets. If they will not hear them, they
will not believe if any rise from the dead.

Nor the Scriptures of the old testament only were brought in after this sort
and order, but in like manner were the letters of the new Testament dispersed
and disposed by the Evangelists and the Apostles, as Ireneus in his first
book Contra hereses writes. Quae primum (inquit) concionati sunt Apostoli
postea per volu^ tatem dei scripto nobis tradiderunt, eaque literis erant
prodita quae ad salute^ nostra^ videbantur necessaria. (vt Johannes dicit) haec
scripta sunt vt credatis.

What things soever the Apostles preached first, the same after by ye will of
god they delivered unto us by writting, and those things were committed to
writing which were thought necessary for our salvation (as John says) these
things be written that you might believe. Also when their writings were
dispersed, yet the course of working of miracles, which served to confirm and
establish the Gospel, was not suddenly abrupt and taken away. But after the
death of the Apostles, Austen. 25 et ^^ cap. 23
miracles were very rare: As s. Austen writes in his book De vera religione.
Nec miracula (inquit) in nostra te^pora durare permissa sunt, ne anima semper
visibilia que re^et, and eoru^ consuetudine frigesceret genus humanu^, quoru^
nouitate flagraret. Miracles (says he) are not permitted to continue unto our
time, least the soul should ever seek and search for things visible, and least
mankind should wax cold with the custom of those things, the newnes whereof
they first inordinatly desired.

Chrysostom upon Matthew. Nu^c signoru^ (inquit) operatio omnino leuata est,
Mathe 24 ho^
magis aute^ and apud eos inuenitur qui falsi sunt christiani appellati facta.
The working of signs and miracles (says he) is now utterly taken away, and
is found to be done rather among those which are called false Christians.

And to beware of such miracles as are done by the operation of Satan, saint
Paul does premonishe all the faithful. 2 The^


If therefore the dispensations of the holy Scriptures, both of the old
Testament and of the new, be well considered and wayed, it does plainly and
evidently monish us, that we should not expecte, seek for, nor desire any
other revelations or oracles at the hand of God, as pertaining to faith, piety
the knowledge of God eternal life, then such which are contained in these two
holy instruments. Otherwise we might open a window and way unto Satan, who
does often transfigure and fashion him self to an Angel of light, Angel, 30.
Anabaptist 31.
and likewise we should seem to maintain that detestable sect of the
Anabaptists, who (the light of the holy Scriptures, being of them neglected)
seek more subtle and spiritual, nay, spiteful ways by dreams and
revelations.

Thus I have at the full declared unto you (most godly auditory) the original of
the holy scriptures, and who first did write them: and for this present lesson
this shall be sufficient, entendyng by Gods grace, at our next repair hither,
to enter into the third general limme of my partition. In the mean time I
commit you to the keeping of the eternal God. To whom be all praise honor
and glory for ever and ever.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea Praelectionis quartae.
Moses. 1.
MOses took his name of this word Maschah, id est extraxit, quasi extractus
ex aqua. Josephus lib. 2. cap. 5. writes, that the Egyptia^s call in their
tou^g water, Mo and saved yses so that of both the words being compound Moses
took his name, as if you would sai, saved out of ye water. For Thermuthis the
king of Egypt his daughter coming to the river to bath her self, saw a little
cradle as it were made with reed, dawbed with slime and pitch, she commanded
it to be brought unto her, in the which she found a little infant, whom she took
home with her, and did educate and bring it up as her own son, and calling
for a nurse, the child would suck no woman of Egypt, until his natural
mother being an Hebrew was brought unto him. At the age of three years, he
was so amyable and fair, that every man was glad and desirous to behold him.
Thermuthis one a time, brought the child to her father the king, who took
and embraced him, and set his diadem or crown upon the childs head. The
child not only suffered it to fall upon the ground, but spurned it also with
his foot, which did portend no good luck to the kingdom of Egypt, which
after came to pass, as ye may read in Exodus. When he came to man's state, and
did se an Egiptian beating an Hebrew, he slew the Egiptia^ privily, and hid him
in the grauel or sand, But when this came to Pharoes ears, Moses left Egypt and
went to the land of Madia^, where he sat a while by a well or a pits side,
unto the which well came vij. mayde^s, being ye daughters of Iethro, to draw
water to give to their sheep, they were often molested of certain
shepheardes, but by the help of Moses the shepheardes were converted to flight
and driven away. But when the maidens came home, and declared this matter to
their father, Moses was straight way sent for: who taking Sephora to wife,
became son in law to Iethro, where he begat two sons. As he was on a time
keeping his father in laws sheep, he saw a bushe burning, but not consuming.
At the which wondering he came nere to it, Exodus 3
and herd a voice out of the bushe saying, that he should come no nigher, but
that he should put of his shows, for the ground in ye which he stood was
holy. The voice said also, I have herd the cry of my people, and I am come
down, not only to releue and ease them from their hard burdens, but also to
deliver them from the oppression of that cruel tyrant. And declaring his
name, enjoined that Province and office unto Moses, who at the last (all Egypt
and Pharao him self being smitten with the power of Gods rod and many other
plages) delivered the Israelites. And after he had slain the Paschall Lamb,
passinge over the red sea drieshodde, brought the Israelites to mount Sinai,
where he received the law of God, and delivered it unto them.

Finally, he dyed in the land of the Moabites, upon a hill called Nebo, which
is also called Abarim. And as Saint Jude says, in his Epistle, his body could
not be found, for Michael the Archaungell strove against the devil, and
disputed about the body of Moses, for it is credible that when Moses was dead,
the Lord God sent an Angel to take away his body, so that no man did know
his sepulcher (as it is written in the last of Deuteronomie) and that was done
that the Jews should have no occasion of Idolatry, for if they had found
him, they would have worshypped him as God. Therefore the devil would have
had the body to be found, but the Angel would not for avoiding of idolatry.

Question.
Certain do demand whither Moses were a Priest or noby, cause it is written
in the four score and ninetene Psalm. Moses and Aaron inter sacerdotes eius,
are among his Priests.

Responsio.
Moses was no Priest, this assertion I will establish out of the holy
scriptures. When God had commanded Moses, that he should prepare all things
that were mete and convenient for the tabernacle of witness, and for the
ornature and decking of the same, then he commanded him also, that he should
institute and ordeyne those which should be Gods Priests (as it is written in
the.28. of Exodus) but we read not in any of the five books of Moses yt ever
Moses took upon him that office, nor ever put on ye priests vesture. For if
Moses had been a priest of ye old law, there is no doubt, but that the old
testament would have made some mention, of who^ he had been consecrate, but it
records no such thing, Ergo it may evidently appear, that Moses was no
Priest.

Again, if he had been a Priest, either he should have been the high priest,
or a priest of the inferior order.

If he had been the high priest, he should have entered once only in the year
in sancta sanctorum, that is, into the holiest place of al with blood (as Paul
says in the.9. to the Hebrews.) But it is most certain, that Moses never
entered into that place, Ergo he was not the high priest. If he had been a
priest of the inferior order, he should have entered in daily, morning and
evening, into the holy place, to have offered sacrifice, but there is no man of
so dull a mind, or gross wit, that dare say Moses to have executed any such
office, for why, the scripture does deliver no such mention.

Furthermore, Paul calls the Leuitical priesthood, a priesthood after the
order of Aaron, and not after the order of Moses. Therefore, if Moses had been
a Leuitical priest, Paul might have said, secundum ordinem Mosi, after the
order of Moses.

Over and beside this, who does not know, that Moses, was a most prudent and
wise law geuer, and did handle civil causes, and entreat in secular judgment,
and did hear and discuss hard and weighty matters? Now the priests of the old
testament, applieng only ecclesiastical matters, were not wont to handle
civil causes, nor entreat of secular judgments.

Obiectio.
How did Moses consecrate Aaron, if he were no priest? For priests be
consecrate of priests.

Responsio.
Lyranus upon the eight chapter of Leuiticus, handling this question, gives
this answer: Dicendum est (inquit) quod id fecit ex mandato domini, qui (per
quemcunque potest) pontificem consecrare. That is, we must say that he did it
by the commandment of the Lord, which can consecrate bishop or priest, by
whomsoever it pleases him.

Question.
But what shall we say to the Psalmist, who unless Moses had been a a priest,
would never have named or nombred him among the priests. Besides that, saint
Austen in his.23. question upon Leuiticus, does grant that Moses was a priest.
His words be these. Cum ergo (inquit) videatur ab Aaron cepisse summum
sacerdotium, quid putamus fuisse Mosen? Si ergo sacerdos non fuit, quomodo per
illum omnia illa gerebantur, si autem fecit, quomodo summum sacerdotium ab eius
fratre cepisse definimus? quanquam etiam psalmus ille vbi dictum est, Moses and
Aaron in sacerdotibus eius, auferat dubitationem quod sacerdos fuerit and
Moses, vestem tamen illam sacerdotalem, quae magnum continet sacramentum, Aaron
iubet accipire and successores eius summi sacerdotis. In Exodo antequam omnino
aliquid de sanctificandis and quodam modo ordinandis sacerdotibus praecipiatur:
quando Mose ascendente in montem, iubentur non ascendere sacerdotes, quos
intelligere alios non possumus nisi filios Aaron, non quia iam erant, sed quia
futuri erant, hoc eius iam scriptura appellauit per anticipationem, sicut sunt
pleraque talium locutionum. Na^ and filius Naue, Jesus appellatus est, cum
long postea hoc nomen ei scriptura narret impositum. Ambo ergo tunc sacerdotes
erant Moses et Aaron, an potius Moses? Aaron vero sub illo. An et ipfe su^mus
propter vestem pontificalem, ille vero propter excellentius ministeriu^? nam a
principio ei dicitur. Ipse tibi quae ad populum, tu, illi quae ad deum.

That is to say. When therefore the high priesthood seems to have begone of
Aaron, what do we think Moses to have been? If he were no Priest, how were
althings done by him? If he were, how then do we define the chief priesthood
to have begone of his brother? although that Psalm where it is said: Moses and
Aaron in sacerdotibus eius. Moses and Aaron among his priests, does take away
all the doubt that Moses was a priest: yet Aaron, and the successors of that
high priest, were commanded to take the Priests garments, which does contain
a great sacrament, or mystery. In the book of Exodus it is written, that
before any thing was commanded of the Priests to be sanctified and ordered,
when Moses ascended up into the mount, the priests were commanded to ascend,
who^ we understand to be the sons of Aaron, and no other, not because they
were then priests, but because they were to be made after, the scripture does
so now call them by an anticipation. As there be many such kind of speches and
phrases: For the son of Naue, was called Jesus, when the scripture does show
that his name was given to him long after, therefore both were priests, both
Moses and Aaron. Or was Moses rather? and Aaron under him? Or was Aaron the
chiefest priest for the pontifical vesture, and Moses for the more excellent
ministry? For it was said to him in the beginning: he shall be thy spokes man
unto the people, and thou shall be to him as God.

Responsio.
To this objection I make three answers. First, I will give one solutio^, both
to the saying of the Prophet, and also to the saying of Austen.

Moses was called a priest, because he used the priestly office in consecrating
Aaron and his sons, and of this mind is Lyranus, expounding the same psalm yet
he was not called a Priest, as Aaron, nor did put on the priests vesture, nor
did execute any part of the office of a priest, in the Tabernacle of witness.

Secunda responsio.
Secondly, Cassidorus declaring ye same psalm, writes after this manner: Nota,
quia hic Mosen sacerdotem dicit dum sic in hep tatencho non legatur. Qui and si
hostias non offerebat sicut Aaron frater ipsius, vota tamen populorum coram deo
semper exhibuit, quod sacerdotis officium esse monstrat. Quapropter merito and
hic sacerdos dicitur, quum magnis precibus irascente domino pro populo
supplicauit. That is to say. Note that he calls here Moses a priest, there is
no such thing read in the books of Moses: who although he offered not
sacrifices as his brother Aaron did, yet did he always exhibit and present
the requests of the people before God, which is declared by the office of a
priest. Therefore he is worthily called a priest, which with great prayers, made
supplications for the people to pacify the wrath of God. And so S. Peter does
call us priests, saying: 1, pet. 2
you as lively stones, be made a spiritual house and holy priesthode, to offer
up spiritual sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ, Apoc. 1
and (as S. John says in his revelation) he made us kings and priests unto
God.

Tertia responsio.
This Hebrew word Cohen, does not only signify a priest, but it is a
general name perteining to all that bear authority or rule (as we read of ye
sons of David which were called Cohenim) therefore Cohen does betoken a
Senior, a great ruler of the people, a noble man or a chief counsailer, and in
this signification, Moses was called Sacerdos.

To end, he that would know what type Moses was unto Christ, let him read the
book entitled, Scripturae medulla, in tertia mundi aetate There shall he
find it set out at large.

Seth. 2.
SEth was the third son of Adam, and took his name of this word Scath, id
est, posuit, that is, he has put or set, because god did put Seth in Abels
place and rome. The common opinion (as Lyranus writes) is, that Adam after the
death of Abell, purposed not to know his wife, but to live continent for ever,
and so continued for long time: but being after admonished by revelation, did
know his wife, and begat of her Seth, of whom Christ should lineally descend,
and not of the line of Cain, because he was cursed of God. Seth and his
Nephews (as Josephus writes) did invent the science of Astronomy, and the
knowledge of celestial things, and wrote them in two pillars, yt they so might
come to the knowledge of other after his death. He was like his father both in
face and countenance (as certain learned me^ do write.)

Cleophas. 3.
THis Cleophas was the brother of Joseph, who was betrothed to the virgin Mary
(as Egesippus writes) Cleophas signifies omne^ gloria^. Theophilactus
thincketh, that the other disciple was Luke him self, and he (as Gregorye and
Lire do declare) did suppres his name for humilities sake. Epiphanius says,
that he learned by tradition, yt Nathaniel should be the other disciple. Of
this diversity of judgments, two things are to be learned: first it is
without all fruit and profit to inuestigate and search that thing, which the
Scripture does concele from us: The other, that traditions are very uncertain,
and no safe credit to be given unto them.

Emaus. 4.
THis Emaus was the town where Cleophas dwelt (as S. Hierome writes) and is a
word of three sillables, declined Emaus, Emauntis, as Cerasus, Cerasuntis. But
Pliny and S. Hierom after him do decline it after ye second declension.
Josephus. lib. 14. cap. 18 says, that after the euersion of Jerusalem by the
Romans, it was called Nicopolis, a city of victory, for in that place the
Romans builded a city, as a monumente of their victory Tripert. lib. 6. cap.
24. and Emaus signifies Aurora^, the morning. It was 60. furlonges from
Jerusalem. Stadiu^, a furlong does contain.125. passes (as Pliny lib. 2.
cap. 23. does manifestly declare:) but note also, that every pase contains.v.
foot, and every foot iiii. palms, and every palm iiij. fingers breadth, and
so it was from Jerusalem.vij. miles and an half.

Enoch. 5.
THeophilacte upon the xxi. Chapter of John does say, yt although Enoch and
Helias be not dead, yet they be mortal: yea and although John be not dead, yet
he is mortal. S. Auste^ against the Pelagia^s speaks after this manner:
Neither Enoch nor He lie by so long time are worn and wasted with age, yet I
do not believe them to be changed into that spiritual quality of body which is
promised in ye resurrection which has gone before in the Lord: except
peradventure yt they do not lack these meats which do refresh by their
conversion and digestion, but since they were translated, do so live, yt they
have the like sacietie yt Helias had by the space of.xl. days by a cup of
water and a lofe of bread. Or if they have need of any such suste^tatio^,
peradventure they be fed in paradise as Ada^ was before he went out from thence
for sins sake. Again in his book Contra faustu^ Manicheu^, he says thus:
Quid de Helia factu^ sit nescimus: hoc de illo tame^ credimus, quod vera
scriptura testatur. Illud sane scimus, hoc de illo factum quod dei volu^tas
habet quod aute^ dei votas non habet, fieri de quoquo omnino no^ posse. That
is, what was done with Helias, we know not, yet this we believe of him that the
infallible Scripture does testify, and this we know, that, yt was done of him
which the will of God would have done with him, and so forth.

Chrysostom also writes after this manner: Vt Enoch tra^sferetur, causa fuit,
quod deo placuerat, vt autem placeret deo causa erat fides: nisi enim sciret
quia recepturus esset retributionem, quomodo placeret Deo? The cause why Enoch
should be translated, was for that he pleased god: and the cause why he pleased
God, was faith. For except he had known that he should have received a reward,
how should he have pleased God? And a little after he says: Multi autem
querunt quo translatus sit Enoch, and quare translatus sit, and quare non
fuerit mortuus, neque ipse, neque Helias? and si adhuc viuunt, quomodo viuunt,
and in quali habitu. Sed superuacaneum est ista requirere. Quia vero translatus
est iste, and quia sumptus est ille, scripturae dixerunt. Vbi autem sint, et
quomodo non addiderunt: nihil autem amplius quam quae necessaria sunt, dicunt.

Many do enquire whether Enoch was translated, and wherefore he was translated,
and why neither he nor Helias died. And if they live yet, how they live, and in
what habit and state. But it is superfluous and vain to enquire such things.
That this was translated, and the other assumpted, the scriptures have showed.
VVher they be, and how they be, the scriptures have not added. They say
nothing more, then those things which are necessary.

What shall I need to rehearse here, what saint Hierome, Tertulia^, Ciprian,
Cirillus, saint Ambrose, Ireneus, and others do write of the translation of
Enoch?

Chrysostom writing of the translation of Enoch, says after this manner. Iam
si quis curiosus rogare velit, and dicere quoipsum transtulit, and number vsque ad
presens vixerit, discat non conuenire humanis mentibus curiosius ea quae a deo
fiunt explorare, sed credere hiis quae dicuntur. etc.

If any man will ask curiously whether God has translated Enoch, and whether
he live unto this present time, let the same learn that it is not mete for
men's minds, curiously to enquire and search those things which are done of God,
but to believe those things which are spoken.

Theodoretus likewise writes after this sort: Sed neutiquam quere^dum est quo
loco translatus sit Enoch, quia scriptum no^ est. Quae autem scripta sunt, ea
colenda, eisque contenti esse debemus. Ideo autem translatus est, vt typum
nobis resurrectionis praeberet, and exemplum diuinae beneuolentiae ac
remunerationis erga pie viuentes, quos nouit dominus ab impiis segregare. That
is. It ought not to be enquired, to what place Enoch is translated, because it
is not written. And those things which be written, are to he reverenced and
received, and with them we ought to be content. He was therefore translated,
that he might give unto us a type and figure of the resurrection, and also an
example of Gods benevolence and favor toward the godly livers, whom the Lord
does know to separate from the wicked.

Certain of the Rabbines, and namely Auen Esra, does interpret this place.
Tulit eum deus, id est, mortuus est. That is, God took him away, that is to
say, he died, and that before the time, least the wickedness of the world should
change his heart. But the Latin men do write, that for his holiness he was
taken away and set in paradise, and that he shall come again to confound
Antichrist which they gather out of the xi. chap. of ye Apoca.

Iacobus Nada^tus, that wrote the works entitled, Scripturae medella, does
dissent from the opinion of the^ which say that Enoch and Helie, ar in the
paradise where Ada^ was, and he calls it an assertion potius famosa^ quam
co^pertam, rather commonly received then truly found out, his words be these.
Constat quidem quod viuunt, and certum est quod inter nos appare bunt ante
iudicium, sed de loco vbi fint, res non sine dubitatione est. Na^ licet legatur
de Enoch quod in Paradisum est translatus, quod locu^ plane exprimit
delitiosum, non tamen scriptu^ est quod ille in terra sit. etc. Et de Helia
legitur, quod est assumptus in caelum, at non dicit empireu^, vbi beatoru^
regio est. Quid ergo? crediderim hos indubie co^seruatos a deo, sed in caelo
terra venescius sum, omnia diuinae sunt possibilia maiestati, nec verendum vbi
vbi sunt, quod sine delitiis non sunt, ob id quod in Paradi so sunt. It is most
certain that they live, and is most sure that they shall appear among us
before the judgment. But of the place where they be, the matter is in doubt,
for although it be read of Enoch that he is translated into Paradise which
betokens a pleasant place, yet it is not written that he is in the earth.
And it is read of Helias that he was assumpted into heaven yet it is not said
into that heaven which is called Impirum, where is the region of the blessed
saints. What then? I believe that they are undoubtedly preserved of God, but
whither it be in heaven or in earth, I know not. All things are possible to
Gods majesty, nor it is to be feared that where soever they be, they be not
without pleasure because they be in Paradise which betokens a place of rest.

To make an end of this I will bring only one testimony more of the great
learned man master Calvin, who writing upon Genesis says of Enoch, after this
manner. Porro si queratur quorsum translatus fuerit Enoch, and qualis nunc sit
eius conditio, respondemus nunc priuilegio singulari, talem eius fuisse
transitum, qualis alioru^ hominum futurus erat. Et si enim ipsum exuere
oportuit quod corruptibile erat, exe^ptus tamen fuit a violenta separatione
qua^ natura refugit. In summa eiusmodi raptus placida fuit laetaque migratio ex
mundo: neque tamen in caeleste^ gloria^ receptus est, sed tantu^ praesentis
viiae misetiis solutus, donec veniet Christus resurge^tium primitiae. 1. Corinthians 15. cap. 23. Et quum vnu^ fuerit ex ecclesiae me^bris, expectare eum
necesse est donec prodeant omnia simul Christo obuiam, vt totum corpus capiti
vniatur. Si quis illud Apostoli obiiciat. Constitutum est omnibus semel mori.
Heb. 9.8 no^ semper diuortiu^ fit animae a corpore, sed mori dicuntur qui
corruptibile^ exuu^t naturu^, qualis erit mors eoru^ quos dies vltimus
superstites inueniet, de quibus disse erit. Paulus Apostolus. 1. Thessa. 4. d.
15. Moreover if it be demanded whether Enoch was translated, and what his
condition and state is now We answer that his going hence by a singular
privilege was such, as the state and going away of other men shall be: for
although it behooved him to put of that which was corruptible, yet he was exempt
from violent separation, from which nature does fly. In fine his taking away
was a pleasant and merry departing out of the world: Yet notwithstanding he
was not received into the celestial glory, but only loosed from the miseries
of this present life, until Christ should come, being the first fruits of
them that rise again.

And for as much as he was one of the members of the Church, it is necessary,
that he expecte and look, until al come forth to mete Christ, that the
whole body may be united to the head. If any man will object this saying of
the Apostle (it is appointed for men once to dye,) the solution is easy, that
death is not ever a separation of the soul from the body, but they are
coumpted to dye, which put of also the corruptible nature, as the death of
them shall be which shall be found alive at the last day, of whom Paul writes to
the Thessalonians.

Chrysostom writing upon Genesis, says thus of Enoch. Mark here (I pray
you) the virtue of a just man, the great goodness of God, and the diligence of
the Scripture. Farthermore Enoch lived.165. years and begatte Mathusalem. And,
Enoch walked with God, or Enoch pleased God, after he had begotten Mathusalem.
Let all men and women harken unto this, and let them learn the virtue of a
just man, neither let any man think, Marriage to be an occasion, why he
should not please God. For the holy Scripture for this cause says once or
twice: he begat Mathusalem, and then he pleased God. And it does double and
repete the same words again, saying: And he pleased God after he had
begotten: that no man might think, that Marriage is an obstacle or let unto
virtue and godliness. For if we be sobre, neither our education and brynging up,
neither matrimony nor any other thing, can hinder us from the pleasing of God.

For Enoch was of the same nature that we are of, neither was there any law as
yet written, neither did the Scriptures teach him this, neither was there any
thing else which might enforce him to embrace wisdom and honestye. It
sprange unto him at home, and it proceeded of his will that pleased God, that it
suffices him until this day, that he should not unto this time taste of
death.

For if that Marriage and the bringing up of children were an impediment in
the course of virtue, then God would not have brought it into the life of man,
to hurt us with a thing temporal and most necessary. But because it does not
only not let us to serve God (if we will live soberlie) but it brings also a
great consolation unto us, while it keeps down the unruly force of our
nature, nor does suffer it to be troubled and tossed like the sea, but causes
the boat happily to arrive unto the haven, therefore God gave Marriage as an
aid and comfort unto man. The which thing to be most true, that just man
declares. Because after that (says the Scripture) Enoch begat Mathusale^, he
pleased God.

Saba. 6.
SAba was the nephewe of Cham, Noes son, of whom part of Aethiopia took the
name to be called Saba. Saba also is the regal City from whence the Queen
came to Solomon, which Queen was princess and governor over great
kingdoms, yt is, Ethiope and Egypt. By her coming to see Salomo^, is
signified ye church of the gentiles, which should come unto Christ to he
members of his Church.

VVriters make mention of many, places which are called Saba. For there is one
region in Arabia Faelice, which is called Saba thurifera, by reason of the
wood growing there, which wood is an hundred pases of lenght, and fifty pases
of breadth, the trees of the same wood being cut in the beginning of the dog
days, do bring forth a certain froth thy humor, which being congeled does
fall down, or else cleaving to the bark, is taken of. There is also an other
Saba, which is a great port or haven of Aethiopia, of the which Strabo makes
mention in his.xvi. book.

Thirdly Saba is an old ancient City in that Island which the river Nilus
does compass about, and was called after, by Cambyses, Merae, after his
sisters name. The Queen of this Saba was she which came unto Solomon, who^
Christ in the Gospel does call the Queen of the South, because she reigned in
Aethiopia Australi, the south Ethiope.

And here may you learn that women did reign and did govern the Empire, and
that the inhabitants did obey them as the Assirians did obey Semiramis, and as
the Scithians were subject to the women named Amazones.

I shall not need to recite here Debora which was judge over Israel by ye
space of forty years, which thing I would that some would observe and note,
which are so straight against the regiment of women.

Tertulian. 7.
TErtulian was borne of a Centurian, which put him unto learning, even in his
tender age, and became most expert and conninge in all disciplines (as
Lactantius does testify.) He being converted to the Christian faith, did give
himself wholly to the study of the holy Scriptures, and worte many books, and
was the third man of the Church which wrote in the Latin tongue (as S.
Hierome writes) he lived under Seuerus the father, and Marcus Aurelius
Antonius his son. He lived until he came to a very great and old age, but
at the last he fell into many errors, and specially into the heresy of
Montanus, who named him self to be the holy Ghost, and became a Montanust. He
conde^neth the second Marriages, beside many other absurd and foolish errors.
What was the occasion or cause why he left Carthage, it is uncertain. S.
Hierome writes, that he was at Rome and remained there Priest unto his middle
age, yet was he driven from thence (as Saint Hierome does show) through the
enuies and contumelies of the clergy of Rome, and returned to Carthage, where
he wrote certain books against the Church Saint Cyprian when he minded to
read his works would say to his servants: Da mihi Magistrum, bring hither my
master.

Tertulian was wont to cause his auditors oftentimes to laugh with merry
conceytes and pretty nippes. Some write, he suffered martyrdom among the
martirs for Christ.

His style is very crabbed and hard, and must be read with much aduisement and
deliberation.

Arca. 8.
ABout the workmanship of the Ark of Noah, and the length of the cubits,
diverse write diuersely. But Origin Contra Celsum does say, after the
tradition of the Hebrews, that the cubite was not our usual cubite, which
does consiste of a foot and a half, but that Moses did mean the Geometrical
cubite which stands of six common cubits, and does make the length of nine
feet, so that the Arc was in lenght.20000. and.700. foot.

Lyranus upon this matter writteth after this sort: Some say, that these
cubits which are described in the buildyng of the Arc, were Geometrical.
But now there rises a doubt (says he) how this buildyng of so great length
and largenes could be joined together. Again he says, the Hebrews do write,
that they were usual cubits, but then (says he) rises an other doubt, how
so many beasts and so much provision for them, could be placed in so
straight a room. At the last he concluded, that the feet of that time were
much bygger and longer then they are now: and in deed Berosus writes in his
antiquities, that Noe was a Giaunt.

Appelles, Martianus his disciple does count this narration of the ship to be
but a Fable, but what cauillatio^s does not the wicked seek, to take
authority from the holy Scriptures?

Saint Austen in his.15. book De ciuitate dei, writes as follows. These
say, that the quantity of the Arc could not conteyne so many kinds of
beasts of both the sexes, two of the unclean, and seven of the clean. If we
do conceive that, which Origene does not unaptly asserte, that is, Moses the
man of God and very well learned in Geomotrie, to have signified the
Geometrical cubits, where as one is as big as six of our usual cubits.
Who then does not see, how much that great vessel could receive and hold?

Unto us which do confess and grant, that the residue of the world was
reserved and saved by an incredible miracle, it ought not to seem absurd, but
that there was declared in the buildyng of this Arc the incomprehensible
virtue and power of God. And therefore leauyng all manner of questions, you
ought to cleave only unto faith, and confess Gods extraordinary power.

Cataclisme. 9.
THe Philosophers make much mention of Cataclismus, for they imagine a certain
year called Annus magnus, or Annus Vertens which contains.12554. years the
winter of the same years is, say they, Cataclismus a general flood, the
so^mer is Ecpirolis, that is an exustion, or an ardent and burning heat.
Josephus calls the space of.1000. years Annus Magnus.

Some does say, that this flood came by a cause natural, and not by a
supernatural: for they affirm, that the conjunction of all the moist Planetes
in waterie signs, was the cause of this floude, and likewise they say, that
the conjunction of the hot Planetes in hot signs shall be the cause of burning
the world before the judgment. Although a particular flould in some part of
the earth, may have a natural cause, yet a general flould specially rising so
high, that it transcendeth the tops of all hills by the space of.15.
cubits, cannot come naturally. Therefore the Philosopher Secundo Metheororum
does write, that when one part of the earth which was before dry, is covered
with sea, an other part in an other region, where there was before a sea, is
discovered and made dry land: But that the whole earth should altogether be
covered with waters, seems to him impossible, and so much of other elements
cannot by any natural power be converted into water, to transmount the tops
of all hills, specially of such a great height. Therefore we must needs
confess, that this flood came supernaturally, and by the miraculous and mighty
power of God,

Esdras. 10.
ESdras was of the progeny and stock of Aaron, well learned in the laws of
God, and a noble master of the Judicial people, a ryghteous man, and of great
might and glory amongs the multitude which came from the bondage of Babylon
into Jury. Eusebius does record the praise of this Esdras, and specially of
his memory, for he could rehearse without stay or doubt all the books of the
old Testament, written before his time. And because they should not be mingled
with the Samaritanes tongue, he changed the Hebrew letters, and found, as some
say, the points called the vowels. The Jews wrote yt this Esdras should be
Malachi the Prophet (as Saint Hierome does rehearse In questionibus Hebraicis.)
This Esdras in the seventh year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, having an Epistle
from the king for his warrantise, went to Jerusalem and began there to restore
again the Jews their publicque weal. Thirtene years after that Nehenias
came from Babylon, by whose help Esdras builded again the walls of
Jerusalem, and read to the people the book of Moses law, he wrote four
books, but the third and the fourth are nombred among those books which
are called Apocryphi. The third does only repeat the two last Chapters of
Paralipomenon, recites also the whole first book which was written by Esdras
him self. The fourth book does contain a disputation why the church of God
was oppressed with so great calamity, and why the wicked does flourish,
prosper, and bear rule. To this question he answers, that judgment shall
follow, and the wicked shall receive pains, and the godly receive glory after
this life. This is the whole sum of the fourth book.

Babylon. 11.
THe Cosmographers do consent, that there were two Babylons, one in Assiria or
Caldea in the field Sinea, the chief City of the kingdom of the Caldeans, in
the which was the great palace of Nimroth. It is called Babylon a confusis
la^^is, because the toungs were first there confounded. It is distant from
Jerusalem toward the East, a great number of miles. In this City the
Monarchy of all the world began.13. years after the flood. This Empire was
translated to the Assirians: but in the time of Ezechia, when the host of
Senacherib king of the Assiria^s besieging Jerusalem, was slain by the aungel
of God, and Senacherib ye king him self murdered of his own sons, one Merodach
Baladan did enjoy the whole monarchy. After him succeeded ^e^nerodach, after
him Nabuchodonozor the first, after him Nabuchodonosor the great: which
vanquishing and ouerthrowyng Jerusalem, led the people of Judah captive into
Babylon, where they were retained seventy years. After him succeeded Balthazar,
who^ Darius and Cirus slew: and overthrowing Babylon, translated the monarchy
of ye whole world to the Persians. He that will read more of this Babylon, let
him read Iosephum, Saint Austen, Pliny, Strabo, with others. Strabo in his 16.
book does call it Selentiam.

The other Babylon is nigh unto Egypt in the costs of Arabia, which is called
in the Arabicall tongue Chayrum, and now is named Alayer, and is the seat of
the great Soulton. Certain writers judge, that Saint Peter wrote his first
Epistle from this City, where he says: Salutat vos ecclesia quae est in
Babylone. The Church that is at Babylon, saluteth you. But there is great
controversy among the learned, of which Babylon Peter here does speak. Many
of the old writers do think, that Rome figuratiuly, is signified by Babylon,
because that as Babylon does signify confusion, so Rome is called Babylon,
because there was the sincke and seat of all filthiness, a confusion of all
impiety and idolatry. The Papists take occasion of this gloss, that Peter
should seem to be Bishop and governor of the Roman Church, but of that I
shall declare more at large hereafter. But yet mark the perverse nature of the
Papists, who passes not for the infamy and reproach of the name, so it may be
lawful for them to have a pretense, to establish the title of the Romish see.
Yea they do not greatly regard Christ, so that Peter may be left unto them,
nay: I suppose, if they may retain and maintain the manner of Peter's chair,
they will not refuse to place it under the earth (I will not say in hell.) But
mark how they be contrary here one to an other. For some of the^ write, that
Mark the Euangeliste died at Alexandria, in the.8. year of the reign of
Nero, and that Peter was slain at Rome six years after, of the same Nero.
But if Mark had been a Bishop any long time of Alexandria, he could never have been at Rome with Peter. And where Eusebius and Hierome do write, that Peter
sat at Rome.25. years, that same is easily refelled out of the Epistle to the
Galathia^s. Therefore when Peter had Mark with him, as his companion and
waiting fellow, it is more probable that he was at Babylon when he wrote this
Epistle, and not at Rome. But (as Luther writes) upon the same Epistle Liberu^
facio cuilibet, vt quod sibivideatur de hac Babylone, censeat, perparum enim
refert quae Babylon illa fuit. I leave it free to every man, to think of this
Babylon, as it shall seem to him best, for it makes little skill which Babylon
it was.

Hebraei. 12
Diverse learned men do judge that the Jews were called Hebraei of one Heber,
who was Sems nephews son. But Oecolampadius and others expert in the Hebrew
tongue, do write, that Abraham was called first Hebraeus, of the Cananites and
Phenitians, because before he came to the^ he dwelled beyond the river
Euphrates in Mesopotamia, and from thence passinge over the flood, came unto
them (as though a man might say) vir trans Euphratem, a man dwellinge beyond
the river Euphrates, and therefore they called him Hebraeus, of this word
Aeber, which signifies commonly to pass over from place to place, by some
mean and middle to pass over, as by water, hills, valley, field or desert.
And therefore all the posteritye of Abraham were called Hebraei, not only of
the Cananites, but also of the Egyptians and other nations. For the
confirmation of which sentence, that makes much which is written in Iosue.4.
Ego tuli patrem vestrum Abraham trans flumen, et duxi illum per omnem terram
Canaan. I brought your father Abraham over the flood, and led him through all
the land of Canaan.

Concerning the difference between these two words Hebraeus and Iudeus there is
diversity of opinions. Erasmus, who doubtless followed others, does say, that
one is the name of religion, and the other of nation. Yet I think as touching
the original of these words, that Hebraeus is called of passing over ye flood,
and Iudeus took his name of Judah, ye Patriach Jacobs son: so that Hebraeus
does properly signify the nation or people of God. For Saint Paul the Apostle,
when he did glory partlye of the nobility of his kindred, partly of the
antiquity of his country, against the false Ap^^^^s does say: Hebraei sunt:
Sum et ego. Israelitae sunt: Sum et ego. They be Hebrews: I am also,. They be
Israelites, so am also I. They be the sedee of Abraham, and I also. As for this
name Iudaeus, he makes no mention of it, but does omit it as a name more
lately invented, and more base. When notwithstanding in many other places,
when he speaks of the same nation, and does make difference of it from other
countries, he makes mention of this word Iudaeus, calling that people Jews.
There is no mention of this in the old testament so frequent and so much, as in
the book of Hester. And thus may you perceive that the Jews were called
Hebraei, as passing over, which name was taken of Abraham, going over the flood
Euphrates, and not of Heber, which was Sems nephews son.

Origene. 13.
OF Origin it is commonly said: Vbi been, nemo melius: Vbi male, nemo peius.
Where he wrote well, no man better. Where he wrote ill, no man wurs. He in
his infancy being a sleep, his father Leonides came into the chamber, and
taking away the clothes softly, kyssed the childs breast, as a temple having
within it the holy Ghost, and gave thanks to god, who had given him such a
son. When his Father was put to death, Origin being but a young child, and
desirous of Martyrdom, ran among other that were led to be slain, and by all
means proffered himself to dye with the^. But his mother perceiving the matter,
in the night when he was a bed, stale away his clothes, so that he was
constrained to tarry at home.

He gelded him self, which was laid to his charge for a foul reproach: He
understood not the mening of Christ's saying in the gospel. Sunt eunuchi etc.
He was excellently learned and wrote many works, of the which certain are
rejected as heretical. Some do write (as Suidas and Epiphanius) that he gelded
not him self with iron, but with certain dry medicines, having power to
exicate and destroy venerial lust, which medicines he applied Locally unto his
privy parts. He had to his masters Clemens Alexandrinus, and one Amonius,
both a Philosopher and a Christian. After that he was made a Catechiste by
Demetrius, he forsook the study of Grammar: and perusing all his
Philosophical books, sold every one for an half penny a piece, and after did
dedicate and give him self wholly to the study of the holy scriptures, and wrote
many godly commentaries upon Gods word.

One Ambrosius a very rich and wealthye man, not only urged him to writing,
but also ministered unto him all his findinge and charges. and that his labor
should the more easily proceed, he gave him six notaries to write, and certain
young maidens excercised in writing, which wrote successively one after an
other, by the space of certain hours. Of this Ambrose Origene writes to one
of his friends after this manner. Sanctus dei and eruditus Ambrosius sepe me
compellauit, qui existimat me amicum esse and valde sitibundum diuinarum
litterarum, conuincit propria assiduirate and amorescilicet ad disciplinas.
Vnde adeo me vicit, vt periculosum esset repugnare ipsius propositionibus.
Neque enim edere licet, nisi priusquam conferam: neque post sumptum cibum licet
ob ambulare and corpusculum reficere, sed and eo tempore philosophari et
examinari cogimur, neque noctem tota^ ad corporis cura^ licet nobis dormire,
cum ipse cupiditate conferendi ad multam noctem detineat nos. Omitto vero
dicere quae matutino tempore, vsque ad nonam and decima^ horam fiunt. Omnes
enim qui volunt assidui esse, tempora illa ttibuunt inquisitioni diuinorum
oraculorum and lectionibus. That is to say. The learned and holy man of God
Ambrose, has oftentimes called upon me, which thinks me his friend, and very
thirstye of godly letters, does overcome me with his continual dilygence and
love unto learning. Whereupon he has so persuaded me, that it were dangerous
to resist his purpose. It is not lawful for me to eat, before I confer with
him: and after meat received, it is not lawful for me to walk and refreshe
my body, but that time also we are constrained to talk of wisdom, and to be
examined: nor it is lawful to sleep all night, to the good constitution of my
body, when he being desirous of conference, does deteine and hold me until it
be far in the night. I leave of here to show what things are done in the
morning, until nine or ten of the clock. For all they which will be
diligente, do give them selves that time to the seeking out of Gods oracles,
and to readinges.

Saint Hierome writes, that Origene wrote six thousand books, which he
testifies him self to have seen.

Suidas says, that after many torments and persecutions which Origene suffered
with a strong and a bold mind, he was brought unto an alter, where there was set
a most foul and filthy Aethiope, and that he should choose whither he would do
sacrifice to the idols, or else suffer his body to be defiled of that foul
Aethiope. But Origene, which ever had a philosophical mind, and did always
observe chastity, did signify, that he would rather do sacrifice, then suffer
such filthiness to be done to his body. Then the rulers putting insence into his
hand, he did move it unto the altar, and to the fire: for the which impiety,
he was after excommunicate of the church. And other do write, that after this
denial, he slyd from the grace of God, and so fell into strange opinions,
wherefore he was excommunicate out of the church. Which contumelye when he
could not suffer, he left Alexandria, and went into Iewry. And when he came to
Jerusalem, the Priests first desired him, and after constrained him, that he
would either preach or read in the church. The^ Origin rising (as though he
would have made some sermon) recited only these words of.49. psalm. Peccatori
vero dixit deus, vt quid tuannuntias iustificationes meas, and vsurpas
testamentum meum in ore tuo? That is to say: Unto the wicked said God: what
have thou to do, to declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth? And straight way he shut the book, and sat down with
tears and mourning (all the auditory weeping together with him.) What was
done of Origin after that, no writer makes mention

When he came to the age of seventy, or three score and nine years, (as
Nicephorus writes) he dyed as it seems, in great miserye and poverty, and (as
some doubt) in desperation, before the age of Hierom. 150. years Suidas and
Hierom do write, that he died at the City of Tyrus, and was also there buried.

Beda. 14.
BEda was an English man, and lived in the time of Justinian the second And for
the modesty of his life, and great labor in study, he was called venerabilis
Beda. He was also in the time of John the sixth, bishop of Rome. When the
Sarasens arrived out of Africa, to invade Spain, then Bid with his letters
solicited the Princes to recover it again. He was very well learned, both in
the Greek and the Latin, and wrote many works, and especially one notable work
De natura and temporibus, which is divided into three books. He traueled
throughout all the parts of the earth. For ye most part, and by the space of.29
years labored in preaching and writing. And being of the age of seventy and
two, died, Anno.734. he had two brethren, learned and very famous, whose names
were Strabo and Haymo, the one wrote certain learned homelies, and the other
wrote upon Genesis. But master Bale in his book De scriptoribus Britanniae,
does say, that he never went out of England. And if he had been in the time
of saint Austen, Hierom, Chrysostom, he might have been compared unto them,
both in learning and eloquence: he wrote above a hundred books, of which some
he fained in his name.

Judas. 15.
THis Jude was also called Lebbeus and Thaddeus, as it appears in the tenth
of Matthew, he is named also Judas Zelotes, for the great and virtuous zeal
that was in him (as saint Jerome in the 4. chapter of the Epistle to the
Galathians, writes) Saint Luke in his sixth chapter, calls him the brother of
James. Eusebius calls him Fratrem domini, the brother of the Lord. Epiphanius
writes, that Joseph had these four sons, James, Simon, Ioses, and Judas,
which as he says was the youngest son of Joseph. We have no other mention
in the holy scriptures of this Judas, saving in the.14. of John: he demanded
of Christ why he would show him self unto his disciples, and not unto the
world. To whom Christ answered: if any man love me, he will keep my word, and
my father will love hi^, and we will come unto him, and dwell with him.

After the resurrection of Christ he preached the Gospel first in Mesopotamia,
afterward in Ponto, and afterward went with his bother Simon into Persia, where
he was slain of the heathen priests.

Saint Hierom writes, that this Jude was sent to Abgarus the king to Edessa,
with the vernacle. He wrote one short epistle, which certain old fathers do not
count auctentical, but apochryphal. Cercain things are written in it out of the
last epistle of saint Peter. He alleges certain sentences as scripture,
which be not in the scriptures, as when Michael disputing with the devil, did
contend about the body of Moses. Also he brings a notable testimony of the
last judgment out of the sermons of Enoch.

Of the death of Jude we read no certainty, saving that Abdias Vincentius, and
other do write, that this Jude by the violence of the Bishops and Priests, was
slain in Persia.

Apocrypha. 16.
APocryphum betokneth in latin absconditum, in english hidden, of the word
(...) which does exaggerate the thing, and signifies to hide. And that kind
of scripture is called Apocryphal, whose original and beginning is not known,
and in the which although there be found some verity, yet for many things which
seems to be false, it has not the importance nor wayght of the Canonical
scriptures. What books be apocryphal, you shall find at the full in the
decrees, Distinct. 15. cap. Sancta Romana Ecclesia.

Gelasius, after that he had burned the books of the Manichies, because he
would separate the chafe from the come, does show what books are to be
received of the church, and how many are to be taken Apocryphi.

Some write that this word Apocryphum is compounded of this preposition (...),
which signifies in latin de, and (...), id est abscondo, celo, qua si
occultus, as you would say, conceled or kept close, because the author of that
book is not known. Others say, that it is said of (...), which signifies a
far of, and (...), which signifies judgment, as you would say far from
judgment, because there can be no certain judgment, either of the matter there
written, nor yet of the author of the book. But this etimology is far fette.

Menander Epimenides Aratus. 17.
MEnander was a poet that wrate commedies, he was Theophrastus scholar, he was
gogle eyed, and was very sharp of wit, but outrageous in the love of women. He
wrote 80. comedies, and one epistle to Ptolomie the king, and wrote also many
things in prose. Haec Suidas. Out of this Menander Paul alleges.1. Corint.
cap. 5. this saying: Mores bonos corrumpunt colloquia praua.

Epimenides.
Epimenides was a Poet, borne in Creta, who being sent of his father into the
field to keep cattle, did sleep in a certain den threescore and fiftene
years: whereof rises a proverb, Epimenidis somnum dormire, which may be
applied to sluggards, and such as do sleep night and day.

The same Epimenides said to the Athenians afflicted with pestilence, that the
city must be purged and cleansed: and when he came thither, being demanded how
it should be done, commanded white and black sheep to be offered in the
street called Areopagus, and when he was returning homeward, they offered unto
him money, but he refused it. Plato does make mention of this man in his first
and third book De legibus. Saint Paul, in his epistle to Tite, alleges this
man's saying of the Cretensians, although he name him not.

Aratus.
Aratus was an old Greek Poet, which wrate very exactly of Astrology (as
Cicero judges) whose work entitled Phenomena, Cicero being a very young man,
did translate, as he him self does write, in his second book De natura
deorum. Out of this Aratus Paul cited this text: Act. 17. Ipsius genus sumus,
which being spoken of Jupiter, Paul does apply it to the very true God.

Arator.
There was a christian Poet named Arator, who was deacon at Rome, and wrate the
acts of the Apostles in Hexametre verses (as Volateranus does note.)

Basilius Magnus. 18.
BAsilius Magnus had to his father a priest and a bishop (as Nazianzenus
writes) who was called Basilius also, a man of rare virtue, and notable piety
and godliness. He had five sons, whereof three were enhaunced to the office of
a Bishop.

Basilius was the hishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, Petrus was Bishop of
Sebasta, Gregory was bishop of Missa, they were three worthy men, very famous
and excellently learned.

Basilius had to his scholemaster his own father, who taught him the rudiments
of godliness, principles of grammar, and the discipline of good manners. When he
was a young man, he both did learn and also teach at Athens, and had to his
companions Gregory Nazianzene, and one Libanius. After that he had gone
through the chiefest churches in Grecia, and al Asia, he returned to Cesarea,
where, for a time he professed diuity. But when a certain strife and contention
was risen between him and Eusebius, the bishop of Cesarea, he departed from
thence unto Pontus, where he spent with his auditors. 14 years, in the study
of heavenly doctrine. But when the Arrians did invade the Churches with their
heresies, he was called back again to Cesarea, and after the death of
Eusebius, was chosen bishop, and had great conflicts, and very sharp
disputacions with the Arrians, whom the Emperor Valence maintained and
nourished: which Valence commanded Basile to leave his office, and to go into
exile, yet he would not obey, but being brought before the judgment seat of
the Emperor Valence, and his officers, and being much attempted to obey the
threatenings of the Emperor, stood stout and stiff against him. And when they
gave him a nights space, to deliberate with himself, Basilius answered: nay
(says be) I will not take that space, but take thou yt space, to desiste and
leave from thy naughty purpose. And in yt night the Emperor Valence wife was
taken in great dolor and pain, and also one of his young daughters died. Then
Valence sent to Basilius, that he would pray unto God, that he himself might
be preserved from danger and death. And so it came to pass that Basilius was
delivered. He that will read more of the life of Basilius, let him look in
Gregory Nazianzene his work, called Monodia, where is commended the
abstinence, the frugality, and the simple apparel of Basilius, who through
continual fastinges, watchinges, and lying on the ground, could not execute
his office as he ought to do. Which thing Erasmus in his book called
Concionator, lays to his reproach. Before he died, his voice was very vocal
and audible, where before he had a very slender and small voice. He dyed
meekely and peaceably, and when he had named his successor, and had spoken
these words of the prophet (Into thy hands Lord I commend my spirit) he gave
up the ghost, the year of Christ. 387.

Adam. 19.
ADam took his name of this word Adamah, which signifies red earth, for the
earth whereof the first man was made, was somewhat read, as it is in the East
part in many places, through the heat of the Sun.

There is a great controversy amongst learned men, whither Adam lost the
image of God after he sinned.

Epiphanius bishop of Salamine in Cypres, in his epistle to John bishop of
Jerusalem (which saint Hierome translated out of Greek into Latin) does say,
that Origin amongst his many other errors did affirm Adam to have lost the
image of God after his fall, when notwithstanding that cannot be found nor
proved in any place of the scriptures. For if it should be so, all things
which be in the world, could not serve mankind as they do (as saint James
does testify) saying: Omnia domantur and subiecta sunt humanae naturae. All
things are tamed and made subject to the nature of man. Now al things could
not be subject unto man, if he had not the image of God, by the which he might
rule al creatures. It is written in Genesis. cap. 5. Et vixit Adam centum
triginta annis, et cognouit Euam vxorem suam, and peperit ei filium iuxta
speciem and imaginem eius, and vocauit nomen eius Seth. Adam lived an hundred
and thirty years, and begat a child in his own likeness after his image, and
called his name Seth. Hec Epiphanius.

This place is of diverse diversely expounded. For some do understand the image
and similitude to be spoken of the shape and nature of man, which both Adam
after his kind did spread to his posterity coming of him: but in that sense,
beasts also after their kinds do beget, conceive, and multiply their kind
like to them selves,

Others do judge, that Moses spoke not of the image and similitude of the body,
but rather of the mind. And they likewise dissent among them selves: for some
understand it of the image and similitude of godliness and righteousness, which
yet was left in Adam.

Others do expound it of the privation of original justice and corruption of
the mind, both which Adam by his disobedience did purchase unto him and his
posteritye.

Others do refer this image and similitude of Ada^ (like to the which Seth was
born) to those things which were then found in Adam, when he begat Seth for Adam
was endewed with reason, he was made in dignity Lord of the earth, he was also
subject unto corruption, sin, many calamites, and unto death. Chrysostom
says: Neque de corporalibus picturis et characteribus scriptura nobis
disserens hoc dicit, secundum speciem suam, and secundum imaginem suam, sed de
statu animae. Ideo matter nomine imposito filio cum gratiarum action hoc nomen
indidit, and neque naturae, neque partui ascripsit natum puerum, seddei virtuti.

Neither the scriptures disputing here of corporal pictures and figures does
say this (after his similitude and likeness) but it speaks of the state of the
soul. Therefore, the mother putting a name unto her son, gave this name with
thanks giving, and did ascribe the birth of her child, not to nature, but to
the virtue and power of God.

Epiphanius also alleges David, writing in his 38 psalm. Veruntame^ in
imagine perambulat omnis homo, but every man does walk in his image But this
text in my judgment has an other sense, and is otherwise red in the Hebrew
tongue. The hebrew word is Zel, which signifies properly Vmbram, a shadow. And
the sense of these wodes, In imagine perambulat omnis homo, is no more but
this: doubtless man walks in a shadow and disquieteth him self in vain: by
which words he confesses the life of man to be not only short and vain, but
to be also miserable and full of cares. In the name of a shadow, David
understands nothing to be firm and sure in man's life, but a certain vain
appearance of things. Some do read In tenebris ambulat homo. The Grecians and
the Latins do read, In imagine. And I am not ignorant, that saint Austen does
read In imagine and does take imaginem here for the image of God. His words be
these. In qua imagine, nisi illius qui dixit: faciamus hominem ad imaginem and
similitudinem nostram. Cassiodorus also is of that same mind. Hec parerga. To
our purpose again.

If Origin take image to signify substance, he is in a manifest error, for if
natural things did remainful and whole, as Dionisius testifies, in the devils,
whose sin was a great deal more grievous the^ the offense of Adam, they
should much more remain in the first man. Over and besides, if some should
withdraw any thing from nature, then sins growing upon sins, should at
the last consume and waste away the whole nature of the soul.

Victorinus, of whom saint Hierom learned Rhethoricke, in his disputacion
against Arrius, writes thus: Aliud est iuxta imaginem quod quidem substantia
est, aliud iuxta similitudinem esse, quod non est substantia, sed in substantia
nomen qualitatis declaratiuum. etc.

It is one thing to be after the image which is a substance, and it is an
other thing to be after the similitude which is not a substance, but a name of
quality declared in the substance. And a little after he says: the soul
therefore is perfect after the image now in this world, but after the similitude
it shall be perfect afterward in God, and in Jesus Christ it shall be such as it
should have been if Adam had not offended. Therefore as perteining to reason, now
it is perfect after the image: but as concerning perfection to come, it is
perfect after the similitude. Hec Victorinus.

Out of the which words it does evidently appear, that the image does greatly
differ from the similitude, but not the image nor the soul being sinful,
does cease to be the image of God, but it cannot attain to the similitude of
God, unless it be holy. But observe thou, that the holy scripture does not
always take image after that signification, but sometimes in the place and stead
of the similitude, so that it does signify the purity of the mind by faith in
Christ (as Paul writes to the Colossians:) Expol^antes vos veterem hominem
cum actibus suis, and induentes nouum qui renouatur in agnitionem secundum
imaginem eius qui creauit eum. Putting of the old man with his works, and
putting on the new, which is renewed in the knowledge of him, after the image of
him that created him. By the which place it is most evident, that Paul made a
difference of the old man from the new, so that the old man which pertains
to sin, has not the image of God, because he lacks goodness: the new man
which pertayneth unto grace recovered by Christ, does bear the image of God.

Saint Austen contra Adimantum, one of Manichies Disciples, writes thus:
Admonet apostolus, vt exuti consuetudine peccatorum, id est v^^er^ homine,
induamur noua vita Christi. etc. The Apostle does admonish, that we laying
aside the custom of sin, that is the old man: put on the new life of
Christ, which he calls the new man. And that he mi^ht teach us, that he lost
it sometimes, he calls it a running. It is to b^ coniectured, that Augustine
meant us to have only lost the perfection of that Image, and not the image it
self: which being cast into foul filthiness, and tombled in the miery
puddle of pleasures, yet it cease not to be the image, although the brightness
and fairnes thereof be obscured, darkened, and covered with the drags of sin.
For Austen him self writes in his retractations, lib. 1. cap. 26. after this
manner. When I did expound in my work of.83. questions, in the.67. question
this piece of scripture: Romans 8
Et ipsa creatura liberabitur a seruitute interitus. etc And the creature it
self shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption: I said, that the
creature it self (that is man him self) with the figure of the image lost
through sin, remained only a creature, which is not so to be taken, as
though man had lost the whole and every part of the image of God. For if he had
throughlye lost it, there had been no cause to have been said, be ye renewed in
the newnes of your mind, and changed into that image. Again, if he had lost
al, nothing had remained. And why should it be said of David, quanquam in
imagine ambulet homo, ta men vary conturbatur. Psalm. 38


Again in lib. De Genesi, contra Manichaeos, he says: Aliquando solent
dicere, quomodo accepit homo potestatem piscium maris, and volatilium caeli and
omnium pecudum, et ferarum, cum videamus a multis feris homines occidi, and a
multis volatilibus nobis noceri, quae volumus vel vitare vel capere, et
plerunque non posse? etc.

They are wont sometimes to say, how has man taken the power and government of
the fishes of the sea, and the birds of the air, of al cattle and wild
beasts, when we see men to be slain of many wild beasts, and our selves to
be hurt of many fliyng fowls, which we would either eschew or take, and for
the most part cannot? How therefore have we taken power over them? Here we must
first say unto them, that they do greatly err, which do not consider man
after his fall, when he was condemned into mortality of this life, and lost
that perfection, in the which he was made after the image of God. But if this
government and rule do so much prevail, that he does rule many beasts (for
although he may be destroyed of many beasts, through the frailnes of ye body)
yet he can be tamed of none of them, foramuch as he himself does tame many
beasts, yea almost all. If therefore this government of man do in this so much
prevail, what may we think of his kingdom, which by the voice of God is
promised unto him, being renewed and delivered from sin? Hec Augustinus.

Ambrose expounding that place of Paul to the Colossians, does say, this image
to be understand in the conversation of good life (as Paul says to the
Corinthians) Quem admodum portauimus imaginem eius qui de terra est, 1. Cor, 1^.
ita et portemus imaginem illius qui de caelo est. As we have borne the image
of him which is of the earth, so let us bear the image of him which is from
heaven. He therefore is the creator of man, whose image he does command us to
bear in holiness and good works, which does descend and come of the knowledge
of the son of God. Haec Ambrosius. But we may guess, that Ambrose did take
the image, for the excellence and perfection of the image.

Question.
But what is the image of god? and what is me^t by the similitude of god?

Responsio.
Chrysostom upon Genesis writes: Neque enim cum dixit, faciamus hominem
secundum imaginem nostram, and secundum similitudine^: hic sermonem finiuit,
sed per ea quae adiungit, manifestum nobis facit, quo sensu nomen imaginis
posuerit. Quid enim dicit? and dominetur piscibus maris and volatilibus caeli
et omnibus reptilibus super terram. Imaginem dixit ergo de principatu and
dominio, no^ de aliquo alio, quia deus fecit hominem principem omnium quae sunt
super terram, et nihil super terram homine maius est, et omnia sub potestate
illius sunt. Hec Chrisostomus. Neither when he said (Let us make man after our
image and similitude) he does here finish the word and sentence, but by those
words which he does adioyn, he does show manifestly, in what sense he puts
the name of the image. For what does he say? and let him be lord over the
fishes of the sea, and the birds of the air, and al creeping things upon the
earth. Therefore he shows and means the image of the government and
lordship, and of no other thing, because God made man prince of al things which
be upon the earth, and nothing upon the earth is mightier then man, and al
things are under his power and rule.

But saint Austen in his treaty upon the Epistle of Saint John does show, the
image and similitude of God to consist and stand in the understanding and in
the inward man: where when he had showed the natural power of man upon those
things that be on the earth, because man was made after the image of God, he
adds this interrogation.

Vbi autem factus est ad imaginem dei? in intellectu (inquit) in mente, in
interiori homine, in eo qui intelligit veritatem, diiudicat iustitiam et in
iustitiam, nouit a quo factus est, potest intelligere creatorem suum, laudare
creatorem suum, etc. Where was he made after the image of god? in
understanding, in mind, in the inward man, in that he understands the truth,
and does discern between righteousness and vnrigbteousnes, he knows of whom
he was made, he can understand his creator, he ca^ praise his creator, he has
the intelligence of wisdom.

Therefore many, when by ill desires and lusts they did fear away the image
of God from the^, and did in a manner by the untowardness of manners extinguish
and put out the very flame of intelligence, the scripture cries out unto them:
do you not become horse and Mule, to whom there is no understanding, that is to
say: I have set thee before horse and mule, I have made thee after mine image,
I have given thee power over these. Wherefore, because the beasts have no
reasonable minds, but thou by thy reasonable mind, do perceive the truth,
thou understand yt which is above thee, and those things shall be underneath
thee, over whom thou art set Lord and Ruler. And because through sin man
forsook God, under whom he ought to be, he was made subject unto them, above
whom he ought to be. Thus far saint Austen, who calls sometimes the image
and similitude of God, the virtue and power of reasonable understanding.

He does also refer the same unto memory, mind, and will, which being three
faculties of the soul, do represent (as he says) three persons in one
substance of Godhead, but this is not the perfection of the image of God. For
memory, mind, and will, are not sufficient to that end, except we understand,
remember, and will those things which please God. For the image of God is the
new man, which understands Gods truth, and is desirous of his righteousness,
(as Paul does expressly teach in the Epistle to the Ephesians. Ephe. 4
Induite nouum hominem, qui secu^dum deum creatus est in iustitia et sanctitate
veritatis. Put on the new man which is created after God in righteousness and
true holiness) When our mind both has the knowledge of God, and is beautified
with righteousness and the knowledge of godly things. And it is nothing else but
a certain flowing of Gods nature, into our minds.

The scholemen do make a distinction between these two, that is to be Imago
dei, and ad imaginem dei, to be the image of God, and after the image of God.
For to be the image of God, is to present God himself perfectly, which
appertains to none, but to the only son of god. Therefore Paul speakinge to
the Hebrews does write, that he is the brightness of his glory, and the
ingraued form of his person.

To be after the image of god, is to participate some part of the perfection of
God: Christ therefore the son of god is the natural image of god ye father,
man is after the image of god.

Exemplum.
The image of a king is one thing in his natural son, and an other thing in
his coin. Man therefore is after the image God, quoad naturalia, concerning
natural things, as understanding, memory, and will, but after the similitude of
God concerning grace. Therefore great dignity is given to man, that he is both
after the image, and also after the similitude of God. Saint Clement in his
epistle Ad Iacobum fratrem domini, does say: Quod in omni homine est imago dei,
sed non in omnibus similitudo, sed vbi est men's pura, and anima benigna. In
every man, is the image of god, but not in all is the similitude of God, but
where there is a pure mind and a good soul.

Contra Antropomorphitas.
There was a certain sect of heretics called Antropomorphitae, who affirmed,
that God had a body and members as a man has, who ground their error falsely
upon this text. Faciamus hominem ad imagine^ and simitudinem nostram. Let us
make man after our image and similitude. But against this heresy, not only
holy scripturs, but also the ancient fathers do most godly and substantially
resist and fight.

Chrysostom has these words. Iterum hic insurgunt and pullula^t heretici
alii ecclesiae dogmata de populantes and dicentes: Ecce dicit secundu^ imaginem
nostram. Et inde volunt, deo humanam formam tribuere, id quod extremi fuerit
stuporis, vt is qui forma specieque caret, and nulli alterationi obnoxious est,
sub humana^ redigatur formam, and incorporeo me^bra and lineamenta attribuantur.

Here rises again and springs up other kind of heretics, destroying and
spoiling the doctrine of the Church, and saying: Behold he says after our
image. Upon this they would give unto God the shape of man, which were extreme
madness and foolishnes: that he which lacks ye form and shape of man, and who
also is subject to no alteration, should be driven under man's shape, and the
proportion and members of a corporal body, should be ascribed unto him that is
incorporall.

S. Austen in his book De fide and Simbolo, Credimus (inquit) quod sedet ad
dextera^ dei patris, nec ideo quasi humana forma circu^ scriptum esse deum
patrem arbitrandum est. Vt de illo cogitantibus dexteru^ aut sinistru^ latus
animo occurrat, aut id ipsum quod sedere pater dicitur flexis poplitibus fieri
puta^du^ est: ne in illud incidamus sacrilegium, quo execratur Apostolus eos,
qui commutauerunt gloria^ incorruptibilis dei in similitudinem corruptibilis
hominis. Tale enim simulachru^ deo ne fas est, Christiano in Templo collocare.
We believe says he, that he sits at the right hand of God the father,
neither yet therefore we must judge or think God the father to be compassed
about with the shape of man, that when we think of him, either right side or
left side, should enter into our mind, or for that he is said to sit, we
should think that to be done with the bowing of hammes and knees, least we
fall into that sacrilege wherewith Paul curses them, which change the glory
of the incorruptible God, into the similitude and lykenes of a corruptible man,
for to place such an image unto God in a Christian Church, is most wicked and
ungodly.

There be three questions concerning Adam, which are proposed of learned men, to
the which I will now answer by the censure and judgment both of the
ancient doctors, and also scholemen.

Question prima.
VVhither Adam was not disceiued (as Saint Paul writes) and whither he sinned
in pride and idolatry, Also whither he sinned more grievously then Eve?

Question secunda.
VVhither Adam did foreknow his fault, although he had the knowledge of good
and evil, before he did eat of the tree forbidden?

Question tertia.
Where Adam was buried, whither in Hebron, or else in Golgotha?

Responsio ad primam questionem. An answer to the first question.
Saint Paul writes to Timothy, Adam non est seductus, mulier autem seducta,
in praeuaricatione fuit. Ada^ was not disceiued, but the woman was disceiued,
and was in the transgression.

Which place Chrysostom expounding, does say. Quonam vero modo Adam non est
seductus? Ergo neque inobediens fuit siquidem seductus non est. Nempe mulier
quidem crime^ excusans, ait, Serpens decepit me. Adam vero non ait, mulier
decepit me, sed dedit mihi de ligno, and comedi. Par autem profecto no^ est, ab
ea quae generis sibi societate iungeretur, decipi, and a bestia quae seruituti
hominis fuisset addicta. Illud seductio potius ac verius dici potest. Ad
comparationem ergo mulieris dicit, illum non fuisse seductum. Illa quippe ab
irrationali animante decepta est, hic autem a libera muliere and sibi naturae
copulata ratione. Rursum non dicitur de Adam, vidit lignum quia bonum ad
comedendum est: sed de muliere tantu^ modo. Comedit enim (inquit) and dedit
viro suo. Non igitur concupiscentiae caedens, sed obtemperans mulieri,
praeuaricatus est,

How was Adam disceiued? he was not disobedient if he were not disceiued. For
the woman excusing here fault, said. The Serpent has disceiued me. But Adam
did not say, the woman has disceiued me, but said she gave me of the tree, and
I did eat And truly it is not like, nor is one thing to be disceiued of her
which was joined unto him in fellowship of ye same kind, and to be disceiued of
a beast, which was appointed to the service of man, therefore the other may the
better and more truly be called a disceiuing. Wherefore in comparison of the
woman Paul says, Adam not to have been disceiued, for she was disceiued of an
unreasonable beast, and he of a free woman, which was coupled unto him with
natural reason. Again it is not said of Adam, he saw the tree that it is good
to eat, but only of ye woman, for she did eat and gave to her husband.
Therefore he gave not place unto concupiscence and lust, but yelding to the
woman, did transgress.

Saint Austen does not dissent from Chrysostom: for he expounding in his book
De ciuitate dei, how Ada^ was not disceiued, and in what things he was
disceiued, does write after this manner: Credendum est (inquit) illum viru^ suae
foeminae, vni vnu^ homine^ homini, coniuge^ coniugi, ad dei legem
transgrediendam, non tanqua^ verum loquenti credidisse, seductu^, sed sociali
necessitudini paruisse: Non enim frustra dixit Apostolus, Ada^ non est
seductus, mulier autem seducta est: nisi quia illa, quod ei serpens loquntus
est, tanqua^ verum esset, accepit: ille autem noluit ab vnico consortio dirimi,
nec in communione peccati: nec ideo minus reus, si sciens prudensque peccauit.
Vnde and Apostolus non ait, non peccauit, sed non est seductus, nam vtique
ipsum ostendit peccasse, vbi dicit, per vnum homine^ intrauit peccatum in
mundum. Et Paulo post apertius: in similitudinem (inquit) praeuaricationis
Adae. Hos autem seductos intelligi voluit, quod id quod faciunt non putant esse
peccatum, ille autem sciuit, Alioqui quo modo verum erit, Adam non est
seductus, sed inexpertus diuinae seueritatis in eo falli potuit, vt veniale
crederet esse commissum, ac per hoc in eo quidem quo mulier seducta est, non
est ille seductus.

We must believe that Adam being man, to his woman one to one, man to man,
husband to wife, not believing the woman as speaking the truth, to have been
disceiued in the transgression of the law of God, but only to have given place
to familiar fellowship and friendship. For the Apostle said not in vain. Adam
was not disceiued: but the woman was disceiued, sauinge that she took it to
be true that the Serpente spoke unto her, and Adam would not be separate from
one fellowship, no not in participation of sin. Yet therefore he was not the
less guilty, if knowing and wittingly he offended, whereof the Apostle does not
say, he did not sin, but he was not disceiued. For he shows plainly him to
have sinned, where he says: by one man sin entered into ye world, and a little
after more playn-plainely he says: in the similitude of the transgressio^ of
Adam. And he would have them to be understand disceiued, which think not yt
thing to be sin, which they do. But he knew, or else how should this be
true, Adam was not disceiued. But having no experience of Gods severity,
might be disceiued in this, that he believed his fault to be pardonable, and so
by this he was not disceiued in that thing or point, in the which the woman was
disceiued.

Again in his book, De Genesi ad literam expounding this matter more plainly,
says: Sicut Solomon vir summae sapientiae in simulachrorum cultu no^ credidit
aliquid esse vtilitatis, sed mulierum amori ad hoc malum trahenti resistere non
valuit, faciens quod sciebat non esse faciendu^, ne suas quibus depirebat atque
diffluebat mortiferas delitias, contristaret. Ita and Adam. etc.

As Solomon a man of excellent wisdom, did not believe any profit to be in
the worshipping of idols, but was not able to resist and withstand the love of
women, drawing and alluring him to this mischief, (doing that which he knew
ought not to be done,) least he should make sad and heavy his deadly
pleasures, wherewith he doted and was drowned: Even so Adam, after the woman
being disceiued, had eaten of the tree forbidden, and gave to him that they
should eat together, he would not make her sad, whom he believed might have
pined away without his comfort, if he should have been contrary to her mind,
and so utterly to have perished in that discord.

He was not overcome with the concupiscence of her flesh, which he yet felt
not, nor the law of his members resistyng the law of his mind: but was
overcome with a certain friendly benevolence and good will, by the which
sometime it is brought to pass that God is offended, least the man should be
made of a friend, an enemy. Which thing that he ought not to have done, the
just end of Gods sentence does declare and show, therefore he was not
disceiued after an other certain manner. But I judge and suppose, that he
could be disceiued no manner of ways by the subtlety of the Serpente, by the
which the woman was disceyued.

The Apostle does call properly this to be a disceyuing, by the which that
thing which was persuaded, was thought to be true, when it was false: that is
to say, to think, that God did therefore forbid to touch that tree,
because he knew them to be as Gods, if they had touched it, as though he did
envy the divinity and Godhead unto them, who had made them men. But if any
desire to have experiment, forasmuch as he saw the woman not to have been dead,
after the fruit, received, did solicit the man through any pride or
arrogancy of mind, which cannot be conceled from God the searcher of all
secrets: yet I suppose him, if he were then indewed with a spiritual mind,
could by no means believe, that God enuiyng them, did forbid them from the
fruit of that tree, but that sin was persuaded, as it might be persuaded to
such. Hitherto Saint Austen.

Concerning the pride of Adam, Saint Austen in his book De ciuitate dei,
writes after this manner. Non ad malum opus perueniretur nisi precessisset mala
voluntas. Porro malae voluntatis initium quod potuit esse nisi superbia.
Initium enim omnis peccati superbia est. etc.

There could not be a coming to an ill work, except there had gone before an
ill will. Furthermore what could be the beginning of an ill will, but pride?
for pride is the beginnynge of all sin. And what is pride, but the ambitious
desire of perverse loftynesse? For perverse loftynesse is in forsaking that
beginning, to the which the mind should cleave and stick, to be as it were a
beginning unto him self, and this is done, when one does overmuch please him
self, and so truly he does please him self, when he does swerve and depart
from that immutable goodness, which ought more to have pleased him, then he him
self. Again, in an other place Austen writes: She said, the Serpent
disceyued me, and I did eat. And he said: the woman which thou gave me, gave
me of the tree, and I did eat. But here sounds in no place the petition of
Pardon, the calling for forgiveness. For although these do not deny that which
they committed, as Cain did, yet notwithstanding pride does seek to refer and
cast it upon other, which one has done naughtily him self. The pride of the
woman upon the Serpent, the pride of the man upon the woman: but it is an
accusation, rather then a true excuse, where there is an open transgression of
Gods commandment.

Concerning the idolatry of Adam, the same Austen likewise writes at full In
questionibus ex nouo Testamento. And thou may perceive, that he is not only
an Idolater which does worship and adore an idol in the stead of God, but
also does desire equality with God by a most impudent arrogancy.

That Adam sinned more grievously then Eve, after a certain manner, many
doctors and learned fathers do defend and define.

Saint Ambrose De institutione virginis, writes after this sort. Mulier
excusationem habet in peccato, vir non habet. Illa vt scriptura asserit a
sapientissimo omnium Serpente decepta est, tu a muliere, id est, illa^ superior
creatura decepit, te inferior. Te enim mulier decepit, Illam angelus, licet
malus. Si tu inferiori non potuisti resistere, quomodo illa potuit superori,
culpa tua illam absoluit. The woman has excuse in her sin, the man has not:
she (as the Scripture affirms) was disceiued of the Serpent the wisest of all
beasts, thou of a woman, that is, the higher creature disceiued her, and the
inferior, thee: but an angel (although ill) disceiued her. If thou could
not resist the inferior, how could she resist the superior? thy fault does
acquit her. Hitherto Saint Ambrose. But yet think not here, that S. Ambrose
meant, that the fault of Adam does utterly take away the fault of Eve, as though
she sinned not at all. But peradventure he meant, that the offense of Adam did
somewhat mitigate the fault of Eve.

The master of the sentence in his second book does say, that Eve to speak
Simpliciter, did more offend, then Ada^, because she would usurp equality
with the Godhead: and being pufte up with to much presumption, believed that it
should so come to pass. But Adam did not believe it, but thought of repentance
and of the mercy of God, when he giving place to his wife, did consent to her
persuasion, not willing to make her sad, and to leave her as one forsaken of
him, lest she should pine through heaviness, and so perish.

Also Saint Ambrose which seems to persuade that Adam offended more grievously
then Eve, writes in his book De paradiso: Adam no^ sua culpa, sed vxoris vitio
lapsum esse. That Adam did not fall by his own offense, but by the fault of his
wife. Yet Ambrose means not by these words that Adam did not offend at all
with his own sin, for if he would, he need not to have given place to his
wife.

But S. Austen in his book De ciuitate dei, does exaggerate the fall of Adam,
saying, that Eve took it to be true, that the Serpent spoke to her, nor
thought it to be sin yt she did. But Adam did not believe it to be true,
which the pernicious enemy did subtilie suggest, and he knew it to be sin
that he did, and wittingly and willingly sinned, and so after a certain manner,
offended more grievously then Eve, but yet not Simpliciter, as the scholemen
hold.

Responsio ad secundam questionem.
That Adam did not foreknowe his fall, although he had the knowledge of good
and evil, before he eat of the tree forbidden, S. Austen does discourse and
defend in his.xi. book upon Genesis, whose words be these: Si praescius
fuisset sui peccati vindictaeque diuinae, quonam pacto beatus esse poterit in
paradiso? and sic in paradiso fuisset non beatus. Imo vt coniicio miser
apprehendendo non infimam in quam inciderit ruinam, and qua a paradisi
voluptatibus and delitiis exularet, nec solu^ a paradiso verum etia^ a gratia
diuina, quod non exiguum est homini detrimentum. If he had the fore knowledge
of his sin, and of the reuengeme^t of god, how could he be blessed in
paradise? For so in paradise he had been not blessed. Yea (as I conjecture) a
miser and wretched in apprehendyng and co^ceiuing that, no small ruin, into
the which he should fall, and by the which he should be banished from the
pleasures and pleasauntnes of Paradise, and not only from Paradise, but from
Gods grace which is no small detriment to man.

Obiectio.
But some men will say: if he foreknew not his fall, but were thereof
uncertain, then was he also uncertain of eternal felicity to come: which
if it so fall out, how then was he either blessed or spiritual? and how
believed he with certain and sure hope, that he should obtain everlasting
blessedness?

Responsio.
This argument is nothing worth. For the certainty (at the least, the moral
certainty, although not the certainty of the evidence of blessedness to come)
and the knowledge thereof, should nothing have withdrawn from the blessedness,
(at the least natural) of Adam being in the state of innocence: yea it should
rather have increased and made it clear and well known: but the foreknowing of
his fall, and of his misery to come, had extinguished his blessedness not the
perpetual blessedness, but the natural, or at the least should much have
obscured it.

It may be said also, that he was uncertain of his eternal blessedness to
come, so that, that incertainty be contrary to the certainty of evidence, and
so the angel being created blessed, was uncertain of his eternal felicity
to come. And although Ada^ had not the foreknowledge of his fall, it does not
therefore follow, yt he was not spiritual and blessed. For they had not the
foreknowledge of the^, unto who^ the Apostle speaks, writing to the
Galathia^s: Vos qui spirituales estis, you that be spiritual, restore such in
the spirit of mekenes, considering thy self, least thou also be tempted. Here
may we call the^ not unaptly blessed, because they were spiritual, not in body
but in righteousness of faith, rejoicing in hope, and patient of trouble.

The scholeme^, to prove that Adam neither was nor could be forekowing of his
fall, reason after this manner: the ill yt is foreknowne and foresene either it
pleases the will, or not. If it please, then there is fault in it, but it
cannot be, that any fault of man should go before the first fault of Ada^. If
it do not please, then there is pain in it, which is not to be granted, for
the pain does never go before the fault.

That Adam had the knowledge of good and evil before he did eat of the tree
forbidden, Chrysostom upon Genesis does say this. Merito quis rogauerit, quam
virtute^ habuerit hoc lignum cuius esus illoru^ oculos aperuerit, and quare
lignu^ scientiae boni and mali vocetur, neque enim esus ex eo ligno oculos
illorum aperuit, nam and ante esum videbant. etc.

One may with good cause ask, what virtue this tree had, the eating whereof did
open their eyes, and why it is called the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil. For not ye eating of ye tree opened their eyes, for they saw before the
eating, but because the taste was an argument of disobedience, and a
tra^sgressing of the commandment given of God, for the which cause glory was
afterward also taken away, which did compass the^, because they had made them
selves unworthy of such honor, the Scripture observing her manner and phrase
does say, they did eat, and both their eyes were opened, and they knew they
were naked, naked through sin, naked of ye clothes of ye supernall grace, and
they felt sensibly ye spoliatio^ thereof, that through shamfastnes which came
upon the^, they should certai^ly know into what peril and danger ye
tra^sgressio^ of ye lords commandment had brought the^. etc.

But a little after, Chrysostom writes in the same place, saying: Sunt
contentiosi multi qui dicere audent, quod post esum ligni, scientia^ habuerit
Adam ad discernendum bonum and malum, non autem antea, id quod extremae fuerit
amentiae.

There be many contentious persons which dare say, yt after the eating of the
fruit of the tree, Adam had knowledge to discern good and il, and not before.
which thing were an extreme madness.

For he that gave names unto al beasts, and which obtained yt marvelous grace
of Prophecy, which he pronounced of the woman, how could he be ignorant what
was good and was what il? Again, if we grant it, we shall bring blasphemies
against our creator, for how should he give co^maundment to an ignorant
person, that transgression was ill, but it is not so (God forbid) but Adam knew
clearly, for that cause he made him in the beginning to be of a free will,
which if it had not been, neither ought he to be punished when he had
transgressed the commandment, neither to have been rewarded if he had
observed it, for he was made mortal through transgression, as it appears by
this commandment, and those things which follow, but before he was immortal.
Who therefore ca^ suffer or abide that man should first receive the knowledge
of good and evil after the eating of the tree, which man before was full of so
great wisdom and obtained with knowledge also Prophetical grace? And how ca^
this be consonant to reason, that he should know the natures of goats, sheep
and all other brute beasts, and what herb should be wholesome and profitable
for meat, and which unwholesome, to seek one and avoid the other, and he him
self being a reasonable beast, not to know what is good and what is ill? But
behold says the Scripture, god calls this tree, the tree of knowledge of
good and evil. I am not ignorant of it, but if thou will learn the
properties of the holy Scriptures, thou shall know wherefore he gives this name
to this tree.

It was not so called because it gave knowledge unto man of ill, but because by
it the transgression of the commandment was done, and so through that entered
afterward knowledge of ill and shamefastnes, and therefore was it so called.

The scholemen and other later writers do say it was called the tree of
knowledge of good and evil Ab eue^tu, that is, of that which followed the
eating thereof, for although man did know before Speculatiue, what was il, yet
he did not know it practice, by experience.

As for example, A Physician being in good health does know diseases only be
speculation, but when he is sick, he does better know them, because he does
both know them, and feel them. Even so Ada^, although he knew before what
obedience and disobedience was, yet after the eating of the fruit, he did not
only know, but also felt what ill came by disobedience, and therefore this tree
is called ye tree of knowledge of ye good an evil, not because it gives such
knowledge of it self, but it is so called (I say) Abeuentu, even as the treee
of life is called the tree of life Ab effectu, that is (as some divines write)
that the fruit of this tree did conserve the integrity of man's health, and the
radical moisture that he should never be stricken with age, with wrinckles,
with hoar hears, nor with any corruption, but should have remained in
perpetual young age.

Other there be whose judgment is cou^pted more true, yt it is called ye tree
of life, not because it gave life unto man wherewith he was endewed before, but
that it should be a Simbole, and a memorial of life taken of God.

Question.
Saint Austen does propose and ask, why this prohibition was made, specially
when to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, was not ill of it
self, but only ill, because it was forbidden.

Responsio.
Saint Austen does answer to this question, saying, that it was forbidden,
not that it should be ill, but yt it should be good unto man as touching the
effect: for that thing which is commanded or forbidden for obedience sake, is
good, as touching the effect.

Again, man could not have known that he had a Lord over him, except some
thing should be either commanded him, or forbidden, and so was the eating of
the tree forbidden him, for obedience sake.

Responsio ad tertiam questionem.
That Adam was buried in Hebron and not in Golgotha, some do prove, partly out
of the old Testament, and partly out of Saint Hierome, and of others which come
nerer the truth, as they say.

It is written in the book of Iosue: Then Iosue blessed him, and gave unto
Caleb, Hebron for an enheritaunce. Iosue 14.
Hebron therefore became the enheritaunce of Caleb the son of Iephoni, the
Kenezit unto this day, because he followed constantly the Lord God of Israel,
and the name of Hebron was before time called Kiriatharba. which Arba was a
great man among the Anachims, thus the land ceased from war. Which place
the gloss (called Glossa inter linearis) expounds after this manner: four of
the chiefest Patriarchs are buried there, who^ Lyra does name Adam, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, together with their wives. And Lyranus commenting upon the same
place, does say: Adam is a common name, and does signify man, yet it is
properly applied to the first man, being there buried But in deed Adam first
and properly is the name of mankind, and does betoken sometimes both the sexes,
as in the.5. chapter of Genesis. In die qua creauit deus homine^, ad imaginem
dei fecit eum: Genesis 5
masculu^ and famina^ creauit eos, and vocauit nomina eoru^ Ada^, in die qua
creati sunt illi. In the day that God created Adam, in the likeness of God, made
he him male and female, created he them, and blessed them, and called their
name Adam, in the day that they were created: and by giving the^ one name, he
notes the inseparable conjunction of man and wife. Sometime Adam is not a name
of kind, but of one only person, which the Logitians call Indiuiduum, as in
the.3. capi. Et occultauit se Ada^ and vxor eius. Genesis 3.
And Adam hid himself with his wife. The Hebrew text, in Iosue has not, Et
Adam maximus inter Anachim, Adam was great among the Anachimes, but reads
for Adam, Arba, which was a mighty person, and of great power* and was the
greatest of the Gyauntes. Therefore where the old text has Adam, that word
Adam betokenneth not there the person of the first man named Adam, but it is a
nowne appellatiue, signifiyng man, as Caietanus writes. Over and beside, Saint
Hierome discoursing this place of Matthew: Et venerunt in locum quod dicitur
Golgotha. Math. 27
That is to say, they came into the place called Golgotha, that is to say, the
place of dead men's sculles, does say thus:

Audiui que^dam exposuisse Caluariae locum in quo sepultus est Ada^, and ideo
sicappellatum esse, quia ibi antiqui hominis sit conditum caput, and hoc esse
quod Apostolus dicit. Ephesians. 5
Surge qui dormis, and exurge a mortuis, and illuminabit te Christus.
Fauorabilis interpretatio, mulce^s aurem populi, nec tamen vera. Extra enim
vrbem and for as porta^loca sunt, in quibus truncantur capita damnatorum: and
Caluariae, id est, decollatorum sumpsere nome^, propterea autem ibi crucifixus
est dominus, vt vbi prius erat area damnatorum, ibi erigere^tur vexilla
martyrii. Et quomodo pro nobis maledictum crucis factus est, and flagellatus
est and crucifixus, sic pro omnium salute quasi noxius inter noxios
crucifigeretur. Sin autem quispiam contendere voluerit, ideo ibi dominum
crucifixum vt sanguis ipsius super Adae tumulum distillaret. Interrogemus eum,
quare and alii latrones in eodem loco crucifixi sunt? ex quo apparet, Caluariam
non sepulchrum primi hominis, sed etiam significare decollatorum, vt vbi
abundauit peccatum superabundaret gratia. Adam vero sepultum iuxta Hebron and
Arba, in Jesus filio Naue legimus. Hactenus Hieronimus.

I heard a certain man expound the place of Caluarie, in the which Adam was
buried, and that it was therefore so called, because the head of the old first
man was there buried, and by this to be meant that, which the Apostle says: A
wake thou which slepest, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light: A favorable interpretation, and pleasing the ears of the people,
but yet not true, for the places in the which the heads of condemned
persons were stricken of, were without the City and without the gate, and
took the name Caluaria, that is, of men beheaded. Therefore the Lord was
crucified there, that where the place of condemned men was, there should be set
up the banners of martyrdom, and as he was made for us the curse of the
cross, and scourged, and crucified for the salvation of all, he should be
crucified as guilty amongst the guilty. But if any man will contend, that the
Lord was therefore crucified there, that his blood might drop upon the grave of
Adam: let us ask him, why the two thieves were crucified in the same place? By
the which it appears, that Caluaria was not the grave of the first man, but
does signify a place of persons be headed: that where sin did abound,
grace might more abound. We read in the book of Jesus the son of Naue,
that Adam was buried by Hebron and Arba.

Lyranus is utterly of the same mind with Hierome, expoundyng the same place
of Matthew. Furthermore Saint Hierome entreatyng that place of Paul before
aleged, ( Surge qui dormis, awake thou which slepest, and arise from the dead
and Christ shall give thee light) says. I remember, that I herd a certain man
disputyng in the Church of this place, which brought into the theater (that is
the playeng place) a form never seen before, that he might please the people.
This testimony (says he) was spoken unto Adam buried in the place of
Caluarie, where the Lord was crucified, which is therefore called Caluaria,
because the head of the old first man was laid there.

In that time therefore, when the Lord being crucified did hang over his grave,
this Prophecy was fulfilled. Awake Adam which slepest, and rise from the ded.
Et no^ (vt legimus) (...), id est, orietur tibi Christus. Sed (...), id est,
continget te Christus, that is, and not as we read Christ shall give thee
light, but Christ shall touch thee, because he might be made alive and rise by
the touching of his blood, and his body ha^ging there. And then also was the
tipe and figure fulfilled in verity, when Elizeus being dead, did raise the
dead man. VVhither these things be true or not, I leave it to the judgment of
the reader.

Truly these things being spoken then among the people, they pleased and were
received with a certain gladness.

One thing, I speak that I know, this sense and meaning does not agree with
the interpretation and text of the same place.

Yet Saint Ambrose in the fifth book of his Epistles does say, that Adam was
buried in Golgotha. Christus (inquit) animam euangelicam suscepit in Golgotha,
vbi Adae sepulchrum, vt illum mortuum in sua cruce refuscitaret. Vbi ergo in
Adam mors omnium, ibi in Christo omnium resurrectio. Christ (says he) brought
his Evangelical soul into Golgotha, where was the sepulcher of Adam, that he
might raise him being dead, by his cross. Therefore where the death of all men
was in Adam, there was the resurrection of all, in Christ.

But this is Ambrose peculiar opinion, or else he consented with the^ which did
little expende or weigh, what Golgotha and Caluaria did mean.

Nevertheless Origene expounding the place of Matthew before alleged, seems not
to reject that sentence And although he does not affirm it, yet he writes
thus: Venit ad me traditio quaedam talis, quod corpus Adae primi hominis ibi
sepultu^ est, vbi crucifixus est Christus. etc. There came to me such a
certaintraditio^, that the body of Adam the first man, was there buried where
Christ was crucified: yt as all died in Adam, so all might live in Christ: yt
in that place which is called Caluaria, yt is the place of heads, the head of
mankind should with all the people find resurrection, by the resurrection of
our Lord and savior, which suffered there and did rise. For it was
inconvenient, that many being born of him, received the remission of their
sins, and did obtain the benefit of resurrection, that he being the father
of all men, should not obtain the same grace.

Theophilactus expounding the same place, does rehearse almost the like words,
nor Ciprian does not differ from them, writing in his sermon of the
resurrection of Christ. Creditur Caluaria Adam sanguine Christi conspersa, qui
sub loco quo crux domini fixa est, humatus traditurab antiquis. The head of
Adam is believed to have been sprinkled with the blood of Christ, which Ada^ is
reported of the old fathers to be buried under yt place in the which the cross
of the Lord was fastened and set.

Adam was the figure of Christ, and his sleep, and the ribbe taken from him,
did bear the shadow partly of Christ's sleping on the cross, partly of the
Church formed out of his side.

Enos. 20.
ENos does signify in the Hebrew tongue, a miserable man, subject to calamity
and heaviness. And this was the great intelligence of Seth to call his son by
this name, Enos. For although he was set and founded of God, that he should be
the head of the generation of the godly, yet did he full prudently know, that
his posterity should, in this world be troubled with many calamities and
cares. And truly unto the end of the world the state and condition of the
elect shall be no other, as long as they live in the flesh, but that they should
be Enoshim, 2, Timo. 3.
that is miserable and afflicted, for as many as will live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

Saint Hierome writes, that as this name Adam is interpreted man, so Enos
after the variety of the Hebrew tou^g, is expounded likewise, man.

Chrysostom writes, se here (says he) how they teach an argument of
thanckfulnes in naming their sons, because he says here, yt Seth called the
name of his son, Enos. And furthermore the scripture willing to interpret
the appellation of the name unto us, does say: Hic sperauit, inuocando nomen
dn^i dei. He hoped, calling upon the name of the lord. Have thou seen a name
more beautiful then a diadem, more noble the^ purple? what shall be more
blessed, then he which is beautified with the invocation of God, and does
possess the same for his name? Do thou se, how that in little and small
appellatio^s are hidden great riches of sentences? For here is not only showed
the piety and godliness of parents, but also ye great diligence toward their
children. Do thou se, how straight way eue^ from the beginning they taught
their children which were borne unto them, admonishing them to exercise virtue
by the very names that they gave them? They did not as they do now, give names
they pass not how, and without any just cause or reason. For they say now: let
the child be named after his graundfather, or great grandfather, or great
grandfathers father: but the old ancient fathers did not so, but gave all
diligence to set such names to their children, which should not only lead
into virtue, those which had such names, but should teach al other which should
come into the world, following no small wisdom. Therefore let us not set vulgar
and common names to our children. Let us not give them the names of our
graundfathers, and our great graundefathers fathers, and of them which were
noble in kindred, but let us give them the names of holy men, which did shine in
virtues, and had great trust toward God. But yet let neither the Parents nor
children trust to the names them selves. For the name profits none, in whom
virtue is not commended: but we must have a regard of salvation in every
operacio^ of virtue, and neither to be high minded in the operacion, neither in
the kindred of holy men, nor in any other, but in the trust of good works, yea
and neither of them to think much of him self. But then we ought to be most
humble and modest, when we have heaped together great riches of virtues: for
even so shall we keep our riches gathered together, and obtain unto us the
grace of God. For Christ for this cause said to his disciples: Luke 17.
when you have done all things, say, we be unprofitable servants. Therefore
in all things, let us humble our hawtines and pride, and let us learn to be
modest and gentle, and not to be lofty and high in our good works. And let us
know this to be the greatest virtue, to behave our selves modestlye and humbly
in our good works. Thus much Chrysostom, for the name of Enos.

Caietanus reading this text after the verity of the Hebrew, does say, that
Moses does express here, not the person of the time in saying tunc, then, and
not passive, sed active, (in saying to call upon) when man began not to call upon
God (for that did Abel before in sacrifising) but to call upon God in that name
Iehoua, which is a name of four letters. For Moses does show the beginning of
al religious acts among the Hebrews, to be in calling upon this special name
of God, Iehoua, for the Hebrews do attribute marvelous virtues to the calling
upon this name. And therefore Moses was very careful and diligent about the
beginning of the invocation on such a name. And by this text we may learn,
that the tongue which is called the Hebrew tongue, was before the flood. For this
name Tetragrammaton, that is of four letters, was of that same tongue, and
written with the same characters, but yet it follows not, that this only
tongue was before ye flood. For the scripture does not so testify, but does
only say, that the children of Noe after the flood were of one spech and
language.

The text of the Hebrews is this: Tunc ceptum est vt inuocaretur in nomine
domini. Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. In this text the
Hebrew verb Halal is of the third conjugation, and it is written in the
beginning with He, and with a single Lamed, but certain of the Hebrews,
following an other signification of this verb, which is to profane or to make
vnglorious, do read this: Tunc prophanatum est ad inuocandum nomen domini.
That is: they did profane and attribute the name of God unto idols, because
they began to commit idolatry. It is referred therefore unto the time, and not
unto the person (as Aquila does translate it into the Greek) (...), id est,
tunc ceptum est, then they began. But there is no cause known, why the.70.
interpretours should translate it after this manner: Hic sperauit inuocare nomen
domini dei. He trusted to call upon the name of the Lord God The Caldie
translati on reads thus: Then began the children of men to pray in the name
of the Lord God. Therefore Enos was the first that began to call upon the name
of the Lord, because after the judgment of some he was ye first that found
certain images, by the which the devotion of prayer should be stirred up. But
that seems to be false and vain. The true meaning of this text is this: Then
began the hearts of the godly to be moved to restore religion, which a long
time by the wicked had been suppressed. And by this word inuocare, is signified
the true woorshipping of God to be restored, which through impiety was almost
lost.

Yet there is no doubt, but that Adam and Eve, and a few of their children, were
the true worshippers of God. And Moses does understand, that the flowing of
impiety was so great in the world, that religion was almost come to utter
destruction, because it remained only among a few persons.

Now after Seth had begotten a son like him self, and had his family godly
governed and ordered, then began there to be a distinct face and show of the
church, and the true worship of God was erected and restored, which should
endure to the posterity. Such of late was the restoring of religion in our
time, not that it was utterly extinguished, but because there was no one certain
nation which did truly worship God, but were dispersed here and there. But now
thanks be given to God, they are restored again to the profession of their
sincere faith and pure religion, as namely this noble realm of England.

Mathusalem. 21.
SOme do record that Mathusale^ lived.xiiii. years after the flood, but this
assertion may be refelled and refuted, both by the text of ye holy scripture,
and also by the writings of certain holy fathers.

It is written in Genesis, that Mathusalem lived. 187. years, and begat
Lamech, and after he begat Lamech, he lived. 782. years, and begat sons and
daughters: so all the days of Mathusalem were. 969. years, and so he died.

Then Lamech lived. 182. years, and begat Noe. Now from the day of the birth
of Mathusalem, unto the nativity of Noe, were. 369. years, unto the which if
ye add the. 600. years of Noe (because in the. 600. year of his life, the
flood came upon the earth) it shall plainly appear, that Mathusalem died in
the. 969. year of his life, even in the same year in the which the flood
began. And this supputatio^ of the Hebrews does saint Hierom follow in
questionibus Hebraicis, unto whom the supputation of the 70. Interpretours
does not seem good, nor please. And of this controversy he writes thus: Famosa
est quaestio, and disputatione omniu^ ecclesiarum ventilata, quod iuxta
diligentem supputationem quatuorde cemannes post diluuium Mathusalah vixisse
referatur. There is a famous question, and tossed to and fro by the disputacion
of al churches, that after diligent supputacion and account, Mathusalem is
reported to have lived. 14. years after the flood. For when Mathusalem was.
167. years old, he begat Lamech. Again, when Lamech was. 188. years old, he
begat Noe, and unto the time of the birth of Noe, the years of Methusalems
life were. 155. Now in the. 600. year of Noes life, the flood came: and by this
the supputation had by part, we must convince and conclude that the flood in
the. 955. years of Mathusalems life, did flow over all the world. And where he
is said before to have lived. 969. years, no man ought to doubt, but that he
lived. 14. years after the flood.

But this Hierome does report out of the supputation of the. 70.
Interpretours, which he does impugn and against say. For he writes: Et
quomodo verum est, quod octo tantum animae in arca saluae factae su^t? etc. And
how can this be true, that only eight souls were saved in the Arc? It
remains therefore, that as in many other things, so in this also there may be
an error in the number. For in the books of the Hebrews and the Samaritanes,
I found written thus: And Mathusalem lived. 187. years, and begat Lamech. And
after he begat Lamech, he lived 782. years, and begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Mathusalem were. 969. years, and then he died. And lamech
lived. 182. years, and begat Noe. From the day of the birth of Mathusalem,
unto the day of the birth of Noe, were. 369. years, ad to these ye. 600. years
of Noe (because in the 600. year of his life the flood came) and so it must
needs follow, that Mathusalem died ye. 969. years of his life, even in yt
year when the flood came.

Saint Austen in his book De ciuitate dei, does give his assent both to the
Hebrews, and to saint Hierome, writing after this manner: Per hanc autem
discrepantiam Hebraeorum codicum atque nostrorum, exoritur famosissima illa
quaestio, vbi Mathusalem quatuordecem annos post dilu uium vixisse computatur,
cum scriptura ex omnibus qui in teria a tuncfuerant, solum octo homines in arca
exitium commemoret euasisse diluuii in quibus Mathusalem non fuit. etc. By this
diuersitye of the Hebrew books and ours, that most famous question does spring
and arise, where Mathusalem is compted to have lived.xiiii. years after the
flood, when the scripture does make mention, that of all them which were then
on the earth, only eight men escaped the danger of the flood in the Arc,
among whom Mathusalem was not. For after our books, Mathusalem after he begat
Lamech, lived.167 years. After that Lamech him self (before Noe was borne of
him) lived. 188. years, which both being joined together, do make. 355.
years, to these are added.600. years of Noe, in the which last year the flood
chanced. Which years make 955. from the birth of Mathusalem, unto the year
of the general flood. All the years of Mathusalems life are compted. 9^9. years.
For when he had lived. 167. years, and begat Lamech, he lived after his birth.
802. years, which all joined together, make. 969. years. From the which
substract. 955. years from the birth of the nativity of Mathusalem, unto the
flood, there remains xiiii. years, the which Mathusale^ is thought to have
lived after the flood. For the which cause many suppose him to have lived
(although not upon earth, where it does plainly appear all flesh to have been
destroyed, which nature will not suffer to have lived in the waters) with his
father which was translated, and to have been there until the flood was past.
And this they suppose, because they will not derogate and take credit from the
books, which the church has taken into so great authority, believing the
jews, rather then those not to have the truth. For they do not admit that it
should be rather by the error of the Interpretours, than to be false in that
tongue, out of the which the scripture was translated in to our tongue, out of
the Greek. But they say, that it is incredible that the 70. interpretours
could err, which altogether at one time and in one sense did agree in their
interpretation, or that they would lie, where it did nothing prevail the^.
They say yt the Jews which do envy us, because the law and the Prophets is
come unto us by interpretations, have changed somewhat in their books, because
they might diminish the authority in our books. Let every man take this
opinion or suspicion, as he shall think best. But it is most certain, that
Mathusalem lived not after the flood, but died the self same year, if it be
true that is found of the number of years in the Hebrew books. Thus far
saint Austen.

Note here one thing, that saint Austen does call them our books, which then
being in latin, the church did use out of the interpretacions of the. 70.
interpretours, before the interpretation of Hierom was made or received: and he
calls them Hebrew books, which are translated according to the Hebrew verity.

Yet saint Austen in his questions upon Genesis, does say, that Mathusalem is
reported in books, although fewer (but yet truer) to have died six years
before the flood, but you must think that saint Austen made here only a mere
relation, and yet not to have been of the same sentence and mind.

But yet least any should slander and cauil against the addition of the
seventy interpretours, it might be said, that their very first and proper
exampler (which perchance now is not extant) not to have dissented from the
Hebrew verity.

Lyranus expounding that place of Genesis, does consent both to the sentence
and judgment of Hierome and Austen.

Lamech. 22.
Two things are to be noted in Lamech, bigamie and murder. For the first,
Lamech was the first man yt ever had two wives, contrary to the lawful
institution of marriage, which is that two should be one flesh. The Hebrews do
say, that it was the manner before the flood to have two wives: the one for the
cause of procreation of children, with whom the husband should have no more to
do, after she was with child, but being set apart, and apparelled with
mourning clothes, dwelt alone as a widow. They say that of the two wives of
Lamech, Hada served for that purpose. The other wife they had to satisfy their
lust and pleasure. She was gorgeously apparelled and decked, and that she
should not conceive, nor be begot with child, and so to leese her beautye,
drounke often the cup of sterilitye, and with her husband always kept company.
And they say that the other wife of Lamech, named Silla, served that turn,
who for the continual company of her husband took this name Silla, quasi sub
vmbra illius sedens, as sitting under his shadow. For this Hebrew word Sil,
does signify vmbram, a shadow: but it makes no matter, for what purpose and
mind Lamech was entised to take to him self two wives, when he did violate
and defile the holy law of wedlock, which was given and showed forth of God.
For God ordained, that there should be two in one flesh, and this was the
perpetual order of nature. But this cruel man Lamech, with a beastly contempt
of God, did corrupt the law of nature, and so the Lord would the corruption of
lawful marriage to come out of the house of Cain, and to begin with the person
of Lamech, that Polygami, that is, they which have two wives at once, may be
ashamed by this example.

That Bigamia, that is to say, the having of two wives at once, is against the
order of nature, it may be proved both by holy scriptures, and by learned
fathers.

First, it is written in Genesis: Therefore shall man leave his father and his
mother, Genesis 2.
and shall cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. It is not here
said, he shall cleave to his wives, but to his wife. And Christ brought forth
this most straight law of wedlock against the Pharisees, who unwisely and
impudently did ask of him, if it were lawful for a man to forsake his wife for
every cause. And Christ to confute them, and shake of their vain question by
the holy scriptures, said: have you not red, that he which made them at the
beginning, made them male and female, and said: Mat. 19
for this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave unto his wife,
and they two shall be one flesh, wherefore they are no more two, but one flesh.
Let not man therefore put a sunder, that yt god has coupled together. Saint
Paul speaks also of the insoluble knot and band between man and wife, 1.
Cor. 6
and of the high mystery signified thereby. Know ye not (says he) that your
bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then make them the members of an
harlot? God forbid. Do you not know, that he which coupleth him self with an
harlot, is one body? For two (says he) shall be one flesh, but he that is
joined unto the Lord, is one spirit. Flee fornication.

Ephe. 5.
Again, in an other place the same Paul says: So ought men to love their
wives, as their own bodies. He yt loves his wife, loves him self: for no man
ever yet hated his own flesh, but does nourish and cherish it, even as the Lord
does the church. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave to his
wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great secret that I speak,
concerning Christ, and concerning the church.

Saint Hierome in one of his Epistles, expounding these words (For that cause
shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife.) This testimonye
(says he) does Saint Paul refer to Christ and the church, that the first
Adam in the flesh, and the second in the spirit, should be Monogamus, having
but one wife. Let one Eve be the mother of al persons living, and let one
church be the parent of al Christians. As that cursed Lamech did divide her in
to two wives: so heretics rent and tear this into many churches: which after
the Apocalips of John, are rather to be called the synagoges of the Devil,
then the counsel house of God. We read in the Canticles, called the ballets
of Solomon. There are 60. queen's, Cant. 6.
and. 80. concubines, and of the Damselles without number, but my Dove is
alone, and my undefiled, she is the only Daughter of her mother.

Tertulian says also: Cum apostolus in ecclesiam and Christum, interpretatur,
erunt duo in carne vna, secundum spirituales nuptias ecclesiae and Christi,
vnus Christus, et vna eius ecclesia, agnoscere debemus duplicatam and
exaggeratam esse nobis vnius matrimonii tam secundum generis fundamentum, quam
secundum Christi firmamentum. etc. When the apostle does interpret these
words (there shall be two in one flesh) upon the church and upon Christ, after
the spiritual marriages of the church and Christ, for there is one Christ, and
one his church: we ought to know the virtue of one matrimony to be here
exaggerated and doubled, as well after the foundation of mankind, as concerning
the stabilitye and ground of Christ. We are counted to be in one matrimony on
both the parts, as well carnally in Adam, as spiritually in Christ. Of two
natiuities there is one prescript and rule of Monogamia. He does degenerate from
both, which straieth from this rule of having one wife. The number of. 2.
matrimonies began of this cursed man Lamech, being the first which married. 2.
wives.

Obiectio.
But thou will say that the blessed patriarchs mingled their marriage, not
only with many wives, but also with many concubines. Therefore it is as well
lawful for us to marry as many in number.

Responsio.
It is lawful plainly, if there remain yet any tipes of any mystery to come
who^ the marriages may prefigure and signify. etc. There be many words which
Tertulia^ speaks of this matter full of high learning, consona^t to the^ which
say that the holy patriarchs might lawfully have. 2. wives at once by Gods
dispensation, in the conjunction of who^ there lay many tipes and figures hidden
of some mystery to come, but chanced not unto Lamech, nor is now mete for us.
Glossa interliniaris, does say: quod Lamech prius contra naturam and morem
adulterium commisit. That Lamech was ye first yt committed adultry against
nature, and against order. But note here yt it is lawful to have. 2. wives, one
after another (as S. Paul writes to Timothy) where he does counsel and exhort
the younger widows to mary again, because (as he says) in an other place,
better it is to marie the^ to burn

Saint Hierome him self, to whose charge this error was laid, that he would
not have a widow to marry again, writes in one of his epistles: Non damno
bigamos, trigamos, nec octogamos, I do not condemn them that marry twice, nor
thrice, nor eight times: yet this is to be understood, that they marry
successively, one after an other.

The second note of Lamech.
The second thing to be noted in Lamech, is the murder yt he committed. He
said to his wives Hada and Silla: hear my voice ye wives of Lamech, berke^ unto
my spech, for I would slay a man in my wou^d, and a young man in my hurt. If
Cain shall be avenged seue^fold, truly Lamech. 70. times. 7. fold.

This whole text is somewhat obscure and hard, and therefore the Hebrews brought
diverse and sundry expositions of it.

The Jews have fained of this matter after their manner a foolish and vain
tale. They say, that Lamech was an hunter and blind, and that he had a boy
which led him by the hand, and that while Cain lay hidden in the bushes, he
was stricken through with an arow of Lamech: and that the boy thinking there to
be a wild beast, did direct Lamech his hand, and so took vengeance of the
boy, which by his imprudencye was the cause of the murder.

They which received this tale, do affirm, that the wives of Lamech did
abstain from his company, for the death of Cain. Lamech therefore to pacify his
wives, and to ioyn them to him again, does show unto them his murder, that it
was not done of set purpose, but by chance, and therefore no great danger to
be feared. For if pain and vengeance was deferred for many years, unto Cain
that wicked and cursed murderer, he thought that his pain should be deferred
unto him for many more years.

Other suppose, that the wives of Lamech did avoid his company, because the
seventh generation and age was even at hand, in the which they thought all the
posterity and issue of Cain should be utterly destroyed, for the death of his
brother. Which thing when Lamech perceived, he wylled to join them again
unto him, for the increase of children, and so did endeavor to mitigate them,
and did say, that he killed not a young man and a stripling, as Cain killed
Abel, and therefore he said: they need not so greatly to fear, and if I should
suffer any mischief or punishment, that the same should be prolonged as yet for
many years, for as much as the pain of Cain, being the first murderer, was
deferred unto the seventh generation. Of this judgment is Caldeus paraphrastes.

But omitting al these things, this following, seems to be the very true sense
and meaning Lameches wives, seeing that al men hated him for his cruelty, were
afraid. Therefore he braggeth that there is none so lusty, that were able to
resist him, yea although he were already wounded, and he mocked at Gods
sufferance in Cain, jesting as though God would suffer none to punish him, and
yet gave him license to murder others. Therefore the intolerable violence of
Lamech toward mankind, did fear his wives, least al men making a conspiracye,
should oppress him, as he was most worthy every man's hatred and curse. Now
that Moses might expres his desperate cruelty, when that the fair speech of
wives is wont sometimes to mitigate and appease the fierce and cruel husband,
he does show, that Lamech did vomit out ye poyso^ of his cruelty, into the
bosom of his wives. The sum is this: he boasted that he had both stomach and
strength enough, to vanquish and overthrow all that durst assault him, and if
there be any peril (says he) I will safely receive it on my own head, and at my
peril, chance what chance may, I redely know away how to escape. And when he
saw his wives stricken with such fear, he is not only made not the meker, but
does sharpen and edge him self forth unto more cruelty. And such is the
beastly rage of cruel men, when they perceive them selves to be hated of al
men, they are so far from repentance, that they are ready to bury one
murder with ten other.

Saint Hierom writes, that a Jew showed him, that it was recorded in certain
books apochryphal, that. 77. souls came of the stock of Lamech, which were
destroyed in the flood, and that in this number vengeance was taken of Lamech,
whose kindred endured unto the Cataclisme.

The same Hierome Contra louinianum, writes: Primus Lamech sanguinarius atque
homicida vnam carnem in duas diuisit vxores, fratricidium et bigamiam
cataclismi paena deleuit, et de altero septies, and de altero septuagesies
septies, vindicatum est: quantum distant in munero, tantum and in crimine. That
bloody and murdering Lamech, was ye first that divided one flesh into two
wives, one pain of the flood did put away murder and bigamy. Of the one
vengeance was taken seven times, of the other seventy times seven: how much
these differ in number, so much differ they in fault.

Saint Austen In questionibus veteris testamenti, says: Sed frustra hoc
putant, qui arbitrantur quod Lamech hoc dixerit de Cain, occidi virum in
liuorem mihi, and iuuinem in vulnere meo. Iam enim in quinta generatione natus
erat Lamech a Cain, id est, de Mathusalem ab nepote Cain. etc. But they do
vainelye suppose this, that Lamech spoke this of Cain: I have slain a man in my
wound, and a young man in my hurt. For Lamech was borne in the fifth generation
of Cain, that is, of Mathusale^ which was of the fourth degree in linial
dissent. But Lamech does speak this, that he would show him self to be more
sharplye punished, which offended under a manifest law: and by this, if
vengeance was taken seven times after Cain upon his follower, how much more
vengeance is to be taken upon him, whom neither the fact nor correction of
Cain, neither the sentence given against him did fear, that it should turn
his will from so wicked and mischeuous a deed?

After Cain therefore Lamech committed murder, which without doubt suffered
seven reuengements: and what should chance unto him, that does follow the same
after Lamech, he shows, saying: Of Lamech vengeance shall be taken seventy
times seven times, that for because repentance did not follow the ill
work, he should be smitten with the strokes of seuentye seven plages,
therefore when Lamech does confess him self to have killed a young man, and
Cain could not live to that time, or if he did (which seems impossible) he
was old, and not young, and therefore Lamech, killed him not. This wuch saint
Austine.

Yet some out of saint Anstens writings do reason and argue, that Lamech killed
Cain: for he grants, that Lamech paid the seven fold vengeance, but in
following the history of Genesis, he should not have paid or losed the seven
fold vengeance, except he had killed Cain, Ergo it may be concluded, that
Lamech killed Cain, although the text does not openly declare it.

Saint Hierome, speaking of the seven fold reuengement of Cain, does say, that
it is not meant that he which should kill Cain, should be subject to seven
vengeaunces: but that he that killed him should loose the seven vengeaunces,
which were so long time together in Cain, who being alive was left wholly and
all unto pain.

Ephrem writes, that Lamech committed two murders. Aliud enim (inquit) est
vir, aliud adolescens. For (says he) a man is one thing, and a young man, an
other: Yet Theodoretus writes, that Lamech killed not 2 but one man, of a
flourishing and lusty age, and not Cain, as many do fable.

Yet saint Hierom holds the contrary, that Lamech killed Cain. For he writes
in his first question Ad Damasum papam: Maiorum nostroru^ ista sententia est,
quod putant in septima generatione a Lamech interfectum esse Cain. etc. This is
the mind of our forefathers, that Cain was killed of Lamec, hin the seventh
generation. For Adam begat Cain, Cain be gat Enoch, Enoch begat Iarad, Iarad,
Mahinael, Mahinael, Mathusale^, and Mathusalem Lamech, which was the seventh
from Adam.

But Chrysostom expou^ding yt place of Genesis, does not grant yt Lamech
killed Cain, although he grant, that he committed two murders.

Lyranus upon that place writes after this manner: because Lamech brought in
bigamie, he was punished by his wives, for by what things a man does offend,
by those things he is tormented. And therefore being made an old man, was il
entreated by his wives. And willing to repress them from the euyls which they
did unto him, he said unto them: because I have killed a man in my wound. To
the understanding whereof, we must know, yt Lamech waxing blind, had a guide to
lead him, and so went into ye fields to hunt, not for flesh (for that time
they did eat none) but for the skins, which they did wear. And Cain lay hid
among the bushes, because he was always in fear: who^ the young man yt led
Lamech, seeing (because he was of a quicker sight then Lamech) supposed it to be
some beast, and therefore said unto Lamech, yt he should direct his arow thither,
which being don, when he perceived yt he had killed Cain, whose killing ye lord
did forbid under grievous pains, he beat the young stripling so sore, yt he
killed him, and by this is meant, that he said, I have killed a man, yt is Cain,
in my wound, that is by a wound given of me: and I have killed a young man that
did guide and direct me. And this is the common opinion, says Lyra.

Other do otherwise expound this sentence: I have killed a man in my wound (as
if Lamech should say) I have killed a man, and a young man, in liuore meo, in
my heart, that is, of envy, as Cain did, which killed Abel, as though he should
say, no.

The Hebrews do say, that this young man, whom he killed, was his own son
called Tubalcain, who was the first inuenter of the craft in woorking of brass
and iron.

These two words vulnus and liuor, after the censure of some, may be diversely
red, either in the accusative case, or in the ablative case. If in the
accusative case, the^ the sense is this: if there be any peril, let it light on
my bed, and whatsoever chance, let me smart for it, for I know how to escape.

But if it be red in the ablative case, then it may have a double sense. The
first is this: although I were wounded, yet am I able to kill a man. What will
I then do, if I be lusty and whole? The other sense is this, which seems more
sound and more agreeable. If any man provoke me with injury, or attempt to
bring any violence to me, he shall well feel and perceive, that he has to do
with a strong and valiant man: for if he once hurt me, he shall not escape
scotfree.

There is a great controversy among the writers, whether Lamech repented and
confessed his fault, or no.

Chrisostomus, Rupertus, and Alcuinus hold the affirmative part, but other of
great learning and deep judgment, do hold the negative part, and do write
that he reioiced and bragged of his cruelty and murder.

What is to be avenged seven fold, and seventy times seven fold, diverse have
diverse judgments.

Saint Hierome says, that vengeance was taken seven fold of Cain, because he
was slain in the seventh generation, that is, in the time of Lamech, and did
suffer pain for his fault, the space of so many generacions. He lived upon the
earth mourning and trembling, and that the reuengement of seventy times seven
fold in Lamech, was the seventy and seven generations from Adam unto Christ.
Read Luke the Evangelist (says he) and thou shall find it to be so, as we
say. Therefore, as in the seventh generation the sin of Cain was loosed (for
God will not punish twice for one thing) and he which has once received ill in
his life, shall not suffer the same torment after his death, which he suffered
in his life: so the sin of Lamech, that is, of the whole world, and of the
blood which was shed, shall be loosed at the coming of Christ, which took away
the sins of the world, and washed his garment in the blood of the wine
press, and has trodden down the wine press alone, and went with red garments
from Edom unto heaven.

Nicholaus bishop of Rome, writing unto Lotharius the king, does sai* Art thou
not to be smitten with sharp vengeance, which art known to have followed in
having two wives, the adultery and wickedness of Lamech, which the Lord did not
put away, but after the seventy and seven generations with his healthful
coming, when that the murder of Cain was wiped away by the waters of the
Cataclisme in the.7. generation?

Other do expound these two clauses, seuenfold, and seventy times seuenfold,
for the greuousnes of punishment, because (as Saint Ambrose says) greater was
the fault of Lamech, which did not correct him self after an other, which was
condemned before him, and because he took not head of that thing, which was
rebuked in an other.

Noe. 23.
COncerning Noe, two things are to be demanded: The first is, whether he is to
be accused of dronkennes? The second, whether he was to be reproved in cursing
of Canaan.

Genesis 3
Concerning the first, it is written in Genesis, that Noe began to be an husband
man, and planted a vineyard, and he drunk of the wine, and was dronken, and
was uncovered in the midst of his tent. And when Cham the father of Canaan, saw
the nakedness of his father, he told his two brethren without. Then took Sem
and Iaphet a garment, and put it upon their shoulders, and went backward, and
covered the nakedness of their father, with their faces backward, and so they
saw not their fathers nakedness.

Chrysostom discoursing this piece of scripture, does think that Noe is not to
be accused, but excused, and that by three reasons. First, because he was not
supplanted nor ouerthrown by intemperancy: hut they which are worthy to be noted
of dronkennes, are they who^ intemperat ingurgitacio^ does accuse. Also the
scripture says not, that the Lord was angry with Noe for that dronkennes, but
does in every place commend his righteousness.

The second reason is this: he fell into this dronke^nes through ignorance,
which properly is called ignorantia inuincibilis, because he could know and
learn of none the power and strength of ye wine, and therefore he fell into
ebriety ignorantly, and not willingly through a corrupt will:

Thirdly, because that righteous man had not experience of the nature of wine,
nor did know what measure thereof he ought to use, it is no marvel if he became
dronken. Chrysostom expounding that also which is adioined in the same story
(that is, that Noe awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done
unto him, and said: cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his
brethren) speaks after this manner: Et haec dico, non vt iustu^ incuse^, multa
enim erant propter quae illi venia debebatur. etc. and I speak these things,
not to accuse the just man, for there were many things, for yt which pardon was
due unto him, especially because he slid not again afterward into the same
fault: which is a great argument and president yt he fell before by ignorance,
and not by negligence, for if it had been by negligence, he should have been
enta^gled again with the same fault, which happened not. For if that should have
happened again, the Scripture would not have concealed it, but have uttered it
unto us. For this is one scope and end of the Scripture, for it does not
intermit any notable or notorious fact, but does teach us the truth: neither
through envy does pass over the virtues of the the righteous, neither for the
favor of the wicked does shadow and keep close their sins, but does propose
and show forth all things openly and plainly unto us: that we might have
thereby monuments and certain doctrines, and that when we fall through
negligence into any sin, we may be made after, more ware, least we fall into
the same again. For it is not so grievous a thing to sin, as it is to persevere
in sin. Therefore, do not only attend and mark, yt the righteous Noe was
drunk, but note also the same thing did never chance to him again after.

Now consider those which do daily consume their time in wine tauernes, and
(as I may say) do almost daily die in them. Yet if they come to good aduisement
again, they do not refrain them selves from the same danger, but do return
to it again, as to their daily work, which Noe did not.

Over and beside, the name of ebrietie in the holy Scripture is not every where
spoken of dronckennes, but does signify sacietie. Therefore a man perchance
may say this, of this righteous man: not that he was droncken through
intemperancie, but the same chanced to him through sacietie. As David
speaks: Inebriabuntur ab vbertate domus tuae, they shall be made droncke with
the plentifulnes of thy house, that is, they shall be made full.

Therbe many things that declare that righteous man Noe worthy of pardon, which
I do not speak as though I would excuse his ebrietie: but do show, that he was
supplanted, not by inte^perancie, but by ignorance, and that his ebrietie
perchance to be accused, to have rather flowne and come of sacietie, then of
inte^perancie. And here thou see, that this word Ebrietas, is Homonimon, or
equivocal, signifieng diverse things. In the second of John's Gospel it is
taken likewise, not for very dronckennes, John 2.
but for fulness: as when the governor of the feast said unto ye bridegroom:
all men at the beginning set forth good wine, and when men be dronke^, then
that which is worse. S. Ambrose in his book De Noe and arca, does seem plainly
to excuse the dronckennes of Noe. Sobria (inquit) erat men's iusti, quando ebria
putabatur: est enim praeclarum poculum, inebrians justice, etc. Then was the
mind of the just man sober, when it was thought dronken. For it is a noble and
worthy cup which does make dronken the righteous: but he was truly droncken,
which laughed at his father: for he that had no consideration of the grace and
favor of the generation before past, neither of present reverence toward his
father, nor of the pain to come of contumely done to his father, was very
droncke: and that which he thought to see, he saw not: for there was in him a
profound, and deep blindness, which culd not se his father for if he had seen
his father, he would not have laughed, for the father is not to be laughed at,
but to be reuere^ced. And how did he see, which thought error of doubtfulnes
to be in him, in whom is the perfect vapor and moistnes of wisdom and other
virtues? And when is the mind more sober, the^ when it does so behold and vewe
the nature of all things, of times present, and times to come, that there
appeared in him no temporal staggering of dronckennes?

Again in his book De Abraba^ Patriarcha, saying: Multi se fortes putant. Number
fortiores qua^ Loath? Number continentiores quam Noe? Many think themselves to be
strong: but ar they stronger then Loath? are they more continent then Noe: the
Scripture does not spread forth the faults of the Patriarchs, whom we read to
be overcome with wine, but yt thou should learn whereof to beware. He lay
naked: this man was open to the errors of his daughters. Noe the just was
disceyued, because he was as yet ignorant. etc.

Thomas the scholeman in.2.2. where he does excuse the ebriety of Noe, says in
his first article. Ebrietas dupliciter potest accipi: vno modo vt significet
defectum hominis, qui accidit ex multo vino potato, ex quo fit, vt non sir
compos rationis. etc. Ebrietie may be taken two manner of ways. In the first
manner it does signify the infirmity of man, which comes of drincking of
much wine, whereby he is made No^ compos rationis, not having full possession of
reason. And this manner of ebriety does not nominate and signify the fault, but
the penal defect, flowing out of the fault. The second manner of ebrietie does
nominate the act, by ye which some man does fall into the same defect which
may cause droncke^nes two manner of ways. First by the great strength of ye
wine, which he knows not that does drink it, and this ebriety may happen
without sin, specially when it chances not by the negligence of man, and so
Noe was was thought to have been droncken.

Secondly it does come of inordinate concupiscence and lust, and of an
unmeasurable use of wine: and so is ebrietie mortal sin, and is contained
under the sin of glotonie. Sicut species sub genere, for glotony is divided
into surfeiting and dronckennes, which Paul writing to the Romans does
forbid, saying: Sic vt in die honest ambulemus, no^ in comessationibus and
ebrietatibus. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in glotonie and
dronckennes. To be short, he says, that ebrietie is mortal sin. As when man
drincking wine, does not think yt it has so quick and vehement a strength,
yt it will quickly smite and hurt ye brain, and he yet notwtstanding does
largely and excessiuely use it, does mortally sin.

S. Austen in a certain sermon speaks of dronckennes after this sort:
Ebrietas est blandus demon, dulce venenum, suaue peccatum: qua^ qui habet,
seipsum non habet: quam qui facit, peccatm non facit, sed ipse totus est
peccatum. Dronckennes is a flattering devil, a sweet poison, a pleasant
sin, which, whosoever has, has not himself, which whosoever does commit,
does not commit sin, but he himself wholly is sin.

Innoce^tius de vtilitate condition is humanae, has a notable saying of
dronckennes. Quid turpius ebrioso, cui fetor in ore, tremor in corpore? qui
promit stulta, prodit occulta, cui men's alienatur, facies transformat. Nullum
secretum, vbi regnat ebrietas: faecu^di calices quem non fecere disertum? What
is filthier then a droncken man? to whom there is stentch in the mouth,
trembling in the body, which utters forth folishe things, and reuealeth
secret things, whose mind is alienate, and face transformed, there is no
secret where ebrietie reigns: whom has not plentiful cups made eloquente
and talkatiue?

Diogenes when he saw the house of a certain man (who was given much to
drink) to be sold, by the inscriptio^ over the door. Scieba^ (inquit) quia
tandem domum euomeres. I did know (says he) that at the last thou would
easly spue out a whole house.

Aristippus the Philosopher to a certain man, bragging that he could drink
much, and yet not be droncke. Quid (inquit) magni narras, cum idem faciet
quoque mulus, what great thing (says he) do thou show, for a horse, and a
mule will do the same? by the which pretty saying, he compared this man, given
so much to drink, unto a brute beast.

The second note of Noe.
VVhither Noe did il, in cursing Canaan? The which question Chrysostom
discoursing, writes after this sort. Ecce prouenimus ad question nem illam
vbique celebrem, multos enim audimus dicentes, quare cum peccauerit pater and
prodiderit nuditatem, filius maledictu^ suscepit. etc. Behold we are now come
to that famous question. For we here many say: why does the son receive the
curse, when ye father offended and showed his nakedness? I beseech you give
diligent attendau^ce, and take the solutio^: for we will speak those things
which the grace of God will minister unto us for your profit. Noe said: cursed
be Canaan, and he shall be the servant of his brethren. He made not here mention
of his son Simpliciter, and that for some secret and hidden reason, for he
would chasten his son for his sin and contumely, which he did unto him:
but yet he would not be prejudicial unto the blessing, which was given him
before. For the Scripture says: God blessed Noe, when he came out of the arc,
and his sons. Therefore that he might not seem to have cursed him, whom God
had blessed, passing over him which had done this reproach unto him, brought
the curse unto his son. Noe (says he) does show this that therefore Cham is
not cursed because he took benediction before of God: but wherefore does he
suffer pain, when an other has offended? neither this also is done without
reason, because the father had no less pain and torment then the son. For
you know that the fathers often do pray that they themselves might sustain the
pains of their children, and in a manner it is more grievous unto them to se
their poor children tormented, the^ if they should be subject to the same them
selves. Therefore this same was done, because he for the nature and love toward
his son, did feel greater sorrow, and that the blessing of God should be
kept inuiolate, and likewise the child taking curse, should suffer pains for
his own sins. For although through the fathers sin he is now subject
unto curse, yet it is lykely, that he suffered pains for his own sins also.
For he took not only the curse of the sin due to the father, but that he
should suffer also greater pain for him self. For neither the fathers for the
children, nor the children for the fathers, shall be punished, but every man
shall suffer for his own sins. This we find written in all places of the
Prophets, Eze. 18
the soul which sins she shall die, and again the fathers shall not dye
for the children, nor the children for the fathers. etc.

This therefore that Chrysostom said, that Canaan, the son of Cham suffered
pain, not only for the sin of his father, but also for his own sins:
does dissolve the argument which might be moved and tossed out of these
Scriptures, that is, the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, nor
the son shall dye for the father. Which Scriptures are chiefly to be
understand of eternal pain, and to be understand also when the son has
by no means offended nor consented to the sin of his father.

Saint Ambrose in his book De Noe and arca, does consent with Chrysostom,
saying. Qua ratione Noc cum filius eius Cham peccauerit, no^ ipsu^ sed filium
eius seruituti addixit? By what reason did Noe when his son Cham had
offended, appointe not him, but his son unto bondage and curse?

Responsio.
It may be peradventure because he was more grieved with the injuries of his
son, of the which he him self was guilty, and the very author, and does more
lament the damnation of his sin to be paid and satisfied of his son, which
should be punished, not so much for his own desert, as for his fathers, And in
the end Ambrose concludes, saying. Ceteru^ non tam hic homines quam mores
comprehenduntur, quorum in vtroque vna natura, nam Cham calor, Canaan co^motio
and inquietudo, qui enim calidus est vtique inquietus est et commotior est. In
duobus igitur erit vna passio and vnus affectus. Itaque cum alter adiicitur,
vterque damnatur. But not so much the men as the manners are here comprehended,
in both whom is one nature. For Cham signifies heat, Canaa^ commotion and
unquietness. For he that is hot is unquiet, and somewhat moved. In them two was
there one passion and one affection: therefore when the one is named, both are
condemned.

S. Austen upon Genesis does explicate this matter after an other sort.
Queritur (inquit) quare peccans Cham in patris offensa, non in seipso sed in
filio suo Canaa^ maledicitur. etc. It is asked (says he) wherefore Cham
offending his father, is not cursed in him self, but in his son Canaan:
There is no answer, but because it is Prophesied, that the children of Israel
which came of the seed of Sem, should take the land of Canaan, and vanquish
the Cananites, and drive them from thence.

Saint Austen also renders an other answer, in his book De ciuitate dei,
where he writes, that by Cham being the middle son of Noe, be signified
heretics: which remain not in the first fruits of ye Israelites, but remain
between both.

Lyranus dissouing this, question does say. Hic nominatur Canaan, quia secu^dum
aliquos is primum vidit coopertium, Noe, and patri suo Cham iudicauit. etc.
Here is Canaan named, because after some he saw first Noe uncovered, and
showed it to his father Cham: After other because it is entreated here, of the
wickedness of Cham, which behaved him self irreverently toward his father.
Therefore is here also mention made of his son Canaan, which followed the
evil conditions of his father, and in whom and his posterity wickedness so
much increased, that afterward the Lord commanded them to be slain, and their
land to be given to the children of Israel.

Saint Ambrose does say, that Canaan was not then borne when Cha^ saw the
nakedness of his father. Other do apply, that Cha^ had already begotten the
fourth son, which was called Canaan, in the time when Noe was droncke, or
else it should not be written, that Cham the father of Canaan did see the
nakedness of his father, but only Cham had seen it.

Berosus in his antiquities does call Noe Iamin, because Iain in ye Hebrew tongue
betokens wine.

The Judgment of the later writers concerning Noe.
The writers of this later time (whom I cannot commend and praise to much, both
for their great learning and deep judgment) be of an other mind, concerning
the dronckennes of Noe.

The ebrietie (say they) that is attriduted unto Noe, although it may be
excused by certain reasons, yet it is such in it self, that it is worthy
great blame: for what soever does excede measure and mean, is to be blamed
even in brute beasts that lack reason, much more in man: for after yt the
reason of man is swalowed and supped up of wine, what part of manhood remains
in man? And by this may we learn, what a detestable and foul thing ebrietie
is. The holy Patriarch, which should have been a notable example of frugalitie
and temperancy, most fowly and shamefully forgetting him self, does throw him
self naked upon the ground, that al me^ might laugh him to scorn. With what
great study therefore ought we to have sobrenes in prise, least the like or
worse happen unto us? A profane Philosopher said in times past: Quod vinu^
esset sanguis terrae, that the wine was ye blood of the earth, therefore when
men do ingurge it immeasurable, they must suffer punishment of their mother
the earth. This holy man Noe might truly be pardoned, which taking before great
pain and labor, refreshyng himself with the drincking of wine, did think,
that he received a just reward, but God does mark in him an eternal spot of
reproach. What shall we think the^, will come and happen to idle bellies and
insatiable goulfes of drincking, which only shote at this mark, in striving
how much wine they ca^ consume and quaffe away, and have in no case respect to
that curse of God, which is pronounced against them, Esa. 5.
which rise early in the morning to drink, and so to continue until might.

Truly God would by this ensample of Noe, admonish mankind to beware of
dronckennes, and not to make any pretense of excuse, because the holy man Noe
was once subject unto dronckennes.

It is permitted for us to drink wine, nor it is sin to drink it, which
the devils doctrine does forbid. But in these days unto the Papists, ebrietie
is no sin: but to eat flesh on certain days forbidden by the Pope, yea in
the time of need, they count it a sin unpardonable.

Concerning the cursing of Canaan, although Noe had a just cause to be angry,
yet he seems to behave him self neither modestly nor gravely: he should at
the least secretly have lamented his fault before God, and have testified his
repentance with some shame before men. But now as though he had nothing
offended, does thu^dre out a sharper curse against his son. But Moses does
not report here the checkes and tauntes, into the which Noe being stirred with
coler and anger, does burst out, but does bring him in rather speaking with the
Prophetical spirit. Wherefore there is no doubt, but that the holy man being
humbled with ye knowledge of his fault, did weigh with him self what he had
deserved, and also did pronounce with a very bitter sorrow of mind this
sentence against his son, for he considered how merueilously he was
preserved among a few.

Now therefore when he was constrained by his own mouth to expel him out of the
Church of God, there is no doubt, but that he grievously mourned and lamented
for the curse of his son. But in this example, God does give us a godly
doctrine, that we must retain and keep the constancy of faith, if we see at
any time them to fail, which be nere joined unto us, yea, and that we ought
not to shrink nor relent, by no means: but so to exercise the severity which
God commands, that we should not spare our own bowels. And note also, that
Noe did not pronounce this hard sentence, but by the instinct of God. Here may
we gather of the cruelnes of pain, how horrible before God is the wicked
contempt of parents.

Question.
Here may be demanded, why Noe did not curse Cham the son of him self,
rather then Canaan the son of Cham: for the fault is not imputed unto Canaan,
but unto Cham: and it is not agreeable to the justice of God, to throw the
parents faults upon the children.

Responsio.
Although God do prosecute his judgments upon the children and upon the
nephews, yet is he never cruel toward the giltles, wherefore there is no
inconvenience to be granted, if God do punish the fathers sins, in the
reprobate children.

But it is meruell, that Noe cursing his nephew, spoke nothing of his son Cham,
being the author of the same, but there is no doubt (that the greuousnes of the
pain may more appear) the pain is to be transferred and brought to the
posterity. As if God should openly testify, that the pain of one man does
not suffice unto him, but that his curse also should be affixed and appointed
to the posterity, that it may crepe and continue by continual ages. Cham him
self is not here exempted, for when he wrappeth together his son with him,
he does exaggerat his judgment. Therefore cursed was the father in his son,
to declare and signify, that he was not cursed only in his own person, but
that his curse also should be derived to his posterity.

Question.
Here may be demanded also, why God of many sons did choose only Cham to be
thus smitten?

Responsio.
Let us beware of to much curiosity, and remember that the judgments of God
are not vainly called Abissus profunda, a depenes unsearchable, and to cry with
Paul: Oath depenes of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, he has
chosen whom it pleases him, and in who^ he does show forth examples and tokens
of grace and mekenes. He does appoint other to be the documents and examples of
his wrath and severity.

Question.
There is yet an other doubt to be moved. For when the Scripture does teach,
that God does revenge the sins of men into the third and fourth generation,
it seems here, to prefixe and appoint a mean unto the wrath of God: for the
vengeance, which is here mentioned, does spread her self unto the tenth
generation.

Responsio.
In the words of the Scripture there is no law prescribed unto God, which it
is not lawful for him to go beyond, as though he should not be fre in
punishing of sins to go beyond the fourth generation. Here ye must see only
the comparison between pain and grace, by the which God does show him self
such a just reue^ger of sins, that he is yet more prone and ready to show
mercy, then justice.

Two things in this are to be noted: First, that the original beginning of
servitude and bondage, began of Canaan, which came through sin. The second
thing to be observed is, how grievously God did plage and punish them, which do
not with due honor prosecute and reverence their parents, which may be a
godly lesson to be learned of perverse and disobedient children. Thus much
touching Noe, both by the judgment of the old fathers, scholemen, and later
writers.

Sem. 24.
COncerning Melchisedech who he should be, there be four opinions. The first
is, of them which supposed Melchisedech to be of a more divine nature, then
that he ought to be numbered and cou^pted in the nature of men, yea they did
affirm, that it was the holy ghost him self, and that he did appear under
the shape of man, and so came to mete Abraham.

The second opinion is of them which did judge him to be the angel of God,
and in this sentence is Origene and Didimus.

The third opinion is, of them, which said that he was a man of Canaa^, and the
king of the City of Jerusalem* in this sentence are Hipolitus, Ireneus,
Eusebius Cesariensis, Emissenus, Apollinarius, Eustacius.

The fourth opinion is, of the Jews, which judge, that Melchisedech was Sem
the son of Noe (as S. Hierom writes Ad Euagriu^) saying: Aiunt hunc
Melchisedec esse Sem filium Noe, and that he was at that time when Abraham was
born.390 years old. But there be great learned men, that hold the contrary,
yea and do move a doubt, who was the first begotten son of Noe the
Patriarche, whither it were Sem, or no? Yet Saint Austen does so hold,
writing, Restabat commemorare filios Sem maximi filii Noe. It remained to
rehearse and make mention of the sons of Sem, the eldest son of Noe. And
the Hebrews do say, that the same Sem was the high Priest of God in Saie^, and
was called the king of righteousness, both by name and office, which Sale^, was
afterward called Iebus, and last of all Jerusalem.

Moses does show, that it perteyned to the dignity and honor of Sem, that he
was the father of all the children of Heber: that by this it might be
understand, that he was the father of Abraham, and so the father of the elect
people of God, and that he was the father of Messiah.

I have no more to say of Sem, but of Melchisedech, of whom I will entreat more
by Gods grace in my prelections.

Abraham. 25.
THis name Abraham is compounded of three words, of Ab. id est, Pater, of ram,
Id est, excelsus, and of hamo^, Id est, multitudinis, as if he would say, an
high and noble father of a great multitude. And this is declared in the fourth
to the Romans, to be spoken not only of the Iudaicallnation, but universally
of that innumerable multitude of men, which at all times and in all places
should be of the fellowship of the Church, and of eternal life. It is also
there declared, that they be called the children of Abraham, not only which
were borne by carnal generation, but which be of the says of Abraham, that
is, which believe the promise of the sede that is of Christ, which promise was
delivered unto Abraham, whereof also Theophilactus speaks, writing: Cum duo
haec Abrahae videantur inesse, praeputiu^ and circumcisio, per praeputium
quidem eorum, qui sunt in praeputio oste^ ditur Pater, Vt fides in illis
suscepta ad iustitiam computetur, hoc est vt iusti efficiantur. Ex
circumcisione etiam Pater esse monstratur circumcisionis, hoc est eorum qui
sunt circumcisi. Est igitur Abraham omnium pareas, non quidem naturali
sanguinis sexu, sed fidei propinquitate, When these two things uncircumcision
and circumcision were seen to be in Abraham, by uncircumcision he is showed to
be the father of them that be uncircumcised: that faith being received in
them might be cou^pted to righteousness, that is, that they may be made
righteous. By circumcision, also he is showed to be father of them that be
circumcised. Therefore Abraham is the father of all, not by natural kind of
blood, but by propinquitie and kindred of faith.

Saint Austen, De ciuitate dei, does ask this question: Cur mutatum est nomen
Abrahae? reddita est ratio, quia patrem (inquit) multarum gentium posui te. Hoc
ergo significari intelligendum est Abraham. Abram vero quod ante vocabatur
interpretatur pater excelsus. Why was the name of Abraham changed? this
reason is rendered: because I have appointed thee, the father of many nations,
therefore it is to be understand, that Abraham signifies the same thing. But
Abram by the which name he was called before, is interpreted, Pater excelsus,
a noble father, nothing discrepant from this sentence, writes Hilarious,
Origene, and Chrysostom.

Chrysostom writes: Sicut prius nomen eius transitum significabat iuxta
Hebraeorum linguam, quia parents eius nomen hoc indiderant, eo quod a patria
sua in Cananeam transiturus erat. etc. As his name before did signify passing
over after the Hebrew tongue, because his parents gave him this name, for that
he should pass over from his country into Canaan, even so his parents gave
him the name of a Patriarche, declaring immediately from the beginning, that he
should become a stranger, and pass over the river into a strange land.
Therefore he says: Because the name given to thee of thy parents did fore
signify, that thou should take also the addition of this word: that thou
may know, that this does declare unto thee, that thou should be the
father of many nations.

Obiectio.
For as much as his parents were infideles, how came this knowledge unto them,
that they should comprehend in this name, that which was to come long after?

Responsio.
Chrysostom makes answer to this objection, saying, this to be the argument
of the wisdom of almighty God, which does dispense and dispose oftentimes,
such things by infidelles, and find many such like things done in other. Let
this name Noe be an example, for his parents did not give him that name
without cause and in vain, but they did fore signify, that the flould should
follow. And his name shall be called Noe, Genesis 5.
he shall make us cease and rest from our worcks, and from the pain and grief
of our hands, and from the earth, which the Lord has cursed. For Noe in the
Hebrew tongue is called rest, therefore the floude being imminent and nere at
hand, he only shall save the world, and be the author of the latter world.
Therefore he says, he shall make us to rest, calling the flood rest.

Question.
Many demand, whither Abraham were a Prophet and a Priest also.

Responsio.
That Abraham was a Prophet, it is most manifest in the book of Genesis. Genesis 12
For God spoke to the king that had taken away his wife: Nunc ergo read viro
suo vxorem, and orabit pro te, quia Prophaeta est, and viues. Restore now
therefore the wife to her husband, and he shall pray for thee, because he is a
Prophet, and thou shall live.

Saint Austen in his book De ciuitate dei, says, Nec sapientia Egiptiorum,
sapie^tiam Prophaetarum nostrorum tempore antecedere potuit, quemadmodum and
Abraham Prophaeta fuit. Quid autem sapientiae esse potuit in Egypto antequa^ ei
Isis, quam mortuam tanquam deam magnam colendam putauerunt, literas traderet?
Isis porro Inachi filia fuisse proditur, qui primus regnare caepit Arginis
quando Abrahae iam nepotes repertuntur exorti.

The wisdom of the Egiptians could not be before the wisdom of our
Prophets, forasmuch as Abraham was a Prophet. What wisdom could be in
Egipte before Isis delivered unto them letters and learning, who^ being dead
they thought to be worshipped as a great goddess. Furthermore Isis is declared
to be the daughter of Inachus, which first reigned over the Argines, when now
the nephews of Abraham were already borne.

Chrysostom upon this place of Matthew. Liber generationis Jesus Christi filii
David, filii Abrahae, writes thus: Quia Christus tres dignitates fuerat
habiturus, Rex, Prophaeta, Sacerdos, Abraham autem habuit duas dignitates.
Prophaeta enim fuit, and sacerdos. etc. Because Christ should have three
dignities, that is, he should be a king, a Prophet, and a priest, Abraham truly
had two dignities, for he was a prophet and a priest. A Priest as God said unto
him, take an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old,
and a ram of three years old, a turtle dove also and a pigeon.etc.

Therefore Christ was called the son of Abraham and of David, that he might be
understand to be a Prophet and a Priest of Abraham, but a king of David.
Therefore he was not only called the son of David, because David was only a
king and a Prophet, but Priest David was none. Read more of this matter In
glossa ordinaria, in Lyranus and in Origin, who do at large prove, that Abraham
was both a Prophet and a priest, but no Priest ordained of the law, but by the
perfection of natural wisdom, so Noe was a Priest, and so Melchisedech and
Job were Priests, who all offered outward Sacrifices unto God.

Obiectio.
Abraham was a lay man, and no lay man was a priest and endewed with Priestly
dignity. And that Abraham was a lay man, Chrisostom shows plainly in one of
his orations Aduersus Iudaeos. Abraham(inquit) progenitor Leuiraru^ ac
Iudascorum sacerdotum sub Melchisedech, qui typum getebat nostri sacerdotii,
Laici locu^ obtinuit. Abraham the progenitor of ye Leuits and the Judicial
Priests under Melchisedech, which did bear the type and figure of our
Priesthode occupied the place of a lay man. And this he proves two manner of
ways. First, because he gave tithes unto Melchisedech, for lay men do pay
tithes unto Priests, and not pristes unto lay men.

Secondly, because he received the blessing of Melchisedech, for lay men do
receive benediction of Priests.

Now conclude the argument. If he had been a Priest, he had not given tenthes
unto Melchisedech, nor received the benediction of him: but he both gave tithes
and received the blessyng, as the less and inferior of the greater. Ergo,
Abraham was no Priest. And that the less and inferior person does receive
benediction of the greater and better person, Paul does manifestly declare in
his Epistle to the Hebrews.

Furthermore in the law of nature only, the first borne men were Priests,
now Abraham was not the first borne and the eldest son of Thara, although he
be first named in Genesis, among the sons of Thara, for it is written
there, that Thara being of the age of seventy years, begatte Abraham, Nathor
and Aram, but he is named there in the first place, not for his age, but for
his dignity, and because the promise of Christ was made first unto him.

Responsio.
It is to be answered, there is no absurdity to grant Abraham in the law of
nature to be both Priest and lay man. In taking a Priest in the large
signification, that is, for him which does give, and offer sacrifices unto God
with a sincere affection and pure mind, which also they did proteste with
offering of outward Sacrifices. Was not Abel a Priest, and yet also a shepherd?

Secondly, where it is to be objected that he was no Priest because he paid
tith, and received blessing, it follows not, for the Levites gave tenth of
tenth unto the high Priest, as it appears in the book of Numeri: but that
reason does only prove, that he was not the high Priest, but inferior unto
Melchisedech, of whom as of the chief Priest, the inferior Priest received
benediction.

Thirdly also Abraham, although he were not the first borne by nativity, yet
he was chief by dignity, and therefore Priestly dignity did not unaptly agree
unto him. Abel was not the eldest by birth, but he was the first by excellency
and dignity, and yet was he enobled with priesthode.

Thus much touching Abraham, who at the first (as Rabanus testifies and other)
was an Idolatre. His words be these: Adueniente Abraham in terram Canaan, quam
tunc Cananeus habitator tenebat, aperuisse ei dominus describitur, cui altar
ipse edificauit, quia spretis idolis gentium, vnius dei cultor fuit. Abraham
coming into the la^d of Canaan, which then the Cananites did inhabit, the
Lord appeared unto him, unto whom Abraham builded an altar: because forsaking
and co^temning the Idols of the gentiles, he became the worshipper of the true
God He died (as some record).35. years before Sem died. For Sem lived unto
the fifty year of the age of Esau and Jacob, but Abraham lived only unto
the.15. years of their age.

Isaac. 26.
ISaac was the son of Abraham, whom he had of Sara, being a very old woman,
and barren, and.90. years of age, before she conceived him, but Abraham had
him of her by promise. He was the figure of Christ, but saint Austen in his
book De Trinitate, calls him Christ, saying: Sicut Isaac Christus erat, cum
ad se immolandum ligna portabat. As Isaac was Christ, when he carried wood for
himself to be offered. But understand, that saint Austen means not Isaac to
be Christ in deed, but to be a tipe and signification of Christ.

Again in his book De ciuitate dei, he says: Therefore Isaac (as the Lord
bare his cross) so he bare wood for himself, to the place of sacrifice, upon
the which he should be laid.

Finally, because Isaac could not be slain, after his father was forbidden to
strike him, who was that Ram, which being offered, the sacrifice was
fulfilled with a signifieng blood. For when Abraham saw him, he was holden in
the bushes by the horns: who therefore was figured by him, but Jesus Christ,
being crowned of the Jews with a bush of thorns, before he was offered?

Isaac in the Hehrue, betokens laughing or gladness. For Abraham hearing the
promise of his son Isaac, of whom Christ the promised sede should be born, he
laughed in his heart, and seeing the day of Christ, greatly rejoiced. Isaac lived
with Sem. 110. years, with his father Abraham 75 years, with his son Jacob.
120. years. He died one year before Joseph was delivered out of prison.

Jacob. 27.
Jacob the son of Isaac, was called by another name Israel. He was the father
of the.xii. tribes, and of all the people of Israel, who of him were called
Israelites. Jacob betokens in Hebrew a supplanter or ouerthrower. For Jacob
betokens planta, the sole of the foot. For when he was born, he held the
sole of his brothers foot in his hand. He was borne.xv. years before the
death of Abraham, and.li. years before the death of Sem. He lived in Egypt with
his son Joseph.xvii. years.

Concerning this name Israel, diverse men have diverse judgments. Saint Hierom
In questionibus hebraicis, writes thus: Josephus in his first book of
antiquities does think, that Jacob was therefore called Israel, because he
stood against the Angel, which I diligently examining, could never yet find
in the Hebrew. And what shall it need me to seek the opinions of every man,
when that he who set the name, does expound the etymology thereof? Thy name
(says he) shall not be called Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: wherefore
Aquila does interpret it (...). id est. Quoniam regnasti cum deo. Symmachus
(...). id est, quoniam regnasti robore aduersus deum. Septuaginta and
Theodotion (...). id est. Quoniam inualuisti cum deo.

Saritha, which is derived of this word Israel, signifies a prince, and then
this is the sense: Thou shall not be called a supplanter, that is Jacob: but
thy name shall be called a prince with God, that is Israel. For as I am a Prince
and ruler, even so thou shall be called a prince, which wast able to wrestle
with me. If thou were able to strive with me, which am an Aungel: how much
more with men that is with Esau, whom thou ought not to fear.

That which in the book of names is interpreted Israel (that is a man or a
mind seeing God) which interpretacion is in every man's mouth. It seems to me
to be so interpreted more violently, then truly. For Israel in this place is
written with Iod, Sin, Resh, Aleph, Lamed, which is interpreted the prince of
God, or directed of God, that is, (...). But the Hebrew word signifieng a man
seeing God, is written with these letters. First this hebrew word Ish, which
betokneth a man is written with these 3. Aleph, Iod, Shin, ye other hebrew word
Raah, which betokens seeing, is written with these.iii. letters, Resh, Aleph,
He. Thirdly this hebrew word El, which betokneth god, or strong, is written with
these.2. letters Aleph, and Lamed. Although therefore they be of great authority
and eloquence, (and their shadow does seem to oppress us) which translate
Israel, a man or a mind seeing God, yet we are rather led with the authority
of the scripture, and of the Angel which called him Israel, then with the
authority of any secular eloquence.

Caietanus does say, that Israel is a compound word of Isra, which be tokeneth
to rule, and El, which is God: and of both these words joined together is
signified, Dominabitur deus, God shall bear rule. And of this that Jacob did
prevail in wrestling with the Angel, and because striving with a man, as
with Laban and his kindred, he did preuail: thou shall therefore be called Israel
(says the Aungel) that is, God shall rule, to signify, that God shall fight for
thee against al, and thou shall preuayl. The Angel in this place did not
change the name of Jacob into Israel, but this change was made afterward, in
the place called Bethel.

Question.
VVhither Jacob sinned in bying the birthright and enheritaunce of Esau, and
whither he lied, when he said to his father, I am Esau, thy first begotten
son.

Responsio.
Saint Austen in his book De ciuitate dei, answers after this manner:
Primatus maioris transfunditur in minorem, ex pacto and placito inter illos: eo
quod lenticulam quem cibum minor parauerat, mayor immoderatius concupirit.etc.
The preeminence of the elder is translated to the younger, by a covenant and
promise made between them, because that ye elder did vnmeasurably desire and
lust the potage, which meat the younger had prepared, and for that price sold
his birthright unto his brother by a solemn oath. VVher we may learn, that no
man is to be blamed and accused for eating any kind of meat, but for the
immoderat desire and greedy lust thereof. Isaac was old, and through age his
sight failed him. He wuld have blessed his elder son, and instead of him (not
knowing) blessed the younger son: who covering his hands and his neck with
goats skins, offered him self to his fathers hands, in the room of his elder
brother, who was al heary. This disceit of Jacob, that it should not be thought
any crafty disceit, but rather the mystery of some great thing should be
sought therein, the scripture has declared before, saying: Esau was a man
cunning in hunting. Jacob was a plain man abiding at home. This thing some of
our men have interpreted to have been done without disceit: whither it be
without disceit, simply or plainly, or rather done without fayning, which is in
Greek Aplastos, what is the disceit of a man without disceit in receiving this
blessing? And how can there be disceit in a simple or plain man? And what other
faining can there be of him, which does not lie, but some profound mystery of
truth? And a little after he says: Therefore the blessing of acob is the
preaching of Christ among all Gentiles. The law and the prophets were in
Isaac.etc. read the place, and there shall you find, that Jacob did not
offend, when he bought the birth right of Esau: and that he did not lie, when
he said to his father, yt he was his eldest son Esau. Saint Austen concludes
in the end of the same place with this exclamation. O res gestas, sed
prophetice gestas in terra, sed caelitus per homines, sed diuinitus. O things
done, but prophetically done in earth, but heavenly by men, but yet of God, so
that you must not consider the bare fact of Jacob, but the prophecy and
misterye signified thereby, which does excuse Jacob from offense and lying.
Chrysostom does not dissent from saint Austen, who writes upon that place
thus: Ne igitur hoc considera, quod mentita fuerunt quae dicebantura Jacob, sed
illud cogita, quod volens deus praedictionem impleri, omnia vt sic fiant,
dispensauit. etc. Do not thou therefore consider, that the words spoken of
Jacob, were lies, but think rather this, that God willing the prophecy to be
fulfilled, did dispense, that al things should be so done.

Obiectio.
But Jacob in bying the birthright of Esau, committed simonie, therefore in that
fact he offended.

The antecedents may be proved thus: All the first borne as long as the law of
nature did floorish (which the old patriarchs did keep) for as yet the law of
Moses was not given unto them that were priests. Forasmuch therefore as
priesthood was always holy and spiritual, he that bought birthright of the
first borne, was worthily compted to have committed simonie: besides this every
first borne by the title of his birthright, had two portions of his fathers
goods. When Isaac therefore the father of Jacob and Esau, was very rich, it is
very likely, that the birthright was much worth, and of great value. And so
Jacob obtaining the birthright for a trifle, disceiued his brother, and
craftily got great gains by him.

Responsio.
Lyranus discussing this reason, does say, that the title of the birthright
was Jacobs, by Gods determination, because it was said before, that the elder
shall serve the younger. Therefore, forasmuch as the interest of this
birthright was due by Gods ordinance unto Jacob, he did not disceiue Esau, nor
committed any fraud in byeng or rather recovering the birthright of him. And he
is not compted properly to have bought them, for by Gods ordinance they
pertained unto him, and no man does bye that which is his own. Therefore the
sense of this proposition (sell me thy birthright) is this: Give me those
things pertaining to thy birthright, which are mine, and because thou will not
give them freely, here I offer thee meat.

Rabbi Solomon to excuse Jacob from lying, does say, that the text must be
thus poynted: Ego sum, I am he which bring meat unto thee, but Esau is the
first begotten son. But this pointing does corrupt the sense. For if one
disceiue another by any craft of words, he cannot be excused from lying. But
the sincere and true explication of the story is this: Although Jacob were not
Esau in very person, yet he was in office and dignity concerning the title of
the birthright, and the blessing was due unto Jacob, and the meaning of this
enunciation (I am Esau thy eldest son) is this: I am he, to whom is due the
dignity and office of the byrthright And this phrase of spech, Christ him self
used, when he said of John Ipse est Helias, he is Helias. Yet Lyranus does say,
that there is no great necessity to excuse the fathers of the old testament from
lying, specially from that kind of lie, which is called, Mendatium officiosum.

Question.
What do you mean by the birthright of the first borne?

Responsio.
The Hebrews say, that it was the succession of the father in dignity, honor,
and bearing of rule. And that it had the authority of the younger brother,
which should rise in the sight of ye elder brother, and should show obeisaunce,
and minister unto him, even as children to their father.

Others do judge the first begotten to have received of their fathers goods
two portions, and that they call the birth right.

Isidorus with others, do suppose the birthright to be the pri^stes garments,
which the elder son having on with the fathers bl^ssing, did offer sacrifices
unto God.

Aegyptus. 28.
ALl Afric which is divided into so many provinces and countries, has not a
more noble, more famous and fertile region, nor beautified with more cities,
the^ Egypt. And that this region Egypt has growe^ so mighty in power and
multitude of men, cities, and riches, there is no other cause of so great her
succes, then the incredible plentifulnes of that country, which Nilus that
famous river, running through the middle thereof, and every year once flowing
over the face of the earth of the whole country, does bring, making moist and
fat all the land. For it reigns in Egypt very seldom, yea (and as Plato says)
never: but the air has a perpetual serenitie and fairenes, and for that cause
it was sometime called Aeria. The river Nilus does supply the room of the
early and latter rain, by the which there comes so great abundance of
corn, that Egypt has often times abundance thereof, when al other regions
lying above, are subject to famine and hunger, the which thing not only the
holy scriptures, but also profane histories do manifestly declare. Of that
rose this proverb: Aegyptus est totius mundi horreum. Egypt is the garner and
storehouse of all the world. As long as it was under the dominion of the
Romans, the Romans had not a more richer province belonging unto them, as
well for corn and pasture, as also for wine, sweet savors, and precious
flowers. The same fertility also is noted in the marvelous plentyfulnes of the
women of Egypt, for where, in other places it chances not very often, that women
bring forth two twyns at once, in Egypt one woman does bring forth three or
four children at one burden. And the eight month of deliuerau^ce which
patteth our women in danger of their life: is with them a most sure sign of
safeguard and health. Therefore for this notable plentifulnes, the Egyptians
challenge to them selves the prerogative of the first creation of man and beast.
They affirm also, that the use of ye sowing of corn was inverted amongst them,
and the Goddess of corn, which of the Romans is called Ceres, they call
Isidem, and her brother, which was also her husband, they called Osyrim. Isis
(say they) being priest of Jupiter, for fear of her father, taking certain
friends with her, went into a ship, and with a prosperous wind came from
Achaia into Egypt: and there finding rude people, taught them to til the earth,
and to sow seed therein, and at the time together the said seed, and to make
bread thereof. That same Isis also is reported to have found out the Egyptian
letters, and to have taught the people laws. Some affirm, that Chameses begat
Osyrim and Isidem, and when Isis found on the ground corn growing of it self,
she sought out the manner, how man might have the fruition thereof, and conserve
it and increase it by tillage. And Osyris departing from her, went into
Palestine, and to many other countries. This Chameses (compted Osyris father)
was the third son of Noe, whom the Scripture calls Cham, to whom Egypt did
fall for his part and lot. Some call him Jupiter, and his son Dionysius, of
whom (as they report) Hercules was begot, Of this river Nilus if you will learn
more, read Munsterus Cosmographie: yet note here one thing, that in the river
Nilus, lives the Serpent called Crocodilus, whom the Egyptians have in a
wonderful reverence, and do nourish the said Serpent, being put in a certain
lake, with bread, flesh, and wine, which is brought of strangers, that come to
see the said Serpent. This Serpent grows to a huge and great bigness, for his
eggs are as byg and as great, as Goose eggs, out of the which there comes a
^itle worm, which grows to the bigness of.xvi. or.xvii. cubits, he lacks
tongue, his body is merueilously defended by nature: for all his back is full of
skales, very hard, he has a long tail, and has in both sides of the mouth
many teeth, of the which two do chiefly appear out, he does not only eat
men, but also rent and tear with his nails all other beasts of the land,
which approaches to the river. His nails are sharper then the point of any
sword or knife, whatsoever he biteth with his teeth, it is never whole again.
He is very timorous and fearful, and will fle from them that pursue him, and
does pursue them that flee from him. When he is about to devour man, he
wepeth, whereof sprang this proverb, Crocodilae lachrimae, which may be applied
when any man does weep fainedly with his eyes, and yet goes nothing to the
heart, and means some mischief. Of this river Nilus rose also this other
proverb: Tanquam canis e Nilo, as the dog lappeth in the river Nilus, which
may be applied unto him, that has taken but a superficial taste, and very
slender knowledge of learning, or any other thing, but has tasted here a
piece, and there a piece, even as the Dogs when they thirst, dare not take
their whole draught for fear of the Crocodile, but as they do run, lap up
the water here and there.

Two tables of stone. 29.
OF what manner of stone these tables were made, it cannot be gathered of the
text. Rabbi Salamon does write, that they were made of the Saphyre stone, and
does say that the Lord showed unto Moses a mass of the same stone, out of the
which Moses did hew. 2 tables, and with that which was hewn of, he was made
very rich, and therefore it was said unto him: hew to thy self. It is in the
Hebrew, Dola tibi ad vtilitatem tuam. Hew to thy own profit. Haec Rabbi
Salamon. But this seems both fained and false, for if it should be so, he had
been more enriched by the fragments of the first two tables, which he brake
before. Also because Josephus makes no mention of what stone they were made,
there is no certainty of it, and Josephus was a long time before Rabbi Salamon.

Note one thing here. God said: Ego scribam, I will write, by the which words
it may be understand, that Moses did nothing in the first tables, he did
neither hew them, nor write in them. But for the second tables it seems that
he did hew them, but that the Lord him self did write in them the ten
precepts.

Angelus. 30.
ANgelus is a word of office, and not of nature, and it is a word common both
to the Latins and also to the Grecians, of who^ it is borrowed. It does signify
a messe^ger, or an embassedor, and therefore it is of a large signification, for
the preachers of truth are called angels, as in Malachi and in the apostle
Paul, for they are the messengers of the Lord of hosts. Saint Peter also
called the devils angels, and so does Paul also saying, that the faithful shall
judge the angels, Mala. 2. 1. Cor. 12. 2. Pet. 2. 1. Cor. 6. 2, Cor. 12.
and that the angel of Satan was sent unto him. But the scripture properlye
calls the blessed spirits of God, ministers, messengers, soldiers, and
angels.

The Saduceis denied that there were any angels* for Luke in the acts of the
apostle says thus: The Saduces affirm, that there is no resurrection, neither
angel nor spirit, the Pharisees confess both. But to say the truth, the whole
scripture does testify that there are angels, which shows in many places, that
they appeared unto men, and that they showed unto the^ the will and pleasure of
God, and to have executed and done his commandment. Christ him self disputing
in the gospel against the Saduceis, says: ye are disceiued, you know not the
scriptures, nor the power of God: for in the resurrection they neither marry
wives, Math. 22.
nor any are bestowed in marriage, but are as the angels of god in heaven Let
us believe therefore yt there ar angels, for the authority of the son of god, and
the verity of ye holy scriptures ought worthily to obtain more credit with us,
then the vain trifles of all the Saduces and wicked men. Yea the Poets
themselves and the Philosophers confessed, yt there were angels which they
called gods. For where as they fain the gods to have been received into the house
of the just men, they seem unto certain learned men to have meant none other
thing, then yt the holy scriptures do declare, yt is, Abraham and Lot to have
entertained angels in the stead of strangers and pilgrims. But howsoever it
be, it is most certain and true, both by the holy scripture, and also by
experience, that there are holy spirits of god (that is to say) good angels.
But what the nature of Angels is, it cannot exactly be expressed of any mortal
man. For there are many things in the order of creatures, the nature of whom
cannot be perfectly declared: yet not with standing they may somewhat be opened
unto the capacity of our understanding. Some do say, that Angels are good
spirits, ministers of a fiery nature, created for the service of God and of
good men. Other say, that Angels are heavenly spirits, whose service and
obsequy God uses, to execute al such things as he has decreed. Wherefore we
shall not be much disceiued, if we say, that Angels are good spirits and
heavenly, I mean incorruptible substaunces, created for the ministry of God
and man.

The scriptures both prophetical and Apostolical witness it, that the Angels
were created of God. For Paul recites that sentence of David, Heb. 1.
who makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire. The same
Apostle says, Coloss. 1
all things are made by Christ, which are in heaven and in earth, things
visible and unvisible, whether they be thrones, or dominations, or
principalities or powers. Wherefore these heretics lied which said, that the
Angels were helpers of the creation, and are coeternal unto the God of all
things. For God made both the Angels and all other creatures in time through
his son. But concerning the time, when they were made and created, whether it
were together with the light, before man or after man, and after all the rest
of the works of God, let him declare that knows any certaintye of it, more
then the scriptures do teach. The ancient Expositers of the scriptures, as
Epiphanius and Augustinus, do confess nothing to be found in the Scriptures
concerning that thing. But that which is not touched in the scriptures, is not
without danger enquired of, but it is without danger to be ignoraunte of it.
It is sufficient to know, that the Angels were made, at what time soever
they were made. Let us rather give God thanks, that he has created such
excellent Ministers for mankind. Let us live an holy and an angelical life
in the sight of the holy angels. Let us take heed, that he do not disceiue
under a fair show, that does transfigure him self into an angel of light.

But now let us se what manner of creatures angels be. They are heavenly
spirits and incorruptible, and most swift substances: we call them aptly
substaunces, that is essential creatures. For some deny them to be substances,
but feign angels to be nothing else, but certain qualities, motions, and
inspirations of good minds. But the canonical scripture calls them
ministers. Our savior says, that when we shall rise again in the last
resurrection, Math. 22.
we shall be like unto Angels. Saint Paul shows the son of God to be more
excellent then Angels, the which worship him as their God and creator.

The same Apostle says, thou shall read no where that the son of God took
upon him the nature of Angels, H^b 2.
but he took the seed of Abraham Which testimonies do most manifestlye
teach the Angels to be substaunces, and not qualities and motions in the
mind of men. What need I declare, how often they appeared unto men, in the
likeness and shape of men? Let us hold therefore and confess, the Angels to be
substaunces.

But those bodies both of young men and old men, in the which often times the
angels appeared unto our fathers, were not their proper and natural bodies,
but they took and borrowed them some other where for the time, and for the
capaciti of our imbecility and weakness. But what manner of bodies they were,
whose shape they took upon them, or from whence they took them, or where they
laid them down again, after they were discharged, it is very hard to be
declared. cap. 59.
Saint Austin in his Enchiridion which he wrote unto Laurentius says thus: who
can expres with what bodies the angels appeared unto men, which were not only
seen, but also touched and felt, and again brought certain visions, not of
corporal substance, but of a spiritual power, to be seen not of the corporal
and bodily eyes, but of the spiritual eyes, and of the mind, and that they
spoke not unto the ear outwardlye, but inwardly in the minds of men, being
there them selves placed. As it is written in the book of the Prophets, the
aungel of the Lord told me, which spoke in me: for he says not, which spoke
unto me, but which spoke in me. And they did appear in their sleep, and
talked with men in their dreams. For we read in the Gospel: Behold, the
angel of the Lord appeared unto him in his dream, saying. etc.

By this means the Angels declared them selves not to have palpable bodies.
And here rises a hard question, how our fathers washed the angels feet, and
how Jacob wrestled with the angel, and touched him sensibly: when such
things are had in question, and every man makes such conjectures of them as he
is able, their wits are not unprofitably exercised, if there be joined with
all, moderate and quiet disputacion and reasoning of them, which take upon them
to know such things as they are ignorant of. For what needs it, that those
things, or such like should be affirmed, ordained, or defined with danger,
where as we may be ignorant of them without fault or blame? Thus far saint
Augustine.

In those and like causes let us acknowledge the omnipotency and marvelous
dispensation of him, who does what things he will, unto whom it is no hard
matter to create substaunces meet and agreeable unto his purpose, whereas he
made of naught, al visible and invisible creatures. The angels that is, those
celestial Legates and heavenly Ambassadors, being of their nature most ready
and swift spirits, by the divine will and working of God, are now conversant in
the heavens, but as soon as it shall please the Lord and governor of al things,
out of hand they are present in the earth with men, unto whom they are sent
from above of god, and they remain in the earth, at one time with one, and at
one time with an other. Not that they are not contained in one place* For when
the angel brought tidings unto the women of the resurrection of Christ, and
was at the sepulcher, he was not at the same instant also in heaven: for it is
only God, which cannot be comprehended in one only place, for he is present
every where.

Also, the Angels are not slow like unto corruptible and mortal me^, neither
are they moved, feling any labor or wearynes in their journey, yet they are
aptly said in the scriptures, to ascend up into the heavens, and to descend
again unto us upon the earth. We believe, our souls, as soon as they pass
out of the body, to enter into heaven. For the Lord said in his Gospel, Ioh ^5.
Luke 23. et. 16.
from death he passed unto life. And again: To day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. And we read of poor Lazarus: it chanced the poor man to die, and he
was carried of the Angels into Abraham's bosom. Unto this end the saying of
Daniel does seem to pertain, who says: As yet truly I speaking and praying and
confessing my fault, and the fault of my people Israel, and pouring out my
petitions before the Lord my god, that man Gabriel, whom I saw in the beginning
of my vision, came unto me flying with speed, behold here our souls are carried
up into heaven of the Angels, the which also in an other place are said to be
rapt and carried out of hand in a moment into heaven. Furthermore, as soon as
Daniel had prayed unto the Lord, without any long tariaunce, an angel flying
most swiftly (for so the scripture does speak according to our understanding)
is present with him praying. Angels therefore are very swift and speedy,
oppressed with no burden, nor hindered by any let or impediment, from those
things for the which they are sent from above. Although they be contained in a
certain place as creatures (albeit not circumscribed) and are moved by a
certain way and means agreeable to that spiritual nature. Perchance this
treatise requires, that some thing be spoken of the strength, power, and
fortitude of aungells. But to what purpose is it to use many words in a plain
and manifest matter? Since that the Lord which sends the angels is almighty,
there is nothing which they in their Messages are not able to do, there is
nothing in the world that is able to resist the mynysters of the omnipotente
God. Neither without some cause are the Angels called powers and virtues: I
will recite one thing amongst many, and that shall not be the most and greatest.

One Angel in one night, without any preparaunce or difficulty, slew in the
tents of the Assirians, at the walls of Jerusalem, 185000. of the strongest
and most valiant soldiers. In Daniel we have this description of an Angel,
by the which both the might and woorthynes of Angels may be gathered. His body
was like the Chrisolite, and his face to look upon like the lightning, and his
eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and feet were like in color to
polished brass, and the voice of his words was like to the voice of a
multitude. So there is no cause why we should use many words, in disputing of
the knowledge and wisdom of the Angels, for the nature of them is
unmeasurable, yet they are but creatures. But as much as pertayneth to their
ministeries and offices, they are most wise instructed, and perfect. For he
that sends them, is the very eternal wisdom, who infourmeth his Ministers
most perfectly.

Of the orders of Angels.
Concerning the multitude and orders of Angels, there be many subtle
disputacions. The scriptures do plainly declare, that there he Angels
innumerable, as it is written in Daniel: Mill millia ministrabant ei, cap.
and decies mill myriades stabant ante illum. Thousand thousands ministered
unto him, and ten thousand thousands stood before him.

Christ also said unto Peter: Think thou, that I cannot pray to my father,
and he will give me more then twelve legions of Angels? Math. 28.
Saint Paul also does write of an innumerable company of angels. Heb. 12.
Ye are come (says he) unto the City of the living god, unto the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to the innumerable company of angels. The most part of writers
divide this innumerable multitude of Angels into nine companies: those
companies again they reduce into three Hierches or holy gouernaunces, every
one of the which they affirm to have three orders. Of the first order are
Seraphim, Cherubin, and the Thrones. Of the second are dominations, verues, and
powers. Of the third are principalities. Archaungels and Angels.

They declare also what difference is betwixt them, and what is the property of
every order. But Saint Austen in his Encheridion, writes thus: What
difference is betwyxt the dominations, cap. 58.
principalities and powers, let them declare that can, if they can bring
proof of their declaration. I confess my self to be ignorant herein.

And again, against the Luscilbanistes unto Crosius, he writes thus. Truly,
says ye Apostle, whither they be thrones, dominations, principalities or
powers, I believe therefore most constantly, that there be in the celestial
furniture, both thrones, dominations, principalities and powers, and I believe
undoubtedly, yt they differ in some thing, but what they ar, and what is their
difference, I know not, neither I think my self to be in any danger through
ignorance thereof, as if I should by disobedience break Gods commandments.
And a little after in the same place he shows, that we ought not to be curious
and busy in searching such matters. Whose counsel truly ought to be
embraced, seeing the scriptures (who contain al things necessary for our
salution) entreat nothing of these things. But this we cannot deny, but that
those orders are expressed in the scriptures, wherefore it is mete they were
somewhat expounded. These holy celestial spirits are generally named angels,
because they be the messengers of the high God. They be called Archangels, when
they are sent in great and weighty affairs of the Lord, bringing tidinges, or
executing hard and divine matters. 1 Thessalonians. 4
For so we read in saint Paul, that the Lord will come down from heaven,
with the calling and the voice of an Archangel and the tromp of God. For (that
we may compare the lesser things with the great) we see kings and princes to
appoint none but chief persons to execute their weighty business. They are
called Throni, either be cause they always stand by the throne of God, either
because God is said of the prophets to have placed his seat among his angels,
and to be carried of them, as though it were in a princelye littre, according
unto David's saying: psalm. 18.
He bowed the heavens and came down, and darkness was under his feet. And he
rode upon Cherub, and did fly, and he came flying upon the wings of the wind.
The description also of the chariot and the throne of God is well known in
Ezechiel. They are called dominations, principalities and powers, because god
governs his impery, and exercises his power in the world through the
ministry and service of the Angels. In like sort also they are called the
strength and the host or the heavenly soldiers of the Lord. For God is
compassed about with them as with a guard, using them as his garrisons, and is
called the God of Sabbath, or the God of hosts, the Lord (I say) of all
Angels, spirits, and creatures, whose service he uses, when, how, and how
much it pleases him.

Saint Hierome thinks, that the Angels are called Cherubim, of the multitude
of their science and knowledge. Other expound them swifte. They have this name
Seraphim of brightness, or because they are lykened unto the clear and shining
fire, or because they burn with love.

What honor ought to be given unto the angels.
We must beware by all means lest we attribute in any wise, to much unto the
angels, against the order of true religion, and that we do not worship,
invoke, or honor them. For when men hear that angels are given them of God,
as Ministers, and that by the means of them God does benefit the^, the^ they
judge by and by, all honor to be due unto the^, as unto God. But true and
sincere godlynes teaches us, that God is the true and only author of all
goodness, and that the angels are but Gods Ministers and instruments, by ye
which he worcketh. As for example, we see the Sun, Moon and stars, the
Patriarchs, the Prophets, and ye Apostles, to be Gods Ministers. Who having
his right wits, will worship or call upon the sun or the stars, although
they be most excellent creatures, and profitable unto man? And who (I pray you)
being of a right faith, did ever worship the Patriarchs, Prophets, or
Apostles, with divine honor, although they were endued with most notable
gifts, and did many great miracles? We give the honor only unto God,
acknowledging God to work in his Saints, the which Saints with the holy
angels desire nothing less, then to be worshipped of us. Lib. 2. cap. 17.
Lactantius has a true saying in the book of his institutions: The angels
(says he) being immortal, will not in any wise suffer themselves to be called
gods, whose office only and duty is to be at the beck of God, and to do
nothing, but at his commandment. For God rules the world, even as a
province is ruled of a President, whose officers no man will call his fellows,
although things be done by their industry and means. And therefore Saint
Augustine said not without cause: when the angels of God hear, then God
himself hears in them, as in his true Church not made with hands. If we
vewe and examine the Scriptures narowly, we shall find in diverse places, the
name of God and of angels to be put indifferently for one. For the angels are
as causes remote and isntrumental (as they term it) but God is the most
immediate principal and proper cause. For in the Acts of the Apostles we
read, how that Stephen said: After.40. years ended, Actor. 7.
the angel of the Lord appeared in the deserte in mount Sina. And by and by
he says: The voice of the Lord came unto him, I am the God of thy father. etc.
He calls him the Lord, whom a little before he called an angel, that is,
because he believed the angel to say and to do all things, at the
commandment of God: so that thee saying and doing is to be imputed unto God
as author, and the angels are but as instruments. Likewise in the book of
the judges he is called the Lord, which a little before was called an angel.
Cap. 6. Gene. 16.
Hagar, the hand maid of Sara, received a great benefit of the angel (...)
called Petrobrusiani and Henriciani. And this was the first heresy which
openly condemned the Baptism of infantes. Affirming stiffely both in word and
in deed, Baptism only to appertain unto the adult, and not unto infantes.
Notwithstanding they used a far other trade and usage, then they which in
our time dwelling in the lower Germany and in Belgica, brought in again the
heresy of the Anabaptists For they took away from infantes not only their
Baptism and their faith, but also their salvation and the kingdom of God,
which they judged to pertayne only unto them that are baptized and believe.
For these are their words as they be rehearsed by Petrus Cluniacensis: He that
believes and is Baptized, shall be saved. These words of Christ do plainly
show, that no man, except he believe and be Baptized, that is, except he
profess the Christians faith, and receive his Baptism, can be saved: for it
is not one of them alone, but both together which does save. Whereupon
although infantes be Baptized of you, yet notwithstanding, because they are not
able through their tender age to believe, they can in no wise be saved. But
these men in our time (which opinion was never heard before) teach and believe,
that all infants, yea the children of the Paganes and infidels without any
other means at all, and without any pledge of grace, are saved, and obtayn the
kingdom of heaven by the virtue of the death and Passion of Christ. And this
heresy, although it prevailed for a time, and took place among a great
multitude in France, yet notwithstanding, as concerning the error of the
Baptism of infants, and the rebaptizing of such as were of adulte age, it
failed and surceased. For the Valdenses, which otherwise were called Picardi
(of whose sect there is a great number remaining in Morauia, and in other
places of Bohemia nighe unto it) although they noted many abuses and enormities
in the Romish Church, for the which cause, at this day they are separated
from the communion and fellowship of that Church, yet they both allow the
Baptism of infantes to be agreeable unto the Scriptures, and also use it and
put it in practice. Wherefore this error lay a sleep until this our age,
before that in the year of our Lord. 1522. one Thomas Munserus a fantastical
and a seditious man sowed first the seed of this heresy, which afterward
multiplied and increased excedingly, and infected the minds of many men, being
of an immoderate and inconsiderate zeal toward God. Of the which heresy,
one Melchior Rink, Baltha, Hoebmayer, and Michael Satelar were authors, until
at the last in the year of our Lord. 1532. one Melchior Hofmannus a courrier
by craft, brought in this new contagion, with other more errors into Germany,
no less pernicious and hurtful. Which errors one Vbbo borne in Friseland,
and one Memno a Frisian also afterward much confirmed and published. After ye
death of this Memno one Theodoricus Philippus took his part, being a man of
no less zeal then he was, of like eloquence, but of greater learning and
knowledge: which certain books set forth by him of late years, do declare,
in so much that it is to be lamented, that so good a wit, adourned with so
many good dowries, did employ his study rather to establish an heresy, and to
maintain scismes, then advance and enlarge the true Church. Although he be
not so evil as some of the same sect be, and does correct certain absurd and
monstrous errors of theirs: The folowers of this Memno, to whom succeeded
Theodoricus, were for the most part, all they which dwelling in the parts of
Belgica, and the parts of the lower Germany, maintained this Anabaptisticall
heresy. In whom a man may perceive the arguments and tokens of a godly mind,
which being sturred through a certain blind zeal, have swarued from the
true sense of the Scripture, rather through ignorance, the^ through malice,
which thing may well appear by this, that they did always most earnestly
resist the co^motions and sturres of them of the City of Monasteir, and of the
town of Baten, who endeavored to place a certain new kind of the kingdom of
Christ, by destroying the wicked by external force and power, teaching the
true restorning and enlarging of the Church to consist only in ye cross.
Wherefore such as these be, may seem worthy rather of pity and correction,
then of persecution and utter destruction. Unto whom the saying of Saint
Augustine disputing of the Manachies, may be well applied, whose words are
these: Although God subuerte and overthrow the erroneous and false kingdoms,
he wills notwithstanding the men themselves, for so much as they are men, to
be amended, rather then to be destroyed. Which thing also Saint Augustine
affirms of the wicked Donatistes and the Rogatistes, saying: that they were
like in this unto the Jews, which had a zeal toward God, but not according
to knowledge, except only those, which with a froward mind did fight
against the truth, knowing it to be the truth. Whose impiety does pass
idolatry, against the which sin there was a mortal punishment ordained,
but because a man cannot easily be convicted of that crime, which lies hid in
the heart, therefore he judges that all men rather ought with lenity to be
corrected, and no severity to be showed, but only unto such as are unquiet
and troublesome, whom Saint Augustine notwithstanding in an other place would
have rigorously punished by fear and the sword of the Emperor. etc. Well, I
will spoke more of the Anabaptists, when I shall make aspeciall and proper
lecture against their errors.

Praelectio quinta habita die Martis.xx. die Februarii. Anno. 1560. The
difference of the old Testament, from the new, with certain notes and rules,
how to understand the holy Scriptures.
I Entend by gods grace at this present to descend to the third limme of my
general partition, and this lesson shall consist in two parts.

First I will discourse, what is the difference between the old testament and
the new.

Secondly, I will declare certain notes and rules, how to understand the holy
scriptures.

For the first you shall observe and note, that the difference between the old
testamente and the new, stands not in substance, but only in form and
manner of administracion thereof, and to speak plain, in certain accidental
circumstaunces.

Concerning the substance, all the fathers and the whole church under the old
testament had these six chief and substancial points of Salvation, that we
have in the new testament, which are these.

1. The same doctrine. 2. The same faith. 3. The same spirit. 4. The same
hope. 5. The same Invocation. 6. The same sacraments in substance.
Doctrina.
For the first, that is doctrine, Our doctrine is the doctrine of the Gospel.
And that the fathers of the old testament were not destitut and void of the same
doctrine, Saint Paul is a sufficient witness, saying: Euangelium dei, ante
quidem promisit deus per prophetas suas in scripturis sanctis de filio suo etc.
Epist^ Rom^
The gospel he promised before by his prophets in the holy scriptures,
concerning the same Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the sede of David
appertayning to the flesh, and declared with great power to be the son of
god.

What can be spoken more clear and plainly? The gospel which was preached
unto the church, was promised in times paste by the prophets in the holy
scriptures, that is, that the son of God should come in to the world to
save them which do believe.

Fides.
Secondly, they which do communicate in the same doctrine, cannot have a
distinct and diverse faith: for faith comes by hearing, Rom ^
and hearing by the word of God.

Are not Abraham and other fathers of the old testament put forth unto us as
presidents and patrons of faith? Saint Paul does teach, Epis^ Rom^ cap. ^
that faith is to be imputed unto us for righteousness. And it was counted unto
Abraham not a strange and diverse faith, but the same which does lean to the
promise of god, and trusts in the blessed seed: he calls him father, not
only of the circumcised, but also of them which should go and follow in the
same steps of faith, which was in Abraham, before he was circumcised.
Abraham and the fathers, believed that Messiah should come to save them, and we
believe that he is already come to save us, and here is all the difference
betwixt their faith and ours.

Spiritus.
Thirdly, that both they and we were and ar governed with one and the self same
spirit of god, Paul does give us a godly testimony. Quicunque spiritu dei
ducuntur, hii sunt filii dei. As many as are led by the spirit of god, they
are the sons of god. And so by a conversion, as many as be the sons of god,
are led with the sprite of god, But who will deny Abraham and other fathers of
the old testament to be the children of god, as both god him self and Moses do
call them?

Again, the fathers and the prophets could not foreshew al ye mysteries of
christ and his church, (which the Apostles do testify to be fulfilled) yea
every word, unless they had been adourned with the same spirit, where with the
Apostles afterward were fully instructed.

Saint Austen cone^steth to the same saying. Eodem spiritu fidei a prophaetis
illa futura videbantur, 2. de ^ato o^ali ^n pe^ et cae ^5
quae a nobis facta creduntur, with the same spirit of the faith were those
things seen of the prophets to come to pass, which are believed of us to be
done.

And a little after he says, we believe to be saved by the grace of our Lord
Jesus even as they were, not by the law of Moses, by the which sin is not
healed but acknowledged.

But now the righteousness of God is made manifestly without the law, and
witnessed by the law and the Prophets: if it be made manifest now, even so was
it then also, but in a manner secretly, which was signified by the vayl ot the
temple. Which veil rent in pieces at the death of Christ, to signify the
revelation thereof, and then also was this grace of the only mediator betwixt
God and man, Veil of the temple. 1. Fleese of wolle. 2.
Jesus Christ, in the people of God.

But it lay hidden, as rain is in a fleese of wol, which rain God does so
segregate and divide, not of duty, but voluntary unto his enheritaunce: But now
the fleese being dried, that is, the Jews being rejected, it is seen open and
manifest, as it were in a plain flower among all the people. These be the
words of Saint Austen, by the which it is evident, that they of the old
Testament, had the same spirit with us of the new Testament.

Obiectio.
If this should be true, how say you then to Saint John, who writes: Nondum
erat Spiritus sanctus, quia Jesus nondum erat glorificatus, the holy Ghost was
not yet, because that Jesus was not yet glorified.

Responsio.
John speaks not in this place of the substance of the holy spirit, which
is of one assent, and being coeternall with the father and the son: But he
speaks of the excellent gifts and graces, which were poured and given to the
faithful, after the ascension of Christ. As to speak with diverse tongues,
and such like.

Also the spirit with his gifts was not so vulgar, so copiously and
abondantly poured upon the faithful and believing, as it was after Christ was
glorified. Speak with diverse tongues. 3.
So that John does not deny Simpliciter, the grace of the spirit to have been
given before the death of Christ, but that it was not so clear, so lyghtsome,
and so well known, as it should be after.

Spes.
Fourthly, concerning the hope that they did communicate with us, although a
carnal and a temporal felicity, and a land flowing with milk and honey was
promised the^, yet they did not stand upon that only, but looked and hoped by
signification of the externe and outward felicity, for a celestial, heavenly,
eternal, and everlasting felicitye and bliss. Saint Paul does show, that the
fathers by that visible inheritance, did hope for a perpetual inheritance, so
that their hope and ours does shoot at one scope and mark.

Inuocatio.
Fifthly, concerning invocation, the fathers did cry and call upon no other, but
upon the only god our creator, and did believe that he would be merciful unto
the^.

And although the invocation of gods name, by the mediatio^ of Christ, was not
vulgar and common among them (as Christ himself says in the gospel,
hactenus non petiistis quicquam in nomine meo, John ^
Hitherto you have asked nothing in my name) yet they were not ignorante of
that mediation, for whose sake they were heard. Daniel praying unto god,
desires god to be herd propter dominu^, Dani^^
that is, for Christ promised.

Daniel. s. 4.
Finally, when they did pray, saying: remember Lord, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
they had no respect to the persons, or to the souls of the holy fathers, but
unto the promise which was made unto them, which was spoken unto Abraham in
this manner: In semine tuo benedicentur omnes tribus terrae. In the.7. and.28.
of Esaias it clearly appears, that god spared the city for the virgins sons
sake, Christ.

Sacramenta.
Syxtly and lastly, they had the same Sacraments, (although not in one form,)
that we have. Sacraments 5.
That which baptism is unto us, circumcision, the cloud, and the sea was unto
them. That which the sacramental bread and wine are unto us, the same was the
Paschall Lamb, Manna, and the hard rock unto them. Saint Paul to the
Corinthians says.

Corinthians. 6.
Brethren I would not that you should be ignorant, 1. Co^
that al our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and
were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and all did eat the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink, the same spiritual drink, for they
drancke of the spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ.

Thus have you heard showed by the open testimonies of the Scriptures, that the
fathers of the Testament had with us one and the same doctrine, one and the
same faith, one and the same spirit, one and the same hope, one and the same
invocation, one and the same Sacraments (although not in one form,) so that
in substance there is no difference between them, and us.

Notwithstanding, in circu^stau^ces there is a great difference, as you shall now
hear.

The circumstaunces in number are three.
First all things of the new Testament are more clear and brighte, then they
were in the old Testament. Moses put on a veil and covering over his
countenance, for the children of Israel could not behold his face, 2, Co^
but we of the new Testament cannot only look upon the face of Moses
uncovered, but also we, beholding the most comfortable and pleasant face of
Christ, do rejoice to see our savior and salvation set out plainly before our
eyes, and therefore Christ said in Luke: Beatioculi qui vident quae vos videtis,
Luk^
blessed are the eyes which se those things which you do see, for I say unto
you, Luk^
many Prophets and kings would have seen that you do see, Simeon. 7.
and have not seen: and to have heard those things which you do hear, and
have not heard. Simeon that just man, did count him self most blessed, when he
saw Christ in the temple, and took him in his arms, and desired forthwith to
die, saying: Nunc dimittis seruum tuum domine, now Lord let thou thy
servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. And although
so great light did not shine to ye fathers, as it does unto us in Christ being
exhibited unto us, yet had they sufficient, for to obtain salvation by Christ.

Aenigma. 8
We also at this time do see Christ, as it were In aenigmate, in a glass: which
although we do not see him in his glory, face to face, yet it is sufficient for
salvation. Cor*


There is a godly similitude set forth by learned me^ touching ye same purpose.
Al though ye sun shines not so bright, and so full in ye morning, as it does
in ye midday, yet the wayfaring and traueling men do not in their journey
expecte and look for the full risyng of the sun, but they take and go
forward in their viage, if they may see which way to go. So some do think, ye
portion of light which did shine in the morning to ye fathers of the old
testament, to be sufficient to salvation, which light (faith being their guide)
brought them to eternal blessedness.

But unto us in the new testament (after ye day star of the morning) is
risen, Day star. 9
is borne, is given the very bright and clear sun of righteousness, Jesus
Christ.

The second circumstaunce,
The second circumstance is, that in ye old Testament were many types, shadows
and figures, but we in the new Testament have received the thing it self,
Typus. 10
that was then figured, and fore signified.

Therefore what God promised unto them, he has performed and given unto us.
They believed Christ to come, and to deliver the faithful: We believe, that he
is come, (...). 10.
and has accomplished all things. Our Lord Christ said in Matthew. Lex and
Prophetae vsque ad Iohannem. As Eo tempore regnum dei annunciatur, and qui vis
in illud vim facit.

The law and the Prophets Prophesied unto John, Unto John.11. Violent take it.
12.
and from the time of John the kingdom of heaven suffered violence, and the
violent take it by force. By the which this is derived, that all shadows and
figures then signifieng things to come, do cease and fall away, when the
thing it self that was figured, is come and made present.

Moreover the yoke and burden which our fathers did bear, are taken from our
shoulders. Their kind of worshipping God was onerous and paynfull, as the
Aaronical priesthood. The tabernacle or temple decked and furnished with
things most exquisite and costly, the diverse kind of sacrifices, with a great
number of such like things. But Christ the complement and fulfiller of all
laws and sacrifices, has delivered us from such rites and ceremonies, both
onerous and sumptuous, and has given unto us very few extern things: that is
to say, Only ye preaching of his word, and the administration of his
Sacraments, which are but two in number.

Saint Paul in the Epistle to the Galathians brings for this purpose a
goodly allegory of two mothers, (...) 4.
the one named Agar, Agar et Sara. 13.
which gendreth unto bondage, the other named Sara, which gendreth unto
liberty and fredome.

By the which two women, he signifies two manner of doctrines, the legal
doctrine, and the Evangelical.

The law gendred the holy fathers and the Prophets unto bondage, not yt they
should be bond slaves, but that they should be retained under a discipline,
which as a scholemaister should lead them to Christ the perfection and
performaunce of the law. The Gospel gendreth unto liberty, and makes us free
from al bonds and burdens of the law, And that is, that Sara the free mother,
which gives us the seed of life, does fashion us forth into the light, does
norishe us in her bosom, having for us both milk and whole meat, that is,
the holy Gospel wherewith she brings us up, noorisheth us, and preserves us.

The third circumstaunce.
The third circumstaunce is this, the people of God in the old Testament were
contained and shut up within streit and narrow bounds and limittes (as the
Prophet David says. (...). 76 (...). 9. (...) 10 (...) 16.
) Olim notus in Judea deus, et Israel magnum nome^ eius. But now seying yt
Christ is exhibited unto us, his people are dispersed through the whole world,
as it is written: In omne^ terra^ exiuit sonus eoru^, et in fines terrae verba
eoru^, Also in Matthew Christ says. Ite et predicate euangeliu^ omni creature.

In times paste the noble and godly men, the kings and the Prophets might
have been nombred, for they were only in the land of promise.

But now, who is able to recite and nombre the kings, the princes, the
nobility, the Prophets, the Bishops, the Martyrs, the Doctors and all other
honorable personages of both sorts and kinds, beside the inferior sort of
people, which all not only Judea has and does give and bring forth, but also
Arabia, Mesopotamia, Persia, Egyptus, and to be short al ye.iiii. costs of the
world east, south, north and weast. To al kingdoms is preached the free
remission of sins, all the faithful of all kingdoms are received into the
favor and grace of God. All people have the knowledge of the Lord and his
word. Finally, where a land terrestrial and earthlye was promised unto them,
a land celestial and heavenly is promised unto us, The land of living. 14
as David writes in the Psalm. psalm. ^
Credo videre bona domini in terra viuentium.

To make an end of this matter, both succinctly and plainly, bear this
lesson away.

Both the Testaments are al one, for in both there is al one and the same God
the father, the same Christ the son, the same holy ghost.

And the divine and godly nature knows neither oldnes nor newenes, but
certain points are changed and made new only externely and outwardly.

Choice of meats. 15. Linsey wolsey. 16.
The Jews had choice of meats, we eat all manner of meats, and none are
forbidden us.

The Jews were forbidden to wear Linsey wolsey: we may wear al manner of
garments, and all manner of cloth.

The Jews were forbidden to plow the ground with Ox and Ass together: we may
till the ground with all manner of cattle, mete for the same turn.

To be short, in the stead of so many diverse kinds of Sacrifices, we have but
only one mystical Sacrifice.

In stead of the holy Temple of Jerusalem, we have a Church spread through
the whole world.

Sabbatum. 17.
In stead of the paynefull circumcision, is brought in the easy bath of
Baptism: the Sabbath is changed into the sunday.

In stead of Moses the servant of God, is succeeded Christ the son of God.
For these things, and many other that are altered and changed, it is called
the new Testament, not for that it is utterly an other Testament, then it was
before, but that it is otherwise given and taught.

Of the Jews such as through hope of heavenly life did live in chearefulnes
of the spirit, were also within the compass of the new Testament.

Again, those men now a days which do measure and judge holiness by
outward ceremonies, being cold in charity, and hot in vengeance, do yet
stand and continue still within the compass of the old Testament.

Thus I have at large showed you the difference between the old Testament and
the new.

Now I would also give you notes and rules, how you may attain to the true
meaning and understanding of both the Testaments, but time will not suffer me.
Yet I will open the door, and show you, how you may enter into these
heavenly houses of Gods book.

First you shall observe and note, that there be two worthy days men (if I
may so term them) which teach us to attayn to the very true sense and
meaning of the holy Scriptures.

The first, is Spiritus sanctus, the holy Ghost.

The second is, the word of God.

Concerning the spirit, Christ says in the gospel of John. Spiritus sanctus
quem mittet pater in nomine meo, omnia vobis suggeret, quae locutus sum vobis.
John
The holy ghost, whom the father will send in my name, shall bring you all
things to remembrance which I have told you. And Paul writes, 1. Co^
that Spiritus profunda dei scrutatur. The spirit sercheth al things, yea ye
deep things of God. Likewise saint John in his first Epistle says. Vnctio
docebit vos omnia, you need not that any man teach you, Vnctio^. 18.
but the anointing teaches you all things. 1. Io^


Obiectio.
In deed says our adversaries, these things are true, but we destitute and
void of the spirit of GOD, therefore we cannot attain to the true meanyng^
of the Scriptures.

Responsio.
(...). 8.
I answer, if you be void of gods spirit, how dare you be so bold to call your
selves christians, seeing ye Paul to the Romans does teach, yt they be not of
Christ, which has not his spirit. I do not mean here, yt every man has the
like gift of the spirit, but the degrees of the spirit are given, as it
pleases God, to some more, and to some less. And he that is a true Christian
man, has at the least this spirit, that he does know what things are
necessary to his salvation, which necessaries are contained in the holy
Scriptures.

The second days man, which teaches us to inuestigate and search out the
truth of the holy sciptures, is gods word it self. For it is mete and
convenient, yt we judge that place of scripture, which is obscure and dark,
by an other place which is more clear and open. And to these two vmpers and
days men, we may couple and adioyne the third, which is the consent and
authority of the catholic Church. But yet not so, as though the Church were
the chiefeste vmper and lady and maistres over the word.

Question.
Here will be said, how can we obtain and purchase unto us these two days men,
the holy spirit, and the word of God?

(...). 119
Responsio.
Concerning the first interpreter and vmper, which is gods spirit, we must
knock at the ears of God with fervent and devout prayers: David prayed,
saying. Retege oculos meos, vt considere^ mirabilia de lege tua, open mine
eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy law. ^m
Also in an other place: Doce me iustificationes tuas, Iustifications. 19,
intellectu^ da mihi, et scrutabor ma^data tua. Teach me O Lord thy statutes,
give me understanding, and I will search thy commandments.

Saint Paul also prays in his Epistles, that the spirit of God and heavenly
wisdom might be given to them, (...). ad ^. 1
to whom he wrote, and that God would lighten and open their eyes, to the
knowledge of the will of God.

Concerning the second interpreter and vmper, which is the word of God, we must
employ our industry and diligence, in earnest reading and study, whereby we may
be able to confer place with place, and to pronounce and understand those
places which are obscure and darcke, by those places which are manifest and
plain.

^n. 4. ^m. 4.
S. Paul warns and exhorts Timothy, Vtincumbat lectione, that he should
apply to reading, and Paul him self when he was in prison at Rome, prayed that
his books and parchement might be sent him from Troada, which he had left
there. Swinckfeldius.


And here by the way, we may note the Swinckfeldians and other fantastical
heads, which do deprave the holy Scriptures and the word written, calling
them Egena elementa, bare and naked elements and letters. They trustyng to
spiritual revelations saying, that they ought not to pass for the Scriptures
written, showing forth their folly: Where contrary wise the holy vessel of God
Saint Paul took great care for his books and writings, which he had left
with his dear friend Carpus at Troada, and did earnestly desire, that they
might be sent him with expedition. For although he were then old, and almost
at deaths door, yet he gave him self to the readyng of Scriptures. And will
those hellhoundes prefer their own judgments and found doctrines, before
so holy an Apostle? God amend them, or else root them out.

Upon this we may infer and conclude, that they which slide and fall into
errors by expou^ding the scriptures, fall by their own folly, for that they
give not them selves sufficiently unto prayer nor reading and study,
accordingly as they are bound to do.

But there is one caution above all to be observed, when we come to read the
scriptures, we must put away al affections and singularity. We must come to
learn, and not to wrest and writhe the scriptures (will they, nil they) to
serve our fantastical brains and affections, as the Arrians, the Pelagians,
the Papists and other sectaries do, Pelagius. 20
who rack and rent the scriptures from their natural and true sense and
meaning to frame their heresies and false opinions. This shall be sufficient for
the first part.

Now to the second part of this Prelection, that is, to the delivery of four
rules, how to understand the holy Scriptures.
Prima regula.
THe first rule is this, we must take heed in our interpretations, that we
admit not nor allow any exposition, which is against the received articles
of our faith, contained either in the symbol, of the Apostles, or any other
aunciente symbol Simbole.
or Creed. As the symbol of Nice, Constantinople, and the symbol of
Athanasius. Therefore reading these words in John (Pater mayor me est.) (The
father is greater then I.) We must considre, that to co^stitute any inequality
in the divinity between the father and the son, John.
, is contrary to the articles of our faith. And therefore we ought to believe and
expound those words, otherwise then the words does show in the first face,
and to seek some other or mo places in the scripture, that do answer to the
true meaning of these words. As Pater et ego vnu^ sumus. And in thepistle of
John. Hii tres vnu^ sunt: Ibide^ Epist^ Heb^
these three be one. These three be one. To turn to repentance. Catholic.
And here we must interpret the one sentence to be spoken of the manhood of
Christ, and the other to be spoken of his divinity. We read likewise in S.
Paul, that it is impossible for them which were once lightened, and fall again,
to be renewed by repentance. We must not expound these words, as though
pardon were to be denied to the penitent and to them that rise again. For the
catholic faith does believe, yt at al times and in all places, and to every
person ye turns to the lord, remission and forgeuenes of sins is promised,
through ye death of Jesus christ our Lord. Also reading these words of
thapostle Paul. Caro et sanguis dei hereditate^ consequi non possunt. Flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven. Cor. ^
We must not expound flesh and blood here for the substance of man's body, for
then we should destroy this atticle of our faith (I believe the resurrection of
the body.) But we must take flesh and blood to signify here, fleshly
affections and infirmities of mankind.

Secunda regula.
^ubuersion of charity.
The second rule is this: We must beware above all things, that our exposition
of the scriptures do not tend nor go to the ouerthrowinge and subversion of
charity and good politicque order.

Saint Austen de doctrina Christiana. Quisquis (inquit) scripturas diuinas,
Lib. ^ cap. 3.
vel quamlibet earum partem intellexisse sibi videtur, ita vt in eo non
edificet, geminam charitate^ dei et proximi nondum intellexit. Whosoever (says
Austen) seems to himself to understand the holy scriptures or any part of
them, and yet in his expoundyng or understanding does not edify and plant the
two fold charity, that is, the love of God, and of his neighbor: plainly
(says Austen) he understands not the scriptures. And example. It is written
in the scriptures. Ne restiteris malo. Resist not ill. Now if we will
expound this generally, and that it pertayne as well to the publicque Magistrate
as to the private subject, Mat^
both good order shall be disturbed, and charity and love toward our neighbor
utterly broken and taken away. For if thieves, rebels and traitors,
extortioners, adulterers, and such like, should not be punished by the
Magistrate, who could live in security and safegarde? The wydowes, the
Orphans, Widows and Orphans
the people should be oppressed, and trodden underfoot, and al iniquity would
raygne.

Tertia regula.
^n. 4. ^. 3.
The third rule is this: we must expend and vewe, by what occasion any thing is
spoken, what goes before, what does follow, at what time, and after what
sort, and of what person any thing is said or written. Saint Paul did observe
the circumstaunce of time, and thereof concluded, Abraham to be justified,
neither by circumcision, nor yet by the law.

Again, when it was said unto saint Peter: put thy sword into thy scabbard,
Qui gladium sumit, gladio perit, he that draws the sword, perishes with the
sword. The person of Peter is here to be considered, that is, that he was not a
magistrate, (...). 23. ^n. 16. (...). 2.
but an Apostle. For we read, that the sword is given to the magistrate to
punish the gilty, and to defend the gilties. It will be to long, to heap
example upon example, concerning this rule.

Regula quarta.
The fourth rule is the collation and conferring of places, either of like or
of unlike, and that the harder places are to be expounded by places more clear,
and fewer places to be expounded by the more. As for example: When James the
Apostle does say that Abraham Abraham justified by works.
and we be justified by works, the more places are to be set out against this
by saint Paul. Tertulian writes, that heretics, and not men that be
Orthodoxi, Orthodoxi
do excerpe and draw out of the scriptures, a few things to defend their
opinions, and that they have no regard, nor do respect to vow other places.
Ita paucula (inquit) sibi delegerunt testimonia, quibus omnino credi postulant,
reclamante interim tota scriptura, quum oportet secundam plura intelligi
pauciora. So (says he) they choose to them a few things, by the which they
require always to be credited, where all the whole scripture does say against
them, that it behooves the fewer things to be understood by the more.

Well, because the hour is past, I will here end, committing you until
saturday next, to the eternal God (through Jesus Christ our Lord) to whom with
the father and the holy ghost, be al honor and glory for ever. Amen.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea Praelectionis quintae.
Veil of the temple. 1.
IT is written in Exodus the second book of Moses, that Beseleel besides
other works that he had made for the tabernacle (as God had commanded Moses)
made also a veil of blue silk and purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined
linen, with Cherubins of brodered work: which veil was between the
sanctuary and the holiest of all.

Aquinas does write, that there were even two vailes in the temple of the
Jews, as there were in their Tabernacle. For there was a veil in the holiest
of al, and an other in the sancturie. These two (says he) do signify two manner
of coueringes and concealements: for the inward veil does signify the covering
of heavenly mysteries, which shall be reveled and made open unto us after the
general judgment, for then we shall be like unto him, when he shall appear in
his glory.

The outward veil does signify the covering of those mysteries which pertain
to the church militant, and therefore this vail was rent in pieces: to signify,
that those mysteries which pertain to the church, were revealed by the death of
Christ. But the inward veil was not then divided, nor rent asunder, because
the secrets of the heavenly kingdom do yet remain unrevealed, whereupon Paul
writes to the Corinthians saying: Cum autem Israel conuersus fuerit ad deum,
amouebitur velamen. When Israel shall be turned to God, the veil shall be taken
away: whereupon all the mysteries which were written in the law and the
prophets, were made open by the passion and death of Christ. As it is written
in the Evangelist Luke, how that Christ began from Moses and all the prophets,
interpreting to the two disciples, Luke 24.
all the scriptures which were written of him. etc.

The four colors in the veil do signify the four elements.

First, by the twined linen, is signified the earth, because linen does grow
out of the earth.

By purple is signified the water, because the purple color is made of
certain shelfish, which are found in the sea.

By the blue color is signified, the air, because it has the color of the
air.

By scarlet is signified, the fire. And therefore, because the matter of the
four elements, is an impediment and let (by the which impediment, incorporal
substances are hidden from us.) The high priest alone by him self went into
the holiest of all, and that but once in the year, to signify that the final
perfection of man is to be brought at the last to that world, which is the world
of glory.

The veil also may signifye by these four colors, four spiritual
mysteries. The fine linen does signify the purity of the flesh. The purple
does figure the cross and troubles which holy men do sustain for Gods cause.
The scarlet does signify double charity, that is, the love of god, and the love
of our neighbor. The blue color does signify heavenly meditations. Other
learned men do make this allegory of the veil, when it was rent in the middle,
at the death of Christ. The renting of the veil does signify, that the way
unto God the father is made open by the death of Christ, also that the fiery
sword is removed from the doors of Paradise, and that those things be thrown
down and destroyed, which did separate us from God: and that those things are
now made open which before were hidden, that is, that the Gentiles are now
made coheires and partakers of the kingdom of God. For it was said before:
Notus in Iudaea deus, in Israel magnum nomen eius. God is known in Iewry
only, Psalm. 76.
and in Israel great is his name: but now it is said, from the rising of the
Sun, to the going down of the Sun. Laudabile nomen domini, Psalm. 113. Mat.
10.
the Lords name is to be praised. And where Christ before his death did say to
his disciples, In viam Gentium ne abieritis, go not into the way of the
Gentiles. After his death he said: Euntes docete omnes gentes, Mark. 16.
go and teach all nations.

Origin speaks of two vailes, as Paul also does to the Hebrews. The first
veil is rent in pieces and taken away, Hebr. 9.
but the second veil does remain, and does cover those things which we shall
see in the life to come. 1. Cor. 13.
For here we know only but in part, but there we shall know perfectly.

In fine, Moses and ye prophets are now made perspicuous, clear and plain.

Note one thing concerning the story, which is, that the veil was rent in two
pieces in the midst.

The Jews when they heard any wickedness and blasphemy against God, they rent
their clothes. And so did the^ the temple of God, for it rent his clothes, that
is, the veil, being astonished, and having great indignation for those injuries
which were done unto Christ. And not without cause, when the true temple of the
Lords body, in whom all fulness of the godhead dwelt corporally: was dissolved
by death. The figurall temple does rent his veil, and in a manner mourn and
lament the ruin of the greater temple, that is, of the body of Christ put to
death.

To end, by the renting of the veil, the Jews were admonished, that al their
legal sacrifices should then cease, and that there should be no more use of the
old priesthood. And although the edifice of the temple did yet stand still, yet
God should not be worshipped there after the old accustomed manner. Also,
because the substance and truth of those shadows was now found, all the
legal figures were turned into the spirit.

Fleece of woolle. 2.
IT is written in the book of Judges, Iud. 6.
how that Gideon said unto God: if thou wylt save Israel by my hand, as thou
have said, behold I will put a fleece of wool in the threshing place. If the
dew come on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the earth, then shall I be
sure, that thou will save Israel by my hand, as thou have said. And so it was,
for he arose up early on the morrow, and thrust the fleece together, and
wringed the dew out of the fleece, and filled a bowl of water. Again Gideon
said unto God: be not angrye with me, that I may speak once more, let me
prove once again, I pray thee with the fleece: Let it now be dry only upon
the fleece, and let dew be upon all the ground. And god did so that same night,
for it was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground.

Psalm. 71. lib. 1, de spiritu sancto.
The allegory of this mystery is described of saint Ambrose and saint Austen,
who wrote after this manner.

The fleece does signifye the people of the Jews, which in times past were all
moist and wet with the word of god. All the earth which was dry, did signify
other nations, who lacked the preaching of gods word. For Christ was the
minister of circumcision, Romans 15. Math. 10.
and sent his Apostles in their first ambassade only unto the Jews. But the
matter came so to pass afterward, that it was thoroughly converted and
changed. For the whole world was made plentiful with the word of God, by the
coming of the holy ghost upon the Apostles, Act. 2.
which word the Jews utterly wanted, and as the barren and dry branches they
were cut of from the fertile and fat Olive tree.

Other learned men do say, that the fleece does signifye the fleece of that
Lamb, John. 1.
of whom saint John spoke, saying: Ecce agnus dei, qui tollit peccata mundi,
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. The fleece
of this lamb being sprinkled with the heavenly dew of gods spirit, does
certify ye elect, of the good will of God toward them, and does strengthen them
against their enemies. This fleece also being thus sprinkled, and all the earth
being dry, does signify, that all other persons were destitute and void of gods
grace and his spirit. Also it is written in the psalm: Psalm. 14
Omnes declinauerunt, and inutiles factisunt. All are strayed out of the way,
and are become unprofitable. The fleece being moist, Col. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
does signify Christ, in whom dwelt the fulness of the godheade corporally. And
as it is written, Non est inuentus dolus in ore eius, there was found no guile
in his mouth, nor any spot in all his life.

To speak with diverse toungs. 3.
2, Actorum.
THis place is of diverse, diversely interpreted. Unto some it seems probable,
that the Apostles did not speak at that time with diverse toungs, but with
only one tongue, which was the Hebrew tongue, which tongue was understand and
thought to be of the hearers, to every one his own natural tongue. Upon this
they have one conjecture, that Peter made one sermon unto a great number
gathered together of many nations and countries, which could not understand
that communication, except a strange voice came unto their ears. Of this
opinion be certain of the Doctors, certain other Expositours, and certain
Schoolmen, and some also of the latter writers, namelye Erasmus in his
Annotacions, the words be these: Dubitandum non est quin apostoli fuerunt
diuersis locuti linguis, quoties id postulabat euangelii negotium, verum eundem
hominem, eodem tempore diuersis loqui linguis, implicat contradictionem. It is
not to be doubted, but that the Apostles did speak with diverse toungs, as
often as the affairs of the gospel did so require: but one man to speak at
one time with diverse tounges, it does importe a contradiction. Unto this
agrees Lyranus, whose words be these: The Apostles not only spoke and
understood al manner of languages, but they speaking in one certain language,
what soever it were, all the hearers, although they were of diverse nations,
understood their own proper language, by the power of the holy ghost For as by
rebellion in building the tower of Babylon, tounges were divided: so by the
infusion of the holy ghost, tounges here were united.

But certain of the Germans do not embrace this judgment, but do say that the
Apostles at that present time did speak with diverse toungs, otherwise (say
they) the miracle had not been in the speakers, but in the hearers. Yet it may
be (say some of them) that the sermon of Peter might then be understood of
the most part of the auditoures, because the greatest part of them which came
to Jerusalem, were expert in the Caldie tongue.

Daniel. 4.
DAniel was a famous and notable prophet, borne of the stock of the kings of
Judah. He was led captive with king Ioachim into Babylon, of Nabuchadonozor,
king of the Caldeans. After that in his youth, he had delivered giltles Susanna
from death: being ennobled by the spirit of god, he did show and expound the
first vision unto king Nabuchadonozor: wherefore the king wondering at his wit
and gift, 1. Daniel. 4. Reg. 24.
fell upon his face, and did salute him, and rendering to him thanks,
commanded a sacrifice to be given to Daniel, as to god. He ordained him his
chief governor, and had him in great honor, partlye because he perceived in
him a comely beuty and great wisdom, partly because he understood to be in him
the intelligence of al visions and dreams. For when Daniel stood in the kings
sight, every word that the king demanded of him, he answered so, that it did
excel and pass ten times the answers of other southsaiers. When
Nabuchadonozor was dead (who thought him self for a certain time, to be a brute
beast) Daniel did declare unto Balthazar his son, what thing should come upon
him, when he saw the letters written with a man's hand, as it did appear.

Now when the monarchi of the Babilonians was destroyed, Daniel was brought of
Darius the king unto Media, where the king did adourne him with great honor, and
did prefer him above al his other Lords. But envy prevailing, Darius was
constrained to cast Daniel into the Lions den, where he suffering no hurt of
them, and knowing that God had saved him, 6. Daniel
Darius did set him in greater honor the^ ever he was before. And because he
was a religious and holy man, Darius did build unto him a most costlye and
sumptuous tomb, in a certain city of Media, named Echathenis, where at the last
he was buried. This Daniel did not only prophecy of things to come, as other
prophets did, but also did prescribe and appoint the time, in the which his
prophecy should be fulfilled. He wrote a book of prophecies divided into ten
visions. Three visions of them were under Nabuchadonozor. Three other under
Balthazar. The seventh and the eight vision under Darius. And the two last
under Cyrus.

His book written in Hebrew, has not the story of Susanna, nor the song of
the three children, neither the rehearsal of Bell and the Dragon, which saint
Hierome did gather together into one book, being dispersed before abrod in
sundry parts. Saint Hierom does call Daniel philostoricum totius mundi, because
he did scribe ye stone bewen from the hill without man's hand, and many other
things. Yet there be certain which do not account the book of Daniel amongst
the prophets, but do reckon it amongst those scriptures which be called
Hagiographa, that is, books entreating of holy histories.

Daniel signifies in the Hebrew tongue Iudex dei, the Judge of God.

Sacramentum. 5.
THis word Sacramentum, is no where used in all the holy scriptures but the
theological interpreters do often times use this word.

Saint Austen in his epistle Ad Marcellum, writes thus: Longum esset disputare
de varietate signorum, quae cum ad res diuinas pertine^t, sacramenta
appellantur. It would be a long thing to dispute of the variety of signs,
which pertaining to godly things, are called sacraments. Whereupon rose this
vulgar and common diffinition, Sacramentum est sacrae rei signum. They have
also an other diffinition more exact then the other, which is this: Sacramentum
est inuisibilis gratiae visibilis forma. A sacrament is the visible form of an
invisible grace.

The latin writers do use this word sacramentum, pro iusiurando, for an oath,
or else for a religious obligation and bond.

Marcus Varro, in his book De lingua latina, does expound what it is to
contend by a sacrament. Qui petebat (inquit) quique inficiebatur de rebus
aliis, vtrique quingentos a ris ad pontem deponebant, de aliis item rebus
certum numeru^ assium, pui vero iudicio vicerat suum sacramentum a sacro
auferebat, victi ad aerarium redibat. The agent (says he) and defendant of
somthings, did both put down at the bridge. 500. pieces of money, and of others
a certain number of those which are called Asses. He that ouercam in judgment,
took away his sacrament (that is his bond) from the holy place, the money of
him which was ouercom, was appointed to the treasury. And because by the
mediation of holy things, we be bound unto God and his saints by the
participation of sacraments, he does in a manner bind him self by an oath unto
us, by the testimony of the sacraments.

Vegetius in his book De re militari, does take sacramentum, for an oath,
taken by soldiers. For it was not lawful for any to fight, unless he were first
sworn by an oath, with conceived words they did swear, that they would do
althinges manfullye, whatsoever the Emperor had commanded, and that they
would never forsake the wars for the defense of the Roman public weal. And
so they had a pledge and reward, and their names were written and recorded,
and they were signed with certain notes. Now because we in our sacraments,
specially in baptism, are received and written into the wars of Christ, and
because receiving the sacraments we profes and testifye that we be the
soldiers of Christ, therefore not without cause the holy signs of Christ and
of the church are called sacraments.

Notio.
Al men for the most part, do confess and believe, that God only, and that
neither men nor the church did institute the sacraments.

A certain scholma^ does warn the church ye she should remember her self, not
to be the lady of the sacraments, but the minister of them.

Aquinas in his question does write saying. Ille instituit aliquid, qui dat ei
robur et virtutem: sed virtus sacramenti est a solo deo: solus itaque deus
potest instituere sacramenta.

He does make any thing, which gives unto it strength and virtue:
But the virtue of the sacrament is only of God.
Therefore God only can and does institute the Sacraments.
Saint Austen has a sentence which is common in every ma^s mouth. Accedit
verbum ad elementum et fit secramentum. The word comes to the element, and a
sacrament is made: whereof you may gather, a sacrament to consist of two special
parts. The first is the sword of God, not the word of man. The second is, the
sign appointed by God, not by man.

Chrysostom writing De causis sacramentoru^. Homilia in Math. 83
Nihil sensibile (inquit) tradidit nobis dominus. Res quide^ sensibiles sunt,
omnia tamen intelligibilia. Sac in baptismo per rem sensibilem datur aqua, quod
autem perficitur nempe regeneratio and renouatio, mente percipitur etc.

The matters of the sacraments are sensible, yet al things are there
intelligible, So in baptism by a sensible thing water is given, but the thing
which is made perfect, is perceived by mind, as regeneration, and renouation.
For if thou were without body, God would deliver all his gifts unto thee naked
and simple: but because the soul is joined to ye body, he has delivered in
things sensible, those things which are perceived in mind. The holy scriptures
do number to be among the christians only. 2. sacraments, yt is baptism, and
the supper of the lord. But Petrus Lu^bardus does acco^t. 7. baptism, penance,
the Eucharist, confirmation, extreme unction, order, and matrimony. Of this
judgment is, for the most part ye whole company of the interpreters, and the
fellowship of all the scholastical divines But the ancient doctors of the church
do rehearse only. 2. sacraments. Lib 1. and. 4. and in lib. de corona malitis.
Tertullian, in his book Contra Martionem, and in his book De corona militis
does recite only two, Baptism, and the Eucharist.

Saint Austen de doctrina Christiana, writes saying. Dominus signis nos non
oncrauit (inquit) sed quaedam pauca pro multis eademque factu facil sima, et
intellectu augustisima, et obseruatione castissima, ipse dominus et Apostolica
tradidit disciplina, sicuti est baptismi sacramentum et cele bratio corporis et
sanguinis domini! The Lord has not burdened us with signs, but for many, he and
the apostolic discipline has given us a few, and those in doing, very easy,
in understanding, very noble, and in observation, very pure, as the sacrament
of baptism, and the celebratio^ of the body and blood of the Lord. Again in
his epistle Ad Ianuarium, he says. Sacreme^tis numero paucissimis,
obseruatione facillimis, significatione prestantissimis, societatem noui populi
colligauit, sicuti est baptismus trinitatis nomine consecratus, communicatio
corporis et sanguis ipsius. etc. The lord has tied together the congregation
of the people of the new testament, with sacraments in number very few, in
observation, very easy, in fignification, most worthy, as baptism, consecrated
in the name of the Trinity, and communication of his body, and of his blood.

Obiectio.
Why sir, saint Austen makes mention in that place by you alleged, of some
other thing besides those. 2. For he says in the same sentence: Et si quid
aliud in scripturis canonicis co^mendatur. Again, he makes mention of the
sacrament of order, which two places do impugn your assertion in numbering
only. 2. sacraments.

Responsio.
To the first I answer: Saint Austen does not say, et si quae alia, but and si
quid aliud. That is: and if any other things are commended in the holy
scriptures: but, if any other thing, in the singular number, which does
evidently declare, that he spoke not of sacraments, but of certain
observations, used and received of ye church, as his words following in ye same
place do show. To the second I answer, that S. Austen does call chrisma,
prophecy, prayer, and other such like, sacraments, as well as order. Therefore
when he makes mention of order, as of a sacrament, he takes not sacra mentum,
in the proper signification: for if he did, then you must make also preaching
and praying sacraments, which were very absurd to grant. Furthermore S. Austen
has often times in his mouth, scripturaru^ sacramenta. Now I dare say ye will
not grant, the scriptures to be properly a sacrament: whereupon it is evident
that this word Sacramentum is used in his writings, sometime in one
signification, sometime in an other. He called these sacraments, because as holy
things they came from the holy sprit of God, and because they be the
ordinances of god, observed of al holy men. But the other, that is baptism,
and the supper of the lord, do differ from those, for these be holy actions,
consisting of words and ceremonies, binding the congregation into one
fellowship.

Rabanus bishop of Mentes, in his book De institutione clericorum, does say:
Sunt sacramenta, baptismus, et chrisma, corpus et sanguis: quae ob id
sacramenta dicuntur, quia sub tegumento corporalium rerum virtus diuina salutem
eoruudem sacramentorum operatur, vnde et a secretis virtutibus, vel sacris
sacramenta di cuntur. Baptize and Chrisma, the body and the blood be
sacraments, which for this cause are called sacraments, because under the cover
of corporal things, the divine power does work secretly the health of the same
sacraments, whereof they are called A secretis vel sacris virtutibus sacramenta,
of secrets and holy virtues sacraments. As for the authority of the books of
Dionisius, it is manifest what every learned man does judge of them.

Obseruatio.
A sacrament does consist of these things following: Of the sign, and of the
thing signified. Of the word, and of the rite. Of the promise of the gospel,
and of the ceremony of the outward thing, and of the inward thing. Of a thing
earthly, and of a thing heavenly. Lib. 4 and. 5. contra heresis.
And (as Ireneus says) of a thing visible, and of a thing invisible, of a
thing sensible, and of a thing intelligible. And of. 2. which have their
different natures in their properties being received, it is manifest, because
that many which be partakers of the outward sign, have no part of the thing
signified. But if ye nature of both parts should be one, and joined together
naturally, then it must needs follow, that they also receive the thing it
self, which be partakers of the sign. We have examples in the scriptures to
the contrary. For Simon Magus in the acts of the Apostles did receive the
sign, Cap. 8
and was baptized: but of the thing it self, that is, of the holy ghost
signified by water, he had no part at al. Judas I scarioth, who betrayed the
Lord, did eat of the bread of the Lord, but not the bread the Lord (as saint
Austen terms it.) For otherwise if he had eaten the things it self, he
should have lived most happy and blessed. For whosoever eats me (says
Christ) shall not die for ever. But Judas perished with eternal death, therefore
he had no part of the lively meat. And it may be easily proved, that neither
the preaching of the gospel, nor receiving of the sacraments with out faith,
does profit any thing at al: for S. Paul says: Heb. 1^.
Sine fide impossibi le est placere deo. Saint Austen Contra Faustum has these
words. Peter does say (says he) baptism has made us safe, and least they
should think the visible sacrament to be only sufficient, he adds: Non
carnis depositio sordium, sed bonae conscientiae interrogatio. Not the putting
of the filthiness of the flesh, but the mind of a good conscience.

Question.
Some will demand whether the grace of God be contained and shut in the
sacraments, and so derived into them, which receive them?

Responsio.
The schole divines, Monks, Friars, and other of that sort, do judge the very
virtue of God, yea and God himself to be contained in the sacraments.
Whereupon rises this frivolous and vain question, that is, what the Mouse
does eat when she does gnaw the sacrament.

Lib. 4. cap. 11. de sacrameto altaris.
Innocentius the Pope does say, that the substance of bread does return
miraculously, but not that substance (says he) which was transubstantiate
into the flesh, but an other bread is made by a miracle in the stead thereof.
And that bread (says he) is gnawn of the Mouse, O subtle and wonderful
divinity, not worth a mess of vinegar.

Bonauenture, who wrote upon the master of the sentence, among many other
words says thus: Lib. 4. did. 1. question. 3.
Non est aliquo modo dicendum (inquit) quod gratia contineatur in sacramentis
essentialiter, tanquam aqua in vase, vel medicina in pixide, imo hoc
intelligere est erroneum. Sed dicuntur continere gratiam, quia ipsam
significant, and quia ibi nisi sit defectus ex part suscipientis, in ipsis
gratia se^per confertur: ita intelligendo quod gratia sit in anima, non in
signis visibilibus. Pro tanto dicuntur etiam ya sa gratiae. Possunt etiam dici
vasa alia ratione, quia sicut quod est in vase, non est de ipso nec ex ipso,
sed tamen ab ipso hauritur ab ipsa anima in ipsis sacramentis. Et sicut quis
recurritad vas cum requirit liquore^, sic quae renti liquorem gratiae, et non
habenti recurrendum est ad sacramenta.

That is: We must say by no means, that grace is contained in the sacraments
essentially, as water is in a vessel, or medicine in a box, for it is
erroneous so to be understood: but the sacraments are said to contain
grace, because they signify grace, and except therbe default in the receiver,
grace always is given in them. Yet this is so to be understood, that grace
is in the soul, and not in visible signs, and for that so great a cause they
are called the vessels of grace. They may also be called the vessels of grace
by an other reason, which is this: As that which is in the vessel, is not of
the vessel, nor comes thereof, yet it is drawn out of the vessel: So grace
is not of the sacraments, nor comes of them, but springs of the eternal
fountain, of the which fountain the soul seeks in the sacraments. And as a
man does run to the vessel when he seeks the licour: So must he which
seeks the licour of grace, and has it not, run to the sacraments. These be
Bonauentures words, which most rightlye referred grace to God only, the
fountain of al goodness. He says also, not the sensible signs, but the soul
of man is the seat and receptacle of grace, and of all the gifts of God.

The holy scriptures do teach in every place, that the mind of man, and no
element is the house of Gods grace. Solomon does say. Si caeli caelorum te non
continent, quanto minus domus haec? If the heaven of heavens do not contayn
thee, how much less this house? Saint Stephen does say also: The most high God
does not dwell in temples made with men's hands. Besides many other places of
the scripture.

Corinthus. 6.
COrinthus was a famous city in Achaia, builded, as Eusebius reports, in the
time of Moses, being 80. years of age. It was builded of one Sisyphus, a
notorious these, who was slain of Theseus and (as the Poets feign) is punished
in hell with a certain kind of torment, that he is compelled to bear a great
stone to the top of the mountain* and when he has carried it to the very top,
it roleth down again to the botom, whereof Ovid makes mention, saying: Aut
petis, aut vrges rediturum Sisyphe saxum. Whereupon rises this proverb,
Sisyphi saxu^ voluere. To role up and down Sisyphus stone. By the which is
signified vncessable sweat and labor, but unprofitable, and utterly vain. As
you would say, Sisyphi saxum voluit, he takes unmeasurable pain, but that
which he does, is all in vain.

This city Corinthus was builded between two seas, the one called mare Ioinum,
the other mare Aegeum. The place where it was set, was properly called Isthmos,
which is a narow place of the country, where two seas are but a small distaunce
a sunder, enclosing the land on both sides. Strabo writes, yt it was a very
rich and notable Mart, unto the which Merchants out of al places of the world
had their recourse. And as for ye most part wanto^nes, riot, and pleasures do
flow out of power and wealth, so at Corinth was there al kind of wickedness:
insomuch yt every man lived as he lusted, and yt without punishment. As Paul
writes to the Corinthia^s saying: Eratis scortatores, idololatrae, adulteri,
molles, auari, ebriosi, 1. Cor. 6.
raptores. You were in times past whoremo^gers, idolaters, adulterers, wanton,
covetous, dronkards, extorcioners. Strabo writes, that there were above a
thousand young women consecrated, to be defiled in the temple of Venus, in the
honor of her. Also in this city of Corinth, there was a notorious strumpet
called Lais, of whom Aulus Gellius reherseth this history. Lais (says he) a
strumpet of Corinthus, did gain great sums of money through her beuty and
fairenes. Unto her all the wealthy men of Grecia did repair, to satify their
filthy lust. She admitted none, unless he would give that which she demanded.
Demosthenes on a time came privily unto her, and made request to have the use
of her body: but Lais demanded of him ten thousand Dragmas. Demosthenes being
dismayed, and made a feared with so great a sum of money, turned his back, and
going away, said these words: Ego penitere tanti non emo, I will not by
repentance so dear. Whereupon rises this common proverb, Non est cuius
libet Corinthum appellere. Every man cannot arrive at Corinth. This proverb is
elegantly used and applied of high and weighty matters, and dangerous to be
compassed, and not every man's part to attempt.

Suidas does refer the original of this proverb, unto the dangerous and not
easy passage or arriual for the Mariners unto the port of Corinth. Aristippus
was wont to say and glory, that he only had Lais, and that all other were had
of her.

Of this filthy sincke of men being given unto pleasure, wantonness, riot, and
polluted with all kind of vice, the eternal God made and gathered unto him a
Christian congregation, by the ministry of Paul, who wrote unto them his
first epistle, out of Ephesus, a city of Asia, in the. 21. year after his
conversion. And the congregation being first by him converted, were afterward
marueilously subverted, of certain falfe Apostles: but Paul in his first
epistle did revoke them again to the true faith, and evangelical verity.

This city was first called Certhera, and being increased and made more
populous, it was afterward called Ephyra. Strabo also writes, that the
Corinthians did defoule the Ambassadors of Rome with filth cast out at the
windows, as they passed by their sumptuous and gay houses. For the which cause
and other insolent and proud parts practiced by the Corinthians, Lucius
Mumius the Emperor, accompanied with a huge and mighty host, threw down the
city of Corinth flat to the ground: such is the reward of pride. This city
being destroyed and overthrown, was restored and reedified of one Corinthus,
Orestes son: but being at the last burned of the Romans, it could never be
restored again.

Simeon. 7.
SImeon betokens in the Hebrew audiens vel auditio, hearing or report. Of
what parents this Simeon came, or what function he used, it is uncertain. It
may be, that he was some private man, that they might the more be ashamed,
which challenged unto themselves great and famous titles of renown and dignity.

He is set forth worthily and praised, for that he embraced true godliness, and
perfectly knew and understood the promises of Messiah, desiring nothing more,
then that he should spedely come into the world. For this cause undoubtedly he
offered earnest prayers daily unto God, especially when he now saw the time to
be at hand. And when he perceived, not without great grefe, al things among the
people of God, to be daily wurs and wurs (for there reigned in the temple
horrible corruptions and de lusions, and in the political government al things
were full of bloody tira^ny) he received of god a singular revelation, that he
should not die before he beheld Christ with his corporal eyes. That benefit he
preferred before al other commodities, and undoubtedly he communicated this
joyful tidings to his family and other good men: but of other stiff necked
people, being blinded in their superstitious opinions and ceremonies, he was
not believed, but rather mocked and laughed to scorn.

He was notwithstanding the temple of the holy ghost, through whose paculiar
motion, he came into the Church at that same hour, when Jesus Christ,
according to the law of the first borne, was offered of his parents, and
presented before the Lord.

And he was so inspired and kindled with heavenly light, that without delay he
took the infant in his arms, which was borne of the virgin Mary,
pronouncing openly and boldly with great rejoicing of his heart, that this was
he which was promised of God, and that there was none other to be looked for.
These his words following are worthy to be rehearsed and pondered. Luke 2.
Now thou let thy servant to depart in peace according unto thy word. For
mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of
all people. To be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy
people Israel. He does not only plainly and evidently show of things
present, but also of things that should follow, and of the whole office of
Christ, And he Prophecieth of gathering together of the Church out of the
Gentiles: finally he sings a most sweet song like unto the swanne before his
death. Joseph and Marie do greatly marvel at this, so manifest and noble
testimony of Jesus Christ, given of so holy a man, for they had nothing opened
this matter unto him. And certainly there were other Priests present at the
hearing of these words, but they were moved nothing at them. It may be also,
that they scorned at him, countyng him a doting old fool. Yet notwithstanding
this sentence of the Messiah is uttered, as it were before the congregation,
and before the Arc and sight of the Lord.

After that, Simeon proceeds in prophecienge, and does execute the office of
a Priest, blessinge them, and wishinge unto them, all glad and luckie things
according to the office of Messiah, adding unto, these words: Behold, this
child is put for a fall and a rising again unto many in Israel, and for a
sign against the which they shall speak. Simeon does not dream here of the
golden and wealthye world, as other did look for at Messiah hands, no other
thing then worldly commodities, but Simeon knew, that Messiah should suffer:
finally, he stre^ghneth and comfort Marie, against the sorrows which she
should feel, saying: The sword of sorrow shall pearse thy soul, that the
thoughts of many men's hearts might be made open. He feared not the hatred and
evil will of the chief rulars, neither did he expecte their determination and
mind, but was only contented with the heavenly revelation. When and how he
died, it is not known. It is to be thought, that he departed in short time
after out of this miserable life, Luke 1
into the land of the living.

Aenigma. 8.
ENigma is an obscure allegory, and a sentence covered with subtle and crafty
words, Man.

Obscurus sermo cunctis aenigma vocatur.
Vt: matter me genuit, mox gignitur ex me.
That is to say: Aenigma is called of al men a dark and obscure speech. As, my
mother has brought forth me, and anon she is brought forth of me. By this
sentence is signified water, for of water Ise is congeled, and is resolved
again into water.

Aenigma differreth from an allegory in this, that an allegory is evident,
clear, and manifest, and aenigma is somewhat obscure and subtle. Neither it
ought to be reprehended if you, either speak, or write to the learned or
unlearned, that there by they may be compelled to search and learn the sure
meaning thereof. Phe Prophets have many aenigmata, so has the Apocalipse.
Likewise in the Ethnicke writers, there be many aenigmata, of the gods and of
the Sibilles. As Sibillae folium, extripede dictum, dixthera Iouis. etc. This
figure is coumpted of Fabius to be rather a fault, than a virtue in any
oration. Whereupon Diomedes being moved, does number this trope as well among
the faults, as among the virtues of an oration.

Hesiodus shows a very apt example of this figure in his Georgikes, saying,
(...). Dimidium plus toto. That is to say: Half is more then the whole, by the
which aenigma is signified golden mediocritie: for he that is content with
half, does consist in the mean, but he that does aspire and desires the
whole, tends to extremity.

Plutarchus does report of Darius, that when he called unto him the Lords
liuetenauntes of his provinces, he asked of them, whether the tributes were to
grievous for the subjects or no. And when they answered that they were mean,
he commanded the one half only to be paid, judging it to be better to take
half with the good will of his prouincialles, than the whole with their hatred.

In aeglogis.
The like aenigma is in Virgill who writes thus.

Dic quibus in terris and eris mihi magnus Apollo,
Tres pateat caeli spatium non amplius vlnas.
Again in the holy Scriptures are diverse and sondrie aenigmata, as for
example in the Psalm. Pennae columbae de argentatae and, posteriora dorsi eius
in specie auri. Though ye have lain among pots, yet shall ye be that is as ye
wings of a dove, psalm. 68.
that is covered with silver, and whose feathers are like yellow gold. By the
which is signified, though God suffer his Church for a time to lie in black
darcknes, yet he will restore it and make it most shining and white. In the
book of Judges there is an aenigma of Sampson, having subdued the Lion. De
comedente exiuit cibus, Iud 14.
and deforti egressa est dulcedo: that is, meat came forth of the eater, and
swetnes went out of the strong. And in the Gospel. Vbicum que fuerit corpus,
Math. 24.
illic congregabuntur and aquilae That is, whersoeuer the body shall be, thither
will the Egles stock. VVherby Christ signifies, that the elect will fly unto
him, when he comes. Also Ezechiell: Cap. 17.
Fili hominis propone aenigma, and narra parabolam ad domu^ Israel, and dices:
Haec dicit dominus deus. Aquila grandis magnarum alarm, longo membrorum ductu,
plena plumis, and varietate, venit ad Libanum, and tulit medullam Cedri. that
is. Son of man, put forth a parable, and speak a proverb unto the house of
Israel, and say: Thus says the Lord God, the great Egle with great wings and
long wings, and full of feathers, which had diverse colors, came unto
Libanum, and took the highest branch of the Cedre. VVherby is signified, that
Nabuchadonozor who has great power, riches, and many countries under him,
shall come to Jerusalem and take away Ieconiah the king. And in the book of
Judges: Cap. 9.
Ierunt ligna vt vngerent regem super se dixeruntque oliuae, Impera nobis. Quae
respondit, nunquid possum deserere pinguedinem meam? etc. That is. The trees
went forth to anoynte a king over them. And said unto the Olive tree: Reign
thou over us. But the Olive tree said unto them: should I leave my fatnes? etc
By the which parable is declared, that those which are not ambitious, are
most worthy of honor, and that the ambitious abuse their honor, both to their
own destructions and others.

Also Ezechiel. Duae mulieres filiae matris vnius fuerunt. Cap. 23.
Et fornicatae sunt in Egypto, in adolescentia sua fornicatae sunt: ibi subacta
sunt vbera earum, and fractae sunt mammae pubertatis earu^. That is to say.
There were two women, the daughters of one mother. And they committed
fornication in Egypt, they committed fornication in their youth: there were their
breasts pressed, and there they bruised their teates of their virginity. By the
which parable Israel and Judah are mente, which came both out of one family.
They became Idolaters after the manner of the Egyptians.

Furthermore in the fourth book of ki^gs. Cap. 14,
Carduus Libani misit ad Cedrum quae est in Libano. Tra^sieruntque bestiae
saltus quae sunt in Libano, and conculcauerunt Carduum. That is. The thistle
that is in Libano^, sent to the Cedre that is in Libanon. etc.

By the which parable Iehoash compares himfelfe to a Cedre tree, because of
his great kingdom over ten tribes, and Amaziah to a thistle, because he ruled
but over two tribes. And the wild beasts are Iehoash his soldiers, that
spoiled the Cities of Judah.

Day star. 9.
Until the day star arise in your hearts. By the day may be understood the
manifest knowledge of the godhead. By the rising of the day star may be
signified the open knowledge of the humanity of Christ. The blessedness of the
Saints shall be in both, as Christ says in the Gospel of John. Haec est vita
eterna vt cognoseant te solum deum and quem misisti Iesum Christum. This is
life eternal, that they know thee to be only very God, and whom thou haste
sent Jesus Christ.

Or by the day is understood the knowledge of the Saints after the judgment:
by the rising of the day star, the knowledge before the judgment.

But to omit such scholasticall allegories, Saint Peter means no more in this
place, but does set the whole day with all his parts against darkness, which
would utterly ouerwhelme all our senses and understandings, except the Lord had
helped us with the light of his word.

Typus. 10.
TYpus does properly signify a form, a figure, an example, a shadow, and an
image of an other thing.

Archetypa, are properly the first and principal examplars, which are not
taken out of other things, but are the very original things them selves.

Typi also (as Gellius writes) are the letters which we call descriptions,
not exactly made, but rude.

Typus also is a figure and symboll of the verity and truth, In which
signification we say, the old Testament to be a type of the new, and the
Sacrifices of the same to be types of the Sacrifice of Christ.

We call the noble art of printyng Typographiam, which was first invented by
one Johannes Gutenbergius, a man of a rare and marvelous wit, in a certain
City of Germany called Maguntia, in the year of the incarnation of Christ.
1450. No less glory, no less immortal memory is to be given to this worthy
man, than to them which first invented letters.

Unto John. 11.
THe Prophets and the law prophesied unto John, as though Christ should say:
It is no marvel if God work now so mightylye in the minds of men, because
he does not show him self a far of under darcke shadows, as he did before,
but is openly present to establishe his kingdom. Whereupon it follows, that
they have less excuse which do conte^ptuously reject the doctrine of John,
then the contemners of the law and of the Prophets. For that which John
preached, is the self same thing whereof the law and the Prophets spoke
before. For John does testify those things which be now accomplished and
performed.

Saint Hierome writing upon this place, does say, that Christ does not exclude
all Prophets after John, Act. 11. et. 21.
for we read in the Acts of the Apostles that Agabus did prophecy: likewise
the four daughters of Philip prophesied. Therefore where it is said here, that
the Prophets prophesied unto John, is meant and declared the time of Christ,
whom John did show with his finger, that he was come, whom the Prophets showed
before, that he should come.

Violence take it. 12.
FRom the days of John the Baptist until now, Math. 12.
the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
That man would labor with all his power to provide for his salvation which
might hear a worthy preacher say that it suffiseth him to get eternal life, if
he return and amend from his former wickedness. This is a very easy way to
attain salvation, which who so holds not, but wandreth always, and goes
astray, is wretched, and of a desperate life. The Lord does not require thy
gold, silver, or earthly possessions, whereby he may lead thee out of
darckenes, and deliver thee from the bondage of sin, but only he requires a
ready and prompt mind of repentance. Show unto him the filthiness of thy
mind, if thou cannot show him thy innocent and pure life, and he will freely
wipe them away. Offer unto him tears gushing out of thine eyes, and he will
receive them in a manner for part of amendment. He does not abhor thee, though
thou be a wicked sinner, but of his great gentleness allureth thee to
repentance. He does not desire the death and destruction of thy soul, but
that thou be rather converted and live. He it is which reioyseth more over one
sinner, Luke 15.
than of ninety and nine just persons, which need not repentance. Acknowledge
thy fault with a ready will, and he will have mercy on thee. He it is, that
said: Tell thine offenses, that thou may be justified. And because thou have
promised to deteste thine unrighteousness, Psalm. 32.
he has already remitted thine ungodliness. The good thief faithfully
believing, that the most plentiful well of Gods mercy could not be spent and
dried up, with great violence entered into the kingdom of heaven, Luke 23
the which thing he obtained by this his confession. Memento mei domine dum
veneris in regnum tuum, That is: Remember me Lord when thou shall come into thy
kingdom. Math. 11.
But wherefore is the kingdom of heaven invaded and set upon, from the time of
John unto these days? because he showed the scope and mark of eternal life,
which we may easily attain. For he said: Repent ye, and the kingdom of heaven
will draw nigh unto you. Math. 3
The Lord also (when he preached) showed the same to be an easy way to enter
in, yea, even unto the blind. And as soon as the multitude did know that an
easy way of salvation was open for them, they ran to attain it, and
breaking in by heaps into the kingdom of heaven, they shot only at this
scope, ye Lord notwithstanding directed the moving of their shot with his
grace. The violent took by force the kingdom of heaven, when with fervent
desire they hastened to cleave unto Christ: and he that was born a man, desired
to become an angel and an erthly creature sought an heavenly habitation (as
writes Hierome) saying. Quest. 1. ad Algatian.
The Gentiles chiefly entered into the kingdom of heaven by fervent faith and
humility, who loved Christ more then the Jews, whereupon Hilary says. Gloria
Israel a patribus debita a Prophaetis nunciata, a Christo oblata, fide gentium
occupatur and rapitur. That is. The glory of Israel, due from the fathers,
declared of the Prophets, and offered of Christ, is obtained and readyly taken
by the faith of the Gentiles. As God stirred John to be the criar of the
kingdom of his son, so did he put into his doctrine the efficacy of the
spirit that it might pearse into the hearts of me^, and kindle their feruencie
toward it. But because the great part of the people were no more moved, than if
no word had been spoken either by the Prophets of christ, or as though John had
never come forth as a witness: christ does teach this violencie of the which he
speaks, to be but in certain kind of me^. The se^ce is this. There is now a
great concourse and repair of men to ye kingdom of heaven, and they do rush
in violently to attain it, for they being stirred by the voice of one man,
come in flocks and in heaps, and do not only with much desire, but gredyly
embrace the grace offered unto them, although there be many sluggardes, which
are no more moved, then if John should tell them but a fable, pertaining
nothing unto them, yet many I say do run to it with a violent love and zeal.
The kingdom of heaven is taken here for the new doctrine of the Gospel.

The kingdom of heaven to suffer violence, is with great and gredy desire to
run to the open preaching thereof, and to break in by strength.

The violent to take the kingdom of heaven, is no more, but to be so hot with
the zeal of the gospel, that a man is ready to despise and lose life and all
yt he has, so that he may be partaker of the kingdom of God.

Agar and Sara. 13.
AGar written without aspiration was handmaiden of Sara, and concubine of
Abraham. She was the mother of Ismaell. And note here, that this word
Concubina, was taken in the old time for an honest name (as Masurius writes.)
And in the laws of the Romans, a concubine was not counted a strompet, nor a
married man's lemman, but Concubina was properly she, which had conjugal
company with a single man: yet she differed from her which is counted Vxor, a
wife, because the cohabitation of a concubine is not individual or
inseparable, and for that both the parties so joined, might be easly separated
again.

Saint Hierome, writing Ad Oceanum, does discern a concubine from a wife, in
these two points. First, that a wife had need of Tables or writings to
record the contracte. Secondly that a wife had a dowrye, which both (says
Saint Hierome) a concubine had not: but this sentence of Hierome is not
generally true, for this his saying is to be strayned to that wife, which was
before a concubine. In deed she that was the concubine, had need of Tables
and record, because she should be no longer named a concubine, and that the
children after borne of her, should be legitimate. As for dowry, is not always
required of necessity, for a dowry cannot be without matrimony, but matrimony
may be with out a dowry. The Romain law did allow concubines to be lawful, yet
it does somewhat note that kind of conjunction, because it does not suffer
children begotten of concubines to be just and right heirs, oneles that the
concubine be made at the last a wife, or else that the princes authority do
legitimate them.

Question.
But what is this to the concubines spoken of in the Scriptures, whom the
fathers had?

Responsio.
A concubine is called in the Hebrew tongue Pilaegaesch that is, a maiden joined
to a man without writing, that is, without contract, or betrouthing, yet she
was counted a true wife in the holy Scriptures, as it plainly appears in
Cethura, who was called Vxor, a wife, Et addidit Abraham, and accepit vxore^,
and nomen eius Cethura, and peperitei Zimran. etc. Genesis. 28
Now Abraham had taken him another wife called Cethura, which bare him Zimran,
And in the same Chapter she is called also a concubine, where it is said, that
Abraham gave all his goods to Isaac, but unto the sons of the concubines,
which Abraham had, he gave gifts, and sent them away to the East country.

Here may you see, that the concubines among the Hebrews were very wives,
although they were oftentimes handmaydens, as Agar, Bala, Zilpa and others.

Concerning the civil ordinances of the places where the fathers dwelt, the
free men could not contract matrimony with their handmaydens* and therefore it
might be, that in the holy Scriptures, they be called Concubinae concubines,
and not wives, notwithstanding before God they were wives.

There be two differences between the laws of the Romans, and the laws of
the Jews. First the Romans counted not Concubinatum, to be matrimony. Among
the Jews it was counted matrimony before God.

Secondly the Jews had their handmaidens to their concubines, the Romans
would not have that to be lawful.

It is to be noted, that where it seems in the decrees, concubines to be
approved and allowed, they are to be understand of those, which were wives in
deed, that is, when both parties do consent and agree to dwell continually
together, and to acknowledge each other as man and wife. Otherwise concubines
be utterly forbidden.

These shall be sufficient for this name, concubine, which now in these days is
not lawful.

Agar written with chet, signifies Cingulum, or Perezoma, a girdle, or any
thing that compasses about.

Agar written with he, betokens a stranger, it comes of this verb Hagar,
id est, peregrinatus est.

Sarah signifies Dominam, or Principem.

Ye shall find, that Abraham had two sons, that is Ismaell of Agar, and
Isaac of Sara.

Both were the true sons of Abraham, Ismael was no less the true son of
Abraham then Isaac, for both came of one father, one flesh and one seed. What
is than the difference? this makes not the difference (says Paul) because
one of the mothers was a free woman, and the other a bond woman (although it
makes for the allegory) but because Ismaell which was borne of the bond
woman, was borne of the flesh, that is without promise and without the word
of God, but Isaac was not only borne of the free woman, but also according
unto promise. Why so? notwithstanding Isaac was borne of the seed of Abraham
as well as Ismaell. I grant they were both the sons of one father, and yet
there is a difference, for although that Isaac was borne of the flesh, yet
there went before a promise and a nomination of God. This difference Paul would
have to be noted. He gathered this difference in this manner out of the text of
Genesis.

That Agar conceived, and brought forth Ismael, it was not the voice and the
word of God, which had foretold that this should come to pass: but by the
permission of Sara, Abraham went unto his handmaid, Agar, whom Sara being baren
(as Genesis witnesses) gave him to wife. For Sara had heard, Gene. 16.
that Abraham by the promise of God should have seed of his body. Unto this
seed she hoped, that she should be mother: but when she had many years looked
for this hope, after the promise was made, seeing the matter to be differred,
she thought her hope to be frustrate. Wherefore this holy woman does yield unto
the honor of her husband, and her own right, resignyng her right unto another
and that unto her handemayd, yet she does not suffer her husband to marry
another wife without his house, but she gives her own maiden unto him in
matrimony, that she might have children in her own house. For so has the
History of Genesis.

Sara vxor Abraham non genuerat illi, Cap. 16.
sed habens ancillam Egyptiam nomine Agar, dixit marito suo: Ecce, conclusit me
dominus, ne parerem, Ingredere quaeso ad ancillam meam, si forte ex illa
aedificer, and cete. That is to say. Sara Abraham's wife bare him no children,
and she had a maid, an Egyptian, Agar by name. And Sara said unto Abraham:
behold now, the Lord has restrained me from childebearyng. I pray thee go
in unto my maid, it may be that I shall receive a child by her. etc. It is a
great humility, that she so much directed her self, taking in good part
this temptation of her faith. She thought thus with her self, GOD is no liar,
what he has promised unto my husband, that will he surely perform, but
perchance God will not have me to be the mother of this seed, I will not
envy Agar this honor, unto whom let my husband go in, perchance I may
have children by her.

Wherefore Ismaell is borne without the word, only at the petition of Sara
her self, for there is no word of God which commanded or promised Abraham
a son, but it seems all to be done by chance, which the words of Sara
declare. If perhaps (says she) I may have a child by her. Since that
therefore there preceded no voice of God unto Abraham, as there did when Sara
should bring forth Isaac, but the voice of Sara only goes before, it is
sufficiently showed, that Ismaell was the son of Abraham according to the
flesh, only without the word. Therefore he was looked for and borne like
unto any other child. This thing Saint Paul diligently pondered and weighed.

He urges also the same argument unto the Romans, which here including in an
allegory, he does repete and strongly conclude, Romans 9
yt all ye sons of Abraham are not the sons of God. Abraham (says he) has
two sorts of sons: the one sort are borne of his flesh and blood, but the
word and the promise of God going before, the one as Isaac, ye other sort
with out the promise, as Ismaell. Therefore (says he) the children of the flesh
are not ye children of God, but ye children of promise. etc. And with this
argument he stops the mouths of the proud Jews: as Christ does also in
Mathewe and in John, Math. 3. John. 8.
who glorified them selves to be the children and seed of Abraham. As though
he should say, It follows not. I am the carnal seed of Abraham, therefore I
am the son of GOD. Esau is the natural son, therefore he is the heir.
They that will (says he) be the sons of Abraham, they, besides their carnal
birth, must be the children of promise and belief. And they that have the
promise and belief, are only the true children of Abraham, and consequently
the sons of God.

But Ismaell because he is not promised of God unto Abraham, is only the son
of the flesh, and not of promise, and therefore he is looked for and borne as
other children are. For no mother knows whether she shall have any child or
no, or if she perceive her self to be quick, she knows not whether it be a man or woman child, but Isaac was certaynely named. Sara vxor tua inquit
Angelus ad Abraham, Gene. 17.
pariet tibi filium, vocabisque nomen eius Isaac. Thy wife Sara (says the
Angel unto Abraham) shall bring forth unto thee a son, and thou shalt
call his name Isaac. Here both the son and the mother are expressly named. So
for this humbleness of Sara, that she did yield her right, and suffered the
contempt of Agar, God recompensed her, and gave her this honor, that she her
self was the mother of the promised son. Gene. 16.


Simile.
Abraham is the figure and token of God, who has two sons, that is, two
peoples represented by Ismaell and Isaac. They were borne unto him, of Agar and
Sara, who do signify the two Testamentes, the old and the new.

The old Testament is of mount Sinai, begettynge bondage which is Agar, for
the same hill which the Jews call Sinai (which seems to have his
appellation of Bushes, brambles and briars) the Arabians call in their tongue
Agar. Which thing besides Paul, Ptolomie does also witness, and the Greek
scholies. After the same manner there are given diverse and sondrie names unto
other hills also, among diverse nations. So the hill which Moses called
Hermon, is called of the Sidonians Sirion, and of the Amorites, Senir.

It does well agree, that the mount Sinai in the tongue of the Arabians has the
same name that a handmayd has, and I think, that the similitude of that name
ministered unto Paul an occasion and light to seek out an allegory. Therefore
as Agar the handmayd, brought forth unto Abraham a son in deed, yet not an
heir but a servant. So Sinai the allegorical Agar, brought forth truly unto
God, a son, that is a carnal people. Also as Ismael was the true son of
Abraham, so the people of Israel had God their true father, unto whom he gave
a law, and delivered his oracles, religion, the service of him and his Temple,
as it is in the Psalm. Psalm. 147.
Qui annunciat verbum suum Jacob. etc. He shows his word unto Jacob, and his
statutes and judgments unto Israel. But this was the difference. Ismaell was
borne of a handmayde after the flesh, that is without promise, and therefore he
could not be heir. So the mystical Agar, that is, the mount Sinai, upon the
which, the law and the old testament was given, begat unto God a people, but
without promise, that is a carnal and a servile people, and not the heir of
God, because yt unto the law there were not added ye promises of Christ (which
should bless them) and of their deliverance from the curse of the law, from
sin, and from death, also of the fre giving of the remission of sins, of
Justice and everlasting life. But he that does the^ (says the law) shall live
in the^

The Land of living. 14.
David says in his Psalms. I should have faynted, 27. psalm.
except I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord, in the land of the
living. Of ye land of ye living, diue^s do diversely give judgment. Euthinius
does say in this place, the land of the living to be this present world, as a
seat most apt for the living, and the land of them that be dead, to be the
inferior regions.

Furthermore, certain do say, that the earth is never found in the Scriptures
to be called heaven, but that heaven and earth be two places much distant (as
it is written in the Psalm. Out of heaven did the Lord behold the earth. 102.
psalm.
The earth therefore (forasmuch as it must be understand in his own proper
signification, except there be a manifest Metaphore) must be taken in this
place the very earth whereon we dwell.

Ezechias fearyng death complayneth saying. Esaias. 39.
Non videbo dominum deum in terra viuentium, neque aspiciam hominem vltra qui
morior, That is. I shall not see the Lord God in the land of the living, nor
behold man any more which do now dye.

In an other Psalm it is said likewise. psalm. 115.
Placebo domino in regione viuorum. I will please the Lord in the land of the
living, that is I will please him in this present life, for if I do not please
him here, how can I please him in the life to come?

Again in an other place. Portio mea domine, in terra viuentium. Psalm. 142.
O Lord thou art my portion in the land of the living. As though he should
say, in this life I covet and desire none other inheritance beside thee,
which art my portion and lot.

Esaias prophecieng of Christ says. Abscissus est de terra viuentium. Cap. 53.
He was cut of from the land of the living, and so is Terra viuentium, taken in
many places of the Scripture.

Saint Austen does take the land of the living for heaven, his words be
these. O bona domini, dulcia, immortalia, incomparabilia, in psa. 27.
sempiterna, incommutabilia, and quando vos videbo bona domini, credo videre
sed non in terra morientium. etc. O the goods of the Lord, most sweet,
immortal, incomparable, eternal unchangeable, and when shall I see you, but
not in the land of the dieng. The Lord shall deliver me from the land of the
dieng, who vouchesaued for my sake, to take upon him the land of the dieng,
and to dye between the hands of the dieng.

Lyranus expounds Terram viuentium, to be Vitam beatam.

Rabbi Kimhi does understand the land of the living, of the state of the life
to come.

Pellicanus expounds this verse: Credo videre bona domini, in terra
viuentium, I believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living,
after this manner. I feel nothing in this present life but calamities and
miseries, although I am not without divine and godly consolations: but after
this life in the land of the living, and in the world of the blessed souls, I
shall see the goodness of the Lord, that is, I shall have the fruition of the
goodness of God, without al trouble, and with great pleasure. Neither of these
two senses are to be reproved, but the first seems to be more nere the truth.

Choice of meat. 15.
IN the beginning God created all things, and so created the^, that as the
creation of the^ is good, so the things created, are at this day very good:
neither is God contrary unto him self, when he forbids us certain kind of
meats, as though any thing in it self were unclean. There lies hid certain
mysteries under this doctrine. The laws which were made concerning meat, and
apparel, appear to be of little estimation, for God would have his authority
in little things to be respected, for the authority of the law, depends upon
God, and he is the maker of the law, and the law it self is the invention of
God. These laws restrain and keep down the audacitie of man, which
oftentimes makes laws, and repealeth them again, and every day inuenteth new
statutes and ordinances. Wherefore god would have his people to show due and
faithful obedience unto such laws. As when at the beginning God commanding
Adam, ^^. 11.3.
that he should not taste of the tree, of the knowledge, of good and evil, he
required thereby faithful obedience of him. The obedience of the faith, which
was in the Machabies, 2. Mac. 6.7.
in Eliazarus, and in certain other godly men, resisting king Antiochus, even
unto the shedding of their blood, and most cruel death, pleased God. But many
other abstaining from the eating of swines flesh, deserved no praise nor
commendation therefore. When the word of God pronounces any thing to be
holy, that thing is holy, and for this only cause, that he yt does command
it, is holy. When God says any thing to be unclean, it is unclean,
insomuch, that whosoever eats any thing, contrary to the word of God, he
polluteth and defiles himself. You are now clean (says Christ in his Gospel)
for the words which I have spoken unto you. It is necessary therefore that we
do believe the word of god, John. 15.
and that the obedience of faith do go before, and after that, whatsoever work
or fact comes of faith (as the fact of Eleazar was, which would not taste of
swines flesh) cannot but be allowed of god: with whom, whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin. Furthermore, in these laws concerning the abstinence from
certain kinds of beasts, god had a respect and consideration of the health of
the body of man: for certain meats which are not permitted to be eaten of man,
are also condemned of the Physicians, as scarce wholesome. VVherof the holy
fathers gather this argument: If god have care of the health of the body, truly
he must needs be much more careful for the health of the soul. Furthermore,
many of the Gentiles refrained both from the eating and touching of certain
beasts. Therefore, that the people of Israel (being otherwise curious and
superstitious, should not herein permit any thing to them selves, and attempt
things at their own pleasure) God gave unto them certain mystical laws,
concerning this point, by the which he both drew them back from their
inventions, and also severed them from the Heathenish nations, Moses said:
Deuteronomy. 14.
Thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord thy God has chosen
thee, that thou should be unto him a peculiar people, among al ye nations,
upon the face of the earth. Also in the Acts of the Apostles, there is a vision
showed unto saint Peter, in the which by the unclean beasts, the Gentiles are
represented. Furthermore, god would that we should have respect unto the
nature of the beasts, which he forbids to be eaten. For in our table and
meat by extern symbolles, he has described and set forth this heavenly
wisdom, ministering at the table it self an occation unto us, both to think
and speak of the true holiness of the mind, least we should be impudent,
vnpure, unclean and filthy. And therefore this clause is often repeated. Ego
dominus deus vester sanctus sum. I the Lord your God am holy, as though he
should say. To this point pertain al these things, that ye should employ and
give your selves unto holiness. Therefore he taught in these tokens, what the
godly should follow, and what they should avoid.

First he declares general rules of unclean and clean beasts, then he
prosecuteth every one in their kinds in a most natural order, the place is
copiously set forth in Leuiticus and Deuterono: Leui. 11. Deuteronomy. 14
Such beasts as are cloven footed and chew the cud, are granted unto the use
of man. VVherin two things are set before our eyes, in the which the office
of a good man is comprehended. For if we will be pure and clean beasts, we must
both divide the hoof and chewe the cudde. The foot is the affection of the
mind, which is not to be followed. There must be a difference had in things:
and as in a cloven foot there are two parts, the right and the left, so a
good man choseth that which is good, and flees the contrary. The ruminating or
chewing of the cud, is judgment. for every thing is not to be admitted, which
we see and hear, but those things only, which we with a diligent examination
weigh, and consider, and find them not to be repugnaunt unto God and his law.

Afterward, there are adjoined sundry living things in a certain cataloge or
number by their kinds, of which it was unlawful for the people of God for to
eat. These were either four footed beasts of the earth, either beasts of
the water, or birds of the air, or creping things.

Of four footed beasts of the earth, there are four namely forbidden: The
Camel, which has a high and long neck, teaching pride and aroga^cy, by all
means to be aduoided. Also the Cony or the Mouse of the mountain, by the
which is signified, that such men as are drowned in earthly things, are not
allowed of God. The Hare, being a fearful beast, does admonish us to put away
al dastardly cowardnes, as the swine all filthiness and uncleanness. For the Hog
is a figure and token of al impurity, whereof rose this proverb: Sus ad
volutabrum. And it is written of Cyrces, that she turned through her
enchauntments, 2. Pet. 2.
Ulysses companions into swine. Al fishes of the water were permitted to be
eaten, which have scales and fins. If they did lack either of the^, they were
forbidden, as the Ele, which although it have sins, yet it has no scales.
For as the bodies of the fishes are governed by their fynnes: so it behooves
man to be governed with a steadfast faith. The scales are hard, and cover the
body, so except we be constaunte, and pacient in the work of the Lord, he
does worthily abhor us.

Of the fowls of the air, such as are most ravening and spoiling, are
forbidden, and such as feed uncleanly, and desire filthye meat. Also such
birds as fly only in the twy light, and in the night, aduoyding the day
light, and such as are subtle, unstable, and nothing quick. By the which the
contraries, as beneficiency, abstinence, temperaunce, also simplicity,
clearnes, constancy, alacrity, integrity, and cleannes of life are commended
unto us.

Finally, not a few of the creping beasts are noted. For men which are
altogether overwhelmed in filthiness, displease god. I will not rehearse the names
of all the beasts which were forbidden, partly because it had been a busy matter,
partly, because the Expositours of the Bible do wonderfully vary and alter in
the interpreting of them, in so much yt I cannot inogh meruel of ye extreme
blindness and frowardnes of ye Jews, in the earnest observing of the choice of
meats, whereas the Rabbines in this place are dark and obscure, nor can declare
certainly, what those beasts be, which God has forbidden them to eat.

But I pray you, may we not call the proctors and doctors of the Romish church,
more precise, more scrupulous, and more strait laced about the choice of
meats, then ever the Jews or Rabbines were? They would not suffer a poor man
to eat an egg on the Friday, or in the Lent, and other their prescribed
days, unless he had a pardon from the Pope. Yea, if a man being sick and ready
to die, had tasted of any kind of flesh, with out their dispensations and
pardons, he should have been cursed with bell, book, and candle, as black as a
coal down to hell. O bloody tyranny, O servile bondage, wors then the bondage
of the Jews.

Saint Paul commands: Omne quod in macello venditur, 1. Cor. 10.
manducate, nihil interrogantes propter conscientiam. Whatsoever is sold in ye
shambles, eat ye, and ask no question for conscience sake.

Again to Timothy he says: Prohibentium abstinere a cibis quos deus creauit
ad percipiendum cum gratiarum action, sidelibus et us qui cognouerunt
veritatem. Quia omnis creatura dei bona, and nihil reiicien dum, quod cum
gratiarum action percipitur, That is: 1. Tim. 4.
Forbidding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with
geuinge thanks, of the^ which believe and know ye truth: for every creature of
god is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanks
giving.

Also to the Colossians: Nemo vos iudicet in cibo aut potu. etc. Colos. 2.
That is: Let no man condemn you in meat and drink. etc.

Furthermore, to the Romans: Qui vescitur, domino vescirur, gratias enim agit
deo: and qui non vescitur, domino non vescitur, Romans 14.
and gratias agir deo. He that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God
thanks: and he that eats not, eats not unto the Lord, and gives god
thanks. And in many other places of the scripture, as in Mark: Nihil est extra
hominem introiens in eum, quod possit eu^ coinquinare. Cap. 7.
There is nothing without man, yt can defile him, when it enters into him, but
the things which proceed out of him, are they which defile the man.

Saint Austen in his book De ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, writes, quod cibos
qvoque credere malos, vel maliciae accusare percipientes, Lib. 1.66.
non est Christianorum, sed potius Herachitarum and Manichaeorum. That is: to
believe meats to be ill, or to accuse them of sin that do receive them, is
not the part of Christian men but of those heretics which are called
Herarchitae and Manichaei.

Again, writing Ad Ianuariu^m, he says: Epist. 119.
Quod scripsisti quosdam fratres ita temperare a carnibus comedendis, vt
immundos qui comederint arbittentur, apertissime contra fidem sanamque
doctrinam est. That is, where as you have written, certain brethren so to
abstain from flesh, that they judge them unclean, which have eaten flesh, is
most manifest against the faith and sound doctrine.

In the counsel named Concilium Martini Papae, it is written after this manner:
Si quis etiam non pro abstinentia, sed pro execratione escaru^ a carne
abstinet, placuit sancto concilio, vt praegustet, and si sic vult abstine re,
abstineat. Si autem spernit ita, vt olera cocta cum carnibus non degustet, iste
non obediens nec suspitionem haete sis a se remouens, deponatur de ordine
clericatus. If any, not for abstinence, but for the execration and abhorring of
meats, do abstain from flesh, it has pleased the holy counsel, that he shall
at the least taste of it, and then if he will abstain, let him abstain, but if
he so contemn, that he will not taste herbs sodden with flesh, then let him
(not obeing nor removing suspicion of heresy from him) be deposed from the
order of his clergy.

Consider I pray you, how saint Austen in his book De moribus ecclesiae,
painteth out, and most manifestlye describes the fast of the Manichies, to be
such a fast as is now adays the fast of our Papists (that is to say) gluttony,
and not a means to tame the flesh, as they do pretend. And that the sober diet
of the christian man, eating sparely of flesh, is the right kind of fasting.
Thus saint Austen reasons: if there be a man (as it is possible) so spare of
diet, and profitable withal, that he will eat but twice in one day, ruling and
tempering with that abstinence, the appetite of his throat and belly. And be it
also (says he) that there be set at supper before this man, a few herbs, and a
little bacon sodden with the same herbs, so much in quantity, as may suffice to
put away his hunger, and that the same man quench his thirst with three or
four draughtes of pure wine, that is unmingled with water, and that this be
his daily diet. And again on the other side: if there be one yt tastes no
flesh, nor drinks no wine, but strange kinds of dishes, made of seeds and
fruits, with abounda^ce of pepper cast upon it, whereof he eats plentifully
at nine of the clock in the morning, and again at night at supper. And also
that the same man drink of the water, wherewith the husks of grapes be washed,
after the pressing, and of Sider and such other licours, which though they be
no wine, yet they serve in steed of wine, yea and pass it also in swetenes.
And be it that this man drink, not only so much as he thursteth, but so much
as him lusts, and that he has a daily provision for this diet, and has
plenty of these delicates, wherewith to serve not only his necessities, but al
so his lust: whether of these twayn judge you, as touching meat and drink, do
live in more abstinence? I think (says saint Austen) ye be not so blind but
that ye will prefer the man which lives with the little baken and wine, to the
other glotton, for the truth it self drives you to this answer. But you
heretics be of the contrary opinion (says he) for by your opinion if this
second man should sup with the first but one night, and should but touch his
lips, and smell of his baken, though it were resty, ye would straight way
condemn him to hell fire, as a breker of your seal (that is) of your
religion. Thus far saint Austen.

Spiridion qualis circa peregrinorum susceptiones faerit, huic apparet.
Instante iam quadragesima, quidam ex itinere venitad eum, Histo. Tripa^ Lib. 1.
cap. So zomenus.
quiuis diebus sine cibo consistens. Videns itaque peregrinum valde defectum,
perge (inquit filiae suae) laua peregrini pedes, and cibos appone. Cunque virgo
dixisset nec panem esse, nec (...), hoc est farinas (quarum rerum solebat nihil
habere conditum propter ieiunium) orans primum, veniamque petens, filiae iussit
vt porcinas carnes quas domi salitas habebat, coqueret. Quibus coctis, sedens
cum peregrino, positis carnibus comedebat, and rogabat, vt vna cum eo ederet
peregrinus. Quo recusante, Tit. 1.
christianumque se profite^te. Propterea (inquit) recusare non debes. Omnia
enim mu^da mu^ dis, sicut sermo diuinus edocuit.

What manner of man, Spiridion, was about the entertaynement of strangers, it
appears by this that follows: In the beginning of Lent, a certain man
iourneing, came unto him, who was without meat.v. days. Spiridion seeing the
stranger very weak, said to his daughter, go and wash the strangers feet,
and set meat before him. And when the virgin had said that there was neither
bread, nor meat in the house (of the which he was wont then to have no store,
by reason of the fast) Spiridion first praying and asking pardon, commanded
his daughter to sees pork, which he had in his house salted, which being sod,
he sitting with the stranger, did eat of the flesh set before him, and
requested, that the stranger would eat with him. Who refusing, and
professing himself to be a christian, therefore (says Spiridion thou oguht not
to refuse, for to ye clean al things are clean, as the word of God has
taught.

I do not bring in this doctrine to that end, that I would set althinges on
cock and hoope (as they say) or that I do mean, that the euangelical liberty,
should be turned into carnal liberty, or that men might eat at al times all
manner of meats, without observation of the laws of Princes, made for a common
wealth: but I speak it for this end, that we should not put any religion or
righteousness, or any vnholynes in the meats them selves, for they be neither
of, nor on, as saint Paul writes to the Corinthians, saying: Atqui esca nos
non commendat deo, and meat does not commend us unto God.

Cautio.
If the church, or the magistrate do make any laws, certain condicio^s, and
circumstaunces are to be observed.

First, that their decrees be not repugnaunt with the word of God.

Secondly, that the true service of God, justification, and remission of
sins, be not put in them.

Thirdly, they are not to be counted so necessary and inviolable, but that they
may be changed, when the state of the faithful shall so require.

Fourthly, they ought not to be made in such sort, that if any man shall not
without offense, or contempt observe them) he shall be thought to offend deadly.
Therefore, since these laws of the choice of meats are repugnaunt unto the
word of God, by the which word al meats are made lawful, they appear to be
pernicious and hurtful. Furthermore, our adversaries in this their decree of
the choice of meats, do account a certain holiness, and service of God to
consist, in so much, that they esteem them, which do not abstain from such
meats, which they have prescribed, to be less holy, less good, and less
religious. Afterward these their ordinances so increased, and multiplied out
of measure, that neither almost there was any end of them. Saint Austen
complained that in his time all things were full of superstitions, so that the
condition, and state of the Christians was wors, then the servitude of the
Jews. Which thing, forasmuch as, he spoke of his time, what, I pray you
would he say now of our time, the church being oppressed with such infinite
burdens. First of all they ordained, and instituted the Lent, after they added
the Friday and the Saturday, and in some countries the wednesday in every weke.
They brought in the imbering days, four times in the year, also the vigils
of many saints, in the which not to fast, Gregory the seventh, made it mortal
sin. Since that, therefore these traditions are so grievous unto the church,
that they may be called in tolerable burdens, which Christ did reprehend, to
be laid upon men's backs of the Scribes and Pharisees, they ought not to be
tolerated, and suffered. Finally, they would have these traditions to be so
necessary and inviolable, that the church could not consist without them. And
they esteem so much their own inventions, that they punish the transgressors
of them more grievously, then the breakers of Gods commandments, as thieves
and adulterers Church robbers. etc.

Obiectio.
They allege the Rechabites for an example, who are praised in Jeremy, because
they obeyed their father, which commanded them that they should drink no
wine, neither should have any certain possessions, but should be wanderers, and
should dwell in no city. Unto whom God, because they performed these things,
promised a long life and posterity. Here they say, that they do as Ionadab the
son of Rechab commanded his sons concerning the choice of meats.
Wherefore, the church appears not to have erred, in commanding such things.
And as god commended the obedience of the Rechabites, so also he will allow the
doings of the Christians, if they obey such decrees of the church.

Responsio.
I answer: It was commanded in the the old law, not to drink wine, and it did
not displease God, yea rather in some persons it is co^me^ded, as it is
manifest of the vow of the Nazarits, which vow, Samso^ and Ihon Baptist
received, from their mothers womb. For at that time, such an intent pertained
unto a certain holy ceremony. Also, their father commanded the^ that they
should live a wandering life, because perchance he appointed them not to
husbandry and tillage of the ground, but to be shepherds, unto whom it was most
convenient to wander through the woods and hyls. Or else, because they were not
of the children of Israel, therefore they could not have any possession of them
in their land, and yet he would not have them to depart into other countries,
because he worshipped the true god of Israel. For this Rechab was of the
posterity of Iethro, as it appears in Paralipome. If thou will contend that
they were Ethnickes, Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
and therefore that they dwelt among strangers, I answer, that their father
would not withstanding, that as they differed from the^, among who^ they dwelt,
in religion, so also they should be known from them, by outward tokens and
signs, as to abstain from wines, and to have no certain dwelling places.
Furthermore, God praised their duty done unto their father, whom they were bound
in moral life, and in manners to obey, for he commanded these things unto them,
as civil, proper, and peculiar badges of his family, and not under the title of
religion. For when they were bidden of Jeremy to drink wine, they did not
pretend a holiness or a service of god, that they would not consent unto him:
they declared only what their father had commanded. Which obedience pleased
God, and should have pleased him, if it had been exhibited in any other
domestical or civil actions. But the Pope and his prelates do not command
choice of meat, but under the title of holiness and divine honoring of God,
which may not be suffered, since it is ye office of god, and not of man, to make
decrees of religion. If that the Magistrate or officer should command us not
to eat or drink this thing, or that thing, for the common wealths sake it
ought to be obeyed. But as concerning divine honor, or Gods service, it is to
be said, that the easy yoke of the Lord is not to be encombred and agrauated
with man's traditions.

Obiectio.
They object always this saying: Qui vos audit, me audit, Math, 10.
qui vos spernit, me spernit, that is: He that hears you, hears me, and he
that despises you, despises me.

Responsio.
I grant that the pastors ar always to be herd, so long as they teach us
Christ and his doctrine. It were an unjust matter, if that they should think that
when they command their own traditions, they should be as well heard as
Christ. In the old law God would not have any thing added or diminished from
his laws. With what face then, durst they to attempt any such thing in the
new Testament? Is the doctrine of the new Testament more imperfect, then the
old law was?

Christ rebuked the Scribes, because they added their own traditions, who
notwithstanding said unto the people, that they should hear them, because
they sat in the chaires of Moses: but they sit in that chair, when they teach
such things as were written of Moses, but when they will appoint their own
decrees, their authority is worthily diminished. The same may be said of our
bishops and pastors. They read frugality and sobriety to be commended in the
scriptures of Christ, and of the holy ghost, let them exhort the people unto
that, as earnestly as they can.

1. Pet. 5. Romans 13
Saint Peter writes, Fratres sobrii, estote, vigilate in orationibus. etc
Brethren, be ye sober and watch in prayer. And likewise Paul: No^ in
co^messationibus et in ebrietatibus. etc. That is: Not in banketting and
dro^kennes, neither in chambering and wanto^nes etc. Also Christ says: Vide te
ne grauentur corda vestra crapula, Luke 21
and ebrietate. Se that your minds be not oppressed with surfeit, and
dronke^nes. Let them also commend and set forth, fasting and abstinence as
profitable things, which are praised in the holy scripture, but of the times,
manner, and choice of meats, let them leave to speak of, except by the choice
they understand frugall meat, and such as is easy to be gotten, and not
sumptuous and delicate. These things are continually to be beaten into the
heads of the people, that modesty, and temperancy may be embraced in the flock
of christ. But to make ecclesiastical laws concerning these things, by the
which the conscience is entangled, it is not good nor requisite. Saint Austen
says, yt the Apostles commanded men to fast, but as concerning the days of
fasting, they spoke nothing. But saint Hierom says, yt the festiual days, and
days of fasting were appointed of wise me^, for their cause, which do not almost
at any time fast, and do not always come unto the church. Wherefore the laws
both concerning days, and the choice of meats, are to be counted as the
tradicions of men, and not the commandments of god. And we read, that the
fast of the saturday had his beginning, of this, because, Peter a little before
he should dispute with Simon Magus on the sunday, commanded a fast upon the
saturday, wherefore upon a superstitious zeal of this fact, they did always
fast that day, which thing was not used of the churches of Africa, and of the
oriental parts. But when such things are instituted and decreed of the choice
of meats, what is to be done of ye faithful? First, that they which use the
liberty granted of Christ and of the church, be well persuaded in their
consciece, which Paul monisheth speaking to the Romans: Quisque in sensu suo
abundet, let every man be persuaded in his mind, Romans 14
because nothing is to be attempted against the conscience. Let him also give
thanks unto god, of who^ he receives this liberty through christ as in the
same Epistle the apostle commands him that does eat, not to be judged of
the weaker, because he eats with giving of thanks. Farthermore, that which he
does, let him do it unto the glory of God, neither let him seek his own
delight, or covet to satisfy his own lusts. For the same apostle says: Sieve
manducatis, sieve bibitis, omnia in dei gloriam facite. Whether ye eat or
drink, let al things be done to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10.
Let him beware also, least he offend his weak brethren. Let him teach them
and instruct them with lenity and gentleness, but not so, that he nourishe their
infirmity. For some are to be suffered for a time, but not continually, except
they will always be lerners, and never come unto knowledge. Neither does this
saying of thapostle make against us: Si esca offendir fratre^ meum, inaeternum
carnes non manducabo. 1. Cor. 8.
Rather then I should offend my brother, I will never eat flesh. He does show
with these words, how he was minded, and does put a cause, saying: least I
should offend my brother. But he that is already taught, and is not offended,
but of a certain stubbournes, we ought not to bear with him, least long
dissimulation tend to the detriment of the whole church.

Question.
From whence came this superstition, to abstain from flesh, and where had it
first his original?

Responsio.
It is to be thought, that it came first from the Heathen, because the priests
of the Egyptians did abstain from flesh. So did Apollonius, Thianeus, and
Pythagoras also, and this they did, because by this means they thought to make
their senses more pure, and to wipe away al grosnes and darkness out of their
mind, whereof they hoped for certain reuelacions by their own industry and
labor, but these be the gifts of the holy ghost, which does distribute them at
his pleasure.

Obiectio.
How say you then to Daniel and his fellows, who did abstain from the meats
of the kings table, from flesh and from wine?

Responsio.
They did abstain for none other cause, but that they would not be polluted
with meats forbidden in the law, which should have been easilye brought to
pass, if they had sitten at the kings table. The wine also did move the^ some
scruple, least it were not pressed out of that vine, which was not yet four
years old, whereof to taste the law did forbid.

Lynsey wolsey. 16.
IT is commanded in Deuteronomy, thou shall not wear a garment of diverse
sorts, as of woollen and linen together. Cap. 22.


Josephus does expound, that this was forbidden for the dignity of the
priesthood of Aaron, because there was such a mixed weauing in the garment of
the high Priest. And therefore it was not lawful for other to wear the like
kind of garment.

Other doctors do say, that it was forbidden to avoid the manner of idolaters,
which worshipped the constellations of heaven, who did wear such kind of
clothes, and other mingled matters, to signify the conjunction of the planets,
in the solemnity of their sacrifices.

other do make a moral of this saying, that by wool is signified simplicity, by
linen is signified suttlety, and the cloth which is made of linsey woolsey
does cover the linen in the inside, and does show the wool in the outside.

He wears a garment of linen and woollen, which, under the innocent pretense
of fair words, does cover the suttlety of mischief and craft.

Sabbatum. 17.
SChauath, agrees in signification with these verbs, Iaschau, and Schou,
Schauah, but yt as they vary in form, so also they differ in manner of
signification. For as schou, betokneth returning to a place, schauah, a leding
away, or moving from a place, and Iaschau, remaining in a place, so schauath
betokens a ceasing or rest from moving and labor. Therefore ye may translate
it with the verb of ceasing or resting Genesis. 1. Et benedixit deus diem
septimum, et sanctificauit eum, quia in eo cessauit ab omni opere suo, quod
creauit deus, vt faceret, That is: And God blessed the seventh day, and hallowed
it, because in it he ceased from all his work, which he ordained to do. And
again: Et cessauit die septimo ab omni opificio suo. That is: and God ceased
from all his work the seventh day.

Exodus 20
Of this verb comes this nowne Schabbath, which betokens quiet or rest, as
in Exodus: Quia sabbatum est ipsi Jehovah.

Sabbatum, therefore does signify a rest, and vacation from al servile labor.
And it is to be observed, that the Lord says not, keep holy the Saboth, but
remember that thou keep holy the Saboth. It does signify that the institution
of the Saboth day was most ancient, and of most antiquity, being delivered
unto the fathers a long time before, and now repeated and received by the Lord,
among the people of Israel. But the sum of the whole commandment, is this,
keep holy the saboth day. The same he expounds more at large, nu^bring the
days the^ selves, rehearsing also the whole family, unto who^ it was enjoined
to keep the saboth. Last of al is added the example of God him self, resting
and sanctifieng the saboth.

This word Sabbatum, is of a large signification. For first, ye scripture
makes mention of a certain spiritual and perpetual saboth, in yt we cease
from our servile labor, abstaining from sin, endeavoring, yt we do not follow
our own will, and yt we do not employ our labor upon our own works but ceasing
from the^, yt we suffer god to work in us, and yt our bodies be subject unto ^
government of the spirit. Esaias 58. et 66 Hebr. 4.
After this saboth does follow ye spiritu al saboth, or ye eternal rest, of ye
which Esaias and Paul to ye hebrews entreats. But then we do truly worship
God, when resting from evil, and obeying the holy ghost, we are exercised in
good works. It is not requisite to entreat at large of the allegory of the
spiritual Saboth. Let us endeavor rather, while we are in these mortal bodies,
to sanctifye a pleasant and acceptable Saboth unto God, with a continual and
wylling desire, and love of godlynes.

Furthermore, the Saboth is an externe and outward ordinance of religion, for
God would deliver unto us in this precept, an outward religion and worshipping
of God, in the which we should all be exercised. But there must needs be a time
to worship God. He therefore has appointed a time, in the which we should
abstain from all corporal labors, and should be occupied in the works of
the spirit. For therefore is the outward rest commanded, that the spiritual
operation might not be let and hindered by the corporal actions. This operation
of the spirit with the fathers, was occupied about four things, that is, in
reading, interpreting and hearing of the scriptures, in private and public
prayer, in celebration of sacraments and sacrifices, and in collecting and
distributing to the poor. In these points consisted the outward keeping of the
Saboth: for the people (al business laid apart, and being at rest) gathered them
selves together into the sinagoge, where the prophets did read, and interpret
the word of God, and did instruct the auditory in true godlynes. After this,
the faithful prayed together with one accord and common assent, for all their
necessities. They praised the name of god, and thanked him for all his
benefits. Furthermore, they offered sacrifice according unto the word of god,
celebrating the mysteries and sacraments of god, and so exercised their faith.

And they were admonished of their office and duty, and that they should offer
them selves a lively sacrifice unto god. Finally, they laid together their
gifts liberally unto the use of the church. These gifts were employed partly
upon the necessary uses of the church, upon the ministers, and to the relief
of the poor. These truly were the holy works of God, which as long as they
used, being instructed in faith and charity, they did sanctify the Saboth, and
the name of the Lord, that is, they performed those works in the Saboth,
which do both sanctifye the name of God, and also adourne the doers of them,
and they are verily the works, which are holy and acceptable unto God. If thou
require a manifest and worthy example, and pattern of the Saboth or feast truly
sancttified, thou shall find it in Nehemias, Cap. 8.
for there the priests expound and interpret the word of God, they praise his
name, they pray with the people, they offer sacrifice, they are liberal in
their gifts, and finally behave them selves holy and religious in all points

But some man will object and say: idleness brings vice, and men must labor
with their hands, that they may have to relieve them selves and their family,
least they should perish through famine. To this, it may be answered, that
there is other time sufficient permitted of God, wherein thou may labor, and
wherein every man may provide sustentation sufficient for his family. For it is
lawful to labor six days, but the seventh day God requires to be
consecrated unto him self. Every week is complete, and ended in seven days,
and of these seven days, God chale^geth but one only unto him self. Who can
worthily complain, that there is injury done unto him? There is more time
appointed for thy labors, then for holy rest. And it is God who does require
this rest, the creator of man, his father and Lord.

Furthermore, the Lord commands this holy rest, this discipline, and
worshipping of him, to be observed of al thy family. VVherof we gather, that ye
office of a good governor of a house, is to see, that his whole family do
sanctify the saboth, that is, that they do these good works in ye Saboth,
which before were rehearsed. And for because God knows the nature of man, who,
when he is promoted unto government, for the most part is insolent and proud,
therefore, lest that fathers and masters should use their family over
straightly and rigorously, or should be an impediment unto them in keeping the
Saboth, he commands in plain words and diligent rehearsal, that they should
grant unto their familye, and to every one of their household, a holy rest and
quietness, wherein he makes no exception of the stranger. He will not have them
to follow the rule of certain slothful persons, which say, that faith and
religion ought to be free, and that no man ought to be compelled unto religion.
For God commands thee to force unto religion, the stranger that is within
thy gates, that is, being in thy jurisdiction and government. This rest is not
commanded for it self. for rest, and idleness are wont always to be blamed:
but is commanded for these causes following. God will have a time and place
reserved for religion. These must needs be hindered by external labors. He is
not in the fellowship of the holy congregation, he does not hear Gods word, he
prays not with the church, he is not present at the celebration of the
sacraments, who, at the commandment of his master, either takes a journey,
or sells things for his master in the market, or cleanses the corn in the
barn, and does exercise rustical labor in the field, or woorketh at home at
the stithe, or mendeth his hosen or shoes. Therefore faith and godliness bids
thee to suffer thy servant to be at leisure and vacation, yea and it
commands thee to provoke and enforce such as are otherwise sluggish, to be
godly occupied. Also God would have yt such as have labored, should sometimes
cease, and take their rest, according unto this verse of Ovid. Quod caret
alterna requie, durabile no^ est.

That which of rest sometimes is not sure,
Cannot continewe long time, nor endure.
Therefore the merciful Lord, who has always a respect unto the observation
of his creatures, does appoynte a mean and measure, and provides, that the
covetousness and rigorousnes of their masters do not to much afflicte the
creature of God. In Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 5.
Moses adds the affection of Gods mercifulnes, saying: Remember, that thou
also wast a bondeman in Egipte. Charity therefore and humanity require a
measure, that we do not grieve and vex our servants with to much labor.

Farthermore, fathers and masters in plantyng of godliness, in their
housholdes, do not a little promote their own utility and profit: for wicked
servants are commenly theuishe and untrusty, but the godly servants are
faithful and diligent. There is also mention made of the beasts and cattle,
not only because man is Lord and master of the beasts, but because without
the ministry and service of man, the beasts cannot be exercised. Therefore we
are plucked away from the religion of the Sabbath, through our beasts, from
the which, least we should be let and troubled, it is commanded, that we
should permit our cattle to take their rest.

Last of all God brings an example, by the which he teaches us to keep
holy the Sabbath. Because (says he) in six days the Lord made heaven, and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, but the seventh day he rested,
therefore God blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. God labored seven
days in creatyng the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that is therein, but
in the seventh day he rested, consecrating a certain appointed day to rest in.
In the seventh day, we must consider the works, which God did the six days
before. The children of God must call to remembrance, what, and how great
benefits they have received the whole week before. Then God is to be
thancked, praised, and to be learned in his worckes. We must consecrate unto
him our whole body and soul, and we must consecrate unto him all our sayings,
and doings. The Lord rested from creating, but he rested not from preserving,
and gouernyng such things as he had created. We must rest therefore from
handie and bodily worckes, but we must not cease from such worckes as
pertayne unto the worshipping of God. Wherefore, the divine rest hurted not the
things created, and restyng, and serving of God in the Sabbath day, will be no
hynderaunce unto our worldly business, and affairs: for God blessed the
Sabbath, he will therefore bless thee and thy house, thy doings and all thy
possessions, if thou be careful to keep holy the Sabbath of the Lord, that
is, if thou do those worckes which he commanded to be done upon the Sabbath.
They do err therefore and are much deceived, which despise the religion and
the holy rest of the Saboth, and call it an unprofitable idleness, and do labor
in the Saboth day like as they do in other profane days, pretending the care
and necessity of their family.

All these things must be applied also unto us Christians, and to our
Churches. It is most certain, that the spiritual Saboth is before all other
things commanded unto Christians. Neither is it to be doubted, but that god
will hau a just order to be observed in our churches as well as before time in the
Churches of the Jews, and especially an exercising of external Religion, we
know that the Sabbath is ceremonial, in that, it is joined with Sacryfices
and other Judicial ceremonies, and in that, it is tied unto a certain time:
but in that Relygion and godliness, is furthered in the Saboth day, and a just
order is retained in the Church, and charity keept with our neighbor: It is
moral and not ceremonial: we must in this time also spare our family, and we
must in these days instruct our household in Religion. God did no where
dissipate or put a sonder the holy congregations, but he chiefly gathered them
together. As there ought to be a certain place, so there ought to be a
certain and a prescribed time, consecrated unto the exercise of religion, and
therefore there must be a holy rest also. Therefore the primative Church
changed the day of the Saboth, least they should seem to be like the Jews,
and to stick unto ceremonies, and celebrated the holy rest the next day after
the Saboth day, Apoc. 1.
which Saint John calls Dominica, yt is, the sunday, or the day of the Lord,
because God in that day gloriously rose again from the dead. And although the
sunday is commanded in no place of the new Testament, yet because in the
fourth precepte of the first Table, the care of Religion and the exercise of
the externe worshippyng of God is earnestly required, it were contrary to
godliness and Christian charity, not to sanctify the sunday, especially since
this externe worshipping cannot consiste without an appointed time of holy
rest. The same is to be thought of certain other feasts and holy days
dedicated unto our Lord Christ, in the which we celebrate the memorial of his
nativity, incarnation, circumcision, passion, resurrection, his assention into
heaven, and the sendyng down of the holy Ghost upon his Disciples. For this is
not the Christian liberty to break and violate Ecclesiastical and godly
observations, which help and set forth both the glory of God and the
charity of our neighbor. But because the Lord will have holy days only unto
himself, such festival days as are dedicated unto creatures, are not to be
allowed This glory and service only appertains unto God. Col. 2.
Saint Paul says, I will not that any man should judge you in the part of
any festival day or Saboth, which are but the shadows of things to come.
And in an other place he says. Ye observe days and months, times, and
years. I fear least I have bestowed my labor upon you in vain. And therefore
we have nothing to do at this time with the observation of the Jews, in the
Church of Christ Let us keep only the Christian observation, and the
exercise of Christian Religion.

The sanctifieng of the Saboth of the Christians.
The sanctifieng and exercise of our Sunday, does consiste also in four
things, which must be found in the holy congregation of the Christians, if
it be holy in deed.

First, all holy men ought to enter into the Church, where the Gospel must be
expounded and declared, by the which the auditory may learn what to think of
God, what is the true service of god, and how ye name of God may be glorified.
Next there must be petitions and prayers made in the congregation for the
necessities of all men. We must extolle the goodness of God giving thanckes for
his daily and inestimable benefits. And (if the time, occasion and custom of
the Church do so require) the Sacraments must religiously be celebrated: for
it is chiefly required in this fourth precept, that we should diligently
observe and devoutly exercise the holy Sacraments, and rites of the Church,
being lawful, profitable, and necessary.

Finally, humanity, and beneficence must take place in the congregation, al
men must learn daily to be beneficial in giving of alms privately, but to be
most liberal publicly, whenever the necessity of the time, and
opportunity shall so require.

By these offices and duties, the Saboth is also sanctified in the Christian
Church, especially, if there be added unto this a continual endeavor of an
upright and innocent life.

This discipline and order is as well to be used in every household of the
fathers and maistres among the Christians, as among the Jews. Of the which
matter it is not needful to make many words, where as I have so entreated of
this place a little before, that it is agreeable in all points unto our
Christian Church. This only will I add at this present, that it is the
office of a christian Magistrate, or at the least wise of a good father, to
bring and keep in order all such as do violate and contemn the Sabbath of the
Lord, and his divine service. The chief of the Jews and the people of God by
the commandment of God, stoned to death one that contemptuously gathered
sticks on the Sabbath day. Number. 15.
Why therefore is it not lawful for a christian Magistrate, to punish in body,
goods, or life the despisers of Religion, and the true and lawful service of
the Sabbath? If that in this corrupt and wicked time the negligent Magistrate
do not his duty, yet every father and master must endeavor, that his family
be not wicked, let him punish his own servants by such lawful means and
ways as is permitted unto him: for it is lawful for every householder,
although he dwell among Idolaters to gather a holy congregation in his own
house, (as we read that Loath did in Sodom, and Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in
the land of Canaan, and in Egypt.) And it is a great offense and a detestable
scisme, if when lawful companies and conuenticles be assembled together in
towns and villages, a Christian man should despise the Church of Christ and
the congregation of Saints, as the Anabaptists do.

The abuse of the Sabbath.
Here is requisite, that we recite the abuses and offenses committed against
this commandment. They offend against this precepte, which cease not from
evil worckes, yea rather abuse this holy rest, unto the entisement and
pleasures of the flesh: for such keep not the Sabbath of God, but they serve
the devil in playeng at dice, in eating and drynkyng, in daunsing, and
followyng other vanities of the world, by the which worcks, we are not only
led away from the holy congregation but pollute and defile our own bodies,
which we ought to sanctify. They offend also which exercise handye worckes
in the Sabbath, or wrapped and couchyng in their beds, sleep much part of
the day, neglectyng the congregation of God. They offend, which burdenyng
their servants with labor, let them from the seruyng of God, preferryng
other corruptible and filthy things before the honoring of God. But they
offend most of all, which do not only not sanctify the Sabbath, but are an
occasion also unto others by their impure tauntes and evil example of
prophanyng the holy day, which disprayse and disdain the holy rites, the
ministry, the Ministers, the schools, and al godly exercises. And all
governors of householdes offend greatly against this precepte, if they do
not their diligence to use, and to retain the sanctifieng of the Sabbath in
their houses: Who soever despise the Religion of the Sabbath, do give an
evident testimony in them selves of impiety and contempt of God. Therefore,
the observation and contempt of the Sabbath, has great promises and
threatninges in the Scripture.

For the declaration of the which thing, I will recite the words of Jeremy,
which are these: Thus has the Lord said unto me, go, and stand in the gate
of the children of the people, whereby the kings of Judah come in, and by the
which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem, And say unto them:
hear the words of the Lord, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the
inhabitauntes of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates. Thus says the Lord:
take heed to your souls, and bear no burden in the Sabbath day, nor bring it
in by the gates of Jerusalem, neither carry forth burdens out of your houses
in the Sabbath day, neither do ye any work, but sanctify the Saboth, as I
commanded your fathers. But they obeyed not, neither inclined their ears, but
made their necks stiff, and would not here, nor receive corction.
Nevertheless, if ye will here me (says the Lord) and bear no burden through the
gates of the City in the Sabbath day, so that ye do no work therein, then
shall the kings, and the princes enter in at the gates of this City, and shall
sit upon the throne of David, and shall ride upon the charettes, and upon
horses, both they and their princes, the men of Judah and the inhabitauntes of
Jerusalem, and this City shall remain for ever, and they shall come from the
Cities of Judah and from about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and
from the plain, and from the mountayns, and from the South, which shall bring
burnt offringes and Sacrifices, and meat offringes and incense, and shall
bring Sacrifice of praise into the house of the Lord. But if ye will not here
me to sanctify ye Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, nor to go through
the gates of Jerusalem in the Sabbath day, then will I kindle a fire in the
gates thereof, and it shall devour the palace of Jerusalem, and it shall not
be quenched. Hitherto Jeremy.

Not without good cause therefore Leo, and Anthemius being religious princes,
writing unto Armasius, commanded him in these words: That the festival days
being dedicate unto the excellent majesty of God, should neither be occupied
in pastime and pleasure, neither be profaned in exacting of tributes.

Likewise we decree, that the sunday shall be reverently honored, that it shall be
excepted from al business. In this day let no suretyship be taken, let no man be
summoned to appear, let no pleadyng be used, and let no causes or matters of
controversy be heard etc. And a little after it follows. Neither do we
suffer, that this day (being exempted from all travel) should be spent in
wantonness, and filthy delights, let there be no interlude or pagent played one
the dominicall day, nor any game or pastime in the place of exercise called
Circus, nor the lamentable spectacle of wild beasts, yea although the
solemnity of our birth happen upon this day, let it be deferred. If any man
on this day shall have any access unto spectacles, or under the pretense of
public or private affairs, shall be an apparitor or sergeant to any Judge,
violating and breakyng these statutes, let him sustain, let him leese the
commodity of warfare, and run into the danger of prescription and atteinder.

But in the mean time, the Christian men do not forget these words of Christ
in the Gospel. The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.
Math. 12.
And therefore is the son of man Lord also of the Sabbath. The godly do
understand, that the Sabbath was instituted of God, to conserve, and not to
destroy man: and therefore the Sabbath is to be dispensed withal, as often as
it shall be through our necessity or health so required. 12. Cap. 6. et 13. cap.
Of the which thing our savior Christ disputes in Matthew and in Luke, for in
such things the liberty of the Christians does consiste. And whereas the
Priests and Levites are excused openly slayeng of beasts in the Temple,
skinning, seething and burning them, that is, preparing their Sacrifice in such
sort, that they be not counted gilty of the breach of the Sabbath. In like
sort it shall be lawful to prepare meat for our necessity on the Sabbath day,
and to feed the body. It shall be lawful also to heal the sick, to visit the
impotent and diseased persons, to succor the nedy, that we may preserve the
creature of God. In this, the example of our savior Christ does instruct us,
executing the works of charity and mercy on the Sabbath day. Of this there
are sundry examples in the History of the Gospel, Luke 6. et. 13. John. 5.
but especially in Luke and John. If it be lawful to pluck a beast out of the
dich or mier on the Sabbath, why is it not lawful on the Sabbath to post and
succor an old house being ready to fall to the ground? Why is it not lawful
upon the Sabbath, to gather together or carry in hay or corn, which has
layne abroad a long time, and to save it, least it should through the injury of
the weather perish, and be utterly destroyed? Constantine the Emperor in his
statutes writing to Elpedius, says thus: Let all Judges and the common people
of the Cities, and all offices and crafts, cease, and be at rest upon the
Sunday. But the people of the country may sometimes freely and lawfully attend
their tillage and ground: because it oftentimes happens, that the corn
cannot be committed unto the earth, nor the vine tree be set in the trenches
more commodiously and conveniently on any other day. And let not the commodity
which is given by Gods provision, perish through the occasion of a momentary or
short time. These be the words of Constantine. He does not permit unto the
men of the country, al manner of violatyng of the Sabbath: for it is required
also of the^, that they serve God, and that they do not break this fourth
precepte, but they have a liberty granted the^ in their vrge^t necessity,
but herein, godliness, and charity ought to be our best masters, and to
dispense with us in this case, least under the pretense of liberty and
necessity, we exercise impiety, and do the works of covetous, and not of
religious persons.

Thirdly, the Sabbath has a mystical signification: for it is a perpetual
token, that it is God only which does sanctify his worspippers, for thus
Lord speaks unto Moses: Thou shall keep my Sabothes, be cause it is a sign
betwixt me and you unto your posterities, yt ye may know that I am the Lord
which does sanctify you. And the rest as follows in Exodus. And it is
repeted in Ezechiel. Exodus 13. Ezech. 20.
To this use it does also confer it causes mutual help and charity,
which was spoken of before in the declaration of the second use: for God does
sanctify his faithful through the holy Ghost, the which thing he declares
unto his Church by the word of his Gospel, which he testifies and seals
with his Sacraments: and he commands us, to desire of him this
sanctification with continual prayers. All which things are exercised
chieflye in the Sabbath day, in this, that we may receive our sanctification of
God which is only holy.

Unction. 18.
SAint John in his Epistle says. The anointing which you received of him,
dwells in you, 1. John. 2.
and you need not that any man teach you, but as the same annoyntyng teaches
you of all things etc. This word Vngere, and Vnctio, do signify many things
in the Scriptures.

First, by the trope Synecdoche, it signifies to constitute and ordain a king
or a Priest.

Secondly, it signifies all civil and human furniture and dealing as in the
book of kings. Surrexit David, and vnctus and lotus est, that is David arose
from the earth, and annoynting and washed him self.

Likewise, saint Luke speaking of Mary, says, Vnxit oleo caput eius, Luke 7.
she anointed his head with Oil.

Thirly, by this word unction is understand the holy ghost, 2. Cor. 1.
as Paul writes to the Corinth. saying: Et qui vnxit nos deus est, qui etia^
obsignauit nos, deditque arra^ spiritus in cordibus nostris, that is And it is
God which has anointed us, who also has sealed us, and has given the ernest
of the spirit in our hearts.

Also, in this place of John, this word Vnctio, signifies the holy ghost: 1.
John. 2.
And ye meaning of this sentence is this after the mind of Chrysostom. The
faithful in ye primative church had not much need of books (ye holy ghost
teaching the^ all things necessary to salvation) and that which John speaks
here, that the unction, that is the holy Ghost, teaches you of, all is true.
Remain therefore in that vnctio^, that is in the doctrine of the holy Ghost,
and ye shall be preserved from deceivers.

Justification. 19.
IVstificare, and iustificari, to justify, and to be justified, is Verbum
forense, in the Scriptures, and chiefly among the Hebrews, and it signifies
properly, to be judged, and assoiled by some man, as if I should say, the
people of Rome has justified Scipio, being accused of the Tribunes, that is to
say, they have assoyled or pronounced him to be a just man, Likewise in the
holy Scriptures, as in Deuteronomie Cum inter litigantes iudicandum est, Cap. 25
iustum iustificent, and impium condemnent, that is, when there shall be strife
between men, they shall come unto judgment, and sentence shall be given upon
them, and the righteous shall be justified and the wicked condemned. And in
Matthew. Ex verbis tuis iustificaberis, Cap. 12.
that is, by thy words thou shall be justified, that is to say, thou shall be
made free and delivered.

Secondly, it signifies any man to be approved, known, and praised to be
just. Hereupon Saint Luke writes, that the people and publicanes which were
Baptized at John's preaching, Luke 12.
did justify God, yt is, acknowledged, judged, confessed, and praised God to
be just.

Thirdly, this word Iustificari, to be justified, signifies also a man to be
allowed for doing well, the which signification S. James uses, when he
concludes, that Abraham was justified by works, and not by faith only,
because God praised Abraham for his obedience, which he was ready to do by the
offering up of his son, and also confirmed the promise of multiplieng
Abraham's posterity, and giving him a blessed seed which was our savior
Christ. This justification was coumpted nothing else but a praise and reward of
his well doing, and not receyuinge of his person unto grace and state of
adoption by his worckes. It is manifest therefore, that this word is taken also
to signify a man's good cause to be allowed, that is, for any man to be praised
and rewarded of GOD for ryghteousnes and obedience done unto him. Cap. 22
We see this word to be so used of Saint Paul, when he wrote that the
hearers are not justified before God, but the doers of the law. Likewise we
see it to be used in the Apocalipse, for to profit in righteousness. Therefore,
to be justified by worckes, signifies to obtain remission, and to be
ryghteous and accepted unto God by our own power and deeds, which is a false
doctrine. But contrariwise to be justified by faith in Christ, signifies to
obtain remission, and to be coumpted righteous, that is accepted to God, not
by our own powers, but by the fre grace of our mediator, the son of God.

Fourthly, Iustificare, to justify, sometime is used for Excusare, to excuse,
Cap. 44
as in Genesis, Quid loquemur? and quo nos iustificabimus? that is what shall
we speak? and how can we justify and excuse our selves? And in Luke. Cap. 18.
Ille autem volens iustificare seipsum, id est, expurgare. etc. that is to say.
And he willing to justify, that is, to clear him self. etc. Again in Luke,
Cap 16.
Jesus says to ye Phariseis. Vos estis qui iustificastis vos coram hominibus.
etc. id est, existimastis vos probos, iustos, that is, you are they, which
have justified your selves before men. etc. that is, have thought your selves
to be good and just men.

Therefore properly justification is none other thing, than a remission,
reconciliation, or acceptance of a person to eternal life, that is
justification signifies remission of sins, a quiet conscience, and a sure
hope of eternal life given freely by the only mercy of God.

The iustifications of God are the words of his promises, which when we
believe, we are justified before God, like as we be condemned for believing lies.
Psalm. Vtinam dirigantur viae meae ad custodiendas iustificationes tuas, that
is. O, that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes, that is to say. O that
my ways were right, that is, the affection of my heart, and my conversation,
and that I might not be seduced with strange doctrine, with other men's
commandments and with other statutes. Heb. 9.


Saint Paul in the Epistle to the Hebrews calls not, Iustificationes, the
word and promises of God, but he calls the^ those things which declare
justification after a sort, although they do not give it, as are the
Sacrifices, and purifications of the law.

Saint Luke seems to put, Iustificationes, Luc. ^.
for externe and outward religion, rites (I say) and ceremonies ordained of
God. These rites and ceremonies are called, Iustifications, not because they
justify by the^ selves, but because they are done of them that be justified,
and do Sacramentally represent the manner of Justification by Christ, and also
do exercise them that be justified in the worshipping of God.

Pelagius. 20.
PElagius was a moncke and a wicked heretic, who came from Rome about the
year of the incarnation of Christ. 400. into England, or as some do say, he
was a Briton borne, he infected the whole realm with cursed and execrable
errors: for he preached, yt man might be saved without the grace of God, and
that every man is justified by his own merits and power. He said also, that
infantes are borne without original sin, and therefore ought not to be
Baptized that they might be delivered from sin, as is declared in the Canon.
Also he said, 24. q. 3. ca. Pelagiani.
man may live without sin in this life. Saint Austen confuted most profoundly
these errors in his six books written against Iulianus, which with one
Caelestinus, defended Pelagius faction and errors. Also in three books De
peccatorum meritis and remissione and Baptismo paruulo tam, and in his book,
De natura et gratia.

This Pelagius (before he was uttered to be an heretic) made three books De
Trinitate fidei: and after he was pronounced and published an heretic, he
wrote doctrines consonant to his heresies.

Praelectio sexta.
I Ente^d at this present by ye help of gods holy spirit to discourse unto you
the fourth and last member of my general partitio^, which shall be of the church
and of the authority of the same, with certain objections of our adversaries
and answeares unto the same. And first I will entreat whether there, has been,
is, and ought to be a church always or no.

Of the Church.
First whether there be a church or no.

Neither there has been, nor hereafter shall be any age in which god has not
sanctified, God. 1.
or does not sanctify at the least some people in whom he dwells being his
holy and peculier house: For the Prophets do testify, that ye Church is
continual. It is written in the Psalm. Psalm. ^
Dominus elegit Syon, elegit eam inhabitationem sibi, haec requies mea in
seculum seculi, hic habitabo, quoniam elegi eam. That is, The Lord has chosen
Syon, he has chosen it, for an habitation to him self, saying, this is my
rest for ever, here I dwell for I have chosen it.

How necessary the faith of the Church is, it appears by this, Because, that
we may be regenerate to eternal life, we must first be conceived in her womb,
and that we may be preserved. And if we swerve from the Church, yet we may
return to her again by repentance. Repentance 2.
We must be cherished in her lap, for the Church is the mother of us all:
without the unity whereof the Scriptures declare, that there is no salvation.
For so are these prophetical speeches to be understood. Cap ^
In Sion et in Jerusalem erit saluatio. In Sion and Jerusalem shall be
salvation. Ezech. In concilio populi mei non eru^t, et in scriptura domus
Israel non scribe^tur, that is They shall not be in the asse^bly of my people,
neither shall they be written in the writing of ye house of Israel. And s. Paul
says to the Ephesia^s. Vnu^ corpus, Cap ^
vnus spiritus, vnus dn^s, vna fides, vnum baptisma, vnus deus et pater omniu^.
etc. That is. There is one body, one spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and father of all. etc. Unto these testimonies the words of the
ancient fathers do agree.

S. Cipria^ says. Ecclesia vna est quae in latitudine^ latius increme^^o
faecu^ditatis extenditur, quomodo solis multi radii sed lume^ vnu^: and rami
arboris multi, sed robur vnu^, tenaci radice fu^datu^, and quu^ de fo^te vno
riui plurimi defluu^t, numerositas licet diffusa videatur ex vnda^tis copiae
largitate, vnitas tame^ seruatur in origin. Auelle radiu^ solis a corpore,
diuisione^ lucis vnitas no^ capit. etc. The church is one, which is largly
stretched forth by a ple^teous increase, Eue^ as there be many beams of ye
sone, and but one light, and many boughs of a tree, and yet there is but one
body strongly rooted, And as out of one spring many rivers do flow, though many
streams of water do seem to be scattered abroad, yet notwtsta^dyng the unity
is kept in ye head of the spring. Take away the beam of the son from the body
the unity takes no participation of the light.

Break ye bough from the tree and it will not bud. Separate ye river from the
fou^tain and it will be dried up. So ye church being dispersed by ye light of ye
Lord reachech out her beams through ye whole world, and yet there is but one
light which is scattered abrod i^to al places, neither is ye unity of ye body
separated, she exte^deth her beams into the whole world by her plentifulnes,
she largly spreads out her flowing rivers, and yet there is but one head, one
beginning, and one mother of plenty.

Therefore seeing ye diverse names are read to be attributed to ye church, we must
not imagine yt there be many churches in ye world, nor we must pull in sonder
the body which receives not nor suffers any division. The writers do call ye
catholic church universal, co^sisti^g of me^ women and children, because it is
one, neither ca^ there be many churches, for although ye church be
distinguished into a triu^phant and milita^t church, and into a church of ye
old fathers, and of ye new people: yet notwtstandyng al these members remain
always in one body, being united under one head Christ. As ye so^dry
co^ditio^s of bond me^ and fre me^ do not divide ye commonwealth into parts,
so yt felicity of ye blessed companies in heaven, and the labors wherwt we are
exercised in this world fighting under Christ his ba^ner, do not make ii.
churches. Fellow servant, 4.
The aungel says to s. John. ^oc. 22
Co^seruus tuus su^ et, fratru^ tuoru^ prophaetaru^, yt is. I am thy fellow
servant and of thy brethren ye prophets. He knowledgeth both ye Prophets and
also ye Apostles to be the sons and household seruau^ts of one God. We read in
the gospel but of one vineyard, and not of ii. or diverse vineyards to be placed
diversely, and so there is but one church of the old fathers going before christ's
coming, and of ye people taken of the ge^tils after the co^mi^g of christ, of
this we have spoke largly before.

The unity and society of this church of god is so great, yt without ye
fellowship of it, there is found no people acceptable unto god. If any man in
times past had offered sacrifice to god without ye tabernacle or temple in ye high
places, he was thought to have sacrificed altogether to devils, and to have
shed innocent blood. And therefore Cipria^ writes well saying. Quisquis ab
ecclesia segregatus iu^gitur adulterae, a promissis ecclesiae separatur, nec
pertinet ad xp^i premia qui reliquerit ecclesia^ xp^i. etc. yt is. Whosoever ever
being separated from ye church, is joined to a cou^terfeit or adulterous
church, he is severed from ye promises of the church, nor the rewards of christ
do appertain unto ye man which has forsaken the church of christ. He is an
alien, a profane man, and an enemi: he now cannot have god to his father,
which has not the church to his mother. If he could escape which was without
the Arc: he also which is without the church does escape. That man must be very
wicked which forsakes his own country, and the fellowship of very good men,
and goes to his enemy.

Lacta^tius said, it is only the church ye retains true religion. This is
(says he) the fountain of truth, (...) 3. cap ^nstit, (...). 15 ^^de ad ^t.
152
this is the household of faith, this is the temple of god, Lactantius 5.
in the which who so enters not, or from the which who soever goes, he is
without hope of eternal life. For our savior first said, without me there is
not found life.

Austen writes, without the society of the catholic church, neither baptism
ca^ profit any man, nor the works of mercy. The same s. Auste^ says in an
other place. Whosoever shall be separated from the catholic church, although he
judges him self to live commendably, (...), 3.
by this only wickedness that he is separated from the unity of christ, he
shall not have life, but the wrath and a^ger of god abides upon him. Anger. 6.


S. Hierome says, It is not to be thought yt there is one church of Rome, and
an other church of the whole world France, Britanie, Persia, the east country
and India, and all the barbarous nations, do worship one Christ, Britain. 7
and do observe one rule of verity. If authority be asked, the whole world is
greater then one city.

What the Church is, and first whereof this word Ecclesia, that is the Church,
is derived, and why it is so called.
This word Ecclesia, (signifieng ye Church) is derived of this Greek word
(...), which betokens Vocare, to call, for no man can have any part of the
Church, which has not come unto it by the calling of God.

Ecclesia, is a Greek word, but it is used of the Latins, as their own, and
signifies Caetu^, a company, a communion, an assemble of people gathered
together to bear matters pertaining to the common wealth: for so does Saint
Luke use this word in the Acts of the Apostles.

It is translated to an holy use, and so Ecclesia, is called a company of ye
faithful, inuocating and calling upon the name of God. S. Paul says yt he
persecuted the church of god, and in the acts of the apostles, Accepi
potestate^ a principibus sacerdotu^ vincie^di omnes qui inuoca^t nome^ xp^i, yt
is. I received power of ye chief of ye priests to bind al those which do
invoke ye name of christ. For now he calls those me^ christians and
inuocatours of ye name of Christ, which before he had called Ecclesia^, ye
church.

In times past ye company or church of ye Jews (which were ye peculiar
people of god) was called Sinagoga, a sinagoge for Synagoga, and Ecclesia, do
signifi one thing, but for the stubburnes of the Jews and their unappeasable
hatred against Christ religion, this word synagoge has almost ceased to be
used, and is become vile.

The Northe^ men of our country do call Ecclesia^, the kirk, alluding
perchance to the Greek word (...). For the Greeks do call (...), Domum, that
is, a house or a common place, or the people of the Lord, and the place also in
the which the people are gathered, to the worshipping of God.

What the Church is.
We may call Ecclesiam, the Church, a company of them that believe, and of them
that are regenerate, which God gathers in Christ by the word and the holy
Ghost, and rules them by the Ministers and teachers of pure doctrine, and by
the lawful use of the Sacraments, and by discipline.

It is called the body of Christ because all his members take him for their
head, of whom they take their increasing, and do obtain life by the sendyng
abroad of the holy Ghost. And these members are so fast joined to the head,
that they be called flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones.

The notes of the Church.
And it has always three notes or marks whereby it is known. The first note
is pure and sound doctrine. The second note are the Sacraments ministered
according to Christ's holy institution. The third note is the right use of
ecclesiastical discipline. This description of the Church is agreeable both to
the scriptures of God, and also to ye doctrine of the ancient fathers, so that
none may justly find fault there with, for Paul to the Ephesia^s says. Christus
semetipsu^ exposuit pro ecclesia, vt il la^ sanctificaret mundata^ lauacro
aquae per verbum, Ancient. 8
that is. Cap. 5^
Christ gave him self for the Church that he might sanctify, it and cleanse
it by the washing of water through the word.

The notes of ye Church in this testimony of Paul, is the word and the
sacrament, for grace calls and purifieth through ye blood of Christ. These
things he shows by the word, yt he may be received by faith, and he seals
it with the Sacrament, ye the faithful may not doubt any thing of salvation
gotten by Christ.

These things are properly mete for the faithful and holy members of Christ.
As touching that the hypocrites are not purged, the fault is in them selves,
and not in God or in the holy ministry. They are visiblie sanctified, whereby
they are taken and counted for Saints.

When Peter had preached the word of God at Jerusalem, Act. ^
and the people asked him what they should do, Peter answered them: Repent
you, and let every of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins. Peter joined baptism to doctrine, the Sacrament to the
word.

Also in the acts of the Apostles. Era^t perseuera^tes in doctrina apostoloru^
and been fice^tia, ac fractione panis ac praecatione, that is, Cap. ^
the disciples continued in ye apostles doctrine and folowship, and breakyng of
bread and prayers. And thus you see the supper of the Lord, and the Sacrament
of baptism, to be added to the word.

Question.
What manner a word that ought to be which is a note of the Church.

It is not enough to boast of ye word of god, unless we do also embrace the
native sense agreeable to the articles of our faith. For if ye do corrupt the
sense of ye Scriptures, and urge the same in the church, ye do not speak the
Scriptures, but your own opinion, invented if your own mind.

The Church of the Arrians did not refuse the word of God, but did as it were
maintain and defend their errors by the testimonies of the Scriptures. By
this one example a man may judge the Churches of all heretics, which although
they do not seem to lack the testimony of Gods word, yet in deed they have
not the pure word of God, nor the true sense of the same.

So the Papisticall Church does not forsake the word of God, but yet takes
away the true sense, and does substitute a strange sense, which that it may
have the fair show, they call it the sense of the holy mother ye Church. In so
much that unless, ye speak and wrest the whole scriptures to their minds and
commodity, that is, temper them with their decrees, ye shall be said to preach
heresies.

By examples the matter shall be made more plain and manifest.

^phesus ^p. 1. 4 et ^d Co^s. 1. and. 2 ^m. 8. (...). epist. Tim. 2. ^n. 1.
E^st. 2. ^m. 2.1 Cor. 1. Cor. 10.^1.
The holy scriptures do teach, that Christ is the only head of the church:
they teach that the Pope is the head of the church militant upon earth.

The scripture teaches, that Jesus Christ is the only intercessiour or
mediator: they add, that Christ is the mediator of redemption, and the
saints to be mediators of intercession,

The scripture teaches, Host. 9.
that only Christ is the only host expiatory of the faithful: They teach that
Priests do offer daily unbloody host or sacrifice, for the remission of sins,
both of the quick and the dead.

The scripture teaches, that Jesus Christ is the righteousness of the
faithful, which is received of us by faith? They teach, that righteousness is
gotten by our own works and merits.

The scripture teaches that bread and wine remain in the sacrament: Bread and
wine remain. 10. Both kinds 11.
They teach, that they are transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ,
and that no part remains, but only accidents.

^dem. 11. ^th. 26.
The scripture teaches, that both kinds must be given: They teach, that one
kind only, must be given to lay people.

^im. 3.
The scripture teaches, that all things necessary to our salvation, are written
in the scriptures: They teach, that some things are needful to salvation,
which are not contained in the sacred scriptures, But Tercullian says, happy
is that church, to the which the Apostles did exhibit with their blood all
doctrine. Augustine also says: ^actatu. ^ cap. 11. ^canne^
Cum dominus Jesus multa fecisset, non omnia scripta sunt, sicut Euangelista
testatur, multa dominum et dixisse et fecisse quae scripta non sunt: electa
autem sunt quae scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur. That
is: When the Lord Jesus had done many things, all were not written, as
witnesses the evangelist, that all things were not written, which the Lord
both said and did. But there were chosen to be written those things, which
seemed to suffice to the salvation of the beleuers.

Who sees not here these most filthy men to tread down the holy word of
God, and to establish laws, and to undo them again by their tyrannical
boldness?

The second note of the Church is the Sacraments.
Sacraments, unless they be used as the Lord him self ordained them, they be
not marks and tokens of the church of God.

Jeroboam offered sacrifice, but because he did it unlawfully, he is called a
stranger, and a swaruer from the true church of God. Jeroboam. 12.


David also, with very great devotion and joy, carried himself the Ark of God,
and daunced before it, but because it was not lawfullye carried upon the
Priests shoulders, forthwith instead of great gladness, a great mourning
arising, argued and proved that it is not enough for a man to use the
sacraments and ordinances of God, unless they be lawfully and rightly used.

The ancient Catholics, would not rebaptize them, that were baptized of
heretics, because the heretics did not baptize them in the name of any man,
or for the fellowship of their heresy, but in the name of the father, of the
son, and of the holy ghost, neither they inuocated their own name, but the
name of Christ, therefore that form of baptising was lawful enough.

Obiectio.
The church of Rome has a most sure mark of the Apostolic church, that is,
the perpetual succession of Bishops, from saint Peter, by Clement the first,
unto Clement the seventh, and so to this present bishop that now is.
Furthermore these members are cut away, which have separated them selves from
that church. Therefore only in the church of Rome is the apostolic succession
found.

Responsio.
The certain succession of Pastors, was greatly esteemed in the primative
church: for they that were then called, were true pastors, and executed the
offices of true pastors. But there have bent such other manner of pastors for
these many years, as Zacharias describes saing. Dixit dominus ad me: adhuc
sum tibi vasa pastoris stulti: quia ecce ego suscitabo pastorem in terra, qui
derelicta non visitabit, Cap. 11.
dispersum non quaeret, et contritum non sanabit, and id quod stat, non
enutriet, and carnes pinguium comedet, and vngulas eorum dissoluet. O pastor et
idolum derelinquens gregem. etc. That is. The Lord said unto me: Take to thee
yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd, for lo, I will raise up a
shepherd in the land, which shall not look for the thing which is lost, nor
seek the tender Lambs, nor heal that that is hurt, nor feed that that
stands up, but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in
pieces. O idol shepherd that leaves the flock. etc.

Therefore the Church is no more proved by the continual succession of
Bishops, specially as often as they do not preach the word of God, nor do the
office of pastors, than if there were a great number of idols set forth to
the face of the world to prove the same.

Who can deny, but that the most part of the Romish Bishops after Gregorius
Magnus, were such like Idolles, such manner of Wolves, and deuourers as
Zachary described?

In the old church of Israel the order of Bishops was common, and the
succession was unbroken from Aaron, to Vrias, and from him to Achas, and to
other wicked Bishops that swarued to idolatry.

But that succession did not prove those idolatrous bishops to be true
pastors, neither their church to be the true church of God.

The prophets, Orthodoxes, and Catholics, teaching the pure word of God,
could not rehearse a succession of priests, that went before them, and yet they
were most bright lights of the church, and they which believed their preaching,
were called neither schismatickes nor heretics.

When Christ taught upon earth, and gathered the church, the adversaries had
the succession of Bishops, which were before them: but they therefore ruled not
the true church, and Christ the heretical church.

The Apostles of the Lord could not show for them and their doctrine a
succession of Bishops going before them, for they were appointed of the Lord,
whom God made bishop for ever, after the new order of Melchisedech, without the
succession of the Leuitical order. And yet notwithstanding the Church gathered
of them, is known to be a holy and a true church.

The Apostles would have none to be counted their fellows and successors,
unless they walked the right way, and in the doctrine of Christ.

Paul says: Imitatores mei estote, sicut et ego Christi, that is: Be you the
followers of me, as I am the follower of Christ. 1. Cor. ^
And although he speaks this to all the faithful, and not only to the
ministers of the word, yet nevertheless he would have them especially to be
such, as he would have al other Christian people to be every one in his
vocation and calling.

Also he says in the Acts. Cap. ^
Ego noui quod ingressuri sunt post dissessum meum Iupi graves in vos, non
parcentes gregi: et ex vobis ipsis exorientur viri loquentes peruersa, vt
abducant discipulos post se. That is. I know (he spoke this at Miletu^, to the
bishops of Asia) that after my departing, shall grievous Wolves enter in among
you, not sparing the flock. Moreover, out of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking peruers things, to draw disciples after them.

Saint Paul fetches out wolves and deuourers from none other place, then from
the apostolic church, yea out of the company of Bishops.

Could not they have alleged for their cause, the apostolic succession, that
is, that they descended from the apostolic pastors? But because they swarued
from the Apostolic doctrine, the apostolic succession made nothing for them.

It is concluded therefore, that the continual succession of Bishops can prove
nothing of it self, yea, and that it is not a just succession, that lacks the
purity of the apostolic doctrine, and the right use of the sacraments,

Tertullian greatly esteming, and that worthily, the continual succession of
Pastors in the Church, requires notwithstanding the same to be approved by
the sincerity of the apostolic doctrine, and wills the Churches to be
instructed with pure doctrine, neither he acknowledges them for apostolikes,
which could only allege the succession of Bishops. His words be these.
Caeterum si quae audent interserere se aetati apostolicae, vt ideo videantur ab
apostolis traditae, quae sub apostolis fuerunt, possumus dicere: Aedant igitur
origines ecclesiarum suarum, euol uant ordinem episcoporum suorum. etc. That
is: But if any heresies dare intermingle them selves unto the time of the
Apostles, that therefore they may seem to be delivered of the Apostles,
because they were under the Apostles, we may say thus: Let them show the
beginnings of their churches, let them search the order of their Bishops so
discending from the beginning by successions, that the first Bishop have for
his author and antecessour some of the Apostles, or some of the apostolic men,
which notwithstanding have perseuered with the Apostles.

After this manner the apostolical churches did show their censures. As the
church of the Smyrneis (having Polycarpus placed by saint John) reports, as
also the church of the Romans (having Clement appointed of Peter) records.
Ita ex ipso ordine manifestatur, id esse dominicum, et verum quod sit prius
traditu^: id autem extraneum et falsum, quod sit posterius immissum. Ea
sententia manebit aduersus posteriores quasque haereses quibus nulla constantia
de conscientia competit ad defendendam sibi veritatem. That is. It appears by
the very order, that that is of the Lord, which has been first delivered, and
that to be strange and false, which has been last put in. This sentence shall
remain to serve against all heresies that shall come hereafter, which will
agree with no steadfast conscience to defend the truth.

Let the heretics pretend any such thing (for what thing do they think
unlawful for them to do after their blasphemy) but they do feign, they shall
not prevail. For their doctrine being compared with the apostolic doctrine,
will utter, and show it self by the diversity thereof, that it has neither
Apostle, nor any apostolic man to be the author. For like as the Apostles
taught not diverse things among them selves, so also none of the apostolickes
would have spoken things contrary to the Apostles, unless it were they which
swarued from the Apostles, and taught otherwise.

After this manner therefore, shall be provoked from them unto those churches,
which (although they bring forth none of the Apostles or apostolickes for
their author, as which succeeded long after, and daily are instituted) yet
nevertheless condescending and agreing in one faith, they are to be counted
apostolic for the affinity of the doctrine.

Furthermore, other churches also do exhibit and give what original of the
apostolic seed they had which were constituted Bishops of the Apostles. Thus
far Tertullian.

Question.
In whom than, or where stands the church? We say that it stands in learned
Bishops, general Counsels, and ancient fathers.

Responsio.
If you say, that the church remains among Bishops, you are very much
deceived, and ignorant in the scriptures. And it is manifestlye declared in
the sacred Bible, that the church consists not in the company of Bishops. The
Jews had a true church in the time of the prophets. And if a general Counsel
of priests and Bishops should have been then gathered, what manner of face
should the church have had? The Lord declares his will not to one or two, but
to the whole order of priests. Jeremy says: Obstupescent sacerdotes, et
prophetae terrebuntur. Cap. ^ Mi^h
That is: The Priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall be afraid. Also
Micheas says. Nox vobis pro visione erit, et tenebrae pro diuinatione, et
occumbet sol super prophaetas, et obtenebrabitur super eos dies. That is: the
night shall be to you for a vision, and the darkness for divination, and the son
shall go down from the prophets, and the day shall be darkened upon them. And if
all that were of one mind and judgment should have been then gathered
together, what spirit would have ruled? We have an evident proof in the
assemblye that Achab called together. There were conuented.400. prophets, 3. Reg
but because they assembled to flatter the wicked king, the Lord sent Satan to
lead them into al lies, and there the verity was condemned, Micha was
condemned of heresy, he was smitten, and cast into prison. And so was Jeremy
and the other prophets handled. As touching the outward appearance of a church,
what lacked in the counsel, which the bishops gathered against our savior
Christ? For unless the church had been then among the^, Christ would never have
been partaker of their sacrifices and other ceremonies. There was a solemn
conuenticle, the high bishop went foremost, the whole company of priests sat
with him, and yet notwithstanding Christ was there condemned, and his doctrine
abolished. This fact teaches us, that the Church was not included and shut up
in that assembly. Wherefore, it is not to be granted, that the church
consists only in the assembly of pastors and Bishops.

Of the fathers.
If they will say, we must go to the fathers for the verity of the scriptures,
it may be that they did many times teach the same, but not always. For
oftentimes they disagre among them selves, they do alter and revoke their
opinions, and sometimes they write and contend one against an other, and do
often times fall into most manifest errors.

Ireneus, Victorius, Papias, Lactantius, Methodius, and many other famous and
worthy writers fell into the heresies of the Millinares. Al men do not
subscribe unto Ambrose, when he grants a man leave to be divorced, and to
marry again after the divorce made. Millinares. 13.
Neither do all men consent unto Augustine, when he says that infants dying
unbaptized, do go unto hell, nor when he judged the Eucharist should be given
unto them, nor when he affirmed all the works of Infidels to be sinful.

Tertullian is gaynsayd, for that he said, that the soul has his beginning,
ex traduce.

Ciprian is refused, because he affirmed, that heretics coming again to the
church, ought to be baptized again.

Epiphanius is not allowed, when writing against Aerius, he affirmed that it
was the tradition of the Apostles, that six days before Easter, nothing should
be eaten but bread and salt. He also interprets the saying of Christ, Pater
mayor me est, to be spoken of the divine nature, and not as the other Orthodox
men do say, of the human nature.

He also expoundetb, that Christ when he prayed in the gardein, did not ask it
as though he would have it so to be done, but that he might deceive the devil,
and might provoke him to a singular sight, as though Christ, dissembled in his
prayer.

Hierome is not to be allowed, for that he was so unfavorable to marriage,
writing against Iouinianus, that he counted bigamie, second or third marriages
whooredome.

Dionisius Dionisius. 14.
writing De caelesti hierarchia, is not received, when he shows the manner of
burieng the bodies of the faithful, for he says that oil ought to be poured
upon the coarse.

Benedictus commanded the sacrament to be given into a woman's mouth that was
dead.

Therefore we must not agree unto all things that the fathers have said or
done: for if we do, we should grant many absurdities.

Obiectio.
Ne transgrediamur antiquos terminos, quos posuerunt patres nostri. That is:
let us not pass beyond the ancient bounds that our fathers have made.

Responsio.
The rule of the bounds in the fields, is not to be compared to the obedience
of faith, which ought to be so established, that it do not forget the people
and house of the father. And if they say, it is an allegory, why do we not
interpreate the apostles to be fathers, rather then any other, whose prescribed
bounds it is unlawful to pull a sunder, so expounds Hierome, saying: Quod si
fixos esse volunt patru^ terminos, cur ipsi eos transgrediuntur. That is: And
if they will have the bounds of the fathers to be sure, why do they them
selves pass beyond them?

^. hist. ^. cap.
Acatius Acatius. 15.
was a father, which said that God neither did eat nor drink, and therefore
he needed not chalices nor dishes.

Ambrose was a father, which said that holy things did not seek for gold, nor
that those things were pleased with gold, ^ic. lib ^. 28 ^. hist. ^. ca. 10
which are not bought with gold.

They do pass beyond this bound, when they think that God is not well
worshipped, unless that all things do gorgeously abound with gold, silver,
Iuory, stones and sylkes.

Spiridion Spiridion, 16.
was a father, which said that he did freely eat flesh on that day, the
others abstained, because he was a Christian.

This bound they do pass beyond, when they do curse that soul, which will
taste flesh in the time of Lent, without the Popes pardon.

Epiphanius was a father, which said, that it was an horrible abomination to
see the image of Christ, either of any other saint painted in the churches of
the Christians. ^^n ^p. 36.
Nor it was spoken by his mouth only, but it was decreed also by the counsel,
that that thing which is worshipped, should not be painted in walls.

These bounds they keep not, when they leave not one corner in the temple
void of Images.

Gelasius was a father, who testifies, that the substance of bread and wine
remains, and cease not to be in the sacrament, even as the substance and
nature of man is joined to the divine nature.

They do pass this bound, which feign that the substance of bread and wine
does cease after the word of God is spoken, that they may be transubstantiated
into the body and blood of Christ.

(...). ^d^s. 2
Chrisostom and Caliptus were fathers, which exhibited to the whole church, but
one communion, and from thence kept away al wicked persons, and condemned
grievously al those which being present, did not communicate.

Those bounds they keep not, when they fyl not only churches, but also houses
with private Masses.

Gelasius was a father, which decreed, that they should be excluded from the
whole use of the sacrament, which being contented with the partaking of the one
kind, abstained from the other kind.

Ciprian was a father, which stronglye contendeth, that Christians ought not to
be denied their masters blood, for whose confession they are commanded to
shed their blood.

They have taken away these bounds, in that they give the Lay communicantes
but one kind.

Apollenius was a father, which vpbraided Montanus with this, among other
heresies, that he was the first that made laws for fasting.

They went from this bound when they made very straight laws for fasting.

Paphnutius was a father, which denied that priests should be forbidden to
marry, Priests to marry. 17.
and he affirmed that it was chastity for a man to lie with his own wife, and
they were fathers which agreed to his authority.

These bounds they over leaped, when they commanded priests to live a syngle
life.

Augustine was a father, which contendeth that the church ought not to prefer
it self before Christ, because he always judges truly, but the
ecclesiastical Judges many times are deceived like men.

They pass these bounds, whiles they will have the authority of the scriptures
to depend of the judgment of the church.

To be short, why do they urge the fathers and do not embrace the sayings of
all the fathers? The church of Christ cannot be quiet through the decrees of
men. Then is the church confirmed, when it hears the word of God. Therefore
the spouse says in the canticles. En dilectus meus loquitur mihi, Behold my
beloved speaks unto me. Constantine the Emperor, in the counsel of Nice (as
the eclesiastical history declares) required of the bishops, that those things
which were called in controversy, should be defined out of the holy scriptures,

Of the councels.
If they will have the church to consist in councels, many of them have
grievously erred. The Ariminense counsel defended the Arrians. The second
Ephesine counsel, favored Eutiches his heresy,

Eutiches. 18.
The counsel of Calcedon fell into such an error, that it would gave the bishop
of Rome authority to be called universal bishop. But the holy man (for he was
absent (hearing of it, utterly spoke against it. Gre^ 4. ^e^ Ep 3^


The council gathered of Ciprian (wherein sat.86. bishops) grievously erred, when
it defined, that heretics which were baptized out of the church, if they were
converted, ought to be christened again.

The Counsel of Constantia Counsel of Constance. 19.
consented, that the half part of the Sacrament should be ministered to the lay
people. This counsel has two contraries. First, it decreed that the counsel
was above the Pope, which thing is true. For Hierome writes to Euagrius. Si
authoritas quaeritur, mayor est orbis vrbe. If authority be asked, the world is
greater then the City. So the whole church is greater then the church of
Rome, being but one Church. Secondly, that Council condemned this article. The
Pope is not above al churches, by the law of God. This decree plainly
gaynsayeth the former decree,

It is about.900. years ago, since the Council of Constantinople assembled in
Leo the Emperors time, decreed, that Images set in the Churches, should be
broken in pieces.

Not long after the Counsel of Nice, which Irene the Empress gathered,
decreed, that images should be restored again to the churches. Whether of them
two shall we take to be lawful? The latter obtained their purpose. But Saint
Augustine denies that images may be in the church, without very great danger
of idolatry.

Epiphanius Epiphanius 20.
being of an elder time, teaches, that it is abomination to behold images in
the churches of the Christians. If they were now alive, would they allow think
you, that second council of Nice?

Gregorius Nazianzenus writes to Procopius, that he never saw a good end of
any council. Therefore, affirming that al had evil ends, he left not much
authority to be attributed to the Councels,

Obiectio.
You bring in here Councels which were not general, as the second counsel of
Ephesus, which the council of Chalcedon denies to be general. Again, it has
no place in the book of Councels.

Responsio.
Nicephorus and Euagrius, which wrote the story of the whole Council, never
denied it to be general. Theodosius the Emperor took it to be gen^ral, for he
says of this Council. Cogitantes non esse tutum absque vestra sancta Synodo et
vbique sanctaru^ ecclesiarum praesulibus. These words of al churches which be
every where does importe a generality of al churches through the world.

Dioscorus Dioscorus. 21.
that was president of the same council, says thus. Theodosius has confirmed
al such things as were determined by this universal and general counsel.

In the counsel of Calcedon it is written thus: To the holy beloved in the
lord, the universal counsel gathered in the mother city of Ephesus.

Liberatus, who lived.400. years ago, who wrote the story of this council does
say: There is appointed at Ephesus a general council, in the which Flauian and
Eutiches made there appearance, as men standing to be judged. Here may ye
plainly see, that this council of Ephesus was a general council.

Obiectio.
Where two or three shall be gathered together in my name (says Christ) there will
I be in the midst of them.

Responsio.
They are not gathered in the name of Christ, which casting away the
commandment of God, that forbids us to add any thing, or to take away
ought from his word, do determine al things according to their own will, and
(not being contented with the authority of the scriptures) do invent some new
thing of their own brains. For as much as Christ promised that he would not be
present at al manner of councels, but gave a peculiar and sure token, whereby we
might discern the true and lawful councels. We must not neglecte this same
different note, which is his word. The same covenant did God make in times
past with the priests of the Levites, that they should teach out of his
mouth. This thing he always required of the prophets: we see also, that this
law was given to the Apostles. They that violate, and break this law are not
counted worthy of God to have the honor or authority of priesthood.

Question.
If the authority of the scriptures be grounded upon the approbation of the
church, by what council was it decreed? By none: Wherefore then did Arrius
suffer him self to be convinced by testimonies alleged out of saint John's
Gospel? For (according to these men's minds) it was free for him to refuse the
scriptures, because they had none approbation of general councels going before.
They do allege the old Cannon, which (they say) had his beginning of the
churches judgment. But I ask them again, in what council was that Canon put
forth? Here they must needs hold their peace.

When the decree of any council is alleged, it must first be diligently
waighed at what time it was made: for what cause, and for what intent, and also
what manner of men were there present. Than afterward the thing that was handled,
must be examined by the judgment of the scriptures.

Would God, al men did keep that way, which Augustine prescribes in his book
against Maximinius. For when he would repress an heretic, contending about
the decrees of Synodes, he said thus. Nec ego Nycaenum Synodum tibi, nec tu
mihi Ariminensem debes tanquam praeiudicaturus o biicere, Arimenie^s
nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Scripturarum
authoritatibus non quorumcun que propriis, sed que vtrisque sint communes, res
cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione certet. That is: Neither I ought to
object against thee, the Council of Nice, neither thou ought to object
against me the council of Ariminense, neither art thou bound to the authority
of this, nor I to that. etc.

Also writing against the Donatistes, he says thus: Episcoporum literae, and
conciliorum prouincialium decreta cedunt maioribus conciliis, Lib. 2.
canonica scriptura nulli cedit. That is: The writings of the Bishops, and the
decrees of the provincial Counsels do give place to the elder councels: the
canonical scripture does give place to none,

Also disputing against Hierome about the reprehension of Peter Reprehension of
Peter. 22.
he appealed from the fathers that Hierome alleged, unto the holy scriptures.

So should they do in the Councels, that they might retain and keep their
dignities: but yet so, that the scripture might have the upper place. For they
all must be subject to the obedience of it.

The old and ancient Synodes are to be embraced gladly, and must be taken as
touching the opinions of faith, for holy Councels, as the Councels of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus the first, of Calcidon, and such like, which were
assembled for the confuting of errors. For they do contain nothing, but the
pure and native interpretacion of the scriptures, whicb the holy Fathers
applied to dashe down and overthrow the enemies of true religion. In the
latter Councels, the Church did degenerate from the purity of the golden
world, yet notwithstanding those councels had some Bishops, that were known
to be better then the rest. But it chanced in these Counsels in the end,
even as the Senators of Rome did complain of that which was done amiss in
their statutes and decrees. For whylest the sentences were numbered, and not
waighed and considered, the better part often times must needs have been
overcome of the greater.

Question.
It is not likely that general Councels should err, for general Councels do
represent the Church. Now God has promised his holy spirit unto the church,
and so unto the Councels, for Gods holy spirit cannot err, Ergo no more can
general Councels err.

Responsio.
Pighius the captain and ringleader of al Papists, writes in his book
entitled, Ecclesiastica Hierarchi, after this manner: Consilia vniuersalia
etiam congregata legitime, vt been, ita perperam, unjust impicque iudicare, ac
definire possunt. That is: General Councels, yea even such as be lawfullye
sommoned, as they may conclude things well, so may they likewise judge and
determine things rashly, unjustly, and wyckedly.

Furthermore, he says that the Councels of Constance and Basile decreed
against reason, and against nature, and against al examples of antiquity, and
also against the word of God, and yet both these Councels were general. But
because you shall not say that we have no other shift to defend our doctrine,
but the testimonies of your own men, you shall hear what saint Austine says,
both of particular and also of general Councels. His words be these: De (...)
con^ nat^ Cap
Ipsa concilia quae per singulas regiones vel prouincias fiunt plaenariorum
conciliorum authoritati quae fiunt ex vniuerso orb christiano sine vllis
ambagibus cedere. etc. The Councels them selves which are gathered by regions
and provinces ought to give place without any ambagies unto the authority of
general councels which are assembled out of the whole christian world, and the
former general counsels the^ selves may be amended with the latter general
councels, when by some experiment, that thing is opened which before was shut,
and when that thing is known, which before was hidden. This may be done without
any show or sign of sacrilegious pride, without any arogant hawtines. without
contention of freating envy, it may be done with holy humility, with christian
peace and catholic charity. By these words: of Saint Augustine, it does
appear, ye general councels do not always rightly and truly define and debate
causes, if they may be amended and corrected by latter councels.

Gerso^ of Paris does write: In sacris literis crudito, et sacram scripturam
proferenti plus est credendum quam generaly Concilio. More credit is to be
given to one learned man in the holy scriptures, and bringing forth authority
out of the scriptures, than to a whole general council.

Panormitanus. Plus (inquit) credendum vel simplici laico scripturam
producenti, quam toti simul consilio. More credit (says he) is to be given
to a simple and plain lay man, alleging the scriptures, then to a whole
general council. By these testimonies before rehearsed, it may appear, that
general Councels both may, and do often times err.

Well, time will not suffer me to declare throughlye such things as I had
determined, concerning the church and arguments of our adversaries, and
certain other objections which they lay against us. And because the hour is
past, I will defer the discourse thereof, until the next reading day. In the
mean time I commit you to the eternal God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, in
the sanctifieng of the holy Ghost. Amen.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea Prelectionis sextae.
Deus. God. 1.
GOd is named of the Latins Deus, whom the Grecians call (...), of his readynes
in succouring, because he never lacks, and absenteth himself, when he is
called upon of mortal men, but at al times, and in all places does help and
preserve them. Likewise Plato and his Interpreter Proctus be of this mind,
that (...) is derived (...), that is, of running. But they do not refer that
running unto the presence of the help of God, but unto some other thing. For
when men saw the Sun, Moon, and the Stars, yea the whole heaven it self,
to be always moved, and to run about, they thought the^ to be gods. Some there
ar which would have it to be deduced (...), that is of fear, for fear and
religion do persuade men, that there is a God, according unto this saying of
Statius. Primus in orb deos fecit timor, Fear first of al made Gods in the
world. Other say, that it comes (...), which signifies: I see or behold,
because God does behold and view althinges. It may be that the Latins have
formed their word Deus God, of the Greek word (...). But some thyncke Deus
comes of dando, that is, of giving, because god gives al things unto al men.
So he is called of the Hebrews Schaddai, as one yt suffiseth unto him self,
and lacks nothing, but has sufficient of all good and necessary things for all men. Other will have God to be called of the Latins Deus, of deesse, to
lack, because there lacks nothing unto God.

Quid sit deus. What God is.
Simonides a Poet very famous for his learning and wisdom, being demanded of
Hiero king of the Siracusanes, what God is: first that he might pronounce some
certainty of so hidden a matter to be discussed, he desired the space of one
whole day, to be given unto him to try his wits, and to beat his brains about
it. When this day was ended, Simonides being asked again the day following of
Hiero, what he did think that God was. He required two days more of
deliberation to be given him. After this manner the time being spent to no
purpose, Simonides always desiring his days to be doubled, when Hiero
marueiling asked him, for what cause in all this time he gave him no answer unto
his question: because (says he) how much the more I consider, ponder, and
search the matter, so much the more hard, obscure and hidden it seems to be.
By this example we are taught, not to be curious in searching and boulting out
the arcane mysteries of the divine godhed, unto the which the imbecility of
man's wit cannot reach and attain. For it is a vain thing to desire to know
these things which a man cannot compass. Caelestial things are incomprehensible,
and impenetrable unto mortal creatures. God is to be sought with faith, and
not with reason. Reason is of no power in divine things, where there is need of a
sincere faith and purity of the mind. As the eye is daseled at the beams of
the son, so is the sharpnes of the mind dulled and dismayed at the
contemplacion of the divine majesty, whereof thou may perceive diverse through
an insatiable curiosity to attain to knowledge and wisdom, to have fallen into
detestable errors. Wherefore since we are preserved by the only faith in
Christ, and not by the strong opinions of the philosophers, and by the mistical
speculations of the divine nature, I think it better, and more safely for a
christian man to be ignorant of somthings, then to be over wise, for as in all
other things, so in the study of wisdom a mean is to be praised. And they
that are ouerwise, are commonly most folish, whereas a christen man ought rather
to endeavor to live well, then to clime to high, in matters passing his reach.

Of repentance. 2.
EVpolis the son of Nitias emperor of Athens in the first night of his
marriage, died, being slain together with his new married wife, with the fall of
his chamber wherein he lay. Vvheras there happens nothing more certain and
sure unto us, then death, yet there is nothing more uncertain, then the kind of
death. We ought to give all diligence and endeavor, least that if the Lord,
when we little think of it, shall call us out of this mortal and short life, he
find us careless and unready, for they are disceiued which defer and prolong
the amendment of their life, until they be old, then beginning to live well,
when they must give over their life and all together. For who can promise unto
himself, that he shall live from morning to night?

Viuimus incerti, nec quos lux crastina casus,
Adferat humano pectori nosse datur.
Our life is nothing permanent, uncertain and unsure,
What mortal man can say, my time to morrow shall endure?
It is therefore our part, that we thinking every day to be the last day of our
life, should so live daily as though we should die to morrow. For the soldiour
of Christ ought always to be in a redines, and to be prepared unto every
chance which shall happen, being not ignorant how he was borne a mortal man,
and that no man in this often change of mortal things, ca^ live long. They have
need of this herb called Helleborus, which being like unto Mydas and
Sardanapalus, and blinded with the desire of riches and pleasure, do promise
unto them selves the years of Nestor or Mathusela. For if the strength and
ability of man, how soever it be esteemed, be wayed in a just balaunce, O
merciful God, what stedfastnes, what certainty, what safety shall a man find?
He shall see rather all things to be most frail, frivolous, doutful and vain.
There is nothing more brickle than man, nothing more unstable and more slipper.
The which thing (except they had been mad) me^ might have learned by this common
proverb, Homo bulla, that is: Man is but a boubble of water: by the which
being warned, it might be, that they would not so greedely gape after riches,
nothing profiting a christian life, neither would they give them selves so much
to riot and surfeting, by the which a great part of men do hasten their own
death before their time, but would use some mean, and so coming unto a better
mind, would call to remembrance that they should once die. Vvherof I know not
whether the just anger of God be more grievously provoked, tha^ eue^ tha^ when
it does come to pass (as it does oftentimes) that they which neither obey Gods
commandment, neither are moved by man's example, wickedly and disorderly
spending the whole course of their life, become wise at the last, but to late
and to their great evil and destruction. I know, that a long talk of death is
nothing plausible unto such as set their felicity in the world. Yet the truth
is not to be kept in scilence. Verily a christian death is most agreeable unto
christian men, which happens unto no man, unless a christian life go before.
For it is impossible that he who lives like an Ethnicke continually, should
die like a christian, neither if a man live christianlike but for a time, he
shall be sure of a christian death, except he continue in this life, and so end
in the same. For herein lies all the matter, how and in what sort we
depart out of this life. Vvherby thou may perceive how perilouslye we
live, as often as being circumuented with the engines of the devil, either allured
by the entisementes of the world, leave our duty, and the office of our
religion undone, whereas no man is free from death, and no man is sure of life,
no not for a moment of time. For no man does know the end of his days, nor the
hour of his death, before it be at hand.

Quo minime remur, mors trux nos tempore mactat.
At what time man does little know,
Death slays him with her mortal bow.
We are set upon unawares, and we are beaten down sodeinly, no legate being
sent to require again our spoil, and without sending of any ambassador to
take a leage of truce Wherefore, since that al our salvation consists in this
point, that we die christianlike, and we cannot die christianlike, except we
live like Christians, and we cannot live like christians, except we despise the
world, and pass our life, according to the prescript rule of Christ. It does
follow of necessity, that if we will be partakers of the salvation of Christ,
whatsoever Christ has commanded us, this only we follow, this only we
observe and embrace, finally, that we express this, both in our words and
deeds, being nothing careful what the world does either judge speak, or
determine of us. For they which will please the world, and also serve Christ,
they are far out of the way. Wherefore, Athanasius writes worthily, and like a
faithful pastor of the Christian flock. Haec est voluntas Christi, vt
quisquis ipsi adhereret, nihil prorsus afferat secum seculi huius, neque
terrenarum rerum cura teneatur, sed sola crucifixi cruce glorietur, ea^que
ferat and noctu pariter and interdiu curam eius and solicitudinem gerat. This
is the will of Christ (says he) that whosoever leans unto him, he bring
nothing with him of this world, neither that he be led with the care of
earthlye things, but yt he glory and rejoice only in ye cross of Christ
crucified, and bear that cross, carieng the care and love of it in his mind,
both night and day. Finally, it is the propertye of man to err, it is the
propertye of man to offend, and it is the frailty of man, through the
instinction of the devil to fall many times into most horrible and damnable
sins, but to grow in vice, and to wax old in wickedness, it is not the
property of man, but of a most wicked, careless, and damnable reprobate.
Wherefore, sinners ought to repent, and they must repent in time, least while
we be to much stifnecked, and to long obstinate, death suddenly and unawares
come upon us (as it happens often times) preventing us of our intent and
purpose. For there is no small account to be made what manners, and what kind of
life he shall use, and what manner of death he dies, that is once regenerate
unto Christ by baptism. Neither the sudden change of a naughty purpose, and
an alteration of the whole life ought to be a shame unto any man, which is done
to a good end.

Neither it ought to repent any man of his enterprise, if he change uncertain
things, for certain, small things for great, evil for good, temporal for
eternal and everlasting. What is more certain, than the divine promises? what
is better than the kingdom of God? what is more eternal than the heavenly
felicity: which no years, no time shall end.

Obiectio.
But man perchance will say here. How shall the promises of Christ be
certain? how can they be but doubtful, which hitherto were never yet exactly
proved, nor could never yet by reason or sense be understood? Which we are
bid to look for through bare hope only, without any taste or feeling of them.
Of the which promises, if Christ would put us in a surety, by giving us some
taste of his promised felicity, no man would refuse to take any pains, yea to
wade through fire and water (as they say) to enjoy this benefit.

Responsio.
First, whatsoever thou art that doubtest, know that it is one thing to believe,
and an other thing to know. It is not given unto any mortal man, to know the
rewards which are prepared for them which run in the Christian course
striving for the best game, the which rewards, what soever they be, we believe
them to be such and so excellent, that they can not be comprehended by man's
sense, nor understood by man's wit, for the abundance, of Gods plentiful
goodness far excedeth all worldly felicity. furthermore, it has so pleased
the eternal wisdom of God, that the mean to attain to our salvation should
consiste in faith only, and not in knowledge, and that all nations should be
saved by faith and not by science.

Also, consider that God him self has promised these eternal rewards unto
us, and how that he is true and the truth it self, and that it is impossible
for him to be false and deceiptfull. VVaigh this, and thou can not doubt. To
be short, except thou give credit unto the word of God, and unfeignedly believe
his sayings, although thou were Christened, yet it shall little prevail thee.

Children.
IT was the manner and custom of certain Philosophers of India called
Gymnosophistae, to call their scholars unto them every day a little before
supper, and to demand how every man had profited that day. They which were
commended for their diligence and industry, were permitted to take their
supper, but the other sort as idle drones were expelled out of the doors with
ignominy and shame, to do some servile labor and work. Masters ought to be
careful, that their scholars may appear to excel and to be good, as well in
mind as in tongue as well in deed as in word. For true virtue that is Christian
faith which only opens unto men the way unto eternal salvation, is always
doing and full of good worckes, not only consisting in prayer, but also in the
exercise of godly deeds proceeding from a pure heart and devout mind unto God.
It is a good thing and much commendable of all men to speak well, but to do
well it is much more excellent and more godly. With a wise and eloquent talk
we win unto us the minds of men, we turn them, entise them, and procure
their benevolence. But with godly doings and mete for Christian religion we
win unto us God him self, and we shall receive of him an inestimable
reward, that is the felicity of the heavenly kingdom which shall never have
end, but endure for ever for although what soever good thing we do, it comes
from God, in so much, that according to the saying of the blessed martyr Saint
Cipriane. Nihil habemus de quo velut nostro gloriemur. etc. we have nothing of
the which we may glory (as of our own) and therefore our justification and
salvation is to be imputed unto faith only, and not unto our worckes, yet
notwithstanding God him self does ascribe his gifts unto all that believe in
him, and does always most aboundantlye reward them as though they were our
own. It is not one thing therefore to say well and to do well, but there is
difference betwixt words and deeds both in young and old. Wherefore it is
the part of them which be Magistrates, and such as have regard of the common
wealth, to appoint unto schools of learning grave men, and men as well virtuous
as eloquent, which may teach such things as are not after to be repented,
and to be untaught again, which shall not only form and frame their tongue,
but also shall instruct the manners and minds of the youth unto the prescript
and rule of the Gospel. finally, which as well by their own example as by
their precepts, may instille and pour into their tender and simple minds the
love of Christ, and the true understanding of Christian religion. for in a
common wealth well ordered, and no less beautified with good and godly
Citizens as with wealth and riches, the chief treasure ought to be the schole
of good literature Aristotle has this se^te^ce, (...), yt is. It is no small
matter for a man to be taught this way or that way from his youth, but it is a
great matter, yea rather it is the whole matter. It is learnedly written of
Aristotle and very aptly, for there are among children which may in time to
come govern a common wealth, well, if they be well taught, evil, if they be
evil brought up. And it is ye part of a wise Magistrate not only for the
present time to provide for the common wealth, but also for the time to come,
for men are made, by industry, and not borne by nature good and profitable
citizens. And masters do absolve and make perfect (such as are imperfectly
begone of nature) by erudition and doctrine, for learning does add the best
part of man unto man, if that it being applied in due time happen upon a toward
wit and a disposition void of filthiness.

The Grecians have a very pithie saying, (...), he that is ignorant and
unlearned, seith nothing although he have eyes. For this cause, I think it
good to follow the example of the Persians among whom there are certain
selected and chosen out of the nombre of the elders, to govern and instruct
their youth, and such as they think will bring them up most virtuously, as
Xenophon Socrates scholar makes mention in a noble work of his entitled
Cyri Paedia, the institution of Cyrus. farthermore if these things following be
accounted a praise unto Cities, and an ornament and a profit unto the same, as
a rich treasure, broad and deep dikes, strong and high walls, how much more
better and more profitable is it to have laws circu^spectly and wisely made?
how much more rich, beautiful and happy are Cities to be judged, if they have
abundance of good and learned men, if they be adourned with a great number of
Citizens, being endued with good disciplines from their childhood, for the true
riches, ye true firmament and strenght, also the defenses, and the true
ornaments, and aides of a common wealth, do not consist in the treasure house,
not in trenches and walls, finally not in armor and weapons, but in the
wisdom, virtues, and true piety of the Citizens, for the Citizens are the
best walls. etc. towers, munitions and ornaments and also the riches of a
Christian City: so that they be sobre, fearing God, followers of the Gospel,
and instructed in Gods word. Other wise what treasure is rich enough? what
tre^ches are deep enough? what walls ar strong enough? what laws are wittily
enough made, unto wicked and foolish Citizens? The Prophet David says. (...).
Wherefore diligent head is to be taken that children be so instructed whereby
they may wax most virtuous and godly, Psalm. 12 7
and that shall be very profitable both for them selves and for the common
wealth, for not the earthly, but the eternal wealth and health ought to be the
only scope unto all Christian common wealths health, which can be purchased
by none other means or art than through faith and the observation of the
precepts of Christ.

Fellow servant. 4.
SAint John writes in his revelation how, he fell down before the fete of the
angel to worship him, but the angel said, see thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servant. This place makes much against our adversaries, who do stoutly
defend, that we ought to worship, to pray and call upon angels and saints in
our prayers. But that their reasons may be the better known, Apoc. 22
I will recite all their objections and arguments, and will also make answer
unto them. First I will answer to the testimonies which they allege out of
the Scriptures, and after that to the authorities which they bring out of the
fathers and Doctors.

Obiectio prima.
Genesis 48.
Jacob said, the angel which has delivered me from all euel, bless these
children, and let my name be named upon them, and the name of my fathers
Abraham and Isaac. In this testimony they urge two things: The first is, that
Jacob does confess him self to be redeemed of the angel, and that the
angel does bless. The second is, that he says, and let my name, and the
name of my fathers be named upon them: for that is as much as though he had
said, They shall call upon my name and the name of my fathers.

Responsio.
Where they say, that the angels bless us, and pray for us, and be the
defenders and kepers both of men and of kingdoms, against that, I had leauer
bring the aunswers of fathers, then mine own reasons. Saint Austen writes
thus. Quaecunque miracula sieve per angelos. etc.

what soever miracles are done, either by ye angels or by any other means from
above, commending and setting forth unto us the honor and religion of God
only, in whom is everlasting life, it is to be believed of them which love the
angels (according unto truth and godliness,) that those miracles are wrought of
them and by them, by Gods operation working in them. And a little after he
says. And when the angels here us, God him self hereth in them as in his
true Church, not made with hands. And again he writes, Cap 16.
If any angels desire Sacrifice, let them be preferred which serve not them
selves, but God the creator of all things: for by this they show, what a love
they bear toward us, when by Sacrifice they would make us subject, not unto
them selves, but unto him, through whose contemplation they are happy, and
they desire to bring us unto him from whom they never departed.

Although this be sufficient to answer to all the objections touching angels,
yet for perspicuities sake I will add this distinction. That which is proper
and pertaining only unto the Lord, is attributed unto the angels, Vt remotiori
cauiae, as to Gods messengers and Ministers, for as it is written in Exodus:
Exodus 23.
Nomen meum est in medio illius. and what other thing is this to say, but that
which the angel does, he does it by my name, by my virtue, commandment, and
power. Saint Stephen says in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts. 7.
when forty years were expired, the angel of the lord appeared unto him
(Moses) in the mount Sina, and a little after he says: Et facta est vox Domini
ad eum: And the voice of the Lord says unto him, I am the God of thy fathers,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Here ye may see,
that he called him God, whom a little before he called angel, because he
meaned that the angel did that which he did, in the name and commandment of
God. To this appertains that place, where it is said, that the angel of the
Lord delivered the City of Jerusalem, when he slew of the host of the
Assirians an hundred four score and five thousand men.

Again the angels in many places did bear the type, and did signify the
Lord, whereupon says Austen: Clamauit ad eum Dominus de rubo, dominus in
Angelo, an dominus Angelus ille, qui dictus est magni consilii angelus, and
intelligitur Christus, that is. The Lord cried unto him out of the bushe,
whether it were the Lord in the angel, or that angel was the Lord, who is
called the angel of the great counsel, and is understand Christ?

This you may see, that deliverance, and redemption and such like ar
attributed in the Scriptures unto angels, for they be attributed for Christ,
and in Christ. So in this place, for as much as benediction was promised unto
Abraham, Jacob could not better express the faith of his mind, than with
these words: the angel which has delivered me from all ill, bless these
children. He understood the angel of the great counsel, the Lord Jesus, who
is benediction, salvation, rightousnes and the sanctification of his people.

Obiectio secunda.
In the Prophet Zachary, the aungel of the Lord is said to complain, and to
be grieved for the exile of the people of Israel, yea and to pray unto the
Lord to have mercy upon the people.

Responsio.
In that place is a figure, which is called, Hypotiposis, or, Suffiguratio,
and est schema in quo persona, res, locus, tempus, aut aliud quippiam tum
scribendo, tum dicendo ita verbis exprimitur, vt cerni potius ac coram geri,
quam legi, aut audiri videatur. Such sightes are often given to the Prophets,
and they are brought forth, not as true histories, or as forms and plain
examples to teach and show the things, as it were before the eyes. Micheas
prophecieng before the kings Achab and Iosaphat, cried out saying: I saw the
Lord sit upon his throne, and all the host of heaven stood by him, on his right
hand, and on his left hand. And the Lord said, who will entise Achab, that he
may go and fall at Ramoth Gilead, and one said on this manner, and an other said
on that manner. Then there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and
said, I will entise him. And the Lord said unto him: wherewith? and he said: I
will go out, and be after a false spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets.
Then said the Lord: thou shall entise him, and shall also prevail, go forth,
and do so. etc. Now, this was not done in deed in such sort, as the Prophet
describes. But it is, Hypotyposis, a figure to show forth a matter before the
eyes, as it were done in deed. For who will gather of these words of the
Prophet, that God did communicate with spirits? and to utter his decrees one
after an other, after the manner of men? It is sufficient, if by a certain
collation or comparison, we understand by this suffiguration, God to be angry
with Achab, and therefore purposed by just judgment, and by lyeng Prophets to
bring him to destruction, which would not give ear to the truth.

So in the Prophet Zachary it is sufficient to understand, yt God did show
(Hypotyposi quada^) that he had pity of his people, which had been greatly
afflicted and punished, and yt now he purposed to bring yt scourge upon ye
barbarous nations. When he might have spoken this thing plainli, he had lever
use the scheme (Hypotyposis) for an enargy or plain euide^cy. They therefore be
ignorant of ye phrases of yt scripture, which will gather by such figures the
patrocinie and aid of saints. The prophet speaks in this place of ye mercy,
ye help, and the just judgment of God, and nothing of ye assistance or help
of saints. Let us therefore worship and call upon the Lord which is the Lord
of Angels, and the Lord of all men. When John fell before the feet of ye
angel, he heard ye angel say: Vide ne feceris, see that thou do it not, for I
am thy fellow servant, and the fellow servant of thy brethren, the prophets,
and of al the^ which keep the words of this book, worship, and pray unto God.

As for the latter part of the objection, which is this: Invoke nome^ meu^
super eos, let my name be called upon the^, and the names of my fathers Abraham
and Isaac. I answer yt dolts and unlearned asses understand not the manner of
speech in ye holy tongue, and therefore, Ex falso colligu^t falsum. The sense of
those words is this: Jacob adopted Joseph's sons, Ephraim and Manasses into
ye number of his own children, that with the^ they might enjoy equal porcio^ of
inheritance. Therefore says Jacob, they shall have my name, and not ye name of
my son Joseph, they shall be called Jacobs children, and not the sons of Joseph,
nor they shall be called ye nephews of Jacob, but ye sons of Jacob. Now sir,
frame your argument out of these words for ye praing to saints: They shall
bear the names of Jacob, Ergo they must pray to Jacob. Guppe with a gald back,
and stu^ble no more.

The like phrase, is in ye prophet Esaias, where the women cry, saying: Pane^
nostru^ comedemus, et vestime^tis nostris operiemur, ta^tu^ modo inuocetur
nome^ tuu^ super nos, and aufer opprobriu^ nostru^ In yt day (says ye prophet)
shall vii. women take hold of one man saying: We will eat our own bread, and we
will wear our own garments, only let us be called by thy name, and take away our
reproach. That is, be you our husband, and let us be called thy wives for they
thought it to be a reproach, to be without an head and husband. And I pray you,
who will gather of these words, yt men must call upon women?

The Prophet means no more, but that there shall be such a slaughter of men,
that seven women shall strive and desire one man to be their husband, and to be
called his wives, and to be named after his name, as women in these days be
called after their husbands names.

Obiectio. 3.
Moses in his prayer says: Recordare Abraham, Isaac and Israel seruorum
tuorum, quibus iurasti per temetipsum. Remember, Exodus 32.
O Lord Abraham, Isaac and Israel thy servants, unto whom thou have sworn
by thy self. etc. Behold (say they) Moses prays for the people, and prays
by the name of the holy Prophets which were dead. Ergo. etc.

Responsio.
Herein they betray their ignorance, which object this for the proof of
intercession to saints, because Moses cried unto the Lord Recordare dn^e
patru^ nostrorum. etc. As though that it were equiualente unto this saying,
holy Abraham pray for us, or forgive us our sins, or bring to pass by thy
prayers, that god may forgive our offenses. But Esaias writes a far other
thing, and clean contrary unto their doctrine, saying: Vbi est zelus tuus and
fortitudo tua? etc, where is thy zeal and thy strength? O Lord, the multitude
of thy mercies and compassions, Esaias. 63.
they are restrained from me, doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not, yet you, O Lord art our father and
our redemer, thy name is for ever. Moses did not inuocat the^, who^ he knew
assuredly yt they were ignorant of him, but he does call upon god ye father, and
only one redemer, putting him in remembrance of his promises. For he says in
plain words: Recordare seruoru^ tuoru^. etc. Remember thy servant unto who^
thou have sworn by thy self, and saidest unto the^. etc, for this cause he
said. Remember our fathers, because God had sworn unto them, that he would be
the God of their seed. Of ye which promise he puts god in remembrance in
this place. And to this appertains that which god himself speaks in Exodus,
Dn^s deus patru^ vestroru^. etc. The Lord god of your fathers, ye god of
Abraham, the god of Isaac, and ye god of Jacob sent me unto you, this is my
name for ever, and this is my memorial from generation to generation.
Wherefore god would be so called and so prayed unto, yt is, to be put in
remembrance of his promises, not for him self, but for our sakes, and makes
this for praying to saints.

Obiectio. 4.
We read in the book of the kings. Ego protega^ ciuitate^ ista^, dicit dn^s,
vt salue^ ea^ propter me, and David seruu^ meu^. Lib. 4. cappite. 19.
I will defend this city (says the Lord) that I may preserve her for my
servant sake. Is it not manifest (say they) that god spares sinners for the
merits and prayers of the Saints, and that whose countries and Cities are
preserved through their aid? as in this place (for David's sake.)

Responsio.
We answer, that the city and kingdom of Jerusalem was spared for gods
sake, and for our savior Christ's sake, for the prophets called Christ David
by this figure Antonomasia. Cap. 34.
The lord speaks in Ezechiel. I will raise up over my sheep a shepherd, which
shall feed the^, which is my servant David. He shall feed the^ and shall be their
shepherd, and I the Lord God will be unto the^ as a God, and my servant David
chief in the middle of the^. I the Lord have spoken. The like place is in
Jeremy. None of all the interpreters have expounded these places otherwise
tha^ of Christ. Cap. 23. Cap. 10.
And the Evangelist S. John does prove the^ to be meant of Christ. Therefore the
Lord spared the kings city, because of Christ our Lord, who^ it behooved, to
have been famous in Jerusalem, and his name and doctrine to be spread
throughout the whole world.

Obiectio. 5.
Cap. 5.
They bring this place out of Job. Voca obsecro, est ne aliquis qui respo^deat
tibi? and ad alique^ sanctoru^ co^uertere. We are commanded openly (say they)
to turn unto some of the saints in our tribulatio^s, as it appears in this
place.

Responsio.
Job did contend, that trouble and adversity does not always come for sins
sake, which he proves by his own example. The Lord (says he) has cast me
into this calamity, not by the reason of my wickedness, but through his own
good will, now his adversaries, and especially Eliphas does reply and say, that
God punishes none but for sin, yea and that al men be sinners, and none
clean in the sight of God. VVherby he touched (as he thought) Job. As though he
should say: name thou any one man if thou can, live he never so holy, which
has not deserved misery and pain for his sins. Thou can show none, for
it is impossible to find any such. This is the very meaning of this place. And
I pray you, what makes this for praying to saints, which is the way to London
a poke full of Plummes. Again this Hebrew word Kedoshim, signifies those
properly, which are separate and clean from the inquination and abomination of
the Ge^tils, the holy men that live here, and not the saints in heaven.
Certain learned me^ to take away ye ambiguitie of the words, do call the
saints in heaven Caelites, which they call in the Hebrew Abbidim, and the
holy men which live upon the earth they call Sanctos, which they call in the
Hebrew Kedoshim, but these words be used sometimes indifferently.

Other do expound this place after this manner. Eliphas does rebuke Job of
impacience, and says, no just man does, or has done as Job does, that is,
spurn, murmr, and grudge against God in his dolours and pains both the
senses are good.

Obiectio. 6.
Apoc. 5.
It is written in the Apocalips, that when the angel had taken the book, the
four beasts and the four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb,
having every one harpes, and golden vialles full of odours, which are the
prayers of the saints. How say ye, is not here mention made of the prayers of
Saints?

Again in an other place it is said: An other angel came, and stood before
the altar, having a golden censer, and much odours was given unto him, that he
should offer with ye prayers of all saints upon the golden altar, which is
before the throne, Apoc. 8
what can be spoken more plain than this for the proof of praying to saints?

Responsio.
For the first place it may be answered, that there is the figure Synecdoche:
for prayer does consiste of two parts: Invocation, and tha^kesgeuing, as it
may be proved by S. Paul to the Philippians. Now we do invoke, when we desire
any thing to be given unto us of God, but we re^dre thanks, when we praise and
celebrate God and his holy name, for his benefits already given. And that the
Apostle John means this last, and not the first, it is evident by these
words following. Canu^t canticu^ nouu^ dicentes. They sing a new song saying.
Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the seals thereof, because thou
wast killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred and
tongue, and people and nation. And I beseech you, what makes this for the
intercession unto Saints? It is no good consequent, this man does praise God,
therefore I must call upon this man. Nego argumentum.

For the second place, here is no other thing said, but that the angel and the
elders praised God together. Yet S. Austen examining this place, does say, that
this angel is Jesus Christ, having the golden censer, that is his holy body,
for he was made the censer, out of the which God received a sweet savor, and
he is made gracious unto the world, because Christ offered him for a sweet
savor. The angel took the censer and filled it with the fire of the altar,
that is, God took a body yt is the Church, and fulfilling his fathers will,
filled it with the fire of the holy Ghost.

Obiectio. 7.
Baruch says in his prayer. Cap. 3
Domine deus Israel audi nunc orationem mortuorum Israel. O Lord God of
Israel, here now the prayers of the dead Israelites, lo, hear Baruch
desires god to here the prayers of the^, that be dead. Ergo, Saints do pray
for us.

Responsio.
Baruch in this place does not speak of the^ which are dead and departed this
world, but of the wicked livers, who although they live in the world, yet
before God they are dead. And this phrase is often used in the scriptures, as
in ye Gospel where Christ says, let the dead bury the dead. Math. 8.
And S. Paul speaking of the widow says. Vidua in delitiis agens, viue^s,
mortua est. A widow living in wantonness, being alive is dead. Baruch speaks
here, of sinners which were yet living.

Other do expound it after this sort, as Lyranus, whose words be these. Audi
dn^e oratione^ sanctoru^ patriarcharu^ and prophaetaru^ qui viue^tes orauerunt
ad te pro bono statu posteroru^. Here (Lord) the prayers of the holy
patriarchs and prophets, who when they lived did pray for the good state of
their posterity, as though he should say: O Lord have a regard to that prayer,
which they made unto thee when they were alive.

Obiectio, 8.
Lib. 2. Ca. 15.
Judas Machabeus saw plainly with his eyes Onias, which was the high Priest, and
Jeremy the prophet, to pray for the people of Jury, Ergo. etc.

Responsio.
This is but a certain vision and dream, by the which it was represented, as
by a certain figure, that the Lord would not forsake the prayers of the Jews.
If this place should prove the intercession of saints, then Judas would have
commended him self to the prayers of Onias and Ieremias, but he converting unto
God only, cried and prayed (when he was in great distress and danger) after
this sort. O Lord, thou that did send thine angel, in the time of Ezechias
king of Judah, who in the host of Sennacherib, slew an hundred foureschore and
five thousand, Send now also thy good angel before us, O Lord, for a fear and
dread unto the^. And let the^ be disco^fited by the stre^ght of thine arm,
which come against thine holy people to blaspheme. This prayer was made unto
God and not to Onias or Jeremy the Prophet.

Again of what authority is the second book, of the Machabees to confirm
any doctrine? truly of none, as both S. Hierome, Cypriane, Austen and other do
declare, but of these books I have spoken sufficiently before.

Replicatio.
Origenes does allege this book, for the confirmation of praying to saints.
His words be these. Sed and omnes sa^cti qui de hac vita discesserunt habe^tes
adhuc charitate^ erga nos qui in hoc mu^do sumus, si dica^tur cura^ gerere
salutis eoru^ and iuuare eos praecibus suis, atque interue^tu suo apud deu^,
non erit inconuenie^s. Scriptu^ na^que est in libris Machabaeorum. Hic est
Hieremias prophaeta dei, qui semper orat pro populo, that is, all the saints
which are departed out of this life having charity and love toward us which
be in this world, it is not inconvenient, if they be said to take some regard
of our health and to help us with their prayers and intercession with God, for
it is written in the book of Machabees. This is Hieremie the Prophet of God,
which always prays for the people.

Responsio.
These homilies ar in Hieromes works set after his co^mentary in Ecclesi.
Austen.
Bruno Amorbachius a man of incomparable learning does doubt of these homilies
which goes in Origenes name, for he supposes many things to be in the^ which
show, that they be not the works of a Grecian but of a Latin man, and what
matter is it if they were Origenes own, shall the authority of man be of more
force with us than the authority of the holy Scriptures? God forbid. Again, of
what authority the book of the Machabees is, it is declared Satis superque.

Obiectio. 9.
It is written in the Psalms. Laudate dominum in sanctis eius, praise God in
his saints, Ergo, saints are to be prayed unto.

Responsio.
If this phrase were formal, praise God in his saints, Ergo, pray to saints,
than this kind of reasoning were good also. Praise God in ye sound of tro^pet,
in cimbals, in harp. etc. Ergo, we must pray to tro^pets, to cimbals and to
harpes. O coraebos, o Terebynthos, o melicides, o sues Baeoticas, and pallade
viduas.

Obiectio. 10.
The spirit does make intercession for us according as the Apostle teaches,
therefore Christ only makes not intercession. Romans 8.


Responsio.
Paul speaks not of any intercessour in heaven, but of the spirit of man
praying in this world, which being incensed and illuminated with the spirit
of God, does sigh and make intercession, the words of the Apostle are evident
and plain.

Obiectio. 11.
We read in the scriptures of the prayers of angels, and that they offer up
the petitions of the faithful unto the sight of God: therefore Christ alone
does not pray and make intercession for us, but the angels and saints also.

Responsio.
We deny this to be a good consequent, for the scriptures do teach, that the
angels ar ministering spirits, and their office requires to offer only our
prayers, as ministers, unto the sight of God. But the scripture does not teach
that they make intercession for us, or that men are heard through angels, but
through Christ, who makes intercession for us, and for whose sake our prayers
being presented unto God the father, are acceptable unto him. If that any man
will affirm the same of the blessed spirits of the saints and holy fathers,
and will form his argument, A simili, let him first prove, that the souls of
saints ar made ministryng spirits, but this cannot be proved. And although it
could be proved, yet this does not argue, that the saints in heaven are
intercessours for men here in earth, for neither ye angels them selves are
therefore intercessours, because they offer prayers of men unto God.

Obiectio. 12.
The Saints are joined with us in charity, and because the spirits of them
dwelling in heaven, have a love unto us living on the earth, in the respect of
this love and charity they pray for us.

Responsio.
They that thus dispute, reason besides, and contrary unto the Scripture, for
although we gladly grant, that the saints in heaven are not without charity,
yet this charity in the heavenly Citizens has not this nature, nor these
offices now, which it had once upon the earth. Otherwise we should attribute
many fond absurdities unto them, as though they should either suffer or do
such things, which in deed they neither suffer nor do, whiles the saints
lived on earth for the nature of their charity, they sorowed, rejoiced, and
prayed with us, and for us. Now, whereas they have put of this corruption, and
have forsaken us, they living with God in heaven, do not know our doings, nor
are moved with any earthly affections. They know that we are very well
provided for, without their help. They perceive that the salvation of man is
so wrought, that they them selves rest from their labors, and rejoice in
Christ, understanding that Christ is the only intercessour for men living in
misery, because he is omnipotente and knows all things, and yt he is never
moved or weried, nor is ignorant of any thing, but does execute and perform
most perfectly al parts of an intercessour. They know this glory to pertayne
only unto the son of God, and therefore they do not take this honor upon
them, that they should make them selves intercessours in the stead of Christ,
for this charity of God does far excel the charity of man toward his
neighbor.

Obiectio. 13.
They do object, that the Saints do not pray for us after such a sort as
Christ does, which is the only mediator, but after that sort as they were wont
to pray for their brethren when they were upon the earth.

Responsio.
It does not follow, they did this living in the world, Ergo they do the same
now in heaven, neither can it be proved by Scripture, that the Saints pray
for us in heaven. Wherefore then should we believe doubtful and uncertain
doctrines, for true and certain? But let us grant that the Saints pray for
us in heaven, as certain of the fathers have written, yet it does not follow,
that we should pray or call upon them. For it is well known what Saint Austen
writes. Gentiles diis suis and templa aedificauerunt and statuerunt aras. etc.
The Gentiles erected Churches unto their gods, they builded them aultars,
they appointed them priests and ordained sacrifices. But we do not build
churches unto our martyrs as unto gods, but ordain memorials as to dead me^,
whose spirits live with God Neither do we erect aultars, upon the which we may
sacrifice unto martyrs, but we offer sacrifice unto one God, being both the
God of the martyrs and also our God. At the which sacrifice, the martyrs are
named in their place and order, as men of God, who overcame the world in
professing of his name. But yet they are not called upon of ye Priest yt does
ye sacrifice, because he is gods priest and not theirs. But the sacrifice it
self is the body of Christ, which is not offered unto them, for they are the
same them selves. Thus far Augustine manifestly declaring, that the saints
are not to be inuocated, because sacrifice does appertain unto God, and not
unto the saints. The same Augustine writes also in his book De cura pro
mortuis gerenda, these words. Ibi ergo sunt beatorum spiritus, vbi non vident
nec cognoscunt quaecunque aguntur in hac mortali vita. The spirits of Saints
be there where they neither se nor know what things be done in this mortal life.

Obiectio. 14
They object, that the church for the space of many years has inuocated
saints, and that the church cannot err, wherefore, the church does not err in
teaching the invocation of saints.

Responsio.
We answer, that the church does not err, as long as she hears the voice of
her husband and pastor, but when she despises the words of her pastoure, and
follows her own decrees and inventions, she does err and is deceived. The
whole church of the Israelites, with the high priest Aaron, and the Elders of
the people erred, when neglecting the law of God, they worshipped an image for
god with daunsing and singing, contrary to Gods will. And the Israelites were
not excused from error and sin, because they did not cut down their groves
and hill aultars in long time.

Replicatio.
The saints being called upon, have helped us sundry times, therefore they
ought to be called upon.

Responsio.
It sometimes takes luckie success, which is done against gods word. But who
would infer of this, that to be therefore good and commendable, which is
instituted against the word of God? Who would say, that it is good to spoil
and rob the innocent in battle, because the bloody soldiers do prosper and
are enriched oftentimes by war? The Gods of the Gentiles also seemed to hear
the petitions of such as prayed unto them. But ought therefore the Gods of the
Gentiles to be prayed unto? God forbydde.

I conclude therefore, that the word of truth pronounced out of the mouth of
God, does teach us to call upon his name, by the interuention of Jesus Christ.
Neither can we read of any of the old or new Testament (of whom the scipture
makes mention) that ever prayed unto any saint, or unto any Patriarche or
Prophet being dead, nor unto any of the Apostles or their Disciples, but unto
god only through Christ. Wherefore let us steadfastly believe, that to be the
most perfect and surest doctrine, which bids us to call upon god alone
through his only begotten son, and that God does require this thing of every
man, whom we cannot please, except we obey him.

Now follow the objections which they bring out of the fathers.

Question.
First, they allege the example of the most holy Emperor Theodosius, of whom
Ruffinus writes thus. Circumibat cum sacerdotibus and populo omnia orationum
loca. Lib. 11. eccles. historia.
etc. That is: He went with the priests and the people, about all the places of
prayer, lay prostrate before the shrines and tombs of the Martyrs and
Apostles, and made intercession to the saints, to send him sure help.

Responsio.
We do not read in all the holy scripture, that any of the kings did
prostrate them selves before the tombs or shrines of the saints, and asked
help of the dead, Psalm. 120.
for they al cried: Auxilium meum a domino, qui fecit coelum and terram, My
help is from the Lord, who has made both heaven and earth. Psalm. 121.
Again, Dominus custodiet te ab omni malo, dominus custodiet animam tua^, The
Lord will keep thee from all evil, the Lord will keep thy soul. Also, Dominus
custodiet egressum tuum, and ingressum tuum a modo, et vsque in seculum. That
is: The Lord will keep thy going out, and thy coming in, from henceforth
world without end.

Furthermore, Ruffinus words seem to importe the intercession of the saints
upon earth: for the Emperor seems to have gone about all the Oratories, in
which the congregation of holy men were gathered, and to have desired their
hearty commendations and prayers to God, that he would grant him victory, and
safely defend the Empire, for the safeguard of many.

Lib. 10. cap. 8
That place of Ruffinus confirms this other sentence, where he writes thus:
Interea Constantinus pietate fretus Sarmatas, Gothos, aliasque barbaras
nationes. etc. That is to say: In the mean time Constantinus the godly
Emperor, subdued the Sarmates, Goths, and the other barbarous nations, saving
them that prevented peace, either submitted them selves to god, so much the
more did god subdue al things unto him. He sent also letters to Antony the
first Heremite, that he would make supplication to the Lord for him and his
children. And by this means he desired to commend him self to god, not only
by his own merits, and by the devout religion of his motber, but also by the
intercession of the Saints.

Lo, in what signification he takes the intercession of saints, nor there is
any great cause why we may not interpret the place of Theodosius to mean the
intercession of the saints, Tripart. hist. Lib. 9. Ca. 43
living here in earth.

But, as touching that Theodoretus writes, that John and Philip the Apostles
appeared to the Emperor Theodosius, it seems to have been the like vision to
that which is said to have happened to Judas Machabeus, for Judas was
instructed by that vision, that he should have the victory, and not that he
should invoke and call upon O^ias and Hieremi, whereupon, he called upon God,
and not upon saints in present danger. Even so also the vision of the
Apostles did show unto Theodosius, that the victory should be given unto him of
God, whom he called upon, and not the Apostles, when he saw his armies turned
and said: Tu omnipotens deus nosti. etc. That is: Almighty God thou know,
that I have taken in hand this battle to revenge Christ, for thy son his
name, if it be otherwise, then take reuengme^t upon me. But if I came hither
for a probable cause, trusting in thee, stretch forth thy right hand to thy
people, least peradventure the Heathen do say, where is now their God?

Unto this sentence, that also belongs, which saint Augustine testifies of
this most holy Prince, how that he did put al his trust in God, as the only
safeguard, being most sure and steadfast.

Obiectio. 2.
They do greatly commend and set forth the felicity of them that have
worshipped the saints, and the misfortunes of them that have neglected the
worshipping of them.

Responsio.
The Lord says by the prophet Oseas: Fornicata est matter vestra, quia dixit,
vadam post eos, qui me amant, et dant mihi panem et aquas. etc. Cap. 2.
That is: Your mother has committed fornication, because she said, I will go
after them that love me, and give me bread, water, wool and flax, oil and
drink, and she knew not that I my self gave her corn, wine, and oil, and
that I augmented her silver and gold, which she made for Baal. Therefore I will
be turned, and will take my corn in his time, and my wine in his time, and I
will violently take my wool and flax, and will cause all her joy to cease, I
will also destroy her vineyards and figtrees, of whom she said: These ar my
marcha^dizes, which my lovers have given to me. etc

By these words we understand, how greatly it displeases God to sai, that we
receive external felicity and goods of the Gods. For as god only gives all
things abundantly, so he alone will be known and taken for the geuer. He
calls that fornication, which these men call devotion. God has coupled our
souls unto him self by the bond of wedlock, that we may depend of him
alone, even as the spouse depends of the husband.

Than we commit fornication, when we say, that we have received the gifts given
unto us of God, being our husband, of other lovers, that is, of other Gods.

It is God that gives all things necessary for our life, meat, drink,
clothing, and moderate recreations, not that we should bestow them upon Gods,
and upon their idols, but that we should occupye them, and be thankful to the
Lord being the geuer. But these idolaters said: these are our wares, which our
lovers gave unto us. But our adversaries say: we have received these gifts by
the bountifulnes of God, but yet by the merits of the saints. Some men
forgetting God, do think, that they have received al things by the benefit of
the saints. But the Lord says to both these sorts: Propterea conuertar, and
accipiam frumentum meu^. etc Therefore I will be turned, and will take my corn.
etc. For he threateneth barrenness, so that our adversaries prove nothing by
their objection.

We must rather believe the Prophet, entreating of true felicitye, and saying
thus: Beatus vir qui timet dominum, and in mandatis eius complacet sibi valde.
Psalm. 112.
Potens in terra erit semen eius, generatio rectorum benedicetur. etc. That is:
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, he has great delight in his
commandments. His seed shall be mighty in earth, the generation of the
righteous shall be blessed.

Obiectio.
It is a very ancient custom to invoke the Saints. For not to speak of
many other things, has not the East and west Churches, for these many years
prayed and song: Sancta Maria ora pro nobis, Omnes sancti, orate pro nobis.
That is. Holy Mary pray for us, All saints, pray for us. Is not the Letany a
very old invention of the fathers? It is not like to be true, that so many holy
and learned men, yea the whole church have erred so many years in praying to
saints.

Responsio.
There is nothing proved by antiquity, which the authority of the scriptures
has not first approved, and beautified. The scripture teaches many examples
and precepts of praying and inuocating God, neither yet has it any precept,
promise, or evident example of inuocatinge the saints. And if antiquity can do
any thing at this present, undoubtedly we have the victory, which antiquity
teaches, that god only in christ is to be inuocated. For this is the most
auncientest doctrine which far excedeth that opinion of inuocating the saints.

The Letanie was found out long after the Apostles time, neither any ancient
father mentioned one word of it. Durandus says, that the Letany is divided
into a greater and a lesser. Cere. Lib. 6,
The greter is used in the feast of saint Mark, and was invented of saint
Gregory. The lesser, which is the elder, was invented at Vienna, of Mamerus the
bishop, when Zeno was Emperor. The first was ordained about the year of our
Lord.490. The latter was instituted in the year.590.

It is called in Greek, (...), and signifies supplication, in which the
Gentiles made their vows, and offered their gifts to the Gods.

But seeing that al antiquity has made their vows only to God, by Christ
Jesus, and have offered their spiritual gifts to God only, let these men take
heed with what spirit they were inspired to institute ye Letanies, in which
the glory only due to Christ, is communicated to the saints. For the ancient
Catholic Churches of the East, and of the west, by the space of.500. and.600.
years and more, prayed only to god by christ.

Therefore, they that are pleased with a new doctrine and late institution, let
them have in reverence the Letanie invented by certain private men, and
delivered to the churches, without the authority of the scriptures. I judge
Christ only to be followed, which said: John. 16.
Quaecunque petieritis patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis. That is: Whatsoever
ye shall ask of my father in my name, he will give it unto you.

Let them not object unto us the errors of so many years. For they have that
old time which inuocated God by Christ only, they have the scriptures, that
is, the Canonical verity, which they ought woorthely to believe. This verity
confuteth all the sayings that our adversaries with great stoutnes object
against us.

Furthermore, Helias being but one and alone, set him self against many
hundreds of Balaams priests. Christ being but one, put himself against the
whole assembly of Priests and Pharisees. The Apostles being but few in number,
and going through the whole world, had against the^ the religon and custom
that was used in many years, the rites of countries, the judgments, words,
and doings of very wise, devout, and righteous men, as they were counted.

But I pray you, why taught the Apostles true things, and the otherwise
worldlings, false things? Ye shall not find the cause by external, but because
what soever the Apostles taught, they taught it by the will of God, according
to his word, and the other fetched their doings from men, 2. Pet. 1. Psalm. 115.
of whom it is written: Omnis homo mendax, All men be liars.

Obiectio.
They say, that there is a certain order with God, whereby men do come by
inferior means unto the highest, and that is by saints, to god himself,
even as in earth by the princes friends, men come to the prince him self.
Again they say, it is an impudency if any man, being a sinner, do forthwith
thrust himself before the sight of gods majesty. It is a point of humility,
when we commit our selves to God by intercessours.

Responsio.
We do grant, that there is an order and certain rule with God, by the which
our prayers are commended unto him. For first the faithful commend them selves
unto God by praying one for an other, and they do also believe, that al their
prayers are accepted of God by Christ, and by faith in his promise, which he
made to receive our peticions. This order to be with God, the scripture
testifies.

But we do not knowledge that order which our adversaries have invented and
made of their own heads, that is, that we ought to commend our prayers, first
unto saints, as to intercessours, which may bring them in the end unto God.

Other being foolisher and more fantastical, inuenting a foolish and much more
vain thing, have fained that sinners do make supplication unto saints, which
saints after do entreat the virgin Marye, and that she showing out her
breasts, does beseech her son, which at the last takes all the cause upon him,
and than that he showing his wounds, comes before his father, of whom at the
length he obtains the petitions of them that pray. But out of what scriptures
will they prove these dreams? Do they not here paynt forth God to be an hater
of man. God destroy such wicked blasphemers, with all their degrees and
payntinges.

The scripture sets forth unto us in all points, God to be a lover of man,
and to be a most merciful father. And God the Son, in the Gospel of saint
John, says plainly: Non dico vobis quod ego rogaturus sim patrem pro vobis,
John. 16.
Ipse enim pater amat vos, quia vos me amastis, and credidistis quod a deo
exiuerim. That is: I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for you, for
the Father him self loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed
that I proceeded from the father. By the which words, nothing is derogated
from the Priesthood of Christ, for otherwise it appears that he is our
advocate, which makes intercession for us unto God the father. But the favor
of God the father is showed toward the faithful, and that we are joined to
God the Father by Christ, so that we ask in the name of Christ, and believe in
him.

To be short, the Lord monisheth us, that we need not to imagine grossly, that
our savior sits at the right hand of God the father with bowed hammes, nor
to use any vocal talk, for the virtue and merit of Christ our reconciler, is
always in the sight and presence of the father.

Concerning the similitude by the which they judge that men come to God by the
mean of saints, even as a man comes to his Prince by one of his friends, we
say, that it is not simile, but dissimile, For the Lord says in Esaias: Esaias. 55.
Non sunt cogitationes meae, cogitationes vestrae, neque viae vestrae, viae
meae. That is: Your thoughts are not my thoughts, nor your ways, be my ways.

If the similitude and authority of man prevail so much with them, comment. in
opi. ad Romans
why does not that place of saint Ambrose preuail, which writing against the
Gentiles, defending their error with almost like arguments, says thus: Solent
misera vti excusatione, dicentes, per istos posse ire ad deum, sicut per
comites peruenitur ad regem. etc. That is: They are wont to use a miserable
excuse, saying, that men may go unto God by the saints, even as they come
unto the king by his Lords and officers. But is a man so mad or so forgetful of
his own weal, that he will give the kings honor to the officer? If any be
found to entreat after this sort they might rightly be condemned of treason.
But these me^ do not think them selves to be gilty, which give the honor due
unto God, to a creature, and forsaking the Lord, do worship their fellow
servants, as though it is somewhat a greater thing then to serve God. For
men go unto the king by officers and waiters, because the king also is a man,
and knows not to whom he may commit the government of his realm. But to
deserve that we may go unto God, which knows althings, and all men's merits,
we need none intercessour, but only a devout mind.

Furthermore, these shameless men call the constaunt and holy confidence of
faith, impudency: but if in the torments of sin it be an impudency to go
first unto Christ, then was the sinful woman in the Gospel an impudent woman,
which going to the feast, Luke 7.
fell not at the feet of Peter, Androw, or John, but she lay prostrate at the
Lord Jesus his feet. The Cananit also should be shameless, Math. 15
which with so great co^stancy cried and desired help of Christ, and not of
the Apostles, insomuch that they at the length being weary of her crying, said:
Send her away, for she fills the heaven with her cry, and wearieth al men's
ears.

Now let us hear what the Lord himself pronounced of this impudency of sins
and sinners.

To the sinful woman he said: Fides tua saluam te fecit, vade in pace, That
is: Thy faith has saved thee, go thy way in peace. To the Cananite he said: O
mulier, magna est fides tua, fiat tibi sicut vis. O woman, great is thy faith,
be it done to thee as thou wylt. Again in an other place the Lord says to
sinners, Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis. etc. That is. Math 13.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will refreshe you.
Whereupon Paul said to Timothy: Certus sermo et dignus, quem omnibus modis
amplectamur, quod Jesus Christus venit in mundum vt peccatores saluos faceret.
That is. It is a sure saying, and worthy by all means to be embraced of us,
that Christ came into the world to save sinners.

Again he says: Habentes ergo pontificem magnum qui penetrauit caelos. etc.
That is to say. Heb. 5.
We having an high priest which pierced the heaven, Jesus the Son of God,
let us hold the confession and faith. For we have not a priest which cannot
feel our infirmities, but which was tempted as we are, proved in all things,
and in all points (sin only excepted.) Let us come therefore with sure hope
to ye throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy. etc.

Let us hear and believe these words, rather then the sayings that these
wretches do bring of hipocritical humility, which is none other thing then a
slendernes, and want of faith.

They think it to be an unworthy thing, that a sinful man should thrust him
self first into the sight of Christ: but unless we do come before Christ with
this confidence of faith, our salvation is lost, we shall not be cleansed from
sin. For they only are purged, which come unto Christ himself, that is, to
the throne of grace, with a true faith.

homil. de pro fectu euang.
Chrysostom says: Non opus est patronis apud deum. etc. That is: We need not
to have patrones unto God, nor much running about to entreat other men: but
although thou be alone, and lackest a patron, and praiest by thy self unto
God, notwithstanding thou shall obtain thy peticion, For God does not so easily
grant our peticions when other men pray for us, as when we our selves pray,
although we be full of very many evils.

Again he says upon these words: O mulier, magna est fides tua, That is,
Eadem hom.
O woman, great is thy faith, Vides quomodo mulier quae indigna erat. etc. Thou
see how the woman, which before was unworthy, is now made worthy, by her
continual crying. Vvilt thou learn, that we prevail more with God by our
selves, than while others pray for us? This woman cried, and the Disciples came
unto Christ, saying: send her away, for she cries after us: but he answered,
Non sum missus nisi ad oues quae perierunt domus Israel. But when she
perseuered in crieng, saying: Domine, nunquid and catuli edunt de mensa
dominorum suorum? That is: Lord, do not the whelps also eat the bread of
their masters table? Then he did benefit her and said: Fiat tibi sicut us, be
it done unto thee as thou wylt.

Thou see how he put her back when others prayed for her, but when she her
self prayed and cried for the gift, he granted it unto her. He said to the
Disciples: I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of Israel. And he says to
this woman: great is thy faith, be it done to thee as you wilt.

These be Chrisostomes words, neither our adversaries have any thing to answer
unto these so plain words.

Conclusio.
Let us consider, in what manner we ought to invoke the lord. This question
cannot be better dissolved, the^ by waighing the principal circu^sta^ces. Let
us see therefore who ought to be inuocated of them that pray, truly no man, but
God only and alone. For three things are required of him that is prayed unto.

The first is, that he do hear the prayers of all men that be in the whole
world, that he perce their hearts, and do narrowli behold them, add also this,
that he do know all the prayers of men, better then the men them selves can
declare.

The second is, that he be present in all places, and that he ca^ do althings in
heaven, earth, and hell, which knows al ways and means to help me^.

The third is, that his will be very prompt and ready, that he will also do that
he can do.

But these conditions are found only in God. For god alone searches the
raines and the hearts. He alone hears and sees all things, he only knows
more perfectly the things that are within and without a man, than does the man
himself: He alone is present in all places, he only is omnipotent, he only
is wise, the most perfect will of God only gives good things to man, and
his will is always ready, and only does most faithfully procure that which
is profitable to man. Therefore God alone must be inuocated.

NVho is he that can attribute these conditions to the saints in heaven,
without blasphemy and sacrilege? Therefore the saints living in heaven with
God, ought not to be inuocated, chieflye for that the scripture with plain
words testifies, that Abraham and Jacob knew us not, and it commands us to
call upon God, and prohibiteth us to communicate those things that pertain
unto God, to creatures.

To be short, to which of the saints living in heaven, can we say without shame:
Our father which art in heaven, and as follows in ye lords prayer?

Let us therefore invoke and call upon god alone that heavenly father, to whom
all the saints yt ever were in the church did pray. Again, S. Paul says:
quomodo inuocabunt, in que^ non credunt? how shall they call upon him, on who^
they believe not? now none will be so fond, as to sai, I believe in Mary, I believe
in Peter, John or James, it were extreme madness so to say.

Lactantius. 5.
HIerom does declare yt Lactantius was Arnobius his scholar (as it is thought)
at Rome, where Arnobius taught a certain space.

Lactantius was born in a castle called Firmium, in the country of Picenum in
Italy. He took his name of eloquence, flowing with sweet milk, or else of the
perfect kind of eloquence.

Hierome calls him a river, flowing with Tullies eloquence, wherein he
excelled (as many times it happens) his master, Epist. ad Pa^linum.
whom Hierom declares to be to co^fuse in declaring matters. But Lactantius
few books which are now exta^t, do show yt he was a perfect and well exercised
rethorician and Philosopher, in which books he lets escape no authors (what
discipline and profession so ever they were of) but would use their testimonies.

He lived in the times of Deoclesian and Constantine, Emperors of Rome.
Hierome testifies, that Dioclesian called him to Nicomedia, where he professed
and taught Rethorique a certain space. The which thing also he him self wrote
in his fifth book, Cap. 2
where he shows, that he had to do with two impure Philosophers, that wrote
two books against the religion and name of Christ. When he lacked audience in
a city of Greece, for that he taught in the Latin tongue. He gave him self to
write and to compose books, having embraced Christ's religion, before he came
to Bethynia. Some do write, that Dioclesian sent for him to Rome, but Hieroms
authority is to be preferred before them.

Eusebius writes in his chronicle, that he was the eloquentest in his time,
and so poor in all his life, that he lacked even necessary things for his use.
He taught in France (as Hierome declares) being an old man, where he was made
master to Crispus Constantine his son, whom his father afterward slew, Lib.
3 eccles histo. cap. 41.
which crime Euagrius removed and did put from him, being an Emperor of very
great praise.

Of his doctrine.
He taught many errors. First, he speaks sometimes unaptly and daungerously
in words and sentences, Lib. 1. cap. 9. Lib. 2. cap. 9.
both of God and of Christ. He says that God was created of him self, and that
Christ once had no being as the doting Arrians also did contend He says also,
whereas there was yet nothing beside God the father. etc. He brought forth a
spirit like to him self, which was endued with the virtues of God the father.
He disputes also, that Christ once had a beginning, and to confirm that his
opinion, he inue^teth two natiuities of Christ, affirming many absurdities,
touching the office and sending of Christ.

First, he says thus: It behooved God the son to be twice born, that he might
be as the father was, (...), and (...), that is, without father and mother. For
in the first spiritual birth, he was (...), that is, without mother, and in the
second carnal nauity, he was (...), that is, without father.

He says also thus: when God perceived and saw the malice and worshippings of
false Gods to prevail and take place, through the whole world, insomuch that
his name was almost out of men's minds (for the Jews also, to whom only the
secret counsel of god was committed, forsaking the living god, and being
entangled with deceites of the devil, had strayed to the worshipping of
vanities, nor would not return again to god by the counsel of the prophets) he
sent his Son, being chief of the angels, unto men, that he might convert
them from wicked and vain worshippings, unto the knowledging and worshipping of
the true God, and also that he might bring their minds from foolishnes to
wisdom, from iniquity, to do the works of justice. These be the ways of God
the father in which he commanded him to walk, these are the precepts that he
commanded him to keep, and he faithfully did that God bad him to do. For he
taught that there is a true God, and that he alone ought to be worshipped,
neither at any time he called him self God, for he should not have observed
his fidelity toward God the father, being sent to take away strange Gods, and
to affirm to be but one God, if he should have brought any other biside one
God.

He judges also, that Christ took flesh, for no other end, Lib. 4. ca. 24.
but that he might declare, that flesh might participate virtue.

He says further, that Christ went into Galile after his resurrection, because
he would not show himself to the Jews, Cap. 20
least he might move them to repentance.

Also he says thus: Seeing that the father makes the son, and the son the
father, there is but one mind, one spirit, Cap. 29.
and one substance to them both. But the father is as it were a plentiful well
or fountain, and the son is as a river flowing from him, the father is as
the sun, and Christ as the beam extended from the sun.

He has many superstitious and old wives tales, Li. 4. cap. 27.
of the eficacy of the image of the cross of Christ. But who can rehearse al
his errors? A man may justly say, that Lactantius never understood either the
person, no nor the office of the son of God: Cap. 24. et. 26
for he makes him to be nothing else but a teacher, a civil law maker, and a
refourmer of men's lives.

Like as he never well understood the person and office of Christ, so al so he
was utterly ignorant of the holy ghost. Look Hierome in his epistle to
Pammachius and Oceanus, and in his commentaries upon the epistle to the
Galathians, and there shall ye see more.

He says, that the angels were appointed to keep man, at such time as
mankind began first to be increased, God fearing, least men might be destroyed
by the wickedness of the devil. He affirmed also, that god from the beginning
gave ye devil power upon earth, and that he made.2. kinds of devils, that is,
the one earthly, and the other heavenly.

As touching the creation of man, although he answers the Epicure, that
asked why God made man mortal and frail, when he made the world for man's sake:
yet he is of one judgment with the Epicure, that is, that God made man at the
first frail, and such one as he was after his fall. For he says thus: Cur
mortalem finxit, Lib. 7. cap. 5.
et fragilem cum illius causa mundum aedificasset? etc. That is: Why did god
make man mortal and frail, for so much as he had made the world for his sake.
etc.

First, that an infinite number of souls might be brought forth, and that he
might replenish the whole earth with the multitude of them, and that he might
give unto man virtue and power, that is patience of adversities and labors, by
the which he might obtain ye reward of immortality.

Again he says: Mortalis atque imperfectus homo eterra factus est. That is.
Man was made of earth, mortal and imperfect. Furthermore, he judged, that God
suffered evil to reign, that the way of virtue might appear for how could
patience keep properly his name, if there were nothing that could not be
suffered, for which cause also he says, that God stirred up the devil.

Making no mention in any place of faith, he says, that the true worshipping
of God consists in good works.

Hierome declares, that he held the errors of the Millinaries, which imagined,
Catalogo. 36. Eze. hi. Li. 3. cap. 30 Epito. divine. insti. 3. Lib. 2. Cap 5.
Lib. 7. Cap. 3
that the saints after their resurrection should live in earth a pleasant and
delitate life with Christ, by the space of a thousand years.

He encountreth with all the sects of Philosophers, whom he calls blind and
sick men in their own philosophy.

Finally, he refuteth the opinion of the Stoickes, which taught, that al things
which moved, ar to be had and numbered among Gods. He confuteth also other
trifles touching the two parts of nature. He confuteth the errors and original
of the Epicures doctrine, Lib. 3. Cap. 17 Lib 7. Cap. 3 Epito diui. insti. Cap
9 ^ib. de opifi. Dei.
and condemns Epicurus himself, because he said, that the world began by his
own accord, and that it was not governed by the providence of God.

Against which error, he sets the industry, cunning, and artificial state
and condition, both of the world, and also of man. He refuteth also the dotage
of Leucippus, which judged all the world to be made of small mothes. Lib. de
ira. de. cap. 10 Lib, 7. cap. 23
He reprehendeth the folish (...), of Pythagoras, because he said the souls
went from one body into an other body, when the bodies were dead.

It shall not be superfluous to rehearse his words of the coming of the son of
God at the last day, and of the state of the time following, his words be
these: Veniet summi et maximi dei filius. etc. That is. Almighty God his son
shall come, who after he shall take away unrighteousness, and shall give general
iudgemene, and restore to life them yt were just, from the beginning, he shall be
conuersa^t among men, by the space of a thousand years, and shall govern them with
the rule of equity: then they yt shall be alive, shall not die, but shall beget an
infinite multitude in the said space of the.1000. years, and their offspring
shall be holy and loved of god, and they yt shall be raised from death, shall rule
as judges over ye living. The Gentiles shall not be utterly extinguished, but some
of the^ shall be reserved for a victori unto god, yt the rightous may triu^phe
over the^, and subdue the^ to perpetual bondage.

About that time also the prince of the devils shall be bound with chains, and
shall be in ward of the caelestiall Empire a thousand years, whereby rightousnes
shall reign in the world, least the devil might imagine any hurt against the
people of god.

After the coming of Christ, the righteous shall be gathered out of all the
earth, and the judgment being done, the holy City shall be placed in in the
midst of the earth, in which God him self shall abide with the righteous
bearing rule. Then darcknes wherewith the eleme^t was darckned, shall be taken out
of ye world, and the moon, shall receive the clearenes of the son, nor
shall be changed any more.

The sun shall be made clearer then it is now by seven times, The earth, shall
bring forth fruits plentifully of his own accord. The rocks shall sweat
with honey, and the rivers shall run with milk.

To be short, the world shall rejoice, and all nature shall be glad being
delivered from the dominion of evil, impiety, wickedness and error. At that
time the beasts shall not be fed with blood, nor the birds with prays, but
all things shall be quiet and at rest. Lions and Calves shall stand together at
one rack, the Wolf shall not raven the Sheep, The Dog shall not hunt, The
Hawke and Egles shall do no harm, The infant shall play with Serpents.

To make an end, then shall those things come to pass, which the Poets said
were done in the golden world, when Saturn reigned. etc. These be the fond
opinions of Lactantius.

Furthermore, how Lactantius ended his life, it is not mentioned in any writers.

Anger. 6.
WHen Athenodorus the Philosopher, which lived very familiarlie with Augustus
the Emperor, being of great age and of many years, had obtained a safe
conduct or passeporte of the king, to depart into his country, the last day
which he minded to leave Rome* giving thanks unto ye Emperor, taking his
leave, and entering into his journey, amongs other things he left this
profitable and worthy precept and admonition unto Augustus, as a monument and
token of him self being absent. At what time (O Caesar says he) anger shall
stir and move thee, speak thou or do nothing before thou have rehearsed with
thy self the.24. Letters of the Alphabete in order. At these words Augustus
beholding him with a cheerful countenance, and taking him gently by the
hand, says in this sort: O friend Athenodorus, I have given thee leave to
depart into thy country at thy request, being moved with thy hoar head and
old age. But seeing that I have more need of thy presence now tha^ I have had
before this, let it not be grievous unto thee at my request likewise, to deffer
thy hasty journey until an other time. Wherefore Athenodorus was constrained
to tarry a year longer in Rome with Augustus. By this lesson I gather, that
there can be nothing well done which is done with an unquiet and angry mind.
Wherefore angry and wayward men, being prone and given of them selves unto
irefull passions, are unfit to have any public affairs in their hands, but
are to be restrained and kept back from all offices and gouernementes, as
troublesome persons and prone to move debate. For it is unlikely, that he
which is thoroughly kindled with anger, will keep him self within the bounds
of equity and justice: for the angry man differs in no other point from a
mad man, but that the angry man is mad but a time, uncircumspect and to
rash hearted. Many men by anger, have done many things, of which it earnestly
repented them afterward, for repentance is the fellow companion of anger.
Anger has punished and destroyed many men, yea and has cast down men, that
otherwise were worthy and noble, from the high estate of worldly felicity unto
extreme misery. Furthermore it has vexed and destroyed many Cities, much
people and many realms and countries. Whereupon some do say, that a wrathful
man because he is also out of bis wit, is not to be reputed and taken for a
man, but for a fearce and brute beast. For what other thing is man, when wit
and reason is taken away, but a mere beast. What a monster and miserable
thing may we think that to be, which transformeth a man into a brute beast?
It is a most unworthy thing for a man to degenerate so far from him self and
from his own nature, that he be dispossessed from the right title of this
name, man. We must therefore diligently labor, not only to strive against,
but also to our powers to overcome this evil, this pestilence so foul and so
hurtful to mankind. And first of all let us set the mekenes and patience of
Christ, which is to be followed of all men, against wrath and anger, which is an
evident and plain share of Satan, wherwt he goes about to catch and to draw
us into the net of destruction. If we do follow the doctrine and example of
Christ with fervent desire, we shall not cause other men to rage and to be
angry. And being provoked and stirred our selves, we shall boldly overcome all
manner of wrathful affections. For he may be thought to be a good and true
christian man, that (casting all his hope and care upon god in the variable and
sundry chau^ces of this deceiptful world) can with much patience suffer a like
both right and wrong. And if any prosperity chance, he gives all praise to
god: and if adversity do happen, he remitteth all reue^gement to god. Also
neither he ca^ be moved from the verity by threatninges or promises, nor by
violence or flatterings: but being always one man, regard^th one and the self
same scope, that is to wit, ye precepts and will of god, and evermore is
careful, least by any means he swerve from them. For nothing is more
contrary to Christian piety, then burning anger and a mind flaming with
reuengement. And contrariwise nothing more becomes a Christian man, then a
quiet and mild disposition. Whereunto agrees John Chrysostom whose words
be these. (...), that is, there be truly many virtues which become a Christian
man, but the chiefest of all is myldenes and patience. For Christ does name
them only, which does shine with this virtue, to be the folowers and lovers
of God.

Mekenes is a friend to brotherly charity, but anger is an enemy, without
which charity no man can be a Christian.

But if there be any that cannot rule them selves through their natural
crabbed disposition, whereby they may the less vex and grieve their
adversaries when occasion is offered: let the^ by Athenodorus council keep
silence, and stay their violent fury for a time, until the burning and whote
stomachs be assuaged and somewhat appeased.

Nor this counsel ought to be contemned, as though it were a trifle, vain and
nothing worth. For Theodosius also the elder Emperor of Rome. Besides Augustus
disdayned not to use this counsel. And every man may learn by daily
experience, how much worth is the calling back of man's irefull mind, even in
the short time of the rehearsal of the.24. letters: and of how great force it
is to pacify and quiet the spirits of furious minds, and to moderate all
importunity of furious rages.

Nevertheless that which Athenodorus spoke of the.24. letters, we may speak it
of the Lords prayer, for the words of Christ have in them, a certain privy
and wholesome sovereign virtue, though they be pronounced sometimes not with a
thorough devout mind. And whatsoever has been wisely invented and disputed of
the Philosophers, that being joined and lincked to the Christian, faith is made
much better.

It shall not be much impertinent in this place, to speak somewhat of railing
and taunting, which does budde forth (as natural branches do out of a tree)
out of hasty ire and anger.

Of railing and taunting.
Leo Bizantius when a certain railer among other evil words, objected and
vpbraided him with the disease of his eyes as a shameful fault, (...), inquit,
(...), he ought to be without fault, which will rail against any man: otherwise
he that speaks what he lusts, shall hear again that he would not hear,
for Sophocles says very well.

(...).
(...).
He that loves a tongue full of vain babbling,
Shall hear that he would not, although he be unwilling.
Therefore a man must consider what he speaks against any man, for the tauntes
that are thrown against a good man, do not stick in him, but for the most
part they return back on him that threw the^. It is an old saying. He
spitteth into the element, and throws a stone against a hard rock, who
soever casts any reproach against a virtuous and godly man. These
incommodities following, sickness, an uncomely and deformed face, a base stock,
want of household goods and such like, with which a great number of good men
by the will and secret judgment of God, is burdened and afflicted no man
(being in his wits) will lay and impute to any man's reproach. for as they are
not in our own powers, so they are to be coumpted calamities, rather tha^
faults, God is provoked to anger, if we handle dispitefully the^, that be in
calamity. He defends all poor people, and them that be oppressed with
miseries.

Therefore whether we be whole or rich, let us not stand to much in our own
conceits, vpbraydyng them that be diseased and stricken in poverty, forasmuch
as we know not certainly, how long we shall continue in one state our selves.
No man is in so great felicity and prosperity in this world, but he may
become in his time most wretched.

It is a Christian man's part, neither to give tauntes, nor being rayled upon,
to rail again. Who ought rather to suffer patiently dispites, tha^ to handle
any man dispitefully: for it is not mete that we should rail or speak evil
words against our neighbors, being commanded of God to say and do well even
to our enemies. Let the Ethnickes requite evil for evil, and defend or
revenge them selves by the law and custom of the world: but let us that be
Christians, follow the patience of Christ, which for railinges, will lay up in
store for us praise: for ignominy, glory: for loss, gain: for sorrow, joy:
for temporal death, eternal life. The proverb says. (...), that is,
Authority makes man. But I say, patience declares a christian man. For we
cannot find a greater difference between a christian and an Ethnike then this,
that the christian having learned the patience of Christ, suffers gently and
quietly wrongs and injuries done unto him: but the Ethnicke contrariwise being
offended, yea at one word spoken amiss, keeps a stur, and leaves nothing
undone, until he have fulfilled his angry mind, in revenging and taking
punishment on his adversary.

Patience is a godly thing, and very agreeable and beseming a Christian man,
which Saint Ambrose calls the perfection of charity, by whose words, we
may understand, that it argues not only a Christian man, but also a perfect
Christian man.

Tertullian also most ancient of al ye Latin divines, says: Ita proposita dei
rebus est patientia, vt nullum praeceptum obire quis, nullu^ opus a domino
complacitu^ perpetrare, extrane^s apatie^tia possit, that is. Patience is so
set out among Gods hestes, that a man having not patience, can do no precept,
nor no work that pleases the Lord. Therefore let no man hope, that he shall
greatly profit and go forward in the faith of Christ, unless he has been
long and much aquainted with the most fair Lady (of all christian virtues)
Lady patience.

To be short, that we may have the redier minds to suffer dispites and other
injuries, we must know, that patience is a most evident token of ye holy Ghost
dwelling in man, even as impacie^ce is a sign of ye malignant and wicked
spirit, which sprite does entise and set forward the furious man, to revenge
and to inuente and practice some mischief against him, with whom he is moved.
But oftentimes it chances, that his malicious devises fall upon his own
pate, (as the Scripture says.) psalm. 7.
Incidit in fouea^ qua^ fecit, that is. He is fallen into the pit that he made,
him self.

Of reuengement.
A certain woman named Naraetia Budaea, was very wayward, bitter and sharp,
and was, as it were the very natural type of the malice of a woman. She having
a very good and honest man to her husband, accused him of adultery, and in tbat
behalf quarelled by tauntes and checkes with him daily. At the last she
consulted with her self, how she might rid him out of his life. She devised to
practice it by poison, and ever sought occasion how she might herein bring her
purpose to pass. At the last she took a long pipe, into the which she put
the poison, and went about to blow the poison into her husbands mouth being a
sleep, but even as soon as she did put the end of the pipe into his mouth, he
brething did blow the poison back into her own mouth and throat, and so
descended into her heart. Now as soon as she felt the poison within her, she
awaked her husband, and confessing the whole matter, forthwith fell down stark
dead. And very well served: for it is often seen, that, that mischief which
some provide for other, does often light upon them selves. As Hesiodorus
says.) (...).

A man to another mischief imaginyng,
worcketh to him self the very same thing.
As man does unto other, the same is oftentimes done to him self.

Adonibezek cut of the thombes and toes of 70. kings, who gathered bread under
his table, but Judah taking him, did cut of his thombes and toes also. And this
was Gods just judgment, that as he had done, so he did receive.

Proud Aman was hanged upon the same gollowes, Hester. 7.
which he had prepared for Mardocheus.

Those men which caused Daniel to be cast into the Lions den, Daniel. 6.
were them selves devoured of the Lions.

The two old men who would have killed Susanna, were justly slain them selves
of the people. 2. Match. 4


Andronichus was slain in the same place where he slew Onias.

Daniel. 13
Jason which cast away many men slain into the graves, was at the last cast
away him self vnbewayled and unburied.

The wicked servant in the Gospel which would not forgive his fellow servant
a small debt, was compelled to pay the whole debt, and a greater debt unto his
Lord and master.

Britannia. 7.
THat this Ila^d was called Britannia of Brutus, certain learned me^ do say is
nothing likely. All the old Latin historia^s agree, that the son of Siluius
the second in succession from Eneas, and of them named the son of Ascanius,
was Eneas, called also Siluius, whereunto the Greeks do also accord, but they
name Siluius to be brother to Ascanius, and borne after the death of Eneas, and
was therefore called Posthumous. But neither the Romans nor the Greeks do
write of any man called Brutus, before Julius Brutus, which expelled Tarquinus
out of Rome, which name was also given unto him by the sons of Tarquine in
derision, because they took him to be folish and dullwitted. Moreover there is
so much diversity between Brita^nia and Brutus, that it seems against reason
that the one should proceed of the other. For if Brutus had been the geuer of ye
first name to this I Will, he would have called it Brutia or Brutica, rather than
Britannia, which has no manner proportion or analogy with Brutus.

S. Thomas Eliot writes of this matter as follows: I will declare a
reasonable cause of conjecture, why this I Will was named Britannia. About 30.
years since it happened in wilshire at Iuie church about 2. miles from
Sarisbury, as me^ dug to make a foundation, they found an hollow stone
covered with an other stone, wherein they found a book having in it little above
20. leaves (as they said) of very thick velime wherein was some thing written.
But when it was showed to Priests and chanons which were there, they could
not read it. Wherefore after they had tossed it from one to an other (by the
mean whereof it was torn) they did neglect and cast it aside, long after a
piece thereof happened to come to my hands, which notwithstanding it was all
to rent and defaced, I showed to M. Richard Pace, tha^ chief Secretary to the
kings most royal majesty, whereof he excedingly reioised. But because it was
partly rent, partly defaced and bloured with wet which had fallen on it, he
could not find any one sentence perfect. Notwithstanding after long beholding,
he showed me, it seemed that ye said book contained some ancient monument of
this I Will, and that he perceived this word Pritannia to be put for Britannia,
but at that time he said no more to me. Afterward I giving much study and
diligence to the reading of histories, considering whereof this word Brita^nia
first came, finding that all the Isles in this part of the Ocean were called
Britanniae, after my first conjecture of Albion, remembering the said writing,
and by chance finding in Suidas, that Prytannia in Greek with a circu^flexed
aspiration does signify metals, fayres, and markets, also revenues belonging
to the common treasure: I than conceived this opinion that the Greeks
flourishing in wisdom, prowes, and experience of sailing, being entered into
the Ocean sea, found in the Isles great plenty of Tynne, Lead, Iron, Brass, and
in diverse places gold and silver in great quantity, they called all those Isles
by this general name Prytannia, signifieng the place, by that which came out
of it, as one would say, he went to market, when he goes to Anwarpe or
Barrowe: or to the fair, when he goes to Sturbridge: or to his revenues when
he goes to any place, from whence his revenues come. And yet because this I Will
excelled the other in every condition, it was of some privately called Albion,
that is to say, more happy or richer. This conjecture approaches more nighe to
the true similitude, than the other inventions, except there be any ancient
history before the time of Geffrie of Monmouth or Beda, which may more
probably confute that I have declared. To such will I gladly give place.
Finally I thought it always more honorable to have received the first name by
such occasion as I have rehearsed: And the generation of the inhabitaunts of
this land to be either equal with the most ancient, or mixed with the most
wise and valiau^t people of Greece, va^quishers and subduers of Troianes, tha^
to take the name and first generation of a vain fable or of a man, if any such
were, which after he had slain his father wandered about the world, uncertain
where to dwell. Also to aduau^t us to come of ye Troianes, causers of their own
countries destruction, by favoring ye aduoutry of Helena, of whom never
proceeded any other notable monument, but that they were also breakers of their
oath and promise. Yet this folly is found almost in all people, which
contend to have their progenitors come first out of Troy. Which fantasy
may welbe laughed at, among wise men: Thus far Sir Thomas Eliot.

The faith of Christ was received in this realm (as Gildas in his history
says) in the time of Tiberius ye Emperor, under who^ Christ suffered. Some
Chronicles do say, that Joseph of Aramathia came hither and preached here.
Polidorus Virgilius writes, that when the Apostles were dispersed, Philip the
Apostle being in France, Lib. 2. histo.
sent this Joseph hither into England with no small train, in the year of our
Lord.63.

Beda writes that in his time, here in Britain, Easter was kept in the full
moon, on what day in the week so ever it fell, Polychro. lib. 5. cap. 17.
and not on the sunday after, as we do now. Wherefore it appears, that these
preachers came from the East part of the world where it was so used, rather
then from Rome which condemned that use.

Ancient. 8.
THis word Authenticum, comes of the Greek verb (...), which signifies,
Approbare, autoritatem mea^ accommodare, to approve, to apply mine authority,
and Authenticum, is, as you would say, Authoratum, vt lex authentica, or
decretum authenticum, quasi multorum authoritate co^probatu^. A law, a writing,
a decree, which has a just and lawful authority, well approved by the
authority of many.

Hostia incruenta. 9.
THe schole divines divide, Hostiam, in hostiam cruentam, and hostiam
incruentam, into a bloody sacrifice, and an unbloody sacrifice, The bloody
sacrifice (say they) did the Priests of Aarons order offer, and Christ him
self was a bloody sacrifice when he was slain upon the cross, but the
vnbloudye sacrifice is offered daily in the Mass by the Priest. If they mean
by the unbloody sacrifice, praise, thanckes geuyng, and the memorial of the
death of Christ, so we will grant that there is, Hostia cruenta offered and so
the council of Nice does grant Victimam, (...). Notwithstanding we cannot
well grant, that they in their masking Mass offer any such sacrifice, for
they boste that they offer Reale Corpus and reale^ Sanguine^, as they term it,
The holy father Irenaeus does write, that the thing that is offered, receives
his dignity and worthynes of him that does offer, and that the sacrifice is
accepted of God, because he that offreth it, is accepted of God, upon this I
make this argument.

Every person that does offer is of more worthiness than the thing which he
offreth. The priest does offer the body of Christ. Ergo, the Priest is of more
worthiness than the body of Christ. O blasphemy intolerable? But of this I
will speak more by Gods grace in the second Tome.

Bread and wine does remain. 10.
WHen Christ said this is my body, he ordained a sacrament, that is, he gave
the name of the thing to ye sign, so that notwithstanding, the matter, nature,
and substance of the sign remains, for onles this substance remain, ye bread
is no sacrament: for sacraments, says s. Auste^ are so called of ye similitude
of those things, to which they be sacraments.

Take away the matter, the substance, and nature of bread and wine, and there
remains no more similitude.

Now all the fathers that were before Gregory, confess, that ye scriptures do
witness, that there must be.3. similitudes in this sacrament: a similitude of
nourishing, a similitude of unity, and a similitude of conversion.

The similitude of nourishing is this: that as bread and wine do nourish our
body and comfort our outward man, so the body and blood of Christ be the meat
and food of our souls, and do comfort our inward man.

The similitude of unity is this, that as the loaf of which we eat, was
made of many corns of wheat by the licour of water knoden into dough, and yet
is but one loaf, and as the wine was made of the juice of diverse grapes, and
yet is but one cup of wine, so all they that eat Christ's body and drink his
blood, being many, are made one body and one flesh by the liquour of charity
and love, are made (I say) the mystical body of our savior Christ, which is
his Church, not his natural body. for the bread is a sacrament, not only of
Christ's natural body, but also of the congregation and mystical body. And
therefore Paul says, that albeit we be many, yet notwithstanding, 1. Cor. 10
we are Vnus panis vnu^ corpus one loaf and one body. What a loaf are we?
verily even Triticius panis, a wheaten loaf, by the similitude of unity
which I have declared.

The similitude of conversion is this, that as the bread and wine is turned
into the substance of our bodies, so by the receiving of Christ's body and
blood, we are turned into the nature of them, we are changed and made bones
of his bones, and flesh of his flesh. He that eats my flesh says Christ and
drincketh my blood, he abides in me and I in him, that is to say, we be made
one flesh and one blood. And the same nature that my flesh and my blood has,
the same gets he that eats me.

These similitudes must be in ye bread and wine, or else they be no sacraments,
now take away the substance, matter and nature of the^, and what similitude
remains either of nourishing or of unity or of conversion?

These similitudes be in ye very substance and inward nature of bread and
wine, not in ye outward show of accide^tes, which do neither nourish, neither
are they changed, neither have any similitude of any unity.

Obiectio.
Cipria^ in his treatise which he writes (De caena dn^i) of the Lords supper,
says. Panis no^ effigy mutatus. etc. this bread is changed, not in the
outward show, but in the nature and substance: and Ignatius says ye same,
Cirill, and Ambrose, and Hierome and Auste^, and Chrysostom, whose doctrines
we do follow, and we do allow and embrace the^.

Responsio.
They are nothing against this doctrine but the pillars and mainteiners thereof,
if their writings be truly understand, mark the phrases, compare their
sayings together, one with another, and you shall find, that many do
foolishly slander the^, and that they which boast and prat most of the
doctors and old fathers, understand not the old fathers. So they say, that
Elizeus changed and altered the nature of iron, when he made it to swim
above the water. So they say, that Elias changed the nature of fire, when
thoroughe his prayer it fell from heaven, and consumed his sacrifice of wood,
stones and dust. The nature of fire was changed, no man can deny it, at what
time God appeared unto Moses out of a bushe in a flame, for the bushe was not
consumed. He commanded the fire not to hurt his faithful servants Sidrach,
Misake and Abednego, and preserved them harmeles from the hot burning oven.
There again nature was altered. Elias and Elizeus did not turn, alter or
change the very substance, and inward essence or matter, either of iron, or
of the fire, into any other substance or nature, but the natural property of
them making the iron, which is heavy to houe above the waters, and causing the
fire which is light to descend downward. Eue^ so the doctors and old fathers
which we allow and follow, say, that bread and wine are changed, that is, the
natural property of the^, so that whereas before they were only the meat of
the body, now after the words rehearsed they are the food of the soul also,
forasmuch as they deliver unto us Christ's sweet flesh and comfortable blood.
Before, it was common bread and wine, now it is holy and sanctified, before it
was no Sacrament, now it is a Sacrament of the blessed body and honorable
blood of our Savior Jesus Christ. But for a more manifest proof that the
old fathers believed the substance of bread to remain after the consecration,
I will allege some of them. Ireneus says, that every Sacrament is made of two
natures, of a heavenly nature, and of a terrenall or earthly nature. Now take
away the substance of bread, and what earthly nature or substance remains
in this holy Sacrament.

Obiectio.
The Papists say, that the earthly nature is Christ's body which he took of
the earth when he was borne of the blessed virgin Marie, for she was earth,
and all men be earth.

Responsio.
To this I answer, that Christ's body is earth in very deed, yet it is not the
earthly and terrenall nature of this Sacrament, which must have three
similitudes, that is, of unity, of nutrition, and of conversion, as is
declared before, which similitudes cannot be in Christ's body. Moreover hear,
what Origene says. Panis sanctificatus vadit in ventre^. The sacrame^tal bread
enters into the belly. Wherefore enters it thither, but to nourish our
bodies, to feed them, to be the meat of the flesh. Wherefore the substance
thereof is not turned, not changed not altered, but remains and continues:
for accide^tes do neither feed nor nourish. S. Austen also subscribeth unto
them, saying: Accedat verbum elemento and fit Sacramentu^, he says not,
Succedat, but Accedat, which is this much to say, let ye word be added to the
eleme^t, and the^ it is made a sacrament, Thus it is evident yt the bread and
wine which is ye eleme^t, remains and is not tra^substa^tiat, both by
autenticall scriptures, which do allow three similitudes, and also by the
consent of all authentical doctors and elder fathers: for out of doubt
Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzene, Hierome, Chrysostom, and other both Latinistes
and Greeks do not disagre with these. Moreover the rock was a Sacrament of
Christ's blood, and yet not transubstantiat: They and we drink one spiritual
drink, as Paul records, likewise Manna was a Sacrament of his body without
any such mutation.

Certain ancient fathers both of the Greek Church, and also of the Latin
church do most plainly affirm, that bread and wine do remain in the
Sacrament, as Origin, Chrysostom, Theodoretus with other.

Origens words be these. In Math. 15.
Quod si quicquid ingreditur in os in ventrem abit, and in secessu^ abiicitur?
etc. If every thing that enters into ye mouth descend into the belly and is
cast into the draught, that meat also which is sanctified by the word of God
and by prayer, as touching ye matter thereof, goes into the belly and is cast
into the draught: but that thing which comes to it by prayer, is profitable
by the proportion of faith, causing the mind to consider and to have a respect
to that which is profitable. Nor it is the matter of bread, but the word said
upon it, which does profit him that eats it, not unworthily unto the Lord:
These are spoken of the typical and simbolicall body.

Here you may se, that the material substance of the sacrament is eaten and
digested, as the substance of other bread and meats are which could not be,
if we should admit a transubstantiation.

Obiectio. 1.
This piece of Origene was of late translated by Erasmus, and therefore is to be
called into suspicion.

Responsio.
How frivolous, how dangerous, and how foolish this their replication is,
Lippis and tonsoribus notu est, for by this means they may as well reject and
refuse all other authors, which are of late brought to light by the industry
and great study of learned men as the works of Clemens, Alexandrinus,
Theodoretus, Justinius, Nicephorus and other.

Obiectio. 2.
Origene was an hereticque, and erred in very many opinions, and this was one
of them.

Responsio.
Have you forgotten your sophistry? do you not remember, that your logic
teaches you to reason, A particulari ad universal, to be no good argument?
as thus. He erred in this article and in that, and in an other article. Ergo,
he erred in all, who would so conclude?

Aristotle says that, Inductio, est a singularibus ad universal progressio.
Here is to he observed that all the singulares and particulars, are to be
nombred either Explicit or, Implicit, which is done by this clause, Et ita
de omnibus, otherwise it is no good induction, as for example. Aliquis homo
quiescit. Aliquis equus quiescit.

Aliquis canis quiescit, and alia plura animalia quiescunt.

Ergo omnia animalia quiescunt.

This induction is imperfect, because all the spices are not nombred, no more
is this objection of yours of any force or strenght. But, if you will reason
thus. Origene erred in this point of doctrine, and he erred also in that point
of doctrine, and he erred in this article, and in that article, and so in all
other articles. Ergo, Origene erred in all points and articles of doctrine.
Now is your induction perfect in fourm. But when you shall be hable to prove all the parts of ye antecede^t of your inductio^ to be true, the^ will we also be
gladly with you induced to say as you say. But we do grant with you that
Origene had his errors which were noted and described by S. Hierome and
Epiphanius. But as touching the supper of the Lord, neither they nor any other
ancient fathers ever noted or accused him, which they would have done, if
Origin had been in any fault in this point.

Obiectio. 3.
Origene speaks not in this place of the Sacrament but of that mystical
bread which was wont to be given to them which were called Cathecumini, Lib.
2. cap. 16
of the which bread Saint Austen writes in his book De peccatorum meritis.

Responsio.
This vanity, Origines his self does confute and refell: for Origenes does
confess, that he does grant the figurate and mystical body, which profits
the^ that eats yt bread not unworthily unto the Lord. And he does
significa^tly allude to the words of s Paul. Again the bread given to the
Cathecumins, was not in use in Origens time. But let it be, that it was, yet
that bread could not make a Sacramental body, for he calls the bread the
typical and simbolicall body of Christ. Thus much for Origenes authority, now
to Chrysostom.

Chrysostom speaking of them which do abuse their own body, writes after
this manner. Si haec vasa sanctificata ad priuatos vsus transfer periculosum
est, in quibus non est verum corpus Christi, sed mysterium eius continetur.
etc. If it be dangerous to transfer to any private use those holy vessels,
in the which there is not the true body of Christ, but in whom the mystery of
his body is contained, how much more ought we not to give place to the deuell
to worck any thing in the vessels of our body which God has prepared to dwell
in.

Replicatio.
It is to be douted whether Chrysostom were author of this book or no. Again
the title does argue that it is no perfect work, for it is called, Opus
imperfectum

Responsio.
Who ever doubted of this book to be good, before you? for whether it were
John Chrysostom Archbishop of Constantinople or any other, it maketb no great
matter. It is most evident, that he was a man of that time learned and had in
great estimation and that work was not only appointed but also much praised
of al men, both then and ever since, but what holes, will not foxes find to
escape?

Replicatio.
Chrysostom in that place does not make mention of the vessels of the Lords
table, but of such as were used in the old law.

Responsio.
VVil you be blind at noone days? Put on your spectacles, and look a little
better upon Chrisostomes words. Those vessels (says he) in the which the
mystery of the body was in, although not the true body. Now it is plain, that
none of the fathers ever used that kind of speech, of the vessels of the
iudaical temple.

Replicatio.
The body of Christ is not contained in the vessels, tanquam in loco, as in a
place, sed tanquam in misterio, as in a mystery.

Responsio.
This is a mistical and very fine answer: for by this means the body of Christ
is not in the supper, nor in the priests hands, nor in the box. Therefore to
be there after that sort, is to be no where. For as saint Austen says: Aufer
locum a corporibus and non erunt. take place from bodies, and then they shall be
no bodies. Also Cirillus writes, that bodies are not without place and
circumscription. His words be these: Si vere sectionem and partitionem diuina
natura (vt illi dicunt) reciperet, intelligeretur and corpus. Si autem haec and
in loco omnino, and in magnitudine and quantitate: and si quanta esset, non
effugeret circumscriptionem. That is. If the divine nature (as they do say) do
receive division or partition, it should be understand to be a body, if it be
that, than always in place and in bigness and in quantity, so if it be quanta,
it could not avoid circumscription. But what need I to discourse or entreat
of this matter any further forasmuch as so many and great learned men have made
absolute and notable books of this matter, to whom I will remit thee, gentle
reader.

Both kinds. 11.
BEsides the scriptures which are sufficient to confirm all verities, and to
confute al heresies, as saint Ciprian writes, saiing: Si ad diuinae
traditionis caput and originem reuertaris, cessat omnis error humanus. If ye
will return to the head and beginning of Gods ordinance, al error of man will
sone give place.

That both the kinds are to be received under the pain of sacrilege. Gelasius
writes, his words be these: Did. 2. cano. Conperimus
Comperimus autem quod quidam sumpta tantummodo corporis sacra portione, a
calice sacri cruoris abstineant. Qui procul dubio (quoniam nescio qua
superstitione docentur astringi) aut integrum sacrum percipiant, aut ab
integris arceantur. Quia diuisio vnius eiusdemque misterii sine grandi
sacrilegio non potest peruenire. That is. We perceive, that certain receiving
only the sacred portion of the body, do abstain from the holy blood, who
without doubt, either let them receive the whole, or else let them be restrained
from the whole, for the division of one and the same mystery cannot be done
without great sacrilege.

As for the gloss which is written upon this decree, I count no better then a
banbery gloss, for the decree seems not so much to pertain to the Priests,
as to the people. Theophilus Alexandrinus writes thus: Si Christus mortuus
fuisset pro diabolo, non negaretur ei poculu^ sanguinis. If Christ had died for
the devil, the cup of the blood should not be denied unto him.

S. Ambrose has a very good and evident saying concerning this matter. Valet
(inquit) ad tuitionem corporis et animae quod percipimus, quia caro Christi pro
salute corporis, sanguis vero pro anima nostra offertur, sicut praefigurauit
Moses, caro, inquit, pro corpore vestro, sanguis pro anima, sed tamen sub
vtraque specie sumitur, quod vtrumque valet. Sub vtraque sumitur totus ipse
Christus. Sed si in altera tantum sumeretur, ad alterius tantum, id est, animae
vel corporis, non vtriusque pariter, valere tuitionem significaretur. Haec
Ambrosius. That which we receive, avails to the tuition both of body and
soul, because the flesh of Christ is offered for the health of the body, the
blood for the soul, as Moses presumed saying: flesh is offered for the body,
blood for the soul. But yet is it received under both kinds, which avails
unto both, because under both Christ wholly is received. But if it should be
received under one kind, it should be signified, that it does profit only one
part, that is, either body or soul, and does not avail to the tuition of
both parts. What can be spoken or written more plain, than this? And by this
you may perceive, that Satan practiced even at that time, in which he went
about to overthrow the institution of Christ.

The same Ambrose (as it is recorded in the tripartite history) speaks unto
Theodosius the Emperor, (who would have presumed to communicate after his
great murder) after this manner. Quomodo huiusmodi manibus suscipies sanctu^
domini corpus? Qua temeritate ore tuo poculum sanguinis preciosi percipies?
quando frurore verborum tuoru^ tantus unjust sanguis est effusus. That is. How
with those hands would thou receive the holy body of the Lord? With what
rashness will thou receive in thy mouth the cup of the precious blood, seeing
so much blood has been shed wrongfully by thy furious mind?

Saint Austine, Cum frangitur, inquit, hostia, dum sanguis de calice in ora
fidelium funditur, quid aliud, quam dominici corporis incruce immolatio,
eiusque sanguinis de latere effusio designatur? That is. When the host is
broken, when the blood is poured out of the cup, into the mouths of the
faithful, what other thing is signified, but the offering of the body upon the
cross, and the effusion of his blood out of his side?

I trust you will not so restrain saint Austines words, that you will call
only priests faithful, and seclude all lay men, you should do then to much
injury unto them.

Your archfather of all Papists in his time (Pighius by name) does grant,
that the receiving of one kind of the lay people, came into the west church by
no institution or commandment, either Sinodal, or else of the Bishops of Rome,
but by a secret consent, which continuing for a time, they made a custom, and
so a law.

Gardener, the great god of the Papists of England, says, that it crept in by
supersticion of the lay sort. By this you may perceive, that it was not from
Christ nor the Apostles time, nor long after that the one part was denied unto
the laity. By this you may know, upon what foundation it was builded, and how
good it is.

They have a rule in their own law. Quae a principio male inchoata fuit
institutio, temporis contractu non conualescit. That is The thing that was
naught at the beginning, cannot be good by process of time.

I much maruail, that the general counsel of Trident, at the last Sessions,
had no better regard to this saying of the law.

But how wickedly they have decreed, and how profoundlye they be answered and
confounded, it appears in the answer made unto them in a certain book
lately set forth, where you shall read at the full, how pithely they be answered.

Hieroboam. 12.
HIeroboam was Nabath his son, an Ephrateus by stock, who (when Solomon
being dead, and the kingdom by sedition divided into two parts) was
constitute and made king over ten tribes against Roboam about.994. years
before the coming of Christ, and reigned in Samaria.22. years, he was in his
youth very strong and marvelous stout.

Solomon constituted him chief ruler over the tribe of Joseph.

A prophet met this Hieroboam, when he iourneyed upon a time to Jerusalem, and
told him how Solomon had sinned against God by loving strange women, and that
after his death the kingdom should be divided, and that the Lord would cause
him to reign over ten tribes. With these words Hieroboam being made proud,
forthwith endeavored to persuade the people to go from Solomon, and to yield up
the kingdom unto him. Which thing when Solomon knew, he sought means to
attache him. But Hieroboam fled to Sisach king of Egypt, and abode with him
until Salomons death.

When Solomon was dead, the chief of the people sent into Egypt, and called
home again Hieroboam, which came unto them in the city of Sicyonia, and went
with the people to Roboam Salomons son, and desired him to release somewhat of
his sharp servitude. But when Roboam gave him an hard answer, the people being
turned to sedicion, divided Salomons kingdom.

Now Hieroboam being made king in the city of Sicyonia, that he might seperat
his accomplices from the tribe of Judah, forthwith made new rites and manners of
worshipping, least the people iourneying to Jerusalem, and keeping solemn
feast there, should be moved to repentance, and forsake him, and return to
their former king. Whereupon he made two golden Calves, and two Temples, one in
the City Bethel, and the other in Dan.

Thus he seduced the people, and persuaded them to transgress the laws of
their country and fathers, which thing was the beginning of all evils to the
Jews. For when he builded churches in the high groves, he made Priests also,
and making himself the chief bishop, he went up to the altar with other
priests, and offered Calves in sacrifice. The prophet coming unto him, reproved
him very sharply, in presence of the people, but the king disdaining it, while
he was upon the altar, held out his hand, and commanded that the prophet
should forthwith be taken. But he could not pluck back his hand, being
immediately dried up, until the prophet by prayer, had caused it to be restored
unto him. But when Hieroboam had purposed to return again to God, a certain
malignaunt prophet utterly turned away his mind, and provoked him to
wickedness, insomuch that he endeavored to work great dispite against God, for
whose wickedness the Lord not long after, took great punishment upon him and
his offspring, and utterly destroyed him and his house.

At the length, all Israel became so stiffenecked, that they lost their rule
together with their religion and sects, and was brought into most foul
servitude.

Hieroboam died when he had reigned.xxii. years, as is aforesaid, leaving the
kingdom to his son Nadab.

Milinaries, 13. Otherwise called Chiliastae.
IT is to be marueiled, that so gross and fantastical opinions should come
into the heads of certain learned men, which were not far from the Apostles
time, of which this is one, that the godly should have in this world a corporal
kingdom after the resurrection, before the last judgment and consummacion of
things.

Eusebius does impute this fained error to Cerinthus, as the first author
thereof, but in an other place he refers it to Papias, where he calls it a
dream and fabulous doctrine, and says yt Papias was of a very dull and slender
wit, and that he did not rightly consider the disputacions and doctrines of the
Apostles and other things which were delivered unto other of the Apostles.

But it appears, that this dream came first from Iustine, as many other
gross, and carnal things came from the Jews. And although Justinius does say,
that many godly and pure Christians do dissent from it, yet he him self does
affirm it, and goes about to prove it by scriptures. His words be these, in
his dialoge entitled (Tryphon.) Putatis ne vnquam instauranda Hierosolyma,
atque ibi colligendum vestrum populum, in hilaritate victuru^ cum Christo and
patriarchis and prophaetis. etc. That is. Do you think, that Jerusalem shall be
restored again, and that your people shall be gathered thither, and shall live
with Christ, with the Patriarchs and Prophets in mirth and pleasure? He
answers. I with other which judge godly and christianly, do know, that there
shall be both the resurrection of the flesh, and a thousand years to live, even
then when Jerusalem is restored again, enlarged, and beautified, as the
prophets Ezechiel, Esaias, and other do affirm.

Esaias says: I will create new heavens, and a new earth, Cap. 65.
and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. But be you glad,
and rejoice for ever, in the things that I shall create. For behold, I will
create Jerusalem, as a rejoicing, and her people as a joy. And I will rejoice
in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more
heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more, there a child of
years, nor an old man that has not filled his days. For he that shall be an
hundred years old, shall die as a young man, but the sinner being an hundred
years old, shall be accursed. And they shall build houses, and inhabit them, and
they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not build,
and an other inhabit: they shall not plant, and an other eat: For as the days
of the tree are, so the days of my people, and mine elect shall enjoy in old
age the work of their hands. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth in
fear, for they are the sede of the blessed of the Lord, and their buds with
them. Yea, before they call, I will answer, and whilst they speak, I will
hear. The woolfe and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat
straw like the Bullock, and to the Serpent dust shall be his meat. They shall no
more hurt nor destroy in all mine holy mountain (says the Lord.)

These be the words I say of the prophecy. We understand the works of the
labor to signify a thousand years misticallye. For as Adam, to whom it was
said (in what day so ever thou shall eat of the tree, thou shall die) did not
fulfill a thousand years. So we understand this sentence: Dies domini vt mill
anni, the days of the Lord, as a thousand years, to tend to the same effect.
For a certain man among us, whose name was Ihon, one of Christ's Apostles,
prophesied in a certain revelation showed unto him, that as many which believed
in Christ, should dwell in Jerusalem a thousand years, and after shall follow
the universal and eternal resurrection and general judgment, which also our
Lord does say: Non ducent vxores. etc. They shall not marry wives, nor give any
to marriage, but shall be like unto angels, seeing they are the sons of God, and
of the resurrection These be Justinius words.

To this point also seems that to appear, which Ireneus says, that al people
shall receive a worthy habitacion before the judgment. Nor that is much
discrepant from this which Clement dreameth in his Egloges, without testimonye
of the holy scriptures, that is, that men shall be changed into Angels, which
shall first learn of other Angels for the space of a thousand years, and
shall after teach other men which are newly changed into Angels, which at the
last (the time being accomplished) shall be made Archangels.

Of this fond opinion of the Millinaries, were many learned men, as Ireneus,
Lactantius, Methodius, and other. Omnis homo mendax.

Dionisius. 14.
ERasmus in his a^notacio^s, writes of this Dionisius in this manner Laurentius
refelleth the opinion of them which think, that he was Areopagita, who was
author of those books, which be entitled, De Hierarchiis and diuinis
nominibus, and that he was martyred at Paris, making of three Dionisiusses (as
I suppose) but one.

First, the Areopagites were Judges, and no Philosophers, but these men make
Dionysius a great Philosopher, which judged by the eclipse of the sun, that
nature was in ieopardy to perish, whereas it is not consonant that those darkness
did reach and come so far as Athens. For that the Evangelist says, that
darkness came upon all the earth, he me^t the earth of that country. in hom^l.
in Math.
Hierome agreing thereunto, and also Origene, which denies plainly, that the
darkness happened by the default of the sun, affirming, that it chanced
either by clouds going between, or else by the thicknes of the air that was
gathered together.

And if this darkness had happened throughout the whole world, surely some latin
or Greek writer would have made mention thereof.

Laurentius derideth that epistle which is written in Dionysius name upon this
matter, and in my judgment, the Christians at that time had not so many
ceremonies, as that epistle writes. Furthermore, it is marvel (if he were so
ancient an author, and wrote so many things) that he was alleged of none of
the old latin and Greek authors, neither of Origene, Chrysostom, nor yet of
Hierom, that left nothing vnassaid.

Also Gregory himself being a man of approved faith, when he did make mention
of Dionisius his letters, he declared not that he was called Areopagita. Again,
forasmuch as great mention is made in the ecclesiastical history of the books
of Dionisius Bishop of Corinth, it is not probable that Eusebius would have
talked nothing of him being so great and worthy a scholar of saint Paul's, if
he had writ so many volumes.

Hierom recites one or two Dionysius, he makes no mention of this Dionysius
his books. In Catalo. scriptorum illustrium.


Laurentius declares, that there were very well learned me^ in his time, that
judged those books to be made of Apollinarius. Albeit Hierom rehearses two of
that name, the one was bishop of Hierapolis, which flourished in Marcus Antonius
secundus time: and the other was bishop of Laodicia in Syria, yet nevertheless
he attributes to neither of them any such works, neither do I think that
they are to be attributed to Apollinaris the heretic.

Not many years hence (as I remember) William Grocinus a man of incomparable
learning, as he was a great divine, so in all kind of learning he was exactly
learned and exercised, when he began to expound the book of celestial
Hierarchy in Paul's church, stiflye affirmed in his preface, that Dionysius
Areopagita made that work, greatly inueighing against the impudencye of them
that agreed not to the same. But before he had half made an end, when he did
taste better of the matter, he openly and freely confessed before his auditorye,
that he thought that Dionysius Areopagita made not that work.

I marvel greatly why Bid thinks that this Dionysius was made bishop of
Corinth, seeing that the ecclesiastical history plainly declares, that it was
an other Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, which wrote many works. His authority
is there alleged, which in a certain Epistle that he wrote to the Athenians,
showed, that Dionysius Areopagita was converted of Paul, and was made the first
bishop of Athens being ordered by the said Apostle. There is none other thing
mentioned of Dionysius Areopagita in the ancient writers. Hitherto Erasmus.

Acacius. 15.
There were diverse of that name, but this Acacius was bishop of ye city of
Amidense. This Acacius was made more worthy and more noble then al other men of
his time, by a certain notable act.

For when the army of the Romans having vanquished the country of Azazen, had
taken prisoners above seven thousand Persians, and would in no wise restore them
to their country (when they were famished to death by little and little, and the
king hearing of it was not a little grieved.) This Acacius when he knew the
matter, judged, that it ought not so to be left of, but gathering together the
Clergy that was under his jurisdiction, said unto them: Our God (O my sons)
needs no dishes, neither cares for pots, for he needs neither to eat nor to
drink. Seeing then that his churches have many treasures both of gold and
silver, which it has gotten by the bounty and liberalitye of them that came
unto it, I judge, that they ought to be laid out and bestowed upon the
redeeming of the Persians being taken prisoners, and for their sustentation
being afflicted with hunger.

After he had spoken these and many like words, forth with he gathered those
tresures, and paid out of the^ unto ye soldiers, so much as he thought
expedient. And when they were refreshed sufficiently with vittail, and had al
things necessary for their iourneis, he sent them to their king.

This worthy act of Acacius moved the king of the Persians to humblenes, for
the Romans greatly studied to have the victory both by war and also by good
deeds. It is said, that the king of Persia desired to see Acatius that he might
behold him, and talk with him, which he obtained by Theodosius the Emperor
his commandment.

After that God had given this worthy victory, the excellent learned men of
that time did put forth books in praise of the Emperor, and dedicated the^
unto him: some yt they might show forth their great eloquence, which they had
in many years gotten, and some also, to the end they might bring the^ selves
into ye emperors acquaintance, and some for other prete^ses.

Not only they that had studied Rethorick did this, but Augusta also the
Emperors wife wrote Hexametre verses to her husband the emperor, for she was
a very noble and well learned woman.

Spyridion. 16.
SPyridion was borne in Cyprus. He got his living by husbandry, and keeping of
cattle, and was of rude manners and conditions, but yet grave and liberal. He
was a godly and holy man, and of many notable and marvelous virtues. He was at
last made bishop of Trymethuntis in Cyprus under Constantinus, of a feeder of
sheep, he was a worthy feeder of men (as Socrates says) in which office he
was famous in many talents worthy of a godly pastor, as in alms to the poor,
and in hospitaliti (which were his natural virtues before his bishopric) he was
courteous, and also grave and fre in reproving those things yt were not dece^t as
thexample of Tryphilus, bishop of Ledranum does show, whom otherwise he used
familiarlye. But in an assemble of the bishops of Cyprus when he was commanded
to make a sermon, and in the text (Toll grabatum tuum) he changed this word,
grabatu^ into a finer word (as he thought.) Spyridion reproved him sharply,
asking him openly in angrye sharp words, whither he were better the^ he yt first
spak this word grabatu^ I leave to rehearse the miracles done by Spyridion unto
ye authors which wrote of him, where of this is one, that he took in snares
(which could not be seen) thieves, which came by night to steal sheep out of
the fold, and when it was day, he chid them being taken, and loosed them, and
when he had given them a weather, let them go.

Also, he made (as they say) his daughter Irene being dead, and in her grave,
to answer him, and show him in what place she had hid certain gold. He wrought
many other miracles, which the interpreter rehearses.

He was present at the Synod of Nice, not being one of the least at mong the
Confessors, where he confuted a prattling and bragging Philosopher in this
manner. For when this Philosopher had babled many wicked things against Christ
and his religion, Spyridion coming unto him said: In the name of Jesus Christ,
O Philosopher hear me. Which when he granted, there is one God (said
Spyridion) the maker of heaven and earth, and of al things that are in them: he
that wrought the celestial virtues, which fashioned man out of the earth, and
made al things visible and vnvisible: By his word and spirit heaven and earth
was made, the sea spread abroad, the air extended, living things gendred, and
man that great and marvelous work was made, all things were made, the
stars, lights, day and night.

We therefore knowing this word to be the son of God, and god him self of the
same essence with the father, we do believe, that he was borne of the virgin,
and crucified for us, and buried and rose again. Whom also we believe will give
us after our resurrection, an other eternal life, and shall be judge of all men.

These words unto the philosopher the Metaphrastes and Nicephorus plainly
ascribes unto Spyridion, how be it, it is maruail that Sozomenus expressed not
his name, which testifies, that this happened in the Synod of Nice, saying
that they were the words of some of the old men, which were famous there for the
confession of their faith, unless he did mean Spyridion to be the old man, who
as we read was of reverend age and simple plainnes. Sozomenus referrith this
example following to Spyridions hospitality, whereby as I said before he was
renoumed, insomuche yt he laid up yearly some fruits to distribute and le^d to
the poor, but some do apply it, to show, what faith and doctrine he had, the
example is this.

There came one unto him upon a time, a wayfaring man (lent drawing nere) in
which he and his household was accustomed to fast certain days. When Spyrion
saw him to be weary, he commanded his daughter forthwith to wash the
strangers fete, and to give him meat. And when she answered that there was no
meat left, because the next day was to be fasted. Spyridion bad her to sees
the bacon that was in his house.

When it was sod, she laid the table for the stranger, and set unto him the
meat. Spyridion began first to eat, and badde the man to eat with him, who
answered, that it was not lawful for him being a christian, to eat. Spyridion
said: So much the less (O stranger) thou ought to abstain, because thou
art a Christian. For to the clean all things are clean, as Gods word does
testify.

Priests to marry. 17.
ALthough it be both heresy and phrenesy to deny the marriage of priests, yet
somewhat to stop the mouths of our adversaries, I will answer to four or five
of their strongest arguments, which they do count insoluble, and to be Nodos
Gordianos.

2. Cor. 7.
Obiectio prima.
Marriage does hinder and let prayers. For saint Paul does say to the married
persons: defraud not one an other, except it be with consent for a time, that
you may give your selves to fasting and prayer. Then, forasmuch as the
ministers of the church ought always to pray, they are bound to live single and
sole, for otherwise they cannot execute their function and office duly and
truly.

Responsio.
First, let us know of what manner of prayers Paul speaks in this place,
whether of private prayers, or of public and solemn. If the text and
circumstaunce thereof be well waighed, you must needs grant that Paul speaks
of public and solemn prayers. For in the primative church, when discipline
took place, and was put in ure, they gave them selves to public prayers. And
this manner of prayer was indicted and commanded, either when some great
calamity, or some sharp persecution did hang over the church, as it may
appear in the prophet Joel, or else when some matter of great importance was
to be done in the church and in the common wealth, when the assistance of the
holy ghost was most earnestly to be called upon. As when Ministers and Pastors
were to be ordered in the Church. A show or step whereof was retained in
these.4. times of the year, which they call Angarias or Imber, at which times.
Ministers were wont to be made. Cap 13.
The like president we read in the acts of the Apostles, when Paul and
Barnabas were separate into the ministeri.

Also that this place of Paul is meant of public fasting and prayers, the Greek
word (...), (...)
which he uses, does manifestly declare: for then they gave them selves wholly
and utterly to those things, setting aside al other business.

Now if they will reason and say, that marriage does hinder and let prayers and
fasting, and that therefore marriage is ill, I will by the like reason infer and
say, meat and drink does hinder and let fasting and prayer, Ergo meat and
drink ar ill. But to this answer may be made, that those things which are good
in their own nature, may sometimes hinder public prayers and fasting: but
nothing can let daily prayers and continency of life, except it be ill. In
sum, it is ye part of a Christian man to have respect to the time, and to do
every thing orderly and in place.

Now to answer the objection concerning common manner of living and other
public functions, the ministers are of the same sort and nature as the people
are. Wherefore if they be married, they ought to refrain and temper them
selves as other people do, and as the Apostle does here counsel in public
fastings and prayers, but in all other usual affairs and business, they are not
forbidden to use matrimony: for otherwise they ought always to fast also. For
Paul wills them to abstain for a time, and to give the^ selves to fasting and
prayer. Then if they do infer by this place, a Priest is bound always to pray,
and therefore to abstain from matrimony, they must be bound also to fast
continually, for saint Paul does couple and join the^ both together. I dare
say the priests would be loath to be brought to such a bondage, to be driven to
continual fasting.

Replicatio.
But S. Ambrose does assign this cause of the single life of priests. 1.
Timoth. 4.
they must (says he) be always in a redines to minister Baptism to those yt
be in danger and peril of life, and to minister the sacred and holy mysteries,
which was wont to be don but once in a weke, saving yt when strangers came, it
was the oftener executed. In the old law (says he) priests might have wives,
because they were not compelled daily to minister. And they were divided into.24.
courses, as it appears in the Chronicles, and they ministered by course one
after another, when their time came about as it appears in Luke, where mention
is made of Zachary the priest John Baptist father.

Responsio.
In these words of Ambrose.2. things ar to be examined and excussed.

First, that the difference between the priests of the old law, and the priests
of the new testament, be firm, sure, and good.

Secondly, it must be considered whither (as he takes it) wedlock does pollute
and defile both the ministers of the church, and the priests of ye old law.

To the first.
Those courses and turns were ordained for the priests, of David, of Solomon,
of Josias, and other. But I pray you, what did they, and how did they before
David's time, and before the courses were instituted and made. Truly we read in
Exodus, yt it was the office and duty of the high priest to offer sacrifice
daily both morning and evening, and always to minister in ye temple. And
concerning the courses which were afterward co^stitute, they did not more
respect ye act of matrimony, the^ ye rest and ease to be given sometimes to ye
priests. S. Auste^ did se, yt the courses and turns made to ye prests were not
sufficient to prove, that marriage did pollute the priests. For writing upon
Leuiticus, he disputes and reasons purposely, how the high priest was able
to offer daily sacrifice, both in the morning, and at night.

If (says he) any will contend, that sickness and diseases might sometimes let
him, it may be answered, that God by a singular privilege and favor might
preserve him, that he should not be sick. But concerning the procreation of
children, what is to be said: for when he was made unclean by the reason of
copulation, he could not come to the holy things. On the other side, it is hard
to say, that he abstained from the company of his wife, for the Priests both
had wives, and also begat children. Or else, says Austine, the sacrifice might
be sometime intermitted and left undone: but the scripture does not seem to
suffer that, for it was an expres commandment to be done daily: or else (says
he) the priest might have attributed unto him a certain peculiar holiness and a
certain prerogative above other men, that the act of matrimony should not
defile him at any time.

But in his book of retractations he brings in an other solutio^. The law
(says he) does command, that a man after copulacion should be unclean until
the evening, and that than he should wash his clothes, and so be clean, where
he had been unclean all the day before.

The high priest therefore might, when he had offered his sacrifice in the
morninge have company with his wife for ye procreation of children, and so to
remain unclean until the evening, and then to wash his clothes, and so to
purify him self, and to be made clean, and so to offer the evening sacrifice.
Here you see yt saint Austine did not flee for a solution unto the 24. courses,
for they were not for ever before David's time, yet he does consent with
Ambrose, that the act of matrimony does contaminate the husbands: but how
truly, let the scriptures try and judge.

In saint Ambrose time there were (as he himself says) a very few ministers, and
they did minister daily. But in these days, seeing there is such a number of
priests, and a great company, which scarcely do minister the sacrament twice or
thrice in the year, and do never baptize, why should they by this rule of
Ambrose be forbidden to marry, forasmuch as so many of them do burn, and live
in whoordome?

Epiphanius writing Contra Valesios hereticos, does grant, that there was a
certain Canon and tradition of the single life of priests, but (as he says)
this Canon was not observed in his time. For many being the^ in the
ministry, were married, and had children: and yet Epiphanius did not condemn
them, nor judges them to be deposed, but that was (says he) because
discipline was then cold, and he does excuse it by the reason of the multitude
of the faithful, and by the fewnes of the Ministers. But those priests did
daily minister, and yet lived in matrimony.

To the second.
Now it remains to be enquired whether the act of matrimony did pollute
Priests in the old law, that they ought therefore to abstain from holy
action and doings.

They allege out of Leuiticus this sentence. Leu. 15.
Vir de quo egreditur semen coitus, lauabitaqua corpus suum and mundus erit
vsque ad vesperem That man from whom an issue of seed does depart, shall
wash all his flesh with water and be unclean unto the eue^: and this is meant
of matrimonial copulation (as Lyranus and Glosa ordinaria, does expound it.)

Responsio.
Our adversaries do not understand this place, nor it is in the Hebrew Semen
coitus, but Semen Schicuath, as you would say Semen seminiale, for this Hebrew
word Schicuath, does signify lacere, to lie down and to be at rest, and so
it many be called Semen alicuius quiescentis and somuiantis. And Caietanus does
so expound it, his words be these. Et vir quando exibit de ipso iacere semen.
Here is no mention made says he of copulation, but of a nightly pollution, and
therefore he significantly does say, Quando exierit de ipso, to make a
difference from this, Quando vir sponte seminat, so that here is mention made
only, De semine somniantis quod egreditur praeter dormientis voluntatem, and
the Hebrews do call it, Semen strati atque huius seminis fluxionem Augustinus
and Canonistae negant esse peccatum, quamuis iuxta legem reddebat homine^
inimundum. Of this issue the Jews do vaynely dream and phantastically write
marvelous horrible things, that is, that Ex hoc semine spirits of the air
and other terrible sightes in the night are gendered, whom they call Lilith,
But such things are not worthy to be rehearsed, much less to be thought true.

Obiectio.
It is mentioned in the first book of Samuel, that when Abimelech the Priest
was about to give ye show bread called Panis propositionis, unto king David, he
asked of him whether his company were clean from women, or no. To whom David
made answer, that concerning women both he and also his servants were
clean, for they were separate from women three days before. It is not credible
that Abimelech them anded this of harlots and strompets, for such were not
suffered to live in Israel. Therefore he meant of the act of matrimony, And by
this it appears, and ought to be granted, that (forasmuch as they of the
old law could not be suffered to eat the show bread which was but a figure,
if they had the use of matrimony) the Priests of the new law ought much more
to abstain from marriage, because they do receive and minister the mystical
bread, which is the verity.

Responsio.
The Priest asked chiefly of women before all other things, because that men
might soon be counted and made unclean by their company diverse and sundry
ways, according to the prescription of the law, for the law pronounced not
only the woman having her monthly disease unclean, but also all them which
touched her, her clothes, bead, her seat or any thing of hers. And this law
was also given of the woman that was lately delivered. Therefore David said, we
came in no company of women, nor touched any thing of theirs being unclean,
for we have been separate from them these three days, we changed our
garments when we came forth, and the vessels of the children be clean, that
is the vessels in the which the bread is to be carried. It is not therefore
necessary that the Priests question and David's answer be restrained and
understand of the simple copulatio^ with the wives, for the law there finds
no uncleanness in that. Therefore there might be many other cases whereby the
company of women might co^taminat man by the law, as the monthly disease, the
bloody flux, late deliuerau^ce and many such other, yea, the touching of them
or any thing of theirs did pollute man by the law. Wherefore seeing there might
be many other causes of this contamination beside matrimony, to bring in only
one cause is to bring in not afirme argument, but Paralogismum non causae vt
causae, and specially to bring that cause, which does not by the old law
pollute man.

Replicatio.
This place must needs be understand of copulation, for the vessels are meant
here the bodies of the young men (as great divines both authentical and
neotericall do expound them.) 1. These. 4
And saint Paul also alludeth to this, where he says. Possideat vnusquisque
vas suum in sanctificatione. Let every man possess his vessel in holiness.
Therefore this place must be understand of the act of matrimony with their own
wives.

Responsio.
Although Vasa, may be so taken. Yet in my simple judgment misterus goes most
nere the text, who expounds in this place this Hebrew word Cheli indumenta,
clothes, or as other great learned men will, baskettes or vessels to bear
things in, for as Reuclinus writes, as this word Arma, betokens in Latin
al things that do come to the use of man's hand so in the Hebru this word Cheli,
does signify a vessel, an instrument, basket, clothes, or whatsoever it be
that may serve ma^s use. Again this word Ischschah, does not always signify a
wife, but as in ye Greek this word (...), does betoke^ so^times a wife so^times
a woman what soever she be, so this word Ischschah, does signify as well any
other woman as a wife. But by ye text and by certain circu^stau^ces it may
easly be perceived, when it is taken for ye one and when for ye other, Some do
guess, yt when it has Iod after Aleph it does signify, a wife, and when it is
written without Iod than it signifies any other woman yt is not married.
Forsterus in his dictionarie writes a merry note which he received of a certain
Rabbine Praga, as he says, I will put forth his words in latin as he wrote
the^, for in English they will not have so much grace. His words be these. Sed
quam ex Rabino quodam Prage^si Rabilam audiui, huc ioci gratia refer libuit,
qui ista duo Ischschah, and Isch, asserebat coniugii esse vocabula atque
autoris coniugii nomen Iah, continere, quando autem in coniugio non adesset
Iah. and adimeretur ex Isch, Iod litera media, and ex Ischschah, vltima litera,
quae simul diuinu^ nome^ co^stituu^t, abesset ipse Iah, atque vera dei
inuocatio in coniugio, atque dilectio, vera fides and timor dei, manner
vtrinque Esch, and Esch, ignem and ignem, hic ignem purgatorii and illic ignem
gehenne and eternu^.

To our purpose again. Let us grant, that Abimelech and David meant wives and
the act of matrimony, and that there was therein some contamination by the law
(which notwithstanding cannot be proved by the Scriptures) will you therefore
say, that it was sin? no verily you ca^ not, nor ought so to say, well than
if it be no sin, why than should that action restrain any man from
ministration of holy things? The menstruous flux did make the woman unclean.
But I pray you who will be so folish to say, that affection or passion of ye body
to be sin? To touch a dead corse in the law was counted unclean, shall we
therefore say that they sinned which buried bodies being dead? No man will be so
fond to say so. By what means than will you say, that the lawful conjunction
of husband and wife ought to remove them from the ministry, specially if it
be done for the cause of procreation, it is without sin (says S. Austen) yea
and without sin also say I, if it be done for this cause, to avoid
fornication, the holy Ghost speaks by the mouth of Paul saying. Let every man
have his wife to avoid fornication. To conclude therefore if it be not sin,
it cannot impair, let or hinder the holy ministry. I do not speak this for
that I do condemn or improve those married ministers, or other which will
temper them selves and refrain sometimes from the act of matrimony,
specially when they shall either minister or receive the Sacraments.

To end, I do not a little marvel to here, that some reason after this sort. It
is good for married persons to abstain for a few days, to give the^ selves to
prayer and fasting, therefore it is much better so to do for many days: But it
is best of al if they do it continually. I will make the like reason. This man
can bear.10 pounds, therefore he can bear.20. pounds: if he can bear twenty
pounds he can bear fo rtye pounds, and so forth. O double foolerie, there
is a regard to be had of man's infirmity.

A man may temper and refrain for a time, but to do it perpetually were
intolerable.

Obiectio.
Saint Paul says Adolescentiores viduas deuita. Refuse the younger widows,
for when they have began to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry,
having damnation because they have broken the first faith. What other thing
does the Apostle call here the first faith, but the faith of the vow, for
these widows did bequeth unto God by a solemn vow perpetual continency,
which they corrupted when they would marry, and therefore says the Apostle
they purchase to them selves eternal damnation. Now if widows were so strait
bound to keep their vow under the pain of damnacion, how much more ought
the votarie Priests to keep their vows, and not to marry under the peine of
damnation.

Responsio.
This place is ye very shot anchor of our adversaries, whereby they think to
prove, that Priests ought not to marry. But because ambiguitie of words does
in argument gender contention and strife, and causes the sentence to be
understood of some this way, and of other that way, therefore I will orderly
speak of those clauses which in this place may be taken ambiguously, they be
in number four which be these.

1. Fides. 1. Faith. 2. Prima. 2. First. 3. Damnatio. 3. Damnation. 4. Abierunt
post Satanam. 4. They be gone after Satan.
Of this word Fides.
What Fides, is and how many significations it has, I have sufficiently
declared before. Notwithstanding I will shortly touch what it does signify in
this place.

Our adversaries do say, that Fides, here does betoken the vow of single life:
but I say with the assent of great learned men, that Fides, may signify in
this place a certain co^ue^tion and covenant made with the Church, when she
received widows. For it is most evident, that the state of matrimony could
not agree with that state unto ye which widows came, that is, that they should
serve the Church, and should live all together in one company: but a woman
that is married is subject to her husband, and is bound of necessity to obey
him.

The widows of whom Paul speaks, were bound in their ministry to obey the
Church, in taking care and over sight of the weak, the sick, the diseased,
and in infourmyng of rude maidens and other women, unto whom the ministers of
the Church had no frequent nor just access or repair.

This was the chiefest and special ministry of the widows in the Church.
And doubtless they which were so admitted, and had made such compact with the
Church, ought to abstain from marriage so long as they occupied that place and
rowme. And although they promised unto the Church to live purely and chastely,
yet they bound them selves with no vow, for all men are bound by the law of
God to live purely and chastely in the state and condition to the which they be
called. The soldiers when they are bound by covenant to do service, as long
as they be in the wars, are not properly said to make any vow, but they give
their faithful promise unto the prince or Captain to do their service truly.
Even so such was the faith and promise of the widows which they made unto the
Church, that is, as long as they waited on the Church, and were found by the
Church, to live singly, purely and chastely, and after this interpretation it
may be easly understand what Paul would have to be understand concerning
widows.

When younger widows were received of the Church in many places to be found
and nourished after the sort which I have said, they giving them selves to
idleness, to excessive fare and other pleasures and lusts (engraffed in young
and tender age,) were intised and stirred to fleshly desires and
concupiscences, and so to live incontine^tly (as the Apostle says) they become
wanton against Christ, that is, they lived impurely in scortation and whoredom.

And Hierom writi^g Ad Geruntia^, does so interpret this word (...), So does
Sophilus, use it Apud Athenaeum, whose words be these, (...), Lasciuiebam
deuoratis cibis, when I had devoured meat up to the gorge, I began to wax
wanton. To this alludeth ye commune proverb. Saturo venus adest, famelico
nequaquam adest, as the common saying in Terence is. Sine Cerere and Baccho
friget venus Now these widows being taken and espied in scortation, would
marie, and said, that they would reuolte from the ministry: but to marry was
not of it self damnable, for who should forbid them to marry when they would.
But they had damnation, not because they would marry, but because they brake
their faith, covenant and promise which they made before unto the Church: by
the which they promised, that they would live chastely, which they performed
not, but fell to wantones and whoredom, which thing made them damnable before
God and man. And therefore Paul says plainly, that they had judgment or
damnation, because that by scortatio^ and whoredom, they made void the
promise given to the Church. Over and beside, they added to this, another
mischief, that is when they were taken in this wantones, and could not abide the
co^tumely which the church laid to their chardge, they married heathen and
infidels, and so were alienate from Christ. Therefore, that no such offendicles
should chance in the Church, Paul ordained, that no widow should be chosen
under the age of.lx. years, as one that was not like to be subject to this
kind of wanton life: for commonly (although it be not generally,) the flames of
fleshely co^cupisce^ce is in such age extinguished. They will marry (says
Paul) which they would not have done, if they had not ben taken and espied in
scortation, for that kind of life pleased them better in the which they might
live at liberty and in wantones and pleasure, being found of the Church,
which was against Christ, for that the Gospel of Christ was ill reported of
by the heathen, who saw and hard of such filthiness to be among them, which
should live purely and honestly.

Our adversaries therefore cannot gather of this place, that these widows had
damnation for that they would marrye, but because they lived wickedly, and than
did pretend marriage when they were taken, which otherwise they would never
have attempted: And thus may the adversary see, that Paul means not here of
any vow, but a certain paction and covenant made with the Church to live
single, as long as they should continewe in that state and function. We have
here in England almost the like example. In the Collegies of the universities
scholars that be fellows of the house, must live single and without wife, as
long as they remain fellows of the College. But yet they make no vow not to
marry, for they may marry if they will go out of the College.

Now to the second clause of ambiguitie, which lies in this word, Prima,
First.

Prima, First.
Our adversaries do refer this word Primam the first faith unto the faith of
the vow which the widows made before they were received of the Church,
which vow if they brake and would after marry, they call them, vow breakers,
and say that they have damnation.

But great learned men more depely and diligently weyng this word Primam, do
say, that it is not understand of the promise of any vow of chastity, but of
the profession of Christianity which the wanton widows (marieng without
Christ,) had broken and forsaken, for if the vow of chastity, should here be
meant, it should not be called Prima, but Secunda Fides.

And where they brag yt the signification of this word (...), is some times
taken and used comparatiue, let the^ persuade the^ selves, that better learned
than they in the Greek tongue does know when it is used comparatiue, and when
positive, specially when (...), is joined as an adjective with his substantive,
as here (...). I pray you is it taken comparatiue or else positive? Let them
that be expert in the tongue, judge. But let us grant (which notwithstanding
the pure divines will not do) that the first faith does signify here as well a
vow as promise of christendom, what will you win thereby? Truly nothing, for
it is a state of ambiguitie, and therefore cannot certainly be asserted. But if
you will vewe the text and circumstaunce thereof, that exposition of Lutherus
and Caluinus, who takes it for the promise of Christianity, is more probable
and more agreeable to the text. This much for this word Prima.

Damnatio.
The third ambiguitie and doubt is this word condemnation. They that do favor
the vow of single life more than lawful marriage, do judge, that those widows
shall enter into the judgment of God, because forsaking the vow which they
had begone to take in hand, they do purpose to marry, and that they do so
grievously sin, that unless they do repent and forsake their marriage which
they had begone, they shall be damned with the devil for ever.

But other men seeing that matrimony is an holy thing among all men, and that
the knotte thereof (by the witness of Christ and his Apostles) is not to be
broken, but for adultery or by the going away of either the husband or the
wife, will not attribut so much to ye vow of widows co^tinencie, for that it
is a thing invented by man, which does unloose marriage against the mind of
Christ and his Apostles, because the will of God is to be preferred before man's
invention.

Furthermore they think, that it is the Apostles commandment, that they do
marry which do not live chaste, and that it is better to marry then to burn.

Whereupon although they grant that those widows which were received at that
time in the Church, couenaunted (or as our adversaries will, vowed single life
and honest conversation) yet notwithstanding if they did marry, it follows
not that they were condemned.

For they say that this word (...), which Paul now uses, must be referred to
me^, that is, because ye widows were counted of men unconstant, and were
reported of most men to be of an ill lightness, for yt they altered their
purpose which seemed so holy. And when it thus chanced many times by taking in
of younger widows into ye Church. Paul goes about to prevent the^ to stay
the^, least these offenses and perturbatio^s might still happen in the Church.
The widows therefore which had thus changed their intention through their
infirmity, not suffering the rebukes of the faithful were turned from Christ,
and went by a little and little after Satan.

For as much therefore as this word (...), may be taken two ways, as well to God
as to men, our adversaries cannot prove (as they always say) that it is not
lawful by the word of God to pass from the vow of single life unto marriage,
when the Apostles words may be understood of the judgment of men: neither yet
if they do marrye, they may be said to have broken their vow, whereas they do
rather amend their foolish promise. For we ought to promise nothing to God,
where with we know that he will not be delighted and pleased.

The double understanding of this word (...), did Martine Bucer well see, and
very learnedly entreat against Latonius.

And that this word (...), may be taken as well for the judgment of man as of
God, I will bring you the testimonies of certain learned fathers. Although I
am not ignorant, that some of the fathers does upon this place of Paul father
their vows.

Epiphanius after he had declared, that it was not lawful after the vow of
virginity or widowhead made, to be coupled in marriage, and they that so did,
Here. 61. Lib 2. ^om. 1.
to sin, yet he adds these words. Sed melius est iudicium quam
condemnatio. Qui enim vt ne confundantur apud homines, occulte scortantur, and
sub solitudinis aut continentiae specie libidinem curant, non apud homines
habent confusionem sed apud deum, qui videt occulta and redarguit omnem carnem
in suo aduentu, prout quisque peccauit, Melius est enim vnum peccatum habete
and non plura, melius est lapsum a cursu palam sibi vxorem sumere secundum
legem, and ex virginitate multo tempore paenitentiam agere, and sic rursus ad
Ecclesiam induci, velut qui mala operatus est, velut lapsum and fractum and
obligatione opus habentem, and non quotidic occultis iaculis sauciari ab
improbitate, quae ex diaboli opere infertur, haec Epiphanius. That is. Better
is judgment than condemnation, for they which live in whoredom secretly,
least they should sustain shame among men, and under the color of single life
and continency do pamper there pleasure they have not shame with men, but with
God who sees all secrets and reproves all fl^she in his coming as every one
has offended. For it is better to have one fault than many. And better it is
for one that has revolted from his course, to take a wife openly according to
the law, and after the learning of his virginity long time to repent and so
to be brought again into the Church (as one which has wrought evil) and as
a man that has fallen and one broken and having need of a bond then daily to
be wounded with privy darts of wickedness, which is wrought by the work of
the devil.

By this you may see, that the fathers were so austere and cruel as the
canonistes and Papists be in these days, for these do cry, that matrimony
entered after the vow, is not marriage but inceste and adultery, and they do
dissolve it, and cannot abide it, where the old do ratify it, although they
say, that such as do marry do sin: not for because they do marry, but because
they have promised that which they will not nor cannot perform, which is the
vow of virginity, but although they do so say that it is sin, let them
show it out of holy Scriptures.

Epiphanius in this place does put a difference between (...), and (...), inter
iudicium inquit and condemnationem, that is, between the judgment of man and
the judgment of God.

Basilius magnus, in his book De virginitate, does not much vary from the
mind of Epiphanius, he speaking of a virgin, which being in that state, did
not serve Christ with sound integrity, but is wrapped with the care of this
world, and contaminate with evil affections, writes as follows: Nam si
abiecto viri iugo, and ad vitam ad quam conseruandae domus and procreandorum
liberorum gratia facta est inutilis and professae virginitati pudenda futura
est, tota res damni plaena est, dum and incruditis cogitationibus animum, and
remissis exultationibus corpus corrumpit. Et long sane prestabilius esset,
ipsam viro coniuncta^ ad vitam gubernari, and quod ad opem rei domestice
ferendam conducit talionis vice pro praefectura ipsi rependere, and liberos
senum nutritores ad generis successionem bonos producere. Haec Basilius. The
some of these words consiste in this, that it is far better for a virgin
which lives not purely and incorruptly without all evil affections in the
state of virginity, to be joined to a man in marriage, and so to govern and
help domestical affairs, and to bring forth good children, then to live in
virginity being subject to cares and worldly affections.

Saint Cypriane writing of certain virgins which had to much familiarity
with men, because they lived not only in one house but also lay in one bead,
and would nevertheless be counted virgins, whereupon rose great offenses in the
Church, he not suffering it, wrote these words unto Pomponius. Quod si sese ex
fide Christo dicauerunt, pudice and cast sine vlla fabula perseuerent: si
autem perseuerare nolunt aut non possunt, melius est vt nubant, quam vt in
ignem suis delitiis cadant. Haec Cyprianus. I have Englished these words
before in the title, where I spoke of vows, there you may read them with other
profitable notes concerning this matter.

He speaks here not of all sorts of virgins, but namely of those which
have professed virginity.

Obiectio. 1.
Our adversaries do say, that these words of Cyprian are not to be
understood De virginibus velatis, but of others.

Responsio.
What know they the manner to have been at that time, that virgins should be
covered, that use was brought in after Cyprians time, as far as I can read.

Obiectio. 2.
Tertullian who was before Cyprian, wrote a book De virginibus velandis. Ergo,
Cyprian meant De virginibus velatis.

Responsio.
Tertullian in deed does speak of certain virgins of God, which were in the
Church, and does name certain of them Virgins Ordinatas, who as the Papists
do think were consecrate of the Bishop, but that manner began not before the
time of Ambrose, when the Church had gotten some rest and peace. It is most
certain, that Tertullian meant not virgins not consecrated of Bishops, for the
virgins at Carthage, came into the Temple bare headed, but when this doing was
reprehended and reproved of many by the words of Paul to the Corinthians,
the inhabitants of Carthage answered, that, that place of Paul was to be
understand of married women, and not of virgins. Tertullian therefore writes
and proves the words of Paul to pertayne to all women, as well the virgins
as the married women ought to be covered in the congregation: but after the time
of Tertullian certain virgins which had vowed in mind perpetual chastity,
were covered with an holy veil. The manner was this: The Bishop in the open
assembly of the Church, received them not without certain ceremonies. These
virgins remained first in their parents house, and never came abroad,
except it were to offer Sacrifice or else to visit the Christian brother being
in prison, or else to here some Sermon. Saint Hierome praised one Asellam,
because she was wont to repair to such things, and does aftentimes exhort
virgins, that they might more safely keep their chastity, to secke Martirs in
their chambers.

After this by the labor and means of Marcella and Paula, Colleges and houses
for virgins were institute and made at Rome. These virgins did shere their
heads, and did offer their shorn hears to their mother. The cause (says
Saint Hierome) why they were shorn, was, for to avoid vermin and lyse,
which do bread in the hear and the skin. And when they were shorn, the
Bishop covered their head and face with a veil, least they should wantonly see
or be seen, least they should love, or beloved. This manner of covering of
virgins was after the time both of Tertullian and of Cyprian.

Obiectio. 3.
These virgins of whom Cypriane speaks, did not live in monasteries as ours
do now. Ergo, they were no virgins.

Responsio.
As though the Church when it had yet no peace under Valerianus and Galienus
(in whose time Cypriane lived and dyed) should have builded monasteries, where
the virgins should have been included. No sir, no such thing was done, but if
any virgin had consecrated her self to God, she remained either in her own
house, or else with her kindred, where she had two or three coparteners with her
of the same profession.

Obiectio. 4.
Cypriane speaks here only of those virgins, which having no regard of
their own strength and power, vowed rashely, and such may marry.

Responsio.
We grant that which you say. For when no person is certain and sure of his
gift, how long he shall continewe therein, and when all men do know, that none
has a chaste, pure and clean heart of his own power, it follows evidently,
that single kind of life and virginity is not to be vowed. Therefore says
Cypriane of certain virgins. Et si nolint: aut si non possint in virginitate
durare, nubant. That is. If they will not or if they cannot continewe in
virginity, let them marry.

Obiectio. 5.
Saint Augustine does write, that to marry after the vow, is not only sin,
but also to will to marry is damnable. His words be these. Non solum
capescere nuptias, sed etiam si non nubant, nubere velle damnabile est. Ergo
the marriages of votaries be damnable.

Responsio.
First I set Augustine against him self, who writing Ad Iulianum, has words
repugnaunt unto these: Quidam, inquit, nubentes post votum, asserunt adulteros
esse, ego autem dico vobis, quod grauiter peccant qui tales diuidunt. That is.
Some do affirm, those to be adulterers, which marry after their vow, but I
do say unto you, that they do grievously offend, which do separate such and
put them a sonder. By these words it appears, that the marriages of votaries
are not damnable, for then why should Augustine say, it to be a grievous offense
to divide such, but because I will not lean to one only testimony I will produce
ye words of Saint Gregory, who spekyng of this matter, writes thus: Tanta vis
est in matrimonio, vt etiam post voti violationem non debet dirimi. That is.
There is so great power and strength in matrimony, that after ye breach of the
vow, it ought not to be broken, how little I pray you did certain of late time
regard the words, either of Augustine or of Gregory, which did not only
separate Ecclesiastical Ministers from their wives, but also took from them
their livings, yea and their lives. Because in the mouth of two or three every
word stands, I will bring the third man, which also does assent to that
which I have before spoken.

Theodorus (as it is in the decrees) has these words: Si vir simplex votum
virginitatis habens, adiungitur vxori, postea no^ dimittet vxore^, sed tribus
annis paeniteat. If a man having a simple vow of virginity, be coupled to a
wife, let him not after forsake her, but let him repent three years. Here you
se, that both Gregory, Theodore and also Austen him self will not those
marriages to be broken, which are celebrate after the vow. Again Austen in his
own words following this objection does not say, that the matrimony in it
self is damnable, but that the breach of the vow is damnable. His words be
these: Damna^tur tales, non quia coniugalem fidem posterius inierunt, sed quia
continentiae fidem primam irrita^ fecerunt. Such are condemned, not because
they have afterward entered into co^iugal faith, but because they have made
frustrat ye first faith of their continency. And a little after he says.
Proinde qui dicunt taliu^ nuptias non esse nuptias sed potius adulteria, non
mihi videntur satis acute ac diligenter considerare quid dicant.

Therefore they which say that the marriages of such are not marriages but rather
adulteries, seem to me not sharply and diligently to consider what they say.
etc.

I am not ignorant, that S. Auste^ with other of the fathers do count the
breaking of the vow to be damnable, being moved thereto by this place of Paul,
and that they took this word, (...), to signify damnation eternal.

Notwithstanding some other fathers (as I have alleged before) do take it Pro
iudicio humano, as Erasmus gives upon these words (Habe^tes damnationem) this
Paraphrase, Contrahunt sibi maculam infamiae, they purchase to them selves a
spot of infamy, they run into obloquie, in that they were so rash to
profess, and take upon them that which they were not able to perform.
Wherefore seeing that the place is ambiguous, why should we consent to any man,
making, an assertion of it after his own judgment? Sit sacra pagina lydius
lapis. Let the Scriptures be the true touch stone to try all verities, which
will sone be perceived if the sentences be well expended and conference of
places duly vewed.

Decre. 22. quest. 4.
If it were damnable to break a vow, why do they in their own law give these
rules. In malis promissis rescinde fide^, In turpi voto muta decretu^. Quod
incaute vouisti, ne facias, Impia est promissio quaescelere ad impletur. etc.
Let this be sufficient for the third ambiguitie concerning this word, (...),
condemnation, now to the fourth ambiguitie.

Abire post Satanam. To go after Satan.
Our adversaries do think, that to go after Satan, is no more but to reuolte
from the vow, and they call such marriages, which are made after the vow, the
counsels of Satan. From this sentence men both godly and notably learned, do
dissent. They do interpret to go after Satan, is to reuolte and forsake the
faith of Christ, which they professed in Baptism. Other godly and learned men
do take, (To go after Satan) to be nothing else, but to live impurely, and
under the pretense and color of chastity, to live in scortation and whoordome.

Thus you see, that this place of Paul has many ambiguities. notwithstanding
if the antecedents, the consequents and other places of the Apostle be truly
marked, the mind of the Apostle is sone and easily obtained.

Notio.
Now let us consider, whether this place of Paul do make for vows (as our
adversaries do grate and ground upon it) or else, whither it be utterly
repugnaunt against vows.

Saint Paul wills younger widows to marry, and to bring forth children,
least under the color and state of single life they should shamefully slide
and fall. He wills also that no widow be chosen under the age of.60. years,
because the younger widows might easily by frailty fall to wantonness and
whoordome. These words show manifestly, that Paul is against the vow of single
life, for fear of danger and offense to be given. If vows had so well pleased
him, he would have gone an other wai to work, than to have rejected the younger
widows. He says to the Corinthians, yt he will not cast or lay any snare to
any, by the which words he signifies, that single life, when it is kept and
observed, ought to be free, and that no man ought to be urged above his power.

Obiectio.
It is one thing to be admitted to the vow of single life, and an other to be
received of the church, to be sustained and found. Paul does define that
widows only of three score years of age should be received of the church,
that they by the goods of the church might be relieved: yet here is no let or
impediment, but that younger widows also should be admitted to the vows of
perpetual continency.

Responsio.
Paulin this place does not only repel the younger widows from the
sustentation of the church, but also from the necessity and bondage of single
life, for because (says he) they brake their first faith, in becoming wanton
against Christ.

Obiectio.
But saint Paul in an other place does greatly allure persons to vow, as Christ
him self does provoke unto the same, when he speaks of these Eunuchs, which
has gelded them selves for the kingdom of God. And I pray you, how can it be
than, that saint Paul should forbid the vow of single life?

Responsio.
Concerning your distinction mentioned in the other former objection, it does
little help your cause, for we say, that Paul does not speak of the vow of
single life, when he says younger widows ought to be rejected for this kind
of vow was utterly unknown unto Paul. It must therefore follow, that Paul does
speak only of those widows of three score years of age, which were received
of the church, to be sustained and relieved.

But because these widows were not admitted, but under a conuention and pact,
that they should live sole and purely, therefore when the Apostle will have none
to be admitted under the age of three score years, it must needs be granted,
that Paul would not have the younger widows to be driven to any such
conditions, whereby they might be restrained from marriage. Therefore I pray you,
expend the matter well, wherefore Paul does reject the younger widows:
perchance you will say, least the church should be burdened with them. I know
in deed that Paul does perswad the faithful who had any widows pertaining unto
them, to relieve and find them, least the church should be burdened. And this
sentence of his is to be taken universally, as well of the younger widows, as of
the elder. And by this Paul does understand here those widows, which be
desolate and comfortles, to be received of the church, and no other.

Now may you see, both how foolish your distinction is, and also that this
place of Paul, does make nothing for vows:

Question.
Why, is single and chaste life no better then matrimony, and be they both of
one perfection? Saint Paul says, he that puts not his daughter to marry,
does better: therefore single life is better.

Responsio.
Athanasius writes, that there was a Shoemaker or Courier of Alexandria, being
a married man, who was by an oracle of God made equal and counted as good, as
holy Anthonius the first Eremites and Monk. The saying of saint Augustine,
Cap. 34.
in his book De bono coniugali, is not dissonaunt from this history of
Athanasius. His words be these. Non est impar continentiae meritum in Ioanne,
qui nullas expertus est nuptias, et in Abrahamo, qui filios genuit: nam vt
Ioannes in opere, ita Abraham in solo habitu continentiam colebat, melior est
autem castitas caelibum qua^ nuptorum, quarum vnam Abraham habebat in vsu,
ambas in habitu, cast enim and coniugaliter vixit. That is. The merit of
continencye is not unequal in John, which was not married, and in Abraham which
begat children. For as John did embrace continency in work, so Abraham did in
habit only. Better is the chastity of the single persons, then of the married,
whereof Abraham had the one in use, and the other in habit, for he lived
co^iugally and also chastely. We do not produce these testimonies to extenuate
the gifts of God, among which we count the chaste single life to be one: but we
say, that this kind of life is not by it self, and of his own nature, a
christian perfection. For fasting, single life, and virginity have not hy their
nature any state of virtue in them selves, except they be directed to some
other good end and thing, which by it self, and for it self is to be desired
and practiced, as to prayers, and to holy studies. To be plain, if great and
equal perfection be found as well in matrimony, as in single life, must it not
needs follow, than that there is no proper perfection, neither to matrimony, nor
to single life? For if either of them were by his own nature a perfection, it
would increase and augment perfection in him in whom it is found, but it did
not increase that perfection in Anthony, which was a chaste single man, and
declared by the oracle of God, to be equal to a married man.

Wherefore it full well follows, that single life by his nature is no
perfection, but as pertaining to faith, hope, and charity (which be the true
measures of the Euangelical perfection) Anthony and the Couriar were both equal
and like. Whereupon it may be concluded, that single life made not Anthony more
acceptable or worthy unto God. For if it did, then we might make this argument
which the Logicians call, Argumentum a co^iugatis, Caelibatus natura sua est
perfectio, ergo iste caelebs est perfectus. I cannot say whither you will grant
the consequent, or no. If this argument be not good, then single life is by it
self no perfection.

Obiectio.
The dignity of Abraham and of John are equal and like, the marriage of the
Couriar, and the single life of John be equal and like. This is true in deed in
one respect, for that which lacks to one, as concerning virginity and single
life, is supplied in the other, by faith, hope, and charity, and other good
works flowing out of the same.

Responsio.
Here we do demand, whither ye will affirm, that Abraham had more faith, hope
and charity, then John the Baptist? And whether the Couriar, more then Anthony?
If you affirm that Abraham had more, then Abraham must far excel John, and
must have more merit, because he had more charity, because the whole reason
of merit (as both you and the scholemen do say) does depend of charity. Now,
if ye deny it, than also they be not like and equal. For then they have
faith, hope, and charity equal, but to one of them beside those virtues
rehearsed there comes virginitye, which (as you say) is the Evangelical
perfection. Therefore they are unequal, contrary to the testimony of Augustine,
and the history of Athanasius.

To make the matter plain, the argument wherewt we pres you, is this. Either
you attribut unto Abraham, equal charity with that which John had or else
unequal. If ye attribute equal, than John is more perfecter then Abraham,
because biside charity, he had also virginity, which you call euangelical
perfection. But if Abraham had more charity then John, then he had also more
merit then John. For merit (as you say) depends not of virginity, but of
charity. But saint Augustine writes, that matrimony in Abraham, and continency
in John, be of like and equal merit. It could not be of equal merit, unless
equal chariti were of both parts

Neither virginity has by it self, of her own nature, and in it self, any
faculty or virtue to make a man more acceptable unto God, but that it has
only of that which is joined unto it, that is, of faith and charity, and the
self same thing is to be granted in matrimony. But if you will make Abraham
wors then Frau^ces the gray friar, it is an other matter. That were in my
judgment a great absurdity. And where you contend that the condition and
state of virginity and single life is to be preferred before matrimony, we will
grant you, but not in such behalf, that it is an Euangelical perfection. But
because it is a more expedite and easy way, to spread abrod, and to promulgate
the kingdom of heaven, that is, the word of God. And this is true concerning
certain persons, but not concerning all persons. Thus I trust, our adversaries
be answered for the marriage of priests at the full, if they will (at the
least) be answered.

Eutyches. 18.
EVtyches an Archeheretick, was an Abbot of Constantinople. He fell into his
heresy, being aged. He affirmed that the nature of the word of God and the
flesh was all one, and so did confound both natures in Christ to be one.
Which heresy when Flauianus the bishop had condemned, there was (by the
commandment of Theodosius) a council indicted at Ephesus, called the second
council of Ephesus, in which Dioscorus, bishop of Alexandria was president.
Who favoring Eutiches part, removed Flauianus from the government of the
church of Constantinople. But after in the fourth general council, the council
of Chalcedon, which was kept about the year after Christ.458. Eutyches was
condemned, and Dioscorus the bishop also, and Eutiches was sent into exile. Leo
calls him in his Epistles an impudent and an unlearned heretic, and desired
the Emperor to send him into exile, farther of, from those parts.

Council of Constance. 19.
THe council of Constance was begone in the time of Sigismund the Emperor, in
the year of the Lord.1414. in the month of November.

John the.23. Pope came thither, but a few days after he fled away privily,
and being after cited, when he would not come, he was deposed from the Papacy,
by the sentence of the council. In the.8. Session it condemned.25. articles,
taken out of John Vvickliffes books.

In the.xiij. Session it took away the one kind of the sacrament from the lay
people, among other things speaking these words. This present holy general
Council of Constaunce, lawfully gathered in the holy ghost, declares,
decrees, and defines, that although Christ after supper, instituted and
ministered to his Disciples under both kinds of bread and wine, this godly
sacrament, yet this notwithstanding, although in the primative church the
sacrament was received of ye faithful under both kinds, the church has
observed, and does yet observe the approved custom, that is, it is received of
the consecrater under both kinds, and of the lay people, under the kind of
bread only.

In the.xv. Session, Anno.1415. the sixth of July was condemned John Husse,
and.30. articles were reproved, which were taken out of his books, among the
which this was the chiefest, that there was but one holy universal church,
which is the universal number of them that be predestinate.

In the.xxi. Session, Anno.1416. the.xxx. of May, Hierom of Praga was
condemned, which was Husseis companion.

In the.xxvii. Session, Anno.1417. the.xvi. of July was deposed Peter de Luna,
which had named him self Benedict the.xiii. and in the time of Scysme he bare
him self as Pope in Auiniona and Spain.

In the.xxix. Session it was decreed, that after every fifth year, than after
seven years, and last of al from ten years to ten years a general council
should be kept.

In the forty Session was proposed.xviii. articles pertaining to the
reformation of the church of Rome.

In the.xli Session, Anno.1417. the eight day of November, was elected Pope
Otho de Columna, which took the name of Martin the fifth.

The.xliiii. Session, Anno.1418. the.xix day of April, the next council was
appointed to be kept at Papia. It was translated from thence to Seen, where it
was concluded, Anno.1424. that the next Synod should be kept at Basile.

This council of Constaunce has two contraries.

First, it was decreed there, that the council is above the Pope, which thing is
most true, for Hierome writes to Euagrius thus: Si autoritas quaeritur, mayor
est orbis vrbe. etc. That is. If authority be required, the world is greater
then a City: so the whole Church is greater then one church of Rome, and the
church of Rome is not above the whole universal church: but contrariwise the
whole church and the council, which represents the church, is above the
church of Rome.

Secondly, it condemned this article of John Hussy. The Pope is not by the law
of God above all churches. And this determination plainly gain says the
first. In this second determination against Husse, the whole church of the
East and of Africa was gaynsaid, and it is also against the councels of Nice
and of Africa.

Because mention is made here of Pope John the.xxiii. deposed by this council,
I shall think it not impertinent to this part, to descrihe and set forth unto
you the whole life of the said Pope John.

This John was a Frenchman, named before Iacobus Catucensis. He was a Cardinal,
and bishop of Portua. And after two years, in the which the sea was vacant, by
the alterations of.22. Cardinals, he was denounced Pope at Lions. He was so
much desirous of new things, that he divided single bishoprics into two. And
after they were divided, he converted them again to one, and he translated
Monasteries also into bishoprics, and likewise bishoprics into Monasteries.
He ordained that thrice in the day the Aue bells should be knoled, that the
people kneling, might idolatrously say the salutacion of the angel to the
virgin Mary. He called them obstinate heretics, which would affirm, that
Christ and the Apostles had nothing proper to them selves, and he sent bulls to
the universities, that the scholemen durst not dispute of that thing. He taught
certain errors, and chiefly, that the souls after they be dead, do not see
God before the latter day.

Lib. 1. cap. 7.
John Mandeuel says, that this Pope wrote largely to the Greeks, that there is
but one Christian church, and that he was the head thereof, and Christ's vicar,
to whom the Greeks briefly answered thus: We believe thy great power and rule
over thy subjects, we cannot suffer thy great pride, we cannot satisfy thy
avarice. The devil is with thee, because the Lord is with us. By the which
brief talk, they showed all the manner and state of the Pope.

When Jews the Emperor, and the noble men of Rome did very well know the
wicked doings of this Pope, and the people of Rome, from the greatest to the
less, was agreued, that the ambassadors, which they sent unto him, was
deluded and laughed to scorn, they all agreed, that the ancient custom of
choosing the Pope, should be brought into the church again, that is, that the
Pope being elected of ye people of Rome, should have his confirmation of the
Emperor. Therefore one Peter of Cabaria, a minorite Friar, was created Pope of
Rome, and was called Nicholas the fifth. And they pronounced John to be an
heretic, and a tirant of the church, and not a pastor, but a disturber of
common peace among the Christians.

He died in Auinion, and was buried in the Cathedral church with a great
funeral pomp. He left so great a treasure, as no Pope left, that is, two
hundred and five thousand pieces of gold.

Pighius says, that this council of Constaunce decreed a falshoode and was in
an error, because it put down the Pope from his sea. And therefore Caietanus
says, that this council afterward was justly abrogated.

Epiphanius. 20.
There is put before Epiphanius book, which he him self entitled Ancoratum, a
brief narration of his life, Lib. 6. cap. 32.
which declares that he was borne at Eleutheropolis, which thing Sozomenus
more plainly declaring, says, that he was borne in a certain village called
Besaduce, being near unto Eleutheropolis in Palestine. But what Parents he
had, neither the said narration mencioneth, nor yet Sozomenus. He was sent into
Aegipt, being but a boy, and had to his teachers and masters (as Sozomenus
testifies) very good and godly Moonkes, whose company and discipline he used,
as it seems certain years, that is, unto the twenty year of his age. He
himself affirms, Lib. 1. Tom. 2 here is. 26.
that he was in Egypt, being a young man. He says yt the women of the heretics
called Gnostici, did stur and provoke him to heresy, but he did not follow their
minds.

Going out of Egypt, he returned to the costs of Eleutheropolis in Palestine,
whereas the foresaid narration declares, he builded a Monastery, where he him
self was exercised in Monastical philosophy a certain space with great
praise, as Sozomenus testifies. Nor it is to be doubted, but that he in this
monastical contemplation wrote that long and famous work against al heresies,
In pref et li. 1 tom. 3. heret.
in the reign of Valentinian and Valens joined Emperors, as he him self
declares.

Sozomenus also declares, that Epiphanius dwelled in Palestine, before he went
to Cyprus, in the time of the empire of valens and valentinian. Hierome
testifies, that he was priest of the monastery. epist. aduersus errores Joan.
Hierosoly.


We be not able to affirm, by what occasion, or at what time he was called to
the bishopric of Salamine, which after was called Consta^tia, being the
Metropolis of the country of Cyprus (as Hierome and Suidas have testified.)
This we can declare out of the testimonies of many men, whom we will recite,
that he was adourned with many excellent virtues, both in his monastical
profession, and also in the bishopric of Consta^ce. For Socrates attributes
unto him excellent piety, Lib. 6. cap. 10
which is a chief and worthy praise in a Christian, and also he says, he was
of a plain wit.

Hierome, which sometime reverently names him holy father, ascribes unto him
these virtues: knowledge and worthy life, authority, gravity, and reverence so
great, yt Valens ye emperor, being the greatest enemi to sincere piety, and a
great defender of ye Arrians, and Eunominians (which were dispersed through all the world) never entreated him violentlye, and the heretics that then reigned,
counted it to the emperor an ignominy and reproach, if he would persecute so
excellent and reverend a man.

Augustine also attributes unto him great praise of notable doctrine in the
Catholic faith.

Sozomenus rehearses other of his virtues most worthy and beseeming a bishop,
as benevolence and liberality toward the poor, and toward them that had
taken shipwreck, or were fallen into calamity by any other means. He shows
also, that Epiphanius laid out for the use of the poor, both his own goods,
and also the common goods of the church.

Sozomenus adds this also, that whosoever would do good to the poor, did
send their money to Epiphanius, as to a common steward, declaring also, that
his piety was approved and confirmed by a certain miracle. For when he had
consumed all the treasure of the church, by distributing to the poor, the
treasurer of the church being angry and agreued, reproved Epiphanius somewhat
sharpelye, calling him a prodigal man. But not long after, there were brought
(it cannot be told how) bags full of gold into the treasurers house, nor it
could be known at any time after, either who it was, or out of what place,
or in whose name the gold was brought. Li. 2. Tomo. 2 here is. 69.
Neither is this also a small commendation, for yt he denies himself to be of
any great audaciti, but did acknowledge himself to be simple and plain. His
writings do testify, how much he excelled in lerni^g.

Li. 3. Tom 1. Here Is. 48.
Epiphanius writes certain traditions, among which this is one: that it was the
constitution of the Apostles always to fast, Penthecost only excepted, and
that six days immediately before Easter, men should eat none other thing,
then bread, salt, and water.

Finally, he varieth from other men in many historical narrations, and chiefly
in Temporum ratione, which thing the reder shall easily perceue.

Lib. 1. Tom. 3 haeres. 46.
Sometime also he is foully deceived: as when he affirms that Justinius Martyr
suffered martyrdom in Adrianus the Emperors reign, when he was of the age of
thirty years: where as notwithstanding it is most certain, that he lived
under the Emperor named Comodi, to who^ he wrote Apologies for the Christians.

Initio Pana et in comp. doctr. eccl. Lib. 1. Tom. ^. here is. 42.
Besides fourscore heresies which he confuteth, he refelleth also oftentimes
iudaical doctrine, and the Ethnicke philosophers, whose errors he does recite
in certain places. He signifies also, that he wrote against Marcion, before
he made his book against.80. heresies.

He confuted also in his time Apollinarius, whom he took as his dear friend
(as he him self testifies) before he fell to heresy.

He confuted also the Antidicomarianites, and them that offered to Mary, and
the Massilians.

Aduersus. Joan. Hierosol.
He condemned Origens books in open words (as Hierome witnesses) and in his
writings, and also in Synodes gathered in Cyprus, and in other places, (as
Socrates also declares.)

Hierome also shows, that Epiphanius disputed against Origin and his defender
Ruffinus in five tounges, and therefore calls him (...). For when he was long
time suspected of heresy unto Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria to be in the
Anthropomorphites error, yet when Theophilus had known that Epiphanius judged
a right of God, he favored him again, and brought to pass, that Epiphanius
might condemn Origens books in the Synod gathered in Cyprus. In which thing
Epiphanius followed Theophilus his mind, and wrote also to John the bishop of
Constantinople, to gather a Synod, and that he also would condemn Origens
books. But John delayed the matter. Whereupon Epiphanius came a little after to
Constantinople, whom John with all the Clergy came forth to mete, and that he
might gratifye Theophilus, he brought with him the condemnation of Origens
books, and openly declared the variaunce which he had with John: yet
notwithstanding he did not prevail with all men to subscribe to the
condemnacion of Origens books. For one Theotinus, bishop of Scythia answered
him thus: I, O Epiphanius will neither dispute against him that has been long
time dead, neither I dare attempt such blasphemy, as to reprove those things
which our Elders have not reproved.

Epiphanius than took upon him a bold and licentious enterprise in the church
of Constantinople, that he might pleasure Theophilus, who was great enemy to
John, in that he ordered a Deacon, contrary to the Canons, and also that with
sharp checkes he taunted John the Bishop openly in his Sermon.

Whereupon John commanded Serapion the Priest, to tell Epiphanius, that he did
many things beside the authority of the Canons, and therefore ought to take
heed least the people, making a tumult, would imprison him, and lay him in
bonds.

Epiphanius disdaining the matter, purposed to return into Cyprus, either
because it repented him that he came into Constantinople, or else because he was
admonished and persuaded thereunto of God, as Sozomenus reherseth, who also
adds this, that Epiphanius entering into the ship, said unto them that had
followed him unto the sea: I leave unto you this city, this court, and this
hipocrisy, but I go hence spedely.

Socrates wrote, that he heard some men say, that Epiphanius, (when he went
from Constantinople) said thus unto John the Bishop, I hope that thou shall not
dye a Bishop. And John answered him again: I hope that thou shall not
return into thy country.

Socrates and Sozomenus declare that both their sayings took place, Socr. l. 6.
c. 10 Sozo. l, 8. c. 8.
and that Epiphanius died in the ship, before he came again into Cyprus, and
that John was banished.

Of this controversy between Epiphanius and Chrysostom, is more spoken before
in the note of Chrysostom.

Sozomenus writes a marvelous notable historye of Epiphanius, which is this:

Two beggars waiting in the high way for Epiphanius (when he went upon a time
from home) that they might get the larger alms of him, the one of them
prostrating him self on the ground, did lie as though he had been dead, and the
other standing by him, wept, as though he had lamented his fellows death, and
complained unto Epiphanius of his poverty, because he was not able to bury the
dead man lyeng on the ground, and to bring him to his grave, for lack of
money. And Epiphanius said, let him lie in rest and peace. And giving the
other man things necessary for the burial, said unto him: see unto the burial
my son, and cease from weping, for he shall not rise again at this present.
That which has now happened cannot be revoked and undone, and it ought to be
taken patiently. When he had spoken these words, he went onward. Afterward
when none appeared in sight, the beggar that stood by him, spurnyng him lying
on the ground, and also praising him that he counterfeited so well a dead man
said unto him: arise, that we may pass away this day merrily. But when he
nevertheless lay still on the ground, and heard not the other man crying and
speaking aloud unto him, neither felt him when he beat him with his feet with all his might, this other man coming hastily unto the bishop, told him what
crafty practice they had used, and weping and pulling his hear, prays him to
raise his fellow again. Epiphanius exhorted the man not to take grievously that
which had happened, and said: let him go, for God will not undo that he had
done. Vvherby he does signify unto all men, that they which so behave them
selves toward Gods Ministers, go about to disceaue God, who hears and sees
all things.

Dioscorus. 21.
DIoscorus was Archdeacon of Alexandria. He succeeded Cyrillus, Theodosius the
younger being Emperor.

He was a wicked and vnpure man, he did greatly hate Cyrillus family, which he
ought to have helped for his testame^ts sake, but he sought craftily for their
goods and lives, as appears by Athanasius and Theodorus books.

He removed from the ministry, godly and innocent men, and appointed in their
roumes, them that served for his wickedness, as Ischirion objected against him
in the Synod of Chalcedon

He polluted himself with many other offenses, done against the first and
second table. He spoke blasphemy against the holy Trinitye, he embraced and
confirmed the heresy of Eutyches, and impugned the true faith, as four
accusers objected against him, in the council of Chalcedo^. Acti 3 et Eusebius.
Dorileus ad Euagrium lib. 2. cap. 4.


Sophronius seems to lay to his charge, that he had committed treason, and had
coueted the empire and rule of Egypt, for he says thus:

Dioscorus was grieved, that such an one should be called lord and governor of
the world, for he would have ruled the diocese of Egypt.

Ischyrion and Theodorus the Deacons, among other crimes, do lay against him
murders, that he was occasioned to commit. It appears in the acts done in
the council of Calcedon, and specially in the accusations of Eusebius
Doryleus, that Dyoscorus was the causer of Flauinianus the bishop of
Constantinople his death in the second Synod of Ephesus.

Neither he was void of theft, for the churches of Lybia were wont to have corn
given them out of Egypt by the Emperors liberality, because they gathered no
fruits of corn there, by the reason of the drines of the places. This
Dioscorus taking up the corn by the way, and bying it to him self with very
great sums of money, sold it again for much more money, then he bought it.

Furthermore, perjury was laid to his charge, in the causes of his
condemnation, because he had promised by an oath, that he would exhibit an
epistle to be openly red, which Leo bishop of Rome had sent to the Synod of
Ephesus. But Dioscorus neglecting the oath, Euagrius. li. 2. cap 4. et alibi
refused to have it read.

This was the disposition and piety, these were the virtues of this so great a
monster of the church, rather then of a Bishop, of a tirant and a woolfe,
rather then of a true pastor.

His accusers said, that no man was free from his cruelty, insomuche that
things having no life, were not free from his furious raginges. For he did cut
down trees, and raised up fires, and plucked down houses.

Athanasius concluding all his accusations with these few words, said, that
Dioscorus had committed such offenses, that were not only forbidden by laws,
but also which exceeded al cruelty of the most fierce and cruel barbarous
people.

When he had been three times called to the counsel of Ephesus to make answer
to his wicked doings, and came not, he was condemned by the voices of all the
fathers, to be put from all the dignities of a bishop, Euagrius li. 2. cap. 4
and to be void from all manner of ecclesiastical functions.

The causes of his condemnation were these.

Because agreing with Eutyches, he received him to the communion, before he had
talked and consulted with his fellow brethren in the council of Ephesus.

Because he had unjustly condemned Flauinianus, Eusebius, and others of
errors, being gilty to none.

Because he added some things to the council of Ephesus, which were not spoken
of the Fathers.

Because he admitted not the reading of the bishop of Romes epistle, being
often warned thereto.

Because he had pronounced the bishop of Rome to be excommunicate.

Because he had contrary to the laws, received them that were lawfully deposed
by diverse Synodes.

Finally, because other his fellow companions, confessing their offense, had
desired pardon, but he continued in his wickedness, nor came to the Synod,
being thrice called. At the last he was sent in to exile, into a certain place
called Gangra, a city of the Paphlagones.

Ariminensis Synodus.
Ariminum was a town in Italy. This city had a notable port or haue^, which
in times paste divided Italye from France. In this City was the counsel called
Consilium Ariminense kept. The cause and beginning of this council, was this:
When the Arrians after the counsel of Nice, had with lies and falshod inuegled
the mind of Constantine the Emperor, Constantine calling some of them from
exile, and purposing to call an other council, to hear the matter better
discussed, but death prevented him, but he commanded his eldest son
Constantius to perform that which his father had purposed, who at the last
called a council to be kept at Ariminum. Before which council many other
assemblies were celebrate and kept, in which this question was greatly reasoned
and disputed, whether the son were consubstantial and equal in substance with
the father. Al refused to teach or say that the son was unequal in
substance unto the father, until one Aetius a Syrmian taught the contrary, but
yet very peruersly and falsely For the which cause Constantius commanded all the
bishops to come to Ariminum and Seleucia^, to rectify this opinion. He had
thought to have brought all the bishops of the East into the west parts,
seking all occasions to make an uniform concord among them: but the far
distaunce of place caused him to alter and change his mind, so that he
decreed, that there should be but one council, but kept in two places, and
that the bishops of the west should be at Ariminum, and the bishops of the
East at Seleucia. But they did not agree in neither place, but great dissension
rose among them, there were at Ariminum above.300. persons.

As Sozomenus does declare, when a question was proposed how they should
believe, Lib. 4. cap 17
Valens and Vrsacius stepping forth (whose cause Germinius Auxentius, Gaius,
and Demophilus favored) required that all that which was written before of the
faith, should be made void and vain, and that, that should take place which
long before that time was composed in the Latin tongue at Syrmium, where it
was defined, that the son was like the father, according to the saying of the
Scriptures, but that there should be no mention made of one essence, and they
said, that this exposition was greatly approved of the Emperor, and that it
ought also to be received of the Synod. So at the last they granted, nay
rather falsely betrayed and defamed this word (...), as a word unknown of the
Scriptures, and obscure and darcke to many. But this Vrsacius with his
accomplices were after pronounced and condemned for heretics, and because they
defended the doctrine of the Arrians, were removed from the Church, as
Athanasius writes in his Epistle to the Bishops of Africa.

Reprehension of Peter. 22.
I Do not think that Hieromes sentence is to be granted, which affirms,
that Paul did but feignedly reprehende Peter.

I would gladly ask Hierome which leyneth to much to Peter's part, whither
Paul lied or no in saing this, I resisted him to his face? and whether these
were cou^terfeyte and dissembling words or no? (They walked not the right way
in the verity of the Gospel.) And if Paul lied not, than he truly
reprehended Peter, neither were these dissembling words, (they did not go the
right way in the verity of the Gospel) Let us say therefore with Augustine,
whose sentence the common consent of the Church does follow and approve, that
Paul truly reprehended Peter, for Peter offended the Gentiles that were
converted to the faith, in withdrawing him self from them for the Jews sake
as though they were not clean enough and purged by the faith and baptism of
Christ, unless they mingled the ceremonies of the old law with the Gospel.

And for so much as in Christ there is neither man nor woman, neither Jew nor
Greek, neither freeman nor bondeman, but in Christ we all are one, why did
Peter disdain to eat with the Gentiles, and cleaued to the Jews?

Augustine says: Paulus non ideo emendauit Petrum quod paternas traditiones
obseruaret, etc. That is. Paul did not reprehende Peter, because he observed
the traditions of the fathers, which thing if he would have done, he should
not have been counted to have done ill (for although they were superfluous, yet
being accustomed to be done they could not hurt,) but because he compelled the
Gentiles to follow the Jews doctrine and Religion, which he could in no wise
do, unless he did them as things, necessary to salvation, yea and that after
the coming of Christ, which thing the verity disanulled by the preaching of
Paul.

Neither was the Apostle Peter ignorant of this, but he did it fearyng them
that were of the circumcision.

Therefore, both he was justly corrected, and Paul also told the troth, least
the holy Scripture, which is to be believed of the posterity, by suffering a
falsitie to have authority, might be altogether doubtful and overthrown.

Neither Paul therefore kept these ceremonies, because he feined him self a
Jew, that he might win them: for else why did he not like Sacrifice with the
Gentiles, because he became as one without a law unto them that lived without
a law, that he might win them, but that he did that also, as a Jew by
nature.

All this he spoke, not that he might feine him self to be that he was not,
but because he judged, that by this means they might be mercyfully helped, as
though he him self had the same error, that is, not doing it with a
dissemblyng mind, but with affection, as of one that had compassion.

Yea these old Sacraments were to be permitted to them for a season, and
chiefly to them, which came of that people to whom they were given, but
afterward they ought to have been forsaken and left of all Christians, as
though they had been reverently buried and hidden.

By this learned sentence of Augustine we know, that the ceremonies of the
Jews, were not immediately after Christ's Passion pernicious and hurtful, for
they sinned not which observed them for a time, although there was no hope of
salvation to be put in them. For otherwise they should have deadly offended,
which would have thought, that they ought to be observed of necessity, as
though salvation and justification should be taken by them.

In Epist. ad Augustine.
Hierome notwithstanding in this altercation with Augustine dissenteth from him,
affirmyng, that the ceremonies of the Jews, after the Passion of the Lord,
were always pernicious and deadly to the Christians, and that who soever,
either of the Jews or of the Gentiles, observed them, he should be cast down
to the pit of hell.

Neither he thincketh, that Paul or Peter observed these ceremonies, but that
they dissembled the matter, to avoid the offense of the Jews, but the
scolasticall doctors do disagre from this opinion.

But after the sufficient preaching of the Gospel, the ceremonies of the Jews
were pernicious.

Obiectio.
Some men will say, was not Paul likewise to be reproved as well as Peter, when
he circumcised Timothy, when he purified him self seven days, when he shore
his head in Cenchreis, and when he let his hear grow by a vow, and when
Sacrifices were offered for him according to the law, least some of the Jews
which believed, should be offended? And if he knew that the circumcision of
Timothy was nothing worth, and likewise his purification, and the offering of
the Sacrifices, and notwithstanding did thus, undoubtedly he dissembled, and
therefore he was to be reprehended as well as Peter.

Responsio.
They that dissolve this argument, do note simulation, as simulation, not to
be any evil, but to be indifferent both to good and evil: for if it save,
edify and kyndle godly zeal, as the simulation of Christ when he feigned him
self to go far, he enflamed his Disciples the more to require his presence,
than it is good.

But if it destroy or take away charity, or be against edifieng, it is evil
and to be reproved.

They do grant, that Paul dissembled in these Judicial observations, when he
knew that they were nothing worth, but at such time as he might not hurt by
his example, but might profit by his dissembling. When he came to Lystra, he
circumcised Timothy whom he would have to be his journey fellow, fearyng least
he should hinder the faith of the Jews, by whom he should pass, if he should
lead about with him an uncircumcised man, furthermore he did appease tumultes
and seditions, which might be moved against him. Also be circumcised Timothy,
because he would send him to teach the Jews, and he did so, that the teacher
might be the more accepted of his auditors, yet for that end (as Chrysostom
says) he circumcised Timothy that he might abrogate circumcision. And if the
Jews had known that Timothy had not been circumcised, they would not at all
have hard Timothy preach.

Neither Paul did offend, when at Jerusalem, he feyned the Judicial
purifications, for they profited and saved charity, neither did they hurt or
hinder the faith of Christ being received, therefore he was not to be reproved
in these simulations. But Peter's dissimulation was evil, because it did hurt
and offend the Gentiles, that were lately called to the faith.

Saint Augustine calls Peter's dissimulation and feinyng, Peruersam and
hypocriticam dissimulationem, that is, a perverse and hypocritical
dissimulation.

Praelectio septima.
I Entend at this present by gods grace to confute and to answer to certain
arguments of our adversaries which they lay against us, and against the true
Church.

First they reason thus against us.
You use nothing but the express word of God. The false Prophets in times
past used nothing but the express word of God: Ergo, you be false Prophets.

Responsio.
I deny the co^sequent: for he is not a false Prophet which uses the
express word of God, but he yt does falsely use it and does detort it from
the native sense. They call the express word of God the text of the
Scriptures, which (as Swinckfeldius does utterly reiecte) so the Papists make
it doubtful and uncertain. The text. 1.


The second argument.
The false Prophets preached nothing in times past, but peace, tranquillity,
and liberty, you preach nothing but peace, tranquillity, and liberty: Ergo,
you be false Prophets. Peace..2.


Responsio.
Conscience. 3.
I deny the minor, for we terrify and make a feared the conscience of men
first, with preaching of the law, and then we do teach unto our auditors the
peace and promises of the Gospel. Ergo, your minor is not worth a minorites
graye hoode.

The third argument.
The old Prophets taught men to doubt and to be in a suspense of the remission
of their sins. You do preach certeintie and make men sure, of the remission
of their sins, Ergo, you be not true Prophets.

Responsio.
I deny the mayor: although you seem to prove it out of Joel, out of Daniell,
and out of the acts of the Apostles. Joel. 4. Joel. 2.
The words of Joel are these. Quis scit si conuertatur dominus? Who knows if
the Lord will return? This sentence you would have to be a dubitation, when in
very deed it is an asseu^ration, and a phrase of the Hebrew tongue. The Prophet
in deed here seems at the first sight to leave men perplexe and doubtful, but
in the next verse he offered them grace and favor, if they would repent from
the bottom of their hearts. Wherefore the Prophet seems not to prosequute his
talk, but rather to be diverse: And al exhortatio^s with the which God
exhorts us to repentance, are cold, yea rather frivolous except he testify
him self to be ready and willing to reconciliation. Whereas therefore the
Prophet here does leave the minds of men in suspense, he seems to cut of that
which he before entreated of the mercy of God. But this manner of spech is to
be observed which oftentimes is found in the Scriptures. For as often as God
is described unto us, hard to forgive sin, this pertains to the sturring up
of our sloth, and to shake of our negligence. At the first we are cold, when
God does inuit us, except he prick us forward by sondrie ways. And also,
when we come unto him, we do it remissely and slenderly. Wherefore it is
necessary, that both these faults be corrected in us, that is, that our
slomberyng be quickened and sturred, and that these delights be driven away
with the which we overmuch flatter our selves: And to this end is the counsel
of the Prophet, for he speaks unto desperate persons. If he only had said,
God is ready to forgive, If he had used only this form of spech, perhaps they
would have come negligently, and would not earnestly have been touched with the
fear of God. Therefore the Prophet does as it were consult with them. Although
we may worthily despair (for we be unworthy, who^ God at any time should
receive unto him) yet there is no cause why we should be utterly dismayed. Quis
enim scit. etc, that is, God is placable. Wherefore we ought not dispeir, for
the Prophet does propone unto us a difficulty of obteyning gods favor, not
that he might leave men in a doubt (for that were contrary to his former
doctrine) but that he might give some taste of the mercy of god, that they
should gather their spirits unto them by little and little, and yt they should
not persuade them selves to be in security, but that they should come unto god
carefully, and with much deliberation, after that they have considered their
offenses.

Let it be that the Prophet spoke, Dubitatiue, yet that dubitation is not to
be taken of the remission of sins, and of eternal pain, but it is to be
understand of the remission of temporal pain. Again a Facto ad ius, is no
good argument.

As for the place of Daniel, is manifestly corrupt, for it is in Hebrew a
plain asseueration. Although the grecians read (...), Forsitan, the Hebrew
text has Hen, which betokens, Ecce, so that Daniell meant when he spoke to
Nabuchadonozor assertiue, when he said, Ecce erit sanatio delictoru^ tuorum.
Lo, Nabuchodonozor. 5*
this shall be a healing for thy sins, or as some read Id enim erit. Chrisostom
also does say, that the Prophet spoke not doubtfully, but says, that the
prophet did smite such a terror and fear unto the king, as though he had
sinned a sin more grievous, then that deserved pardon. His words be these.
Hoc sic dixit non ambigens (valde enim persuasum erat Prophetae, sed volens
illum terrere and cogere vt hoc faciat. etc.) He said, this not doubting (for
it was thoroughly persuaded unto ye prophet) but mindyng to put him in fear,
and to constrain him to do this. For if he had spoken affirmatively, the king
would have been the more negligent. So likewise we the^ most of al do instigate
and make him the more earnest, when we say, desire him and show unto him,
perchance, he will hear thee: for fear rising of a doubt does provoke a man
the more, for this cause the prophet made it not sure and certain. What
say thou? will god forgive so great wickedness? There is no sin which
almesdede cannot purge and extinguishe. Every sin gives place unto alms,
and is a remedy profitable for every wound.

This and such like places of scripture are not to be understand as though the
worck it self of alms giving, does justify man: but that if it be given out
of a lively faith and godly love, it does declare and testify man to be
justified. The like place we have in the Evangelist s. Luke, where Christ
speaks to the pharisees after this sort: Date cleemosynam, and ecce omnia
mu^d a su^t vobis. Give alms, and behold all things are clean unto you. That
the papists out of this place do infer alms deeds to be a satisfaction,
by the which we are made clean from our sins, it is more vain then that
it needs any long refutation. Neither Christ does here dispute by what price,
we may attain the remission of our sins, but that they do eat their bread
vndefiledly which give part unto the poor. The conscience is not purged, but
by repentance. And repentance does consiste chiefly in two points, the one
in the acknowledging of our faults, the other in a sure faith, that through
Christ our sins are remitted. Wherefore, when Christ admonished the pharisees
to purge their consciences from sin, by the same words he willed them to
acknowledge their sin, and to believe that through Christ they were forgeuen,
for he only can reconcile us unto god, and make satisfaction for our
wickedness. Also he adds the fruietes of repentance, that is the worckes of
charity which proceed of faith.

As for the words of Peter out of the acts of ye Apostles which he spoke
unto Simon Magus, saying, Repent from thy wickedness, and pray, Simon Magus. 6.
if perchance god will forgive thee. It helps the papists nothing at all,
which will have men to pray with suspense and doubtful minds, and counted it a
temeritie and rashness for a man to persuade him self any certayntie in his
prayers. But if the words of saint Peter be well vewed, the answer is sone
made, for this greek word (...), is as much to say, as if a man should say in
Latin. Si qua tibi remittat deus. If god by any means may forgive thee. This
manner of spech Peter uses not, yt he might leave ye mind of Simon in doubt,
but that he might ye more provoke him to ernest prayer, for the difficulty of
the matter is of no small force to excite and stir us: because when we se
that the matter is more easy, and in our own power, we are to secure and
sluggish. Wherefore Peter does not here put Simon in a terror and fear, to the
intent that he might put all confidence and hope out of his mind and so
discourage him, but declaring that there was a certain hope leaft unto him, if
he called for mercy with an humble and lowly spirit (only to make him the
more ardent,) shows him, that for the greuousnes of his sins, it was hard to
obtain pardon: for faith is most necessary when soever we have access unto
god, and pray unto him, yea rather it is the mother of prayer.

The fourth Argument.
The devil uses the Scriptures, the false Apostles use the scriptures, the
Anabaptists use the Scriptures as well as Christ and the Apostles, and you also
of this new Church use the Scriptures, Ergo, the scripture is an uncertain
thing to lean unto.

Responsio.
I deny the argument, for what soever is used of diverse having diverse
judgments, is not of it self doubtful, but it behooves us to behold and
examine, who does use it falsely and who truly for it is not the diversity of
men's wits that makes a thing sure or unsure, for in every thing there is a
verity.

The fifth Argument.
The true Church has ordained, that the lay sort should receive the
Sacrament under one kind only, that is, under the kind of bread and not of
wine.

But your Church commands to give to the lay sort both kinds. Ergo, your
Church is not the true Church.

Responsio.
I deny the mayor, for the true Church of Christ does never alter nor change
Christ's Institution. Now Christ's Institution was that al me^ should drink of
the cup, Ergo, your Church forbidding the same is the Synagoge of Antichrist,
and not the Church of Christ.

Replicatio.
You take these words to be spoken generally, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink
you al of this. Infantes ought not. 7.
But infants, do not, nor ought to drink of the cup. Ergo, you are deceived in
saying that all men generally should drink of the cup.

Responsio.
This which you bring of infantes, who ought not to be admitted to this
Sacrament before a certain time is frivolous and childishe: for saint Paul
would have all them which come to this Sacrament, To prove themselves 8.
to prove and examine them selves, before they eat of this bread or drink of
this cup.

Therefore this saying, Bibite ex hoc omnes, is generally spoken to those,
which be of those years that they be able to try and prove things. And I
pray you have you forgotten your logical distinction of this universal
sign, Omnis, which is taken in the Scriptures sometime distributive, sometime
collectiue, Turn the leaf I beseech you, and see how these words are to be
understood. Omnis Hierosolima exiuit ad Iohannem. Again, decimatis omne
olus. etc. Deus vult vt omnes homines salui fiant: hoc est, ex omni genere
aliquos, that is. Man Ti^ cap^
God would have all men to be saved, that is to say, of every state some.

The sixth Argument.
In the true Church there are no sects, but in your Church there ar sects.
Ergo, your Church is not the true Church.

Responsio.
(...) 11. (...) 3. (...) 2
First I answer S, Paul says. Oportet hereses esse vt electi probentur, there
must be heresies, that the elect might be tried and made manifest. It is
written also, Satan stood among the sons of god. Also there are tares among
the corn, furthermore they went from us, but they be not of us.

Now secondly I answer: I deny this argument. Heretics be among the elect,
Satan among the children of god, tares among wheat, goats among sheep, Ill
fisshes among the good. Ergo, the elect children of God, are not the children
of god. Ergo, wheat is not wheat, Sheep be not sheep, But if you will make a
good argument, you should conclude thus. Ergo, tares be tares, heretics be
heretics, (...)
Ill fishes be ill fishes.

Notio.
Although the whole rablemence of Papists do agree together in persecutyng of
Christ and his gospel, yet there is great dissension and sects among the^, as
it may well appear unto them, which shall read their worckes, Original sin
of Mary. 9.
As the Thomistes, the Scotistes about the original sin of the virgin, the
Henricistes and other questionistes, who fights and writes one against
another. What say you to your own men which wrote of late days, Gardener and
Smith, who do write contrary doctrines about the Sacrament. Likewise Pighius
and E^kius write contrary doctrines about original sin.

The seventh Argument.
Love is the end of the law and of all the Prophets, but you of this Church do
not love, (...). 13.
because you depart from the unity and concord of the Church of Rome. Ergo,
you do against the manifest word of god, against the law and against the
Prophets.

Responsio.
I deny the argument, love is of two sorts. The love of god, and the love of
man The love of god which is the foundation of the first table, and does
consiste in a Christian faith, (...). 6.
is to be preferred above the love of al men. Yea Christ commands. If thy
eye offend thee, pull him out and cast him from thee.

Also Saint John says, if any man come unto you, and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into your house, nor bid him god speed. Again, what fellowship
is there for light with darcknes.

Replicatio.
If any man bring any sentence out of the Scriptures which is profitable to
edification and charity, (Although he who wrote the sentence do not so mean)
yet he is not deceived with any great danger, nor does swerue from the word of
god.

Responsio.
He racketh these words out of Saint Austen, and would, that willyngly we
should err from the true understanding of the Scriptures, as for example,
where Christ says, (...) ^4.
Drink you all of this, you would not have us to know these words, least
we should trouble the concord and unity of your Church, you would have us to
learn that lesson out of Terence. Tu quod scis nescis. These words be mete
for an Infidel, and not for one that professes gods word. That kind of
edifieng and charity which is done to further the cause of Antichrist, is no
true edification, but is a destruction of godly love, and a ruin of our
salvation.

The eight Argument.
The true Church is a visible congregation, which may be seen and known.

But you cannot show a visible and known church, for Flacius condemns Philip
and Philip condemns Flacius. Ergo, neither you nor they be any Church.

Responsio.
I deny the consequent, for condemnation does not exclude both the parties: for
it is necessary, the condemnation of the one part to be just and good, and of
the other unjust and wicked.

I will make you the like argument. Moses rebuked Aaron being foully deceived.
Paulus rebuked Peter when he disse^bled. Ergo, none of the^ be of the church.
Exodus (...) Gal. 2, ^
Who would not call ten Democritos, Democritus. 10.
to laugh hartly at these unsavory sequeles.

Obiectio.
They that be of the Church, must follow and observe three things, that is,
vniuersallity, antiquity and common consent, otherwise they cannot be true
Catholicques. Vincentius 11.
This says. Vincentius Lirinensis.

Responsio.
If the Church were now in such state as it was when Vincentius. wrote this
saying, we would gladly follow it, and embrace universality and antiquity, but
the Church since that time has established many things that repugne against
the Scriptures, and therefore it is not to be followed in all things.

We ought to follow that universality, which contains such kind of doctrine
as the sacred Bible appoints and sets out unto us.

Also every faithful man ought to receive and regard such an antiquity,
which nothing swarueth from the canonical verity, and the meaning thereof.

Or else no universality, antiquity nor consent (though they have been put in
ure never so long) ought to be admitted: for the universal church of Christ
bears the voice only of her pastor, and does not knowledge the voice of
strangers.

The universal number makes not the true Church. John, (...)

The Church of the Israelites was in times past a great and notable Church, in
which were the number of six hundred thousand men beside women, and
children: Aaron. 12. Phinies. 13.
in the which were excellent men, noble men, holy and learned men, yea and the
workers of miracles. The wise and eloquent man Aaron was in that Church, There
also were Eleazar, Ischamar, Hur, and Phinees, which were renowned and famous
men in all kind of literature, being aged and expert men in many things. Did
not (I pray you) this universal Church, in which were six hundred thousand
armed men, receive the calfe by general consent? for no man did put forth him
self to resist that filthy Council. Did this work (think you) please God,
because it was made by the universal consent of the Church? yea and the holy
and learned men allowed it by their silence, yea and Aaron furtheryng and
openly agreyng to it. But the Lord said to Moses: get the down, the people has
broken the covenant, They have gone out of the way, which I commanded them to
walk in, A calfe. 14.
for they have made them an image of a calf to worship it. Exodus ^


Lo, the mouth of the Lord calls those learned and holy men, covenant
breakers and Apostataes, yea and the universal Church of the Israelites, only
Moses, or at the most Joshua and Moses excepted.

Helias. 15. Baalists. 16.
Helias alone resisted many hundredes of Baalistes.

Christ alone put him self against the whole college of Priests and
Pharisees. The Apostles being few, went forth into all the world, and had
against the^ the faith and custom that was used many years before, the rites
of the fathers, the judgments and deeds of very wise and religious men (as
they seemed.) Therefore were those things true, which so many learned, wise and
just men taught, which so many Realms and nations observed and kept so long
time before? and contrary wise, were those things false which a few
Apostles taught, being new, base and contemptuouse men?

But wherefore did the Apostles teach truth, and the other falsehood? ye shall
find the cause, not by exernall deeds, but because they taught by the will of
God expressed in his holy word, and the other men took their doctrine of men
of whom it was written. Omnis homo mendax, that is, all men are liars. That
undoubtedly is an error which fights, (...) ^5.
with the will of the eternal God, with the law and word of God, or that
agrees not with it.

Therefore the Church erreth, as often as it follows her own mind, not
regardyng the Scriptures.

The old Church before Christ's time erred many years, when it neglected the
commandment of god, and loved her own will.

Therefore it is a great foolishnes, to will to defend any errors under the
pretense of the Church, as though the Church could not err, but all things
were true and right that it does.

The Church erreth, not when it hears the voice of her shephearde, but it
does err when it hereth it not.

Therefore we must inquire whether the Church has herd the voice of the
shephearde in that thing which has been called in question. If this thing do
appear, it will be manifest, that the Church does well.

But some men go a strange way, gatheryng this argument: this thing the
Church does and observes: therefore it does well. But this is not to play the
divine, but to play the Sophister.

Paphnutius alone stood against the council of Nice and was heard: whereby it
appears, that this note of universality is not a true note of the Church.
Paphnutius 17


Antiquity.
As touching antiquity, who I pray you was auncienter than Christ? by whose
guidyng the true Church is governed, and whose only words it ought to here:
the which thing Cyprian affirms saying. Et quod christus debeat solus
audiri, pater etiam de caelo contestatur dicens, hic est filius meus dilectus,
in quo been consensi, ipsum audite. Quare si solus Christus est audiendus, non
debemus attendere quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid prior
Christus qui ante omnes est, fecit. Neque enim hominis co^suetudinem sequi
oportet, sed dei veritatem, yt is. And that Christ only ought to be heard, god
the father witnesses from heaven, saying, this is my beloved son in whom I am
well plesed, here you him. Wherefore if only christ must be heard, we ought not
to regard what any man before us has thought good to be done, but we must
take heed what Christ did which is before all, for we must not follow the
custom of men, but god his verity.

Augustine says. Quia quod anterius est inquiu^t falsum esse non potest. etc.
that is to say. (...) no (...) ^m. (...) 4. (...) de (...) b.
Because they say that cannot be false which is first, as though antiquity
and old custom does hinder and let the verity. For thus men slayers
voluptuous men and adulterers may defend their wickednesses, because they were
ancient.

Also Saint Ambrose says. Nos noua omnia quae Christus non docuit, iure
damnamus, quia fidelibus via Christus est, Si igitur Christus non docuit quod
docemus, etiam nos id detestabile iudicamus, that is. We do ryghtly condemn
all new things which Christ has not taught, because Christ is the way
unto the faithful. If therefore we teach that which Christ has not taught,
we judge it detestable.

Felix the Bishop writteth. Nemo consuetudinem rationi et veritati praeponat,
quia consuetudinem ratio et veritas semper excludunt, that is. Let no man
prefer custom before reason and truth, because reason and truth do always
exclude custom.

Saint Hierome writing upon these words. Dominus numerabit qua^do scribet
populos. Iste natus est ibi, or as the Septuaginta interpreters does translate.
Psa^
Dominus narrabit in scripturis populoru^, Septuagi^ta. 18.
et principu^ eoru^ qui fueru^t in ea. that is. The Lord shall cause it to be
written and preached among the pleople, that he was borne there. Se (says S.
Hierome) what the Prophet says, they which were (says he) and not which be:
whereby he signifies that what soever other thing shall be said or taught
(except the Apostles and their doctrine) may he cut of and have no
authority, yea although he be never so holy, never so eloquent, yet he coming
after the Apostles, has no authority.

Origene writing upon the Prophet Ezechiel. Nullu^ imitemur (inquit) et si
volumus imitari que^pia^, Ezech. 19.
propositus est nobis ad imitandu^ christus Jesus, descripti sunt actus
Apostoloru^, et Prophaetaru^ gesta de sacris voluminibus agnoscimus, Ho^
Illud exe^plar firmu^ est, Illud propositu^ solidu^: quod qui sequi cupit,
securus ingreditur, that is, Let us follow none (says he) and if we will follow
any, Jesus Christ is set before us to follow: the acts of the Apostles are
written, we know the doings of the Prophets out of holy books, this example
is firm and sure, this purpose is sound, which who coueteth to follow, does
go safely.

Obiectio.
In the true church there be no scismatikes, and they be scismatickes which
do forsake the old church of Rome and make to them selves new conuenticles and
congregations, but you have forsaken the Church of Rome and made your selves a
new Church Ergo, you be schismatikes.

Responsio.
There be some fantastical men, which these many years have not, neither
yet do communicate with any church, for in all things and persons they find
some want, but in the^ selves only they find nothing to be accused. And
therefore they conceive and imagine a marvelous form of a church, which unless
they do perceive to be constitute in some places according to their minds, they
do contend, yt there is yet no true Church of Christ in the world. But they
seem to the^ selves to have just causes of schisms. They will not communicate
with our Church, because the doctrine of the ministers of ye church does not
as yet seem pure, clean, and spiritual enough. They co^plain in some
churches, that there are very many and diverse rites used, Rites. 20.
and also they desire to have rigor and severity of discipline, and a very
exquisit purity of life, for they do fear, least they should be polluted and
defiled with the co^papanie of certain persons. Many do forsake the church,
through the offenses and vices of some ministers, of which number the
Anabaptists are: but this is no just cause to separate them selves from the
church. Yet there be certain just causes, wherefore the godly and faithful may
separate them selves from the company of the wicked men, in which not only
the lawful use of the Sacraments is corrupted, but also the sincere doctrine
is adultered.

Causes wherefore schism ought not to be made, first not for the diversity of
doctrine.
In primis no schism ought to be made for diversity of doctrine. For
concerning doctrine, it is exercised partly in certain and sure
determinations, of which sort are the articles of the faith, and the
necessary and true sentences of the Scriptures, which if they be agreablie,
purelie and simply taught in the Church, it is sufficient, although there be
none other ornaments or decking shows. Irenaeus says. Cum vna and eadem
fides sit. et cet. that is, for so much as there is one only faith, neither he
that ca^ speak much of it speaks more than behooves him, nor he that
speaks little does therefore diminishe it. Therefore seeing the doctrine of the
Ministers in the Church expounds those things which are of the Scripture,
of the true and sincere faith, what more have those schismatikes to require.
Doctrine is partly exercised in ye daily exposition of the Scriptures, and in
applying the same to times, place, and matter. In expoundyng has been always
a marvelous variety and diversity, but yet no wise man therefore has severed
him self from the Church. For it happens oftentimes, that two or three or
mo do expound one place not a like, but diuersely. One makes it darcker, To
time place and persons. 21*
an other man makes it playner, the one hitteth the mark, the other does not
touch it fullye, one man applies the place which he entreats very aptly,
an other man has not the like dexterity in applying the Scriptures: Yet he
speaks nothing contrary to faith and charity, but utters all things to
edification. Through this diversity no man may take occasion to swerve and go
from the Church, for all godly men do allow all things, and do retain that
which good is. The learned disdain not the sermons of them that be less
learned: Again, the unlearned do not envy them that be better learned,
neither their gifts, neither they disdayn to learn perfecter things, nor do
condemn the learned sermons of the learned preachers, but they praise God in them.

Austen says. Quisquis scripturas diuinas vel quamlibet earum parte^
intellexisse sibi videtur. et cet. that is. Whosoever thincketh, yt he
understands the holy scriptures or any part of them, ^
so that by the understanding of them he do not edify to double charity of
God and man, he has not ye understood them. But whosoever shall gather such a
sense out of the scripture, that may profit to the edifieng of the said
charity, and yet does not speak that thing, which he when he reads does
mean, is not deceived with any danger, nor does utterly speak a falsehood. He
says also shortly after. Corrigendus est tamen. et cet. that is. He must be
admonished and taught. More profitable it is not to forsake the true way, left
by accustoming to go out of the way, he be compelled to go in a froward and
perverse way. Therefore if the interpreter shall in any place grossly err, he
that is better learned may admonish him brotherly, but he may in no wise make
a schism.

Secondly no schism ought to be made for the disordered life of the Ministers,
nor for the impure life of any other person.
If the Ministers have vices and infirmities, and yet be faithful in teaching,
aduertising, exhorting, accusyng and comforting the people, and also if they do
lawfully Minister the Sacraments, no man has just cause therefore to forsake
the Church. The Lord said in the gospel. In cathedra Moysi sedent scribae and
pharisaei. etc. that is. The scribes and pharesies sit in the chair of Moses,
Cath. Mos. 22.
therefore do you all things, that they command you to keep and to do, but
do you not according to their works, for they say and do not. Lo, the Lord
says: They say and do not. Therefore their life agreed not with their doctrine,
yet because they sat in the chair of Moses, that is, because they preached
the word of God truly and sincerely, the Lord bids to receive their sincere
doctrine, and to forsake their life, not aunsweryng to their teaching. To say
and not to do. 23.
Therefore God forbids us to make any schism for the vices of teachers. The
Churches of the Prophets and Apostles do make for this place, for Esaias and
Jeremy accusyng the manners of their time, did greatly inueigh against the
corruption of doctrine and manners, neither did they lay unto their charge
light offenses, but heinous and capital.

Esaias cries out: A vertice capitis ad calcaneum vsque pedis no^ est boni
quidpia^. that is, from the crown of the head unto the sole of the feet there
is no goodness. And yet he did not swerve from the Church, nor made him a new
Church. though he took diligente heed to keep him self clean from all
their impiety. How many vices and errors were in the company of the very
Apostles of Christ? Did the Lord therefore depart from them? The Church of
the Corinthians was corrupted not only in manners but also in doctrine. There
were in it great contentions, factions, chydynges, certation and prophanyng of
wedlock. Beside that many did communicate with profane Sacrifices, they did
also erreniously refer baptism to the virtue of man, they polluted the
supper of the Lord with private and riotous banckettes, and judged not well of
the resurrection. But did the Apostles therefore depart from it, or commanded
others to depart from it? With bankets. 24.
No, he affirms the same Church to be an holy Church, and greatly
disprouing their disse^tions, exhortyng al men to the unity of the Church, and
to sincere verity.

They therefore undoubtedly do err, which restrain them selves from that
Catholicque congregation, in which although there be great errors of corrupt
living, yet the doctrine is sincere and pure.

Thirdly no schism is to be made for the diversity of rites and ceremonies.
Obiectio.
Some object, saying, that there is not one form and manner used in the
baptising of children. One form of baptising of children
Likewise say they, in the Lords supper, some receive the Sacrament sitting,
some standing, some knelyng, some receive it with their hands, some into their
mouths out of the Priests hands, some receive it often, some seldom, some
never but once a year. Again they have not one form and manner of praying.
How therefore can the spirit of unity and peace be in that Church, in which is
found so great diversity? We do therefore (say they) justly depart from you.

Responsio.
Do not these miserable me^ know, how great diversity there has always ben
in the rites (the unity of Christ's Catholic Church nevertheless remaynyng
vnseparated? Socrates largely expounds the diversity of rites in the church.
And amongs other things, he says. Nulla religio eosdem ritus custodit. No
religion keeps like or the same rites, albeit they embrace one manner of
doctrine: for they that be of one faith, do dissent among the^ selves about the
ceremonies. And again he says. It would be a laborious, grievous and
impossible work to write all the rites of the churches used in cities and
countries. Irenaeus rehearses a great diversity of churches in fasting and
celebrating Easter. Celebrating Ester 25.
And afterward adds. Et tame^ nihilominus omnes isti etia^ cum in obseruantia
variarent. etc. that is. and yet nevertheless all these when they varied in
their observations, they were and be always at peace within them selves and
with us. Did this diversity of fasting break the unity of faith? And again
he says when Policarpus came to the city of Rome in the time of Anicetus, and
had a little controversy between them of certain other things, they were
forthwith reconciled, but of this point they did nothing contend among them
selves. Policarpus 26.
For neither Anicetus could persuade Policarpus, not to observe those things
which he had observed with John the disciple of the Lord and other the
Apostles with who^ he was always conuersau^t, neither did Policarpus persuade
Anicetus not to observe ye custom which he observed with those elders who^ he
succeeded. And notwithstanding this diversity, they had agreement between them.
Thus far Irenaeus. Therefore the primative Church used a great liberty in
using ceremonies, yet, so that it dissolved not the bond of unity.

Augustine says. Nulla disciplina est in his melior. etc. that is. There is no
discipline better to a wise, grave, and Christian man (concerning these
ceremonies) than to do after that manner, as he shall see that Church to do to
the which he shall happen to come: for that thing which is enjoined neither
against the faith nor against good manners, is to be counted indifferent and to
be observed, as the company does, among whom we live and are conuersaunt.

Fourthly, no schism is to be made for them, which do not worthily
communicate the Lords supper.
Obiectio.
Blasphemers. 27.
You admit all men indifferently to the Lords table, whoremongers,
dronckardes, covetous persons, blasphemers and other of that note, with whom
the Apostle forbids to eat common meat, much less he does grant to
receive the bread of the Lord with such. Therefore except ye will be polluted
with the company of such, it is necessary either not to come to such a company,
or else utterly to fly from it.

Responsio.
Paul the faithful servant of Jesus Christ, Judas. 28.
was not more rigorous than his master, who did admit Judas to the holy table,
whom he knew thoroughly, both inwardly and outwardly, and yet put him not back,
but he would have repelled him, if he had known that the rest of the Disciples
should have been corrupted with his company. Judas him self was polluted, for
his mind and conscience was corrupted, but the Apostles could not be defiled
through an other man's infideliti. And therefore the Apostle Paul says: Probet
seipsum homo, and sic de pane edat, et de poculo bibat. (...), 11.
That is: Let a man prove him self, and so let him eat of the bread, and
drink of the cup. He byddeth every man examine him self, and not to judge an
other man's servant. If thou be taught in the faith, and do woorthely
partake of the Lords table, thou art not polluted with an other man's malice.
Therefore thou have no just cause to be separated from the church, for that thou
would avoid corruption, in which church thou see evil men mingled with
good men to be partakers of the Lords supper. And if thou be separated, thou
plainly declarest, ^
that thou do arrogantly partake with them whom Augustine describes in
these words: Illi filii mali, qui non modo iniquitatum alienarum. etc. That
is to say: Those ill children, which not only in the behalf of other men's
iniquities, but also in the study of setting forth their own contentions, do
affect and desire either to draw, or to divide the weak people entangled with
the boast of their name, being puffed up with pride, furious with heddines,
deceitful with slanders, troublesome with sedicions, least they should beseme
to lack the light of truth, do pretend a show of rigorous severity. And those
things which in the holy scriptures are commanded to be done, to correct the
faults of the brothers with a certain moderation, the sincerity of love being
saved, and the unity of peace preserved, they usurp and drive to the sacrilege
of schism, an occasion of division. Also in the two chapters following, he
gives this council to quiet and peaceable wits, that as much as they may, they
correct moderatelye that thing which they can, and that they may not, to suffer
patiently, and that they be sorye and lament it with charity, until God
himself either redress them, or else in the latter day scatter the chafe from
the wheat.

Conclusio.
To conclude with Ciprians authority concerning this matter, I will allege his
words: Si videntur in ecclesia esse zizania. etc. If there seem tares to be in
the church, yet our faith and charity ought not to be let or hindered, that
because we see tares in the church, we should therefore depart from the church,
we ought rather to labor to be made the good wheat, that when the wheat shall
be laid up in the Lords barn, ^
we may receive fruit for our work and labor. The Apostle in his epistle
says: In domo autem magna. etc. That is: In the great house there are not
only vessels of gold and silver, but also vessels of wood and earth, and some
to honor, and some to dishonor.

Let us endeavor our selves as much as we can, that we may be vessels of gold
and silver. But it pertains to the Lord only to break in pieces the
earthen vessels, to whom also the iron rod is given. The servant cannot be
greater the^ his master, neither let any man think to challenge to himself
that thing, which god the father gives only to his son, that he may
think him self able to purge the floor, and to fan the chafe from the
wheat, or to sever the tares from the wheat by man's judgment. This is a
proud obstinacye and sacrilegious presumption, which a mad fury usurps to it
self. And whylest some men always take the Lord to them selves, more then
meek justice does require, they do perish and go out of the church, and
whilst they do extol them selves proudly, they being blinded with their own
pride, do leese the light of the veritye. Hec Cyprianus.

The Lord Jesus reduce again the wa^dring sheep into the unity of the church,
and preserve them, and further them to live in unity, quietness, and peace.

Thus it is declared at the full, wherefore schisms ought not to be made in the
Church. Now will I make answer to your objection, wherefore we departed from the
Church of Rome.

We make a distinction between the old Church of Rome, and the late new
Church. For the church of Rome at the beginning was holy and faithful, which
the Apostolical men and the Apostles them selves founded and builded upon the
word of God.

That church not only lacked the ceremonies now used, but also wanted the
decrees and constitutions, which the late new church leans and cleaves unto.
That old church knew no Monarchy, nor that ruflyng court. Therefore we have not
gone, nor at any time will go from that primative church. But we do not agnise
that new church of Rome, which affirms the Pope to be Christ's Vicar in
earth, and that we should obey his laws. And where they say, that the
scripture has his authority in the church of Rome, and that it is recited in
their church, and that it is used in the distribution of the sacrament, the
contrary may be showed.

First, they make subject the interpretacion of the scriptures unto their see,
and do attribute all Judicial judgments to the Bishops of Rome. That Canon
following is well known.

All men must observe whatsoever the Pope decrees and ordeineth foreuermore,
and without gaynsaying.

Also the whole church through the world knows, that the holy church of
Rome has right and authority to judge of all things, and that no man may
judge of his sentence. Therefore he judges also the scripture, expounds and
wresteth them after his own mind.

But al men do see plainly, that they take away the native sense, and do
substitute a strange sense unto the scriptures, as I have largelye declared
before in my former Lectures, where ye may read and perceive, that the late
church of Rome is not the true church of Christ.

Obiectio.
By this means there shall be no church left in earth. For when the governors
of the church do err, what hope of the church remains? Or when the signs:
marks of the church do not appear, where is the church?

Responsio.
God in the calamities of the church, in which the governors decline from the
word and true worshipping of God, reserueth nevertheless unto him self in earth
a church, which was defended and preserved by certain preachers and teachers,
although they were in number very few.

The matter shall be made more plain by examples. In the time of Achaz king of
Judah, 4. Regum. ca Ibidem. 2 Para. 28.
when Vria the high priest wincked at idolatry, and the rulers and other
priests did not resist it, the king shut the temple of the Lord, and took
away the holy seat. And therefore the ordinary ministry of the word and
sacrifices ceased. But nevertheless there was an holy church in the kingdom of
Judah, in which no doubt Esaias and other godly men taught, as it were
extraordinarily.

4. Reg. 22.21. 2. Par. 33.34.
When Manasses reigned, sincere doctrine, celebration of the sacraments, and
circumcision were utterly taken away, and that same apostasy continued until
the church was reformed of the most godly king Iosia: yet all this mean time
prophets were sent, and the church of God was in Judah, although the greater
part of the people with their governors, followed the impiety of Manasses.

In the kingdom of Israel, Hieroboam the king did put the Levites, which were
teachers and preachers of the law of the Lord, from the ministry, and placed
profane, and unlearned priests unto the people, and founded new and great
churches, setting up Idols and Calves, a new worshipping, new altars, and new
feasts, and by this means abrogated the true worshipping of God, so that in
Israel no external sign of Gods church appeared, and yet there is no doubt,
but there was a notable church of God in Israel, to the conservation whereof the
prophets were often sent.

Amos the second of that name, being a prophet, a shephearde, or heardman of
Tecoa, taught the true word of God under Hieroboam. Amos. 1. et. 7.
But Amasia the high priest said thus unto him: Go forthwith and get thee into
the land of Judah, and there do thou prophecy, but in Bethel hereafter do thou
not preach, Bethel. 29.
because it is the foundation and temple of the king.

In the time of Achab, who succeeded all the kings before him in impiety, who
also added the abominable worshipping of Baal, unto Hieroboams impiety and
apostasy, and had set up al manner of superstitions, idolatries, and
sacrileges, and cruelly persecuted the sincere word of God in the Prophets,
there was found notwithstanding in Israel a noble and clear church of God.

Helias the great and most excellent prophet of God, fleing into desert, 3.
Reg. 19.
for the foul apostasy of the people from God, hid him self in dens, and
being asked of the Lord what he did there, answered: Zelo quodam zelatus sum
pro domino deo exercituu^, quod filii Israel faedus tuu^ dereliqueru^t, aras
tuas dirueru^t, et prophaetas tuos occiderunt,, et ego solus relictus sum, et
quaerunt animam meam, vt tollant ea^. That is, I have been very zealous for the
Lord God of hosts. For the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant,
broken down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword, and I alone
am left, and they seek my life also to take it away. But he was sent again
into the land, from whence he fled, God speaking these words unto him: Reliqui
mihi in Israele septem millia virorum, quorum genua nunquam curuata sunt ante
Baal, neque os osculatum est eum. That is I have left unto my self seven
thousand men, whose knees have never bowed to Baal, nor their mouths kissed
him.

Lo, this great prophet thought that he was left alone in Israel, but he
hears that seven thousand holy men were reserved of God, which served Baal with
no external worshipping.

Who knows not, but that the prophet by the number of seven thousand, meant
an infinite number of people which were circumcised into the covenant of the
e^ernal God? Seven thousand. 30.


These men lacked not faith, and therefore they did not lack doctrine, although
it was not common and ordinary, nor seemed to the priests of Baal to be
catholic.

But undoubtedly they lacked sacrifices, because when lawful sacrifices were
not exhibited, they would not be partakers of unlawful sacrifices.
Notwithstanding they were not destitute of these things that were signified by
these simboles or sacraments, and were partakers by faith of all the gifts of
God.

Now to the Romish Church.
In like manner, after the bishop of Rome had corrupted and oppressed the church
of God, yet it was not extinguished through ye whole world: neither did ye holy
ministry of the word and true worshipping of God cease or fail among al men.
For there have been found many men dispersed through the whole world, which
never allowed the Pope nor his adherentes.

God sent almost in every age (even from the beginning of popery) grave, godly
and learned men, which constantly required the church to be purged from all
corruptions, teaching the true doctrine and the true use of the sacraments. But
when pure reformation could not be obtained, yet there was found a continual
desire of purity.

Furthermore, the Lord without doubt could have kept to him self a copious and
great church, as well under the papisme, as under Machumetes religion: For who
judges that there remains no members of the church of God, throughout all
Asia and Africa?

We see, that it has happened through the great bounty of God, that like as
circumcision was given in times past to the people for a sign of the covenant
of God, in the midst of their apostasy: Even so also we now se, that holy
baptism is given to the Christians for a seal of remission of sins, and of
the inheritance of the sons of God.

Furthermore (that we may omit other things) was it not received for a very
certainty by a general consent, that all the commandments were given very
perfectly and briefly in a short sum? And that in the lords prayer there is
given a very perfect form of praying to god? And in the Symbol of the
Apostles, that there is contained a very perfect rule of our faith?

The.xii. articles have been accustomed to be recited almost to all that
depart out of this world, as the very perfect rule of our faith. Neither is it
to be doubted that the mercyful god having compassion on them that were
oppressed, has touched with his heavenly grace the hearts of the living, and of
the dead, and by the holy ghost has taught them, that Jesus Christ the son
of god, pardoning all their syns, has sanctified the souls of al faithful,
and has translated them unto eternal life.

Obiectio.
Be al our forefathers yt were before this time of the light of ye gospel,
condemned?

Responsio.
It happens many times, that they to whom it was not given in all their life
time to judge well of religion: it was granted them at the last hour, and
being at the point of death, did perceive, that the abuses which they had bound
them selves unto before, were vain and pernicious, which thing undoubtedly
happened to Bernard, Franciscus, Dominicke, and to other fathers. For when they
lived in the foundation that is in Christ, although they had invented many
superstitions, they might notwithstanding be saved.

Obiectio.
We do not read, that in the time of the Bishops and prophets of the Jews
church, the rulers of the faithful, or the faithful them selves did decline
from the bishop, or from the universal church, and instituted new sacrifices,
as you now a days do, declining from the bishop of Rome, yea from kings and
Emperors, and from the universal church to your selves.

Responsio.
It appears, that the fathers before the coming of Christ, for the cause
above written (the temple being profaned with idolatry) did not seek new
places for their sacrifices, Leuit. 17. Deuteronomy. 12.
for it was not lawful to do sacrifice without the limits of the temple of
Jerusalem: neither for any other cause did the people of Israel (being holden
in the bondage of Babylon. 70. years) offer no sacrifices. Notwythstanding it
is most certain, that the holy and true worshippers of god did separate them
selves from the worshipping and sacrifices used against the word of god. The
laws being fulfilled of the Lord, and abrogated by the Lord, the Apostles
manifestly declined not only from the Bishop and the Church of Jerusalem, but
also they gathered a new church unto Christ by the preaching of the gospel, and
by the administration of the sacraments, which church is described in the Acts
of the Apostles.

To conclude, there be three kinds of schisms.

1. Apostatical. 2. Heretical. 3. Schismatic.
Apostatical. 1.
Apostatical schism is that, by the which through hatred of the Christian
faith and by mere impiety and contempt of God, the Athei with their wicked
Lucian and Julian Apostata do go from the Orthodoxe and Catholic says, and
from the communion of the faithful: and wickedly do taunt and blaspheme the
christian verity, and do scorn and persecute the very true church of god.

Heretical. 2.
That defection is heretical, the which Valentine, Marcion, Arrius,
Manicheus, Artemon, and such like proud, bold, stiffnecked and wicked men,
either forsaking or wresting the scriptures, do contemn and spurn it, or else
do deny, subvert and oppugn the most sure articles of the faith, and sound
opinions of the church, and do affirm and set up new opinions, and by this
means do build them heretical churches, and do go away from the true Orthodoxe
and catholic church.

Schismatic. 3.
Schismatical is such as was the schisms of the Donatistes, which separated
them selves from the true Church of god under the pretense of a more absolute
life, and a more perfect holiness. The two first schisms are very abominable
and wicked, and also the third cannot by any means be defended. But none of
these can be justly imputed unto us declining from the Romish church, for that
departing is without al blame, which is not from a true church, but from a
false church, not from the people of god, but from the persecuters of the
people of god, not from the articles of the faith and sound doctrine of the
church, but from errors which darken the articles of the faith, and from the
wicked traditions of men, which spesially is not don by any lightness, but by
necessity, not for the desire of innouacio^ but for true religions sake, and to
recover the true faith, according to the testimony of the eternal verity, that
leaving the fellowship of darkness, we may be gathered again in true light,
placed with Christ and al his members. So we at this day have forsaken that
Romish Sea full of false doctrine and idolatrye, and flowing with the innocent
blood of martyrs, and have embraced the Euangelicke and Apostolic doctrine.
And so Christ him self being head of the Church which is the commmunion of al
saints believing in Christ.

Thus I have long troubled you with my tedious and prolixe doings, before the
entry into the text, desiring you of pardon and patience, and to take in good
part these four general lyms, which I have discoursed unto you, and by gods
grace, I will enter at my next coming into this place, into the text, in the
mean time I commit you to the eternal god, to whom be praise for ever.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea Prelectionis septimae.
The Text. 1.
THe most part of writers are wont to divide the interpretation of the
scripture into a litteral sense and into a spiritual sense. Again, they divide
the spiritual, into a tropological, allegorical and anagogical sense.

They call that literal, which is understand according to the Grammatical sense
and the proper signification of the words.

This manner of interpreting must always be first sought out, and from it, it
is not lawful to swerve in weighty disputacions.

The knowledge thereof comes out of the rules of Grammar, Logic, and
Rhethoricke, and also of the knowledge of the Phrases, and of customed speeches
of the scriptures. And this litterall sense is called properly, the text.

That is called a spiritual interpretation, when an other thing is signified,
than the words do simply importe.

Tropologia (which has the first place in spiritual interpretation) is that in
which are noted such things that pertain to manners, and to the framing of man's
life, and it is called a moral sense. An example. Out of the story of Loath
being drunk, it is gathered, how much to be detested dronkennes and surfets
are in all ages, but chiefly in old age, and also what horrible wickedness does
follow dronkennes, for she is never alone, without some enormity following.

Allegoria, is that, in which acts or sentences are otherwise understood,
than the words do sound, and be applied and conferred with other things, which
have a certain similitude or analogy with them, but specially with those
things which concern Christ the head, or the church his body. Of this sort the
most part of those things, which in times past were done of the holy fathers,
are applied to these things, which long after were accomplished in the Gospel
by Christ, or by the Church, and it is manifest, that both these do well agree
together.

Ephesians. 5.
The conjunction of man and woman is declared, to contain a great sacrament of
the love, wherewith Christ loves the church.

Anagoge, is a manner of expounding the scripture, wherein, bisides the
signification of the words, some thing is affirmed, pertaining to the heavenly
glory to be looked for after this life, and pertaining to the mysteries of the
Trinity, or of the divine nature As if one would say: The City of Jerusalem
represented unto us the kingdom of heaven How apt these definitions and this
division are, I will declare hereafter. But first I will evidently show, whereof
they, which made these distinct intepretations, have taken occasion of this
partition.

The fathers, as well Greeks as Latins, have somewhat entreated of spiritual
interpretation, which things these diuiders, reading without judgment, either
have not well understand them, or else unfaithfully have abused those things that
were faithfully and well spoken.

Eccle. hist. li. 2. Cap. 17.
Eusebius declares, that there were certain men called (...), that is to say,
suppliantes, which were wholly occupied in the perpetual contemplation of
divine things, and that they did so interpret the scriptures, that they gave
them selves wholly to allegorical exposition. For the whole law (says he) seemed
to them to be like to a living beast, consisting of body and soul: so in this
law they called the letter it self, and those things that were signified by
the letter, the body: but the spiritual, secret and invisible sense, hidden
in the letter, they call it the soul. Thus much Eusebius^

But what manner of making of Allegories was at that time, it is evidently
enough showed in diverse works of Philon, Eccles. hier. 2.
and chiefelye in the two books of the Allegories of the law.

And so are certain things read of Anagoge in Dionysius (if at the least it
were Dionysius work) which things are applied to the interpretation of the
ceremonies, which were than used in the administration of the sacraments.

Origin judged, that every thing in the scripture might aptly be expounded by
an Allegorye and Anagogicallye, and he brought into the schools and churches a
marvelous boldness, for other men so to do He writes most plainly of this in
his commentaries, whom certain other Greek writers did imitate and follow.

Among the latin authors, Hierome took the like out of the Grecians
storehouse, as it appears in diverse places of his works. For he writing upon
Amos, says: Debemus scripturam sanctam, In Amos. 4.
primum secundum litteram intelligere. etc. That is: We must understand the
holy scriptures, first according to the letter, doing what things so ever are
commanded, pertaining to manners, secondly, per allegoriam, that is,
spiritual understanding, and thirdly, per anagogen, that is, pertaining to the
blessedness of things to come.

Again he writes, praecipitur nobis Salomone dicente. etc. It is commanded
unto us (Solomon speaking it.) Proverb. 2.
But write thou three times in counsel and knowledge, that thou may answer
the word of truth to them which propound unto thee. etc. There is (says
Hierome) a tripple description and rule of the scriptures in our hearts.

The first is, that we understand them according to the History, the second,
according to the Tropologie, the third, according to the spiritual
understanding.

In the History, the order of those things which are written, is observed.

In the Tropologie we rise from the letter, to greater things, and what so
ever has been carnallye done in the former people, we do interpreate it
morallye, and do turn it to the wealth of our souls.

In the spiritual contemplation, we pass over to higher things, we leave
earthlye things, and we dispute of the blessedness of things to come, and of
heavenly things, that the meditation of the life present, may be a
signification of the blessedness to come. Thus much says Hierome.

Lib de vtili. credendi. c. 3.
But Augustine writes otherwise. For he declares, that the scripture is
expounded four manner of ways.

Lib. imperfe. de genes. ad literam. c. 2. 2. Samuel. 21. Math. 12
The first, according to the history, that is, when it is taught what is
written, and what is done, what has not been done, but only has been
written, as though it had been done. As for example, when Christ alleges out
of Samuel, that David did eat the show bread.

The second is secundum (...), when it is declared, for what cause any thing
was said or done. As for example, Christ prohibiting the divorce of the wife,
unless it be for fornication, shows prudentlye the cause, why the libell of
divorce was before permitted to the Jews. He said, Moses permisit enim vobis
propter duritiam cordis vestri, That is: Math. 19.
Moses suffered you to have a byll of divorce, for the hardness of your hearts.

The third he calls secundum (...), in the which the congruency of both the
testaments is showed.

The fourth is (says he) secundum allegoriam, when it is taught, that those
things which are written, are not to be taken according to the letter, but
are figuratively to be understand (as for example) Saint Paul declares, 1.
Cor. 10.
that the history of Exodus was an allegory of the christian people, and that
all things happened to the Fathers in a figure.

Hereby it came to pass, that some men have taken in hand whole histories,
yea whole books to be expounded after these diverse ways.

Ruffinus, (as witnesses Genadius) expounded the benediction of Jacob upon the
Patriarchs, in three manner of senses, that is, historical, moral, and
mystical.

But after that time, boldness to expound the scriptures diverse ways grew more
and more. For some men shamelesly attempted to interpret by allegories and
anagogies what thing so ever is written in the sacred scriptures: and not only
the histories (in which it is often times done with a grace) but also the
preachings and disputations of the Prophets and Apostles, the precepts also
and promises, in the which there can be no digression (without peril) from the
simple grammatical sense.

But now I will show, what ought to be judged of these diverse forms of
interpretations, and will also declare, how the sayings of the holy fathers are
to be understand. I will entreat orderly of every one, and first of the
litterall sense, next of the tropologicall, then of anagogicall, and last of
the allegorical.

The literal sense (which otherwise is called historical or Gra^matical) ought
first to be sought out as ye most noblest and chefest sense, forasmuch as it
alone brings forth perspicuous and evident sentences It is only apt to frame
arguments by which the doctrines of religion are confirmed, it alone gives
necessary probations, where out of the allegorical and anagogicall senses
only probable and apparent assertions are brought.

It is not lawful at any time to leave the simple and native sense of the
words, unless there be figures in the words, or the sentence it self taken
grammaticallye, do signify some absurdity, for the which cause it is needful
to fly to the allegorical interpretation, whereof I will speak hereafter.

Wherefore I would gladly have men to judge, that he does well and wisely,
which exercises himself diligently in laboring to attain the literal and
grammatical sense.

That manner of interpreting which Augustine would have to be done per (...),
ought utterly to be referred to this kind: for in it there is no digression
made from the Grammatical sense, but only the cause of the deed, or of the
word being expounded, the sentence is made more plain and open.

For in all interpretation of every kind of writing, the same is most
necessary to be done: for oftentimes it is expedient, that we set before our
eyes the intent of the writer, and to be showed as it were with pointing of the
finger, to what end the oration tends, why it is ordained, and how great
weight every part has.

Furthermore the other kind of intepreting which Augustine calls secundum
(...), can not be separated from the Grammatical interpretation, for it is not
like unto an allegory (as some do suppose.) For analogia, is none other thing
than a certain collation and conference, wherein what soever have been either
done or said in the old Testament, are compared with those things that are
found to be spoken or done in the new Testament. Of which sort this is. If any
man reasoning of Judas betraying his Master unto his enemies with a kiss,
which is a simbole or sign of amity and friendship, does say, that he did the
same which once did Ioab, who killed Amaza, while he feyned to kiss him.

Likewise if any man does show, that the words of Christ or of the Apostle
do in all things agree with the words of Moses or of some other holy Prophet
or worthy man.

Every man understands, that when this is done, nothing is changed in the
Gra^matical sense, but yt only a comparison being made, and examples showed to
teach with all, there is added an ornament and euidency to the sentence, after
such a sort as the Rhetoricia^s sometimes are wont to ioyn the acts of the
Greeks or forayne nations, unto gestes of the Romans.

Plutar. in. Paral.
Which thing we see Plutarch and Valerius Maximus have done very elegantly.
Therefore we may well call the entreating of these manner of examples in the holy
scriptures argumentationem a typo.

To be short, every exposition deduced out of Rhethorick or Logic, when it
leads not from the simple sense or meaning of the words, it is judged most
aptly to pertain to the literal or Grammatical sense.

Tropologia.
Tropologicall exposition is not far from that sense, which the words of the
sentence do bring forth, but is an applying of that which is signified by the
words, to the framing of ma^s life and manners. As for an example, when we read
the history of Loath being dronken, it is well gathered per tropologiam, that we
learn by it, that dronke^nes ought to be by all means detested and shunned.

Likewise, it is no hard thing to gather out of holy histories and sermons,
those things which induce us to seek after virtues, and to avoid vices.

Whosoever will fruitfully read holy histories or sermons, it is nedeful that
he gather up all the best sayings and doings to the framing of his own private
life, which thing Titus Liuius wisely monished in his preface to the history of
the acts of the Romans.

Wherefore this manner of interpretation is more rightly called moralis or
Ethica, than Tropologica, For although this word (...) in Greek signifies not
only (...), that is a figurative speech, but also the life and manners of man*
yet by a very long used custom it represents unto the hearers a figurative
speech, that by the name of (...), they may understand the sentence, in the
which a word is declined from the native signification.

How be it, the Apostle Paul had lever have those things which are gathered to
the ordering of life and manners to be noted with the names of institution and
correction. For he says: Vtilis est scriptura ad institutionem et
correctionem, That is. The scripture is profitable to teach and to correct.
And I pray you, why do we not hear and follow Paul, who is the best master to
teach, and to interpret divine matters, rather than other men, which sometime
dote in their interpretations?

Anagoge.
Anagoge seems to be of more difficulty, but if we do well expende and weygh
it, Anagogicall interpretation utterly agrees with the Allegorical
interpretation, neither they are distinct, which to be true I will prove both
by the description of them both, and also by the judgment and sayings of the
Fathers.

They call that an anagogicall interpretation when a sentence of the Scripture
is so expounded, that by going a little from the first signification of the
words, there may be something gathered to be meant of the celestial glory to
be looked for after this life, or else some thing to be meant of the mystery of
ye Trinity, and so a passing to be made from things visible, to invisible
things, from a dark speech (as Paul says) to ye clear sight of God. As John
disputing of baptism, John. 3. Coloss. 2.
proceeds from water to the spirit. The Apostle also speaking of our
resurrection with Christ, bids us to look only upon heavenly things,
affirming that our life and conversation is in heaven. But you shall find this
kind of interpretation to be very seldom, and rare in the Scriptures What is
an allegorical interpretation, but that in which a deed or a sentence is
expounded by a new sense, being somewhat removed from ye literal words? But in
such sort yt something may be gathered of Christ or of the church, either of ye
law or else of the gospel, or else of the offices of faith or of charity?

Therefore it is manifest concerning the knowledge and manner of interpreting,
that an allegory and anagogie in all points do agree. And as touching the
matter, there is a very small difference.

Notwithstanding it is no more necessary to put a difference between them, than
it is need to make a difference between an allegorical interpretation, which
is made of Christ, or of the glory of the celestial city of God, and between
yt interpretation which is made of man or of the church which is the earthly
city of God, or of any other matter.

But let us weigh the sayings of the fathers. Dionisius after he had described
the rites of baptism adds, Eccl. hier. c. 2.
yt he would expound them secundu^ anagogen. And yet that which he there
writes, sauoureth an allegorye, and ought simply to be reduced to the order of
an allegory, which thing every mean learned man may judge.

Augustine plainly joins and mingleth an allegory with anagoge. for he
says. Quis sit modus interpretandae allegoriae. etc. What is the way and
manner to interpret an allegory, which is believed to be spoken by wisdom in
the holy Ghost: whether it be sufficient to fetch it from the elder visible
things unto the latter visible things, or else unto the affections and nature
of the soul, or else unto unchangeable eternity?

In which words the two latter members do importe anagoge: yet nevertheless they
are comprehended under an allegory, when he affirms, that he speaks of
interpreting an allegory.

Hierome knowledgeth but three manners of interpreting, that is, ad Hedibia.
Historical, Tropologicall, and Theoricall, or iuxta intelligentia^
spirituale^: for he understood and allegory and anagoge in like sort, which he
judged not to be distinct.

He also in his commentaries expounds some things, as it were per anagogen,
which (if we will narrowly view them) we shall find them to be entreated per
allegoriam.

Esaias. 1.
I will bring forth one or two examples, Cognouit bos possessorem suum, et Asinus
praesepe domini sui. That is. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass knows
his masters crib. Hierome says: Bos iuxta Anagogen refertur ad Israel, qui
legis portauit iugum, et mundum animal est: Asinus peccatorum onere
praegrauatus, gentium populus accipitur. That is: That Ox per anagogen, is
referred to Israel, which carried the yoke of the law, and it is a clean beast:
the Ass being oppressed with burden of sins, is taken for the Gentiles.

Esaias. 1.
Again, upon the words of the Prophet, Derelinquetur filia Sion, sicut
vmbracula in vinea. That is: The daughter of Sion shall be forsaken, as the
shadow in the vineyard. Hierome says: Iuxta anagoge^, vinea dei et pomorum
paradisus homo appellari potest, cui si men's praefuerit. etc. That is, The
vineyard of God, and the pleasant garden of fruit may be called man, in whom
if the spirit and mind does rule, he has God for the keeper af the spirit and
mind, but if sin and vices do take a pray of us, as it were of certain
wild beasts, we are forsaken of God being our keeper, and we shall be all left
desolate.

He declares, that these interpretations are made secundum anagogen, which if
ye will diligently examine, ye shall perceive that nothing is spoken of the
life to come, or of the misterye of the Trinitye, but of the life present, of
the church, and of holy men's exercises. Therefore ye se that the allegorical
sense is there only simply to be considered, and no other diverse sense.

It were an easy thing to bring forth more examples out of Origene, whom
Hierome seems to have diligently followed.

By these examples therefore it is evident, that Anagoge, and Allegoria be all
one. And as much as it is, so every man may perceive, that there be not four
senses of the scripture, but only three, according to Hieroms judgment, and
the censure of other holy fathers, that is to say, the first is litteral, which
is otherwise called Grammatical or Historical, the second is Tropological
(which some have leauer call moral) but the Apostle does more rightly term it,
institutionem and correctionem, and the third is Allegorical, which they call
spiritual, mystical, and speculatiue.

But a word or two more against our adversaries, concerning the literal sense.

Expostulatio.
I do greatly dissent from the opinion of them which judge, that we may attain
to the mystical sense without the understanding of the simple letter, They do
lean to this authority saying. Litera occidit, spiritus vero viuificat, that
is, the letter kills, but the spirit quickneth, whereas no letter kills, but
that only which is peruersly understood and violently wrested, to that which
is far strange, from that which God the author means. As for example. The
phariseis wrested the good worckes which God commanded in the old Testament,
unto vain ceremonies. For when God had given the commandments of the law by
Moses, at the lenght he inferred this. Ligabis ea in manu tua, Deuteronomy. 6.
and erunt immota ante oculos tuos. that is. Thou shall bind the^ in thy
hands, and they shall be always set before thine eyes, of which words this is
the meaning. Let my precepts be in thine hands that they may be accomplished
in your worckes. Let them be before thine eyes, that thou may remember the^
day and night.

The pharisees misunderstanding this, wrote the tene commaundeme^ts of the law
in parchment, and to the end they might always have them in sight, they wrapte
the^ up in a garland, and bound them upon their foreheades Here the letter
killed, because the pharisees corrupted the meaning of God. But if the letter
be well understood, there is meant an other thing, And we shall perceive a
great congruencie between the mystical word and the letter of the law. Which
thing I prove thus.

We read in the old law, that Pharaos magical men, when Moses and Aaron
wrought miracles before their faces, (God working by the^) said. Vere digitus
dei est hic. Indede, this is ye fingar of god. Exodus 8 Luke 11.
we read also in the gospel, that christ said. Ego in digito dei eiicio
demonia. that is, I cast out devils by the fingar of God. What other thing can
we understand in the old and new laws here by the fingar of God, than the
holy ghost and the power of God? as Saint Basil interprets, beside many
other learned fathers.

Likewise as it is said before, where Christ commands, Math. 5.
in the Gospel to cut of and cast away eye, hand and foot, if they offend
us.

Saint Hierome says, that they be mistically signified, which are joined unto
us in kindred, familiarity and friendship, who all in respect of love toward
Christ, are to be rejected and contemned.

How could any mystery here be gathered, except Christ had signified the same
in the better by a parable?

Origene gathered out of these words an higher mystery, interpreting by the
eye to be understand the Bishop and Priest in the Church, who ought to have
respect to salvation of all persons, by the hand he understands the deacon,
because he is a minister, by the foot the people. And all these ought to be
cast of, if they behave not them selves rightly in matters of faith.

For as much then as the mystical sense is builded upon the letter as upon a
foundation the letter is not to be rejected. Notwithstanding there be infinite
places in the holy Scriptures, which if they be drawn to mystical senses,
they do rather kill than edify, as for example, this sentence. Ecce virgo
concipiet and pariet filiu^, and vocabitur nomen eius Emanuel, that is,
behold, a virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son, and his name shall be
called Emanuell. These words ought to be none otherwise understand, but as the
letter speaks: yet Saint Hierome makes record of one, who did interpret
this place, mystically saying, that the virgin betokened the soul, being
corrupt with no spotte of sin. This virgin brings forth Emanuel, yt is,
the word of God. This sense is as fondly sought out as it is far fetched.

Let us therefore take the literal sense for the foundation, upon which every
doctrine ought to be builte (which I spoke by a similitude) unless any will be
so foolish, as to think, that we ought to cast away the rudiments and
alphabeticall letters, that we may the sooner come to the study and knowledge
of Philosophy.

Obiectio.
The law and the letter is called of the holy and learned fathers sometimes a
type, sometime a figure. Ergo. etc.

Responsio.
I grant this to be most true, yea and I will say also, that it is sometime
called Vmbra, a shadow. (...), is a Greek word, which signifies the form of
some one thing, that is called in Latin Figura, a figure.

Now let us vewe to what persons and things types and figures in the law do
pertayne. Saint Hierome, Origene, and all other holy fathers do affirm, the
godly man Job to be a type and figure of Christ, partly for his other excellent
virtues, but specially for his great patience, wherewith he did most constantly
resist the devil.

I pray you, what will you say of this type and figure? is it not a form and
representation of Christ him self?

To be short, this word Litera, in this sentence, Litera occidit, does not
signify the literal sense, 2. Cor 3
as many ignorauntly and peruersly have taken it, whereof has ensued this
pernicious error, that they thought the reading of the scriptures, to be both
vain, and hurtful, unless every sentence almost of the scripture were drawn
to an allegory. And the more bold that any man has been in this kind of
interpretation, he has been cou^pted the more excellent. And so have played
with the sacred word of God, as one would play and toss to and fro, a
tennisse balle.

By this occasion also heretics have wonderfully troubled the Church, for
when it was lawful for them (as they thought) and when they used to make Ex
quolibet quidlibet, there was no doctrine so absurd and so prodigious, which
they would not induce, and bring forth by some color of an allegory.

To end, Litera, Gal. 3.
in this place (as the most of the writers do expound it) does signify the
law, by the which law (as Saint Paul says) comes the knowledge of sin.
Paul in that chapter does teach that the Gospel was not written in tables of
stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart, not written with incke, but with the
spirit of ye living God, and then he says, the letter kills but the spirit
gives life. 2. Cor. 3.
To make the matter plain. In the law whosoever offends, is punished: but in
the new Testament the offender and sinner is made just by faith. Who being
justified, is delivered from the death of sin, and does live. If the law take
hand-fast of a murderer, it kills him, but if grace take hold of him, it
does illuminate and give him life by faith. The law makes of a living man a
dead man, the Gospel makes of a dead man a living man. Math. 11.
Come to me (says Christ) all ye that labor and are laden, and I will
refreshe you. He does not say, Puniam, I will punish, but Reficiam, I will
refresh.

Other learned men do expound this sentence after this sort. The letter
kills, but the spirit gives life, that is, The word of God if it be only
spoken with mouth, and heard only with ear, it is the cause of death, but
when it is received and embraced in heart, then it gives life.

Allegoria.
Thus having plainly and sufficiently entreated of the literal and
Tropologicall sense, I will now speak of the allegorical.

The entreating of allegories pertayneth not to every common sort of people,
neither it must be handled rashly and in every place. Wherefore a great
diligence must be bestowed in the declaration of them, I will orderly discuss
the matter.

First I will show what an allegory is. Secondly how it differs from a type.
Thirdly where and when it is convenient to add allegorical interpretations.
Fourthly which is the most aptest way to gather such interpretations. Fifthly
and finally I will declare what is the use of them, and how far they are to
be admitted.

An allegory generally is defined (as testifies Augustine) to be a trope,
where out of one thing is understand an other thing, De trinitate lib. 15. cap.
9. 1 Thessalonians, ca. 5,
as in this example of Paul. Itaque non dormiamus sicut and caeteri, sed
vigilemus and sobrii si mus, nam, qui dormiunt, nocte dormiunt, and qui
inebriantur nocte sunt ebrii, at nos qui sumus diei, sobrii sumus, that is.
Therefore let us not sleep as others do, but let us wake and be sober, for they
which sleep, do sleep in the night, and they that are droncken, are droncken in
the night, but we which be of the day, let us be sober.

This sentence is to be taken allegorical.

Hierome says, that an allegory does portend one thing in words, and
signifies another thing in sense. The books of Orators and Poets are full.
The holy Scripture also has in it many allegories.

But after this sort an allegory extends it self more largely, for as much
as this definition may be applied to co^parisons, similitudes, darcke speeches,
apophthegmes, parables, apologos, and ironies.

Therefore it is requisite to define an allegory more straytly, and to
distinguish it from the other.

Allegoria, is an interpretation of the Scriptures fetched somewhat far of,
and is adjoined either for utility, or else for necessity unto the
Grammatical and moral interpretation. And although it be somewhat far from
the meaning of the words, yet it keeps a mete similitude of those things
which be compared together, and it is always proportioned to the doctrine of
faith, and applied to the instruction of the hearers.

The ecclesiastical writers have many examples of this interpretation.

We se the fabulouse narrations of Poets (which were ye divines of the
heathen) to be so expounded, that under them may seem to be hidden the
knowledge of great matters, and also that much doctrine may be gathered out of
them, as of the natures of things, the framyng of life, the decrees of
Religion. etc.

These forms and kinds of interpretation Palephatus, has elegantly written
of, and also Fulgentius, and Saint Basile.

Every one of those interpretatio^s if we weigh the^ well, is plain
allegorical, and no man can deny, but there is in them great utility and
profit.

After this sort therefore many places of the holy Scriptures are expounded
allegorically and with great fruit, specially when it is manifest, that the
holy Scripture, is fuller of mysteries than can be spoken, and that it gives
most plentiful matter of spiritual goodness to the whole use of man, as well of
life as of knowledge.

By this it may appear, what is properly meant by an allegory.

Likewise it is said in the Prophet Hieremie. Bibite and inebriamini, vomit
and cadite. Drink and be droncken, spew and fall.

Here is taken a similitude and manner of speaking out of the manners of
droncken men, and are noted incredible troubles and great slaughters to follow,
of such kinds of sentences, Saint Augustine gives a rule saying: An allegory
must be advisedly distinguished from a type. For we se many men to confound
types and allegories together, and where there is a type in any writer, they
falsely affirm it to be an allegory. As for example. Where Paul says. Patres
nostros fuisse omnes sub nube, and omnes per mare transisse. etc. That is, that
all our fathers were under ye cloud, and that they passed all through the sea,
and that they were all baptized in Moses in the cloud and in the sea. etc.
they suppose this to be an allegory, but they are deceived, for it is only a
type, or rather an example, for the Apostle proves by evident examples, that
those men should not escape unpunished, which after they had used the
Sacraments godly instituted by Christ, returned again to their former sins.

I will therefore show you a difference between a type and an allegory.

A type or figure is, when any thing is brought out of the old Testament, and
is showed to have foresignified, or to have figured some thing done or to be
done in the new Testament.

An allegory is when some thing either out of the old Testament or out of the
new is expounded with a new sense, and is applied to spiritual doctrine, or
else to the government of man's life.

A type consists in the comparison of acts and deeds, and is wholly
hystoricall.

An allegory is occupied not so much in acts, as in orations, sermons, or
sentences.

A type entreats almost of none other thing than of Christ, and the Church,
and of the law and the Gospel, neither is it in all places applied to our time
and persons.

An allegory entreats of all things and is very much applied to our persons
which be egged forward, and taught by it unto ye offices of godliness.

In summa, Types are straightly applied unto certain things, as of the person
of Christ, of the Church, of the law, and of the Gospel.

Allegories do largely extend the^ selves, and are dispersed into al matters.
VVherby it may happen in one and the self same history a type may be marked in
one place, and an allegory in another place, as interpretations greatly
different one from another.

For if the history of David, fighting with Goliath, did signify the strife of
Christ with the devil whom Christ overcame and vanquished, it is expounded as a
type to us. But if it do signify the conflict of the spirit with the flesh,
which every one of us feleth in him self, than it is an allegorical
exposition

It is no great nor hard matter to gather such like examples. You shall read
many typical expositions in many places of the new Testament. Jonas being
devoured of the whale, and cast out again, Math. 12.
is described in Matthew to be a type or figure of Christ buried three days, and
rising again from death.

The brazen Serpent was a figure of Christ crucified. Joan. 3.


The Paschall Lamb, whose bones were not broken, was a type and figure of
Christ. Joan. 19. Gala. 4


The two sons of Abraham in Paul do bear a type of the two testame^ts.

In which place although the Apostle declares, that they were spoken by an
allegory: yet they may be well said, that they were spoken not by an
allegory, but rather by a type, (as Chrysostom has well noted) saying,
Comment. in Epist. Gal.
Allegoriae vocabulum ibi pro typo vsurpatur, that is. This word Allegory is
used there for a type, for being a very learned interpreter of the Scriptures,
he perceived that an allegory and a type differed much. Albeit it cannot be
denied, but that an allegory also is there inter mingled, where the Apostle
interprets Jerusalem to be our mother, meaning undoubtedly the Church
gathered by the Gentiles, which was always counted baren, but after was made
more fruitful than the Synagoge of the Jews.

If any man desire to have more examples which open the difference between an
allegory and a type, let him read Cyrillus commentaries upon Leuiticus where
many times when Sacrifices rites and ceremonies are entreated of, he first
declares, if any type of Christ, or of the Church be had in them Secondly he
adds by an allegory some thing profitable for our instruction.

Let this be sufficient how much an allegory and type do differ.

Now I will prove, where and when it is expedient to use allegorical
interpretations, but I wll entreat of them last of all. Neither I can
thoroughly entreat of this part before I have discussed first those things
that pertain to the Grammatical sense, than, the things pertinent to the
moral sense, or as the Apostle says,) (...), how be it this happens not
always, nor rashly, but then only when either the necessity of the sentence
enforces us, or the great utility of the hearers persuadeth. I will show how
both may happen.

There be three causes which enforces us by necessity to expound by an
allegory.

The first is, when the scriptures pretend a falsitie, unless you grant some
trope to be in them. As for example: the Psalm says of Christ. Super aspidem
and basiliscum ambulabis and conculcabis leone^ and dracone^. Psalm. 91.
that is. Thou shall walk upon the Lio^ and Aspe, the young Lion and ye Dragon
shall thou tread under feet. But for so much as we do not read ye Christ did
so, there seems to be a falsitie in ye Prophets words. Wherefore if ye will
expound those words by an allegory, of the va^quishing of ye devil, the
world, sin, and death you have the plain and true sense.

The second is, when the words of the scripture being taken in the gra^matical
sense, do bring forth an absurdity. To this place pertains these phrases of
God, by which the affections of man are attributed to God, as anger,
repentance, irck sons, doubting, ignorance, and furor. etc.

Likewise this saying of Paul. Hoc faciens, carbones ignis congeres su per
caput eius, that is, This doing, thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head.
Where, when mention was made before of feeding, and refreshing the enemy,
these words seemed to be added against the nature of amity and friendship: but
we must interpret them by an allegory (as Austen says) Vt intelligas te ad
beneficentiam reuocari: De doctrine. chri. li. 3. c. ^6.
and carbones ignis esse vrentes penitentiae gemitus, quibus superbia sanatur,
eius qui dolet se ini micum fuisse hominis, a quo eius miseria subuenitur that
is. That thou may understand that thou art called again to do good, and
that the coals of fire, are the burning sighs of repentance with which the
prides of him is healed, who is sorry that he was an enemy to that man, which
relieved and eased his misery. etc.

The third cause is when the Grammatical sense repugneth with sound
doctrine, or is contrary to good manners. Math. 5.
As for example Christ bids to pluck out, cut away, and cast from us the
eye which is cause of offense, but for so much as this his commandment might
not be done without sin, necessity enforces to seek an Allegorical
interpretation. And therefore Chrysostom very well does affirm that these
words, hom. 7
are not to be understand to destroy any parts of the body, but does say
that the ill of lust and pleasure is to be reproved, and that Christ speaks
of them here, which be joined unto us by frendshyp and familiarity, and that
pleasure is to be avoided, and those friends to be eschewed which lead us from
piety.

The book called Cantica canticorum, is full of Allegories, yea it is wholly
Allegorical, lib. de doctr. christ. 3. c. 22.
of the which Augustine gives a goodly rule saying. Si quae facta leguntur a
patribus etiam sanctis, that is If we read any thing to be done of ye holy
father which abhors from the custom of good men* who after the coming of
the Lord do keep the precepts of god, they refer the figure to the
understanding, that is to the mystery, by an allegory, and do not transfer
or bring the deed it self to the same manners.

Whensoever therefore we do chance upon such manner of places in the Scripture,
we do necessarily fly to allegories for so much as if the Grammatical
interpretation be retained, it gendreth no small errors, for so the error of
the Anthropomorphites sprang, which attributed to God the liniamentes of man's
body, and affections of man's mind: when they would not understand those
phrases of God used in the Scriptures to be spoken by a trope and figure.
Likewise the Euchitae erred foolishly, contending that we ought to do nothing
else but pray, because it is written in the Gospel, Oportet se^per orare and
nunquam intermittere, that is. We must always pray and never cease. It is
manifest therefore that necessity enforces sometime to interpret the
Scripture by an allegory.

Vtilitas.
Utility persuadeth us to use allegories, as when in precepts and rules red
in the law and the Gospel, the words only Grammatically and literally taken,
do bring no profitable doctrine nor institution: or if any doctrine do appear,
yet it will be more profitable, if an allegorical interpretation be used.

Which thing I will make manifest by an example. We read in the history of
Jacob how he was deceived of his father in law Laban, how he took to his wife
Lia, thinckyng that he had gotten Rachell. How that for Rachell he had served
many years very hardlye, how he by a provident policy increased his flock
of sheep, laying rods of diverse colors into the troughes. Here seems to
be proposed none or a very small profitable doctrine, but rather guyles,
craftines, foolish love and gredy desire of riches. Wherefore that some fruit
may be taken, it is expedient to expound all these things by an allegory.
And undoubtedly you shall find a sweet taste of the spirit under the hard
bark of the letter, and a pleasant mystery, which is this. Lya, signifies
human Philosophy, and Rachell may signify divine Philosophy, which to
obtain, we must employe all our labors and diligences. Neither yet we ought
to contemn and reiecte human Philosophy if it happen to be given to us, but
yet I say the end and scope of all our studyes ought to tend to the obtaining
of the knowledge of divinity. Neither can the sleightes and guyles of Laban,
that is of the world and the flesh hinder us from enioyeng at lenght the good
things which we desire.

Other perchance may expound this History another way more learnedly and
more fruitfully.

We read also many such examples in Leuiticus, or in some other book, of
Priesthood, of ceremonies, of Sacrifices and diverse observations, After the
Grammatical sense, there comes no profit of the^ unto us, forasmuch as they
be abrogate, and pertayne nothing unto us.

Therefore that we may take some spiritual profit out of them, it is expedient
to use allegorical interpretations profitablie applied to the institution and
framing of life.

So after this sort among the Grecians Origenes, Cyrillus, and Eucherius did
expound almost all the ceremonial precepts of the law, and among the Latins
S. Austen does sometime the same.

But where the Histories be evident and plain which minister profitable
doctrine largely enough by them selves, (as many such be in the books of
Joshua, the Judges, Samuel, and the kings) it would be superfluous to expound
them by allegories.

Likewise where bare precepts infourmyng manners are contained as in the
Proverbs, in Ecclesiastes, in Job, and in the Psalms, there need also none
allegories.

Now I will declare how Allegorical interpretations ought to be framed and
made, which may be best learned and attained, rather by use and often judging
of examples entreated of other men, than by precepts and rules.
Notwithstanding I will give some general notes and observations of this part.

Obseruatio.
1. That man may welbe noted of rashness, which thinks, yt the scriptures
ought to be interpreted in every place allegorically. Such boldness embaseth
maruelously ye authority of the scriptures* for the hearers do forthwith
think, that there is no certainty in ye scriptures, and that it is free for
every man to interpret any place as it pleases him self, for ye which cause
Porphyrius scorned the teachers of our religion, so likewise did Iulianus the
Apostata most enuiously vpbrayde our writers. It behooves us always to perpend
and weigh, where necessity requires it to be done, and where utility
persuadeth it to be done. If in any thing, in this specially we ought to be
circumspect and ware.

2. If you desire to frame an allegory, see first of al, that the sentence of
ye interpretation which you meditate, be found expressed in other places of
the scriptures, plainly and without any figure, and so ye veil being drawn
away, it may correspond to the analogy of the faith. For seeing that every
allegory is ordained to teach the hearers of matters of godliness, it is
requisite, that a simple doctrine of the truth may appear in it. Wherefore it
is not good to receive all allegories yt be made by other me^, but we must
examine and try them by the rule and touch stone of Gods word.

3. We must take heed that allegories be kept within certain bounds of
doctrine, and that they be chiefly occupied in commun places of the Gospel and
of christian doctrine. He that brings the^ out of these bounds, besides that
he does injury to ye sacred scriptures, he also hinders the herers rather
than furthereth them: and of him this proverb may be verified, Extra oleas
currit, that is. He runs beyond his bounds.

4. Furthermore an allegory ought truly to agree in all things with the parts
either of the sentence or of the history which you take in hand to expound, and
that it do by no means repugne with things going before or things following,
for if your interpretation disagree and be far fette, it ^seth all the grace
of an allegory I say not this as though it were necessary superstitiously to
discuss all the parts and circumstaunces, but that it is not mete to omit
the principal parts, and those that do chiefly commend and adourne the cause.

5. You shall not dwell nor tarry in an allegory longer than the cause
requires. Wherefore some learned men will, that allegories be briefly and
pithily touched rather than thoroughly at large entreated. Which kind is used
in the sacred scriptures, and therefore oght worthily to be followed. As for
example: 1. Cor. 9*
Thou shall not mussell the oxes mouth, treading out the corn. does God care
for oxen? Or whether does he speak this for us? It is written for us, that he
which ploweth ought to plow in hope, and he which treads out the corn in
hope, ought to be partaker of his hope.

The same Apostle does very well prosequute that matter which he began
concerning the institution of marriage, and of the mutual love of man and
woman, he expounding them of Christ and the Church, says: Misterium magnum
est, verum ego loquor de Christo and Ecclesia. It is a great mystery, Ephe. 5.
but I speak of Christ and of the Church.

By the which interpretation being but short, he greatly stirs married
folks to their duties, and worthily extolleth matrimony: for he plainly
shows, that the husband in the house (so that it be godly ordered) bears
and represents the person of Christ, and the wife the person of the Church,
in so much that in a very small family there appears a certain image of
Christ and the Church.

Our savior Christ bidding his disciples to beware of the doctrine of the
pharisees and of the Saduces, Math. 16. Exodus 34 2. Cor. 3.
uses a brief allegory of leven. The history of Moses coueryng his face is
very conningly expounded by Paul of the blindness of the Jews

Although some may say, that it is rather a type than an allegory, yet it may
be a very apt allegory, if we do interpret it of them which in our time
cannot suffer the brightness of the verity, and do prefer the traditions of
men before the word of God.

6 For so much as one and the self same place of the Scripture may be diversely
interpreted by an allegory, yet we must take heed, that we make not many
expositio^s thereof. Or if the place does so require, and per adventure is
found diversely expounded of the learneder sort: yet that only exposition is
to be used which has more grace and more agrees to the purpose, and is
occupied in commune places, and is also read to be approved in other places of
Scriptures Augustine has this rule: for after he had interpreted by an
allegory this verse (and those that follow, omnia subiecisti sub pedibus eius*
oues and boues. etc. that is. Thou have put all things under his fete sheep
and oxen. and cetera.) of the power of Christ, he added in the end this. Non
quia ista nomina isto solum modo intelligi and explicari possunt, sed pro locis
nam aliud alibi significant, that is. Not because these words may be
understood and expounded only after this manner, but for the places, for they
signify an other thing in other places of Scriptures. And this rule is to be
retained in all allegories, that that may be considered and weighed for the
meaning of the present place, which is spoken by a similitude.

These notes concerning Allegories shall suffice.

Finally I will declare what is the use of Allegories, and how far they must
be admitted. They ought to be discretly and seldom used, and ye must always
have respect to the hearers, and specially to them that be weak: for although
you do handle them rightly, yet all men do not understand them in one sense.
Wherefore it is very requisite, to be diligent in collectyng the moral
doctrine, or rather according to the Apostles mind, in discussing, searching,
and setting forth of doctrines, in reprouynges, in instructions, in
corrections and comfortynges, this is the judgment of the best part of learned
men.

It chances many times, that he which is bold to frame oftentimes
allegories, falls into error, and utters sometime that, which learned and
good men do contemn, and the unlearned and maleuolous do scorn and scoff at,
and wherewith also the weak be offended.

Origene is ill reported of the learned, although he be not obscure in
Allegories.

Ambrose also appears to be taunted of Hierome, for that he writing upon
Luke, In. Commen. Math. 26.
labored violently to excuse the denieng of Peter by an allegory Hierome
says thus. Scio quosdam pii affectus erga Petrum, locum hunc interpretatos vt
dicerent, Petrum non deum negasse, sed hominem, and esse sensum: Nescio hominem
quia scio deum: hoc quam friuolu^ sit, prudens lector intelligit si sic
defendunt Apostolum and deum mendacii reum faciunt, that is. I know, that some
being godly affected toward ye Apostle Peter, so interpreted this place, yt
they said Peter did not deny god but man, and yt the meaning was this. I know
him not man, because I know him to be god, how vain and frivolous an
exposition, this is, ye prudent reader perceives, if they so defend Peter, yt
they co^de^ne god to be a liar.

The same Hierome accuses and condemns him self, In. prefat ad Abdiam.
because when he was a young man with a youthly rashness and boldenes he
interpreted the Prophet Abdias allegorically, whose history he understood not.

Yea and the hearers the^ selves do oftentimes count it, to be as lawful for
the^ to dally and play with allegories, as it is for the teacher. And when it
does not succeed as they would wish it, they do bring forth monstrous
opinions. As the Priscillianistes did obstinatly defend their wicked opinions,
contendyng that what soever was spoken against them, August. in catalogo herae.
ought to be interpreted allegorically, by the same madness as certain monckes
also did defend their loyteryng and idle life.

Furthermore that which thou interpretest by an allegory one way, Idem in li
de opere mona.
an other man with like boldenes will interpret ye same by an allegory after a
much stranger way. VVherby it happens, the Anabaptists do oftentimes strive
among them selves in their interpretations: and those things that they object
against us, we, chaungyng a little the intepretation, do return them again to
them, as it were buckler players. Therefore you must accustom your selves to
use allegories openly, but seldom, and with anaduised counsel.

It is not to be allowed to proceed at no time and in no place, no further than
the Gra^matical sense. But it is much more to be disalowed, to run at every
light trifling occasion to allegorical interpretations.

Conclusio.
Allegories ought to be received, first, when it is manifest, yt they are made
for a just cause: that is, either for necessity, or else for some notable
vtility.

Secondly, they ought to be admitted when they shall be framed after such a
manner, as we see the^ to have been used of learned writers and teachers.

Thirdly, they may be received, so that they be ordained and applied for ye
instruction and correction of life: not for the co^probation of any doctrine of
faith, for out of Allegories necessary arguments are not to be brought, but
only probable and persuading argume^tatio^s, as Auste^ well affirms.

Fourthly, if an allegory be brought for the confirmation of doctrine, it
shall have the last place, that is, it shall be brought after all other
arguments brought out of the Scriptures, which arguments evidently without
figures and obscurities do confirm and establishe that which is the
principal and chief assertion by necessary consequentes and conclusions.

By these conditions allegories may take place, and it is certain, that they
being thus made, shall not only not do hurt, but also bring some no small
commodity.

Now to conclude, Allegories do delight, teach, and set forth a very rich
plentifulnes of the Scriptures.

And in deed it cannot be, but the auditors may get some fruit by sundry
interpretations made with judgment.

That which sauoureth not to one man's mouth, will be pleasant to an other man's
mouth.

Some men were greatly delighted with heavenly Manna, but other men's stomachs
did loath it. Even so in a great multitude, there be some whom the sundry and
manifold exposition of the Scriptures do please, but there be other whom it
displeases.

That thing pleases every man most wherewith he is affectioned. But understand
this of the purity of sincere doctrine. For the doctrine which is vnpure and
corrupt of it self, how can it profit, any ways? nay it does great hurt.

Peace. 2.
Esaias the prophet calls Jesus Christ the prince of peace, Esaias. 9.
whose kingdom shall be multiplied, and there shall be no end of peace, that is
to say. The reign of Christ shall be the kingdom of peace and tranquillity,
under whom all things shall be joyful and prosperous, and there shall be
playing on instruments, daunsing, singing, and al kind of melody: there shall be
heard the voice of joy, and the voice of mirth, and of God being pacified, of
the remission of sins, and of the mercifulnes and goodness of God: there shall
be heard the voice of the bridegroom and his spouse, there shall be great mirth
and iubilies, there shall be no sadness nor trouble in this kingdom.

And Hieremy declares no less of this kingdom. Hieremy. 22.
In these days (says he) Judah shall be saved, and Isael shall dwell without
fear I will not heap up many testimonies concerning the peaceable reign of
Christ, of the which the scriptures are full, being contented with this one
testimony out of Esaias. Erit opus iustitiae pax. Esaias. 32.
etc And the work of Justice (says he) shall be peace, even the work of
justice and quietness, and assurance for ever, and my people shall dwell in the
tabernacle of peace, and in sure dwellings and in safe resting places. And the
same prophet has in an other place. They shall break their swords also into
mattockes, Esaias. 2.
and their spears into sithes: Nation shall not lift up a sword against nation,
neither shall they learn to fight any more. And when Christ was borne, the
Angels sang, glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, Luke 2. Ephesians. 2.
and good will toward men. And saint Paul writes Ipse est pax nostra, he is
our peace.

Question.
How does this then agree, that whereas the scripture calls the kingdom of
Christ, the kingdom of peace and tranquillity: yet Christ him self says,
that he came not to send peace, Math. 10.
but the sword into the world.

Responsio.
The scripture being misunderstanded of the kingdom of Christ deceived ye
Jews. Also certain new spirits ar deceived, which at this day dream of a
certain security and corporal reign of Christ, where there shall be continual
peace, pleasure of ye flesh and worldly tranquillity, in ye which kingdom one
nation shall not lift up their sword against another nation, and swords shall be
turned into coulters, and there shall be one Shepherd and one fold, and there
shall reign a temporal peace. For this also the Jews look even at this
present time, that is, to have the restitution of their kingdom, but in vain,
not understanding that which Christ said in express words before Pilate.
Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo, My kingdom is not of this world. And being
ignorant, Joan. 28.
how that the kingdom of Christ is a spiritual kingdom, and not a corporal
or earthlye kingdom. John 4.
For God is a spirit, therefore his kingdom is spiritual. And likewise all
things in this kingdom are spiritual. And therefore this peace must be a
spiritual peace, 2. Cor. 3
that is, the peace of the mind and conscience, and no external pleasure, but
rather affliction. There shall be no fear of death, sin, Satan, or hell, but
good will, giving of thanks, although the elect be afflicted of the world, yet
they shall have a confidence in God, they shall not be disquieted, but rather
shall be glad, because they have a crown and a great reward laid up in store
for them in heaven. For Christ does confirm them in these his words: In mundo
afflictionem habetis, Joan. 16.
in me pacem, confidite, ego vici mundum. In the world ye have affliction, but
in me peace, be of good comfort, for I have overcome the world. This is the
peace and comfort of the godly, because they have a loving father in heaven.
The peace of the world is the securitye of the flesh, the concord of the
wicked, and of the enemies of the truth, temporal joys, the fruit of the
pleasures and delites of the world, such a peace he had which said: Luke 12
Anima, habes multa bona reposita in annos multos, requiesce, comede, bibe,
gaude. O my soul, thou have much goods laid up in store for many years, Luke
16.
take thy rest, eat, drink, and rejoice. Such a peace also had that rich
glutto^ in Luke, which was finely appareled, fed and fared always delicately.
This peace have the children of this world, which in deed is no peace, having
so much bitterness and cares mixed with it, it has more gall then honey, being
most full of miseries, with the which this world abounds This peace Christ
gives not, but the world taking it away again when it lists. This peace is
very short and momentainy, and scarce endures any time. But the peace of
Christ is perpetual, it cease not, it is never broken. Of this peace there
shall be no end. Wherefore Christ says in John: Pacem meam do vobis, pacem
meam relinquo vobis, Joan. 14.
non comodo mundus dat, ego do vobis. etc. I give my peace unto you, I leave my
peace with you, not as the world gives, give I it you. Gal 5.
They that are endewed with my peace, have strife with the world: for the flesh
always strives against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. Ismael
does always persecute Isaac, and Esau, Jacob, and Cain, Abel. 2. Cor. 6
There is no fellowship of justice with injustice, there is no communicating of
light with darkness. There is no agreement betwixt Christ and Belial Wherefore
Christ says: I came not to send peace, but the sword, that is division. Luke
12.
For I came to divide the father against the son, and the son aginst the
father, and the daughter against the mother, and the mother against the
daughter, the mother in law against her daughter in law, and there shall be
enmity betwixt them that be of one house. He that shall love father or mother
more then me, he is not woorthye of me. etc. The same thing Simeo^ prophesied
before, saying: Ecce hic positus est in ruinam et in resurrectionem multorum in
Israel. Behold, Luke 2.
he is set for a fall and a resurrection to many in Israel. Christ brings
peace unto the godly, but unto the wicked, trouble, for the wicked cannot abide
the truth, they cannot suffer the judgment of the spirit to condemn their
judgments. Wherefore being blinded, they stir seditions to oppress Christ.
They provoke others against the truth, least that the truth having the upper
hand they might be confounded, but they nothing prevail. Esaias. 8
Omnia quae loquitur, populus iste coniuratio est. Al yt this people speaks,
is a co^spiracy. Fremunt and conueniunt aduersus Christum domini. psalm. 2
They rage and come together against Christ, or the anointed of the Lord. Non
est prudentia and consilium aduersus dominum. Proverb. 21
There is no wisdom nor counsel can prevail against the Lord. The Lord
disperseth a sonder their cogitacions and thoughts, because they are vain.
Luke 1.


Here we hear, that the sword is taken in hand of the peruers and froward
dispisers of the truth: for the godly, loving peace, suffer injury, they do not
rail, they stir not seditions, they exhort unto patience. Contrariwise, the
wicked freate and fume, they intend mischief and slaughter, they raise
tumultes, and persecute the godly, as I said before. Ismael does persecute
Isaac, and he which is borne after the flesh, does persecute him yt was borne
after the spirit. Gal. 4. Esaias. 57.
Whereupon the prophet says Impii quasi mareferuens quod quiescere non potest,
et redundant fluctus eius in conculcationem et lutum, non est pax impiis dicit
dominus. The wicked are as a raging sea, which cannot be still, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace (says the Lord) to the wicked. Hierem.
12.
Likewise Hierome says: Non est pax vniuersae carni There is no peace to all
flesh. To be short. There is no peace without Christ, but only a shadow (and
as you would say) a smoke of peace, which vanishes away before a man can take
any sure hold of it. And it may be well called a peace, nomine, et non re, in
name only, and not in deed. The Christians only have the true peace, yea in
the very middle of tumults, of battle and affliction, they have a quiet
conscience, and are armed with the word of God against sin, death, Satan,
hell, and the world. Romans 8.
They know that althings work together unto them for the best, they know, that
to the clean all things are clean, that al things are subject unto them,
that there is no condemnation unto the^ which are in Christ Jesus They know,
that they have a father in heaven, loving and mercyful, who has care over
them, and nourishes them, out of whose hands they cannot be taken away. John.
10.
And what needs many words? the faithful only acknowledge and glorifye God.
This is the true peace, which the world cannot give, nor take away, only God
gives this peace, which is apprehended and retained only by faith. Romans 5.
Iustificati fide pacem habemus erga deum per dominum nostru^ Iesum Christum.
Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. This peace the Christians do gladly communicate with others, they
preach Christ, in whose blood they promis remission of sins, they embrace
charity, they do not strive, they are not envious, they work deceit against no
man. They lay aside all injuries and wrongs, they offend no man, they spoil no
man, but rather they help al men, giving of their own.

And this is to turn the sword into coulters, to lay aside pride, envy, and
the malice of the mind, to help and succor the necessities of our brethren,
to hurt no man, to hate strife, and to desire peace. If the Jews had
understood this peace, they would not have dreamed of the carnal kingdom
of Christ. Wherefore there is none other kingedome of Christ to be looked
for upon the earth, for it is already begone among us by the preaching of
the Gospel, because all nations are called unto this kingdom, and we which
have received the first fruits of the spirit, are abiding in this kingdom
through faith, hope, and charity. In the end of the world it shall be
finished and declared, what we have hoped for, 1. Joan. 3. 1. Cor. 13.
and what we have believed. Then we shall be like unto Christ, and we shall see
him, as he is. Nunc videmus perspeculum in aenigmate, tunc autem facie ad
faciem. Now we see through a glass darkely, but then shall we see face to
face, that is, we shall have the truth, not a shadow, we shall rain truly and be
glorified.

Therefore such things as are spoken of the Prophets concerning the peace in
the kingdom of Christ, are to be understood spirituallye. That peace is in
the spirit and the minds of the godly, and not a licentious, fleshly and
worldly tranquillity, as certain false Prophets dream, who think that then
there shall be one pastor, and one fold according unto their fond fantasy,
faith engendereth that spiritual peace through the Gospel of Christ.

They that hear the Gospel and believe, they have that peace, of the which all
the prophets so manifestly and often have prophesied. That is called the peace
of God, Philip 4 Coloss 3.
because god only gives it, and christ came to exhibit it unto the world. But
as for the other peace which is of the flesh, he came not to bring, but rather
to dissolve, that we should be at discord and perpetual hatred with the world,
that is, that we should not put any affiaunce in things transitory, but that
we should have peace and concord with God only through our Lord Jesus Christ.
We shall be rich enough in all goodness, if we posses God, which is the
author and geuer of all goodness.

Conscience. 3.
COnscience is a credulity of intention to do any thing, or not to do it with a
firm deliberation of the mind. Here is to be considered, that according to
the minds of the scholastical divines, god in creating the soul of man for his
temple and dwelling place, ordained and set in it four especial natural
properties, by ye which it might aduoyd al dangers, and choose things to be
done, and eschew things to be avoided.

1 The first is, Lex naturalis, the law natural, of ye which S. Romans 2.
Paul writes saying: Gentes quae legem non habent, naturaliter ea quae legis
sunt faciunt. etc. The Gentiles which have no law, naturally do those things
which pertain unto the law, who show the works of the law written in their
hearts, their consciences being a witness unto them.

2 The second facultye is reason, which is a power and facultye of the soul,
not only having a knowledge of good and evil, but also giving a suggestion
and motion to desire that is good, and hate that is evil. Aristole says,
Ratio semper deprecatur ad optima. 1. Ethic.
Reason does always counsel a man to the best.

3 The third thing in the soul is conscience. And like as a candle is set in
the house, that all things in the house may be seen and discerned: So God has
set a conscience in the middle of man's heart, as a light, whereby the soul might
see and discern what to do, and what to refuse.

4 The fourth part in the soul is called Synteresis, which is a sparkle of the
conscience, stirring to do that which is good, and to abhor that which is
evil. To make it plain, the law natural does teach the soul, that every
evil thing is to be avoided, and the contrary to be done. The^ follows
judgment in reason, which defines in judgment, that this thing or that thing
is evil. As for example, pride, avarice, riot, and such like, and so the
conscience is framed and informed, that this or that is not to be done. Now,
when judgment has declared, that thus it ought to be, then follows
Synteresis, which is a sparkle of the conscience which inciteth the will not to
do this evil, but to do this good thing, and it does always murmr and grudge
against the evil. By this it appears, that the conscience is a certain rule
in reason, and Synteresis a rule and guide in the will of man, instigating and
stirring it unto God. This is the doctrine of the scholemen.

Conscientiarum diuersae species.
The schole doctors also do number eight spices of consciences.

1 The first conscience is called of them praesumptuosa, presumptuous. 2 The
second larga, large and broad. 3 The third arcta, narrow and straight. 4 The
fourth conturbata, troubled. 5 The fifth inquinata, corrupt. 6 The sixth timida
fearful. 7 The seventh erronea, erronius and deceitful. 8 The eight and last
is called salutifera, wholesome, good and perfect.
1 Of the first conscience which is called praesumptuosa, presumptuous, saint
Bernard writes, saying: Conscientia quaedam est tranquilla, sed non bona, vt
eorum qui spe veniae peccant, et dicunt in cord suo quod deus non requiret.
There is a certain conscience, and yet not good, as of them which sin upon
hope of forgeuenes, saying in their heart, that god will not require it of them.
Such a conscience is to be feared, because it is a cursed conscience.

Saint Augustine says: Maledictus omnis qui peccat in spe, Cursed be al which
sins in hope.

2 The second conscience is called larga, large and broad. Such a conscience
have they, which only weigh great and heinous sins, and make no account of
the lesser offenses, esteeming them to be no sin. As for example: They care
not for usual swearing nor perjury, except it be committed solemply before a
judge. They think it no offense to use them selves inordinatly with their own
wives. Also to take usury for love, to deceive in byeng and selling, to use
false weightes, and counterfeit coin, they count it nothing. Also to prole and
diminishe the common goods of the church, to spoil by unjust battle, they
count them as no offenses. But what difference is there, whether a man be
drowned in the great and deep sea, or in a little river, since that he can but
once dye in both.

Innocentius says: Per vnicum solum mortale peccatu^ quodcumque damnabitur
homo in aeternum. For one only mortal sin (whatsoever it be) a man shall be
condemned everlastingly. Wherefore, we must beware of a large conscience, which
calls evil good, and good evil, as it is written in Esaias. Esaias 5
Ve, qui dicitis malum bonum, et bonum malum, ponentes lucem in tenebras, and
tenebras in lucem. Vvo unto you which call evil good, and good evil, making
light darkness, and darkness light. But such ar wont to excuse them selves,
Thomas in quod libeto.
saying, that their conscience does not accuse or prick them of any mortal
sin. Unto whom answer is to be made, that an erring conscience does not
excuse a man in such things, which he may and is bound to know. (...) naue^tura.
And especially he may not be excused by his conscience, which transgresses
the precepts of God.

3 The third conscience is conscientia stricta, a strait laced or a spiced
conscience, by the which conscience a man judges those sins which be venial
(as the scholemen term them) to be mortal and damnable. As for example to let
slyp such number of prayers as he has been wont to say, although he were not
bound unto them, or to make a lie in pastime, or to speak a merry word and such
like. But virtue consists in the middle. Wherefore to hold the mean, it is
best in all points. We ought not to make our conscience to straight nor to
large, because (as saint Bernard says) Omne quod est nimium, vertitur in
vitium Every thing that is to much, is turned into sin. Also saint Augustine
says: Sapientes Graecorum et Latinorum pro regula dicunt. Ne quid nimis. The
wise men both of the Grecians and of the Latins use this for a common rule. To
much of one thing is not best. If a man wreste the stringes of a harp to
slack or to straighte, they be tempered out of place. Mark this sentence out
of Ecclesiasticus: Noli esse nimis iustus, neque plus sapias quam necesse est.
Ecclesiast. 8.
Covet not to be over just, nor to be wise more then needs.

4 The fourth conscience is called conturbata, a troubled conscience, of the
which saint Bernard speaks, saying: Quedam est conscientia, nec bona nec
tranquilla, vt eorum qui in multitudine peccatorum suorum desperant etc. There
is a certain conscience, neither good nor quiet, as is of them which despeire
in the multitude of their sins. There is an other conscience which is good,
but not quiet, as of them which being now converted unto the Lord, do pass
their years in the bitterness and sorrow of the soul, that is in heaviness and
sorrow.

Against this troubled conscience let us comfort our selves with this sentence
of saint Bernard. Omnia peccata mundi diuinae misericordiae comparata sunt
quasi gutta aquae. etc. All the sins of the world being compared unto Gods
mercy, are as it were a drop of water being compared unto the whole sea. The
greatness of my sins shall trouble me (says he) but I will not be
ouertroubled, because I will call to remembrance the wounds of Christ. For
the least drop of Christ's blood had been sufficient for the redemption of the
whole world, and for the washing away of all men's sins.

5 The fifth conscience is called inquinata, which the Apostle calls, Tim. 4
conscientiam cauteriatam, a conscience marked with an hot yro^. Such a
conscience have they which stumble at a straw, and leap over a block, that
is, which avoid small offenses, and incur and fall into the greater. As the
Phariseys did, tithing mint and al kind of herbs, but neglecting the greater
commandments of the law. Math. 2^.
They made clean their cups, and would not receive meat with unwashed
hands: but yet they were full of rapine, and all kind of iniquity.

They were afraid least they should be defiled by entering into the hall of
Pilat. yet they had no regard in conscience to murder Christ, Lucas. 11.
being innocent. Such there are at this time, which make a great conscience in
not fasting the Fridaye or Saterdye, but they make no conscience of extortion,
pollyng, and oppressing of the poor, nor slaundryng of their brethren.

6 The sixth conscience is called timida, fearful and scrupulous, which always
fears least she should offend mortally, and this is also called
pusillanimity. Against this conscience the book of Ecclesiasticus speaks.
Noli esse pusillanimis in anima tua exorare, et facere eleemosynam, ne
despicias. Be not faint hearted when thou make thy prayer, neither slack in
giving of alms. For although we should be afraid least we offend god: yet if
it happen that we offend him, let us not fear to return to repentance, and
to pray unto God, that he will keep us from that time forward from sin, and
from temptation, and let us have a sure confidence in him, that he will not
suffer us to fall, if we earnestly pray to avoid sin.

7 The seventh conscience is called erronea, erroneus, which springs of the
conscience before rehearsed, and wills a man to do according to his error,
which he cleaves unto, as it appears in heretics and Infidels, and
Papists, which make a conscience to be true and faithful subjects to their
prince. Also in wicked Christians, who do not forsake their sin, or do not
repent truly, neither resist other men's sins, when they may, and yet th y
think erroniously, to be saved without true faith, and true repentance.

8 The eight and the last conscience is the best, being called salutifera,
which brings health and salvation. What manner of conscience this is, saint
Bernard and Hugo declare, saying: Multae sunt conscientiae. etc. There are many
consciences (say they) but there is none better then that, by the which a man
does know him self. Many men know many things, and know not them selves, but
he that knows not him self, knows nothing well. For to know other things,
and not to know him self, what other things is it, then more grievously to
condemn him self? because the servant knowing the will of his master, and
yet does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Luke 12. Jacob. 4
Nam scienti bonum, et non facienti peccatum est illi. For he that knows what
is good, and does it not, sins. There is this last good conscience, where is
puritas in cord, veritas in ore, and iustitia in opere, purity in heart, verity
in mouth, and righteousness in works.

Certain rules for the reformation of the conscience.
There are diverse rules given, by the which the conscience may be preserved and
reformed.

The first rule is, animosa scrupulorum a motio, the bold and courageous
removing away of scruples. For as saint Bernard says: Scrupulositas nimia
conscientiae desperationem inducit. Overmuch scrupulositye of the conscience,
engenders desperation. Wherefore let us put of and cast away as much as we
can, al scruples out of the conscience, because they are not profitable, but
hurtful, for they are certain suspicions of the conscience. Gerson in a certain
treatise of his writes thus: Mill surgunt praecipue apud aliquos scrupuli
more canum oblatrantes, etc. There rise a thousand scruples of conscience,
especially in some barking like dogs, against them that will walk in the way of
the Lord, which (says he) we cannot better overcome and repel, then to care
nothing for them. But let this contempt be done with fear and good
consideration. And in such matters the counsel of learned and godly men is to
be asked, neither ought we to have regard of fond fantasies. For (as Gerson
says) it is accepted sometime to will, to believe, and to be sorry for our
offenses, although a man cannot sensibly feel that sorrow in heart.

Question.
Here may be demanded, from whence this scrupulous and erroneous conscience is
caused, or comes.

Responsio.
There ar many causes. Sometime it proceeds of four natural causes.

1 First, of a complexion subject and prone unto fear, as in certain old
women, and in melancholique persons, and secondly of a melancholique sickness,
by the which the imagination of the head and reason is hurted, (as Galene and
Auicein write) and then it is good to have the remedy of the Physicians.

2 Sometime it comes of the temptations of the devil, who when he cannot
entise spiritual men unto manifest and open sin, he endeavors through these
scruples and fantasies, to let them from prayer, and other godly
contemplations. Wherefore Gregorius says. Diabolus assidue tentat ut saltem
taedio vincat. The devil does never cease to tempt a man, that at the last he
may overcome him with wearines. And then the best remedy is to flee unto the
recordation of the passion of Christ, and unto earnest prayer.

3 Sometime it proceeds of overmuch watch and fasting, by the which the head
is empayred and made imperfect.

4 Oftentimes it comes by using the conversation and company of such as be
scrupulous. Such causes are to be taken here of, and to be left

The second rule of reformation.
The second rule of reformation is, benigna praeceptorum declaratio, a gentle
interpretation of Gods commandment with equity. For equity (which the
Philosopher calls (...)) does mitigate the rigor of the law. Equity is thus
defined. It is justice tempered with the swetenes of mercy, (al particular
substances being considered) that a gentle sentence may be given. Wherefore
Aristotle writes, (...), interpretatiua legum melior est, quam iustitia
legalis, Ethic. 6.
The interpretation of the law with equity, is better than the justice of the
law with extremity. And so we ought always gently to expound the precepts
of God.

In the court of pleading it is his office to interpreate the law, who is the
maker of the law, or who must give sentence, but in the court of conscience it
pertains to every man for his own fact, so that he interpreate it with
reason. The cause why the commandments of God are to be expounded gently, is
because they were not given of God to take away al liberti and swetenes, which
is clean taken away, when they are interpreted to scripulously and to streit,
for God does not bind us to things hard or impossible. Math. 11
For it is written, Onus meum leave est, my burden is light and easy. And in
the new testament yt which is called impossible is expounded scarce possible,
yt is to say of great difficulty and hard to be brought to pas.

3 The third rule of the conscience is, cordis ad gratiam praeparatio, the
preparation of the heart unto grace which is done by faith and repentance.
Bernard says. Duo faciunt bonam conscientiam, de praeternis paenitere
veraciter, et a futuris abstinere Two things make a good conscience, to repent
unfeignedly for that which is past, and to abstain from that ill which is to
come. Hieron. ad nepotiam.


4 The fourth rule is, diuinae scripturae indagatio, the searching of the
scripture, and the hearing of Gods word, whereupon saint Hierom says:
Scripturas saepius lege and saepius audi: audiens enim sapiens, sapientiorerit.
Proverb. 1.
Read the scriptures often, and hear them often, for the wise man by hearing
shall be made wiser.

Jacob. 1.
5 The fifth rule is, exorationis deprecatio, to pray, to obtain by prayer, as
saint James says. Si quis vestrum indiget sapientia postulet a deo, and
dabiturei. If any of you lack wisdom (says saint James) let him ask it of
God, and it shall be given him.

6 The sixth rule is, fidei adhibitio sapientum et bonorum iudicio. To credit
and to believe the judgment of wise and good me^, whereupon Gerson writes thus:
Vnum hoc generale damus docume^tum. etc. We give this one general rule, that
is to believe the judgment of the wise and godly, and not rashly or lightly to
make any curious doubts and scruples against their sensures and minds.
Wherefore the simple man being doubtful in conscience, ought to ask counsel
of the learned.

7 The seventh is, Humilis praelatis obedientia Humble obedience unto the
Prelates and Preachers for we ought to harken unto the^, for the avoiding of al
scruples and douts, so yt they teach nothing against gods word

8 The eight and last is, superbae singularitatis deuitatio, the auoydyng of
proud singularity and self will, which error of conscience comes chiefly of
a singularity, by the which a man following his own proper sense and judgment,
does swarne from the life and judgment of al other.

Gilbertus the scholeman writes, that as it is one degree of humility not to
decline from the common wai of good men, so it is one degree of pride to lead a
singular life, contrary to the life of all others.

An example I read of a certain man, which desired to be so perfect, that he
might live without al sin, contrary to the saying of the wise man: Seven
times a day falls the righteous. Prouer. 24
He would wear no clothes as other men did, but went into the wilderness naked,
but when he was molested with the pricking and stinging of flies, fell into a
deep heaviness, and almost into desperation. At last he returned to his
christian brothers acknowledging his infirmity, unto whom they alleged this
saying: 3. Reg. 8.
Non est homo iustus in terra qui non peccat There is no man so rightuous in
earth, which sins not.

Joel. 4.
IT is not expressed in the holy scriptures, who and what manner of man Joel,
the son of Pathuel was. But it appears in the first sermon of Peter the
Apostle, that his authority was great, and alleged of Peter against the wicked
blasphemers of the holy ghost, proving the seding of the holy ghost to be
promised and prophesied before.

Saint Paul also alleges Joel, when he disputes of the principal articles of
our faith and salvation. But at what time he prophesied, the interpreters do
diversely judge.

I do consent to them, which judge, that he lived in the time of Esaias, and
prophesied in Judah, where Sennacherib made cruel war against Ezechias. For
although Ezechias had restored the true religion of God, yet (as testifies
Esaias) there wanted not some persons which endeavored to retain and keep still
the old superstitions, and were licentiously given to al kind of wickedness.
Beside the league and covenant with the Egiptians, to the which Ezechias
(being otherwise a very good and godly prince) was, by the subtle and crafty
counsels of certain men, allured and provoked: inso much as the state of the
kingdom of Iewry the^ was like to the state, that the church in these days
almost is in, under the Christian Magistrates, for some do maintain
superstitions, and other again under the pretense of the gospel, do live to
licentiously, and do put al their confidence in man's defense. Which thing was
the cause yt God sent unto them the Assirians, to punish them being ungrateful
and rebellious, yt by their own harm they might learn to obey God, which
before had to proudly contemned his word. Not wtsta^ding he sent before
prophets, to advertise the^ of the danger yt was to come, and to teach and
comfort them being penitent, even when the danger came upon the^. Among which
prophets Joel is nu^bred, who did not so severely inueigh against their sins
and offenses, as the other prophets did (bicauss they were rather to be
comforted, then to be bitterly chid) but with a singular gravity told the^ the
dangers which they already suffered, and also what they should suffer afterward.

Furthermore he told them, that repentance was the way to escape the perils,
and instructed them how they should repent.

Finally, least any man should be offended at the fortunate successes of the
enemis of God, he prophesied also what perils should fall upon them, and thereby
he takes occasion to prophecy of the kingdom of Christ, and of the happy
instauration thereof. Which both things he accomplisheth in two sermons, of
which the first comprehends in a sum, what peril they should be in, and
how they should repent. The second declares, the same more largely, adding
what dangers should come upon the enemies of God, and shows those things
also that were pertinent to the kingdom of Christ promised.

In which things the maruailous goodness of God is to be considered, which does
not punish, no not the most wicked, except they be warned before, and yet he so
punishes the^, that he has in the mean time a co^sideracion of his chosen,
whom he does sustain with loving consolations.

He prophesied of the calling of the Gentiles to the fellowship of the church
of God. Also he called the vale of Iosaphat, not the vale of ire, but the vale
of grace.

Joel in Hebrew signifies (...), in Greek, that is in Latin, incipiens, a
beginner, or else betokens Dominum deum, the Lord God.

How he died, we have no certainty.

Nabuchodonosor. 5.
NAbuchodonosor king of the Chaldeies, or of Babylon (who for his noble gestes
was surnamed Magnus, the great) began his reign at Babylon, in the fourth
year of Ioachims reign. But how long he reigned, we have no certainty. Who (as
Josephus says) after he had taken upon him the kingdom, made great wars with
the borderers, and had very good succes in battle, especially against ye
Egiptians, and at length vanquished their king Nechao, and his son Psameticus,
which succeeded him He subdued Iewry and Syria, killed the foresaid Ioachim, and
his successor twice vanquished, with his mother and family, princes, and many
other mo, which had yielded them selves to him, and brought the vessels of the
Lord into Babylon, and placed Sedechias in Ioachims room: who, when he had
broken his oath and promis, Nabuchodonosor came and beseged the city long time
with a great army, and at the length, when he constrained the Citizens to yield,
took him prisoner almost famished, and caused his eyes forthwith being
brought before him, to be put out, and commanded all his family to be slain,
and brought many bondmen of the city into Babylon, commanding the whole City
and the Temple to be destroyed and burned.

He obtained at the length ye kingdom of the Assiria^s, which had been
destroyed of the Meades, whereby ye kingdom of Babilo^ was made the Monarchy
over al kingdoms, but when he had exalted him self to much by standing to much
in his own conceit, the Lord stroke him with a certain madness called Mania,
Daniel. 4
and caused him to eat hay and grass as an ox and horse seven years. Which
years being expired, lifting up his eyes to heaven, beseched God to grant him
again his kingdom, which was restored to him with his sense and reason, which
when he had received, he praised and tha^cked God, receiving greater glory and
renown than he had before Wherefore he said. I laud, praise, magnify and
glory the king of heaven, because al his works are true, and his ways ar
judgment, and he knows and is able to make the proud humble. After he had
lived forty years, he died at Babylon, and left his son Nabuchadonozor to
succeed him in his kingdom.

Simon Magus. 6.
SImon Magus was born in Triton (or as some say) Gittho^, a town of Samaria.

He was taught and exercised from his youth in Philosophy and other letters, it
appears, that he followed the Philosophers trifles concerning the Gods, he
borrowed a mixed religion of the Jewish and of the Christians. He craftly and
deuilishly did attempt to confirm it. He had to his father one Anthemius, and
to his mother one Rachell. He was learned in the Greek, and very expert to
dispute in dialect.

When his confused religion took place in Samaria which was partly Iewishe
and partly heathenisse, this Simon being of an evil nature, by the instigation
of the devil wrought wonders, and grew to such a mad folly, that he was bold
openly to call him self God, and required godly honors to be given unto him.
And that he might be the better credited, he gave him self to Magic, and so
blinded the eyes and minds of men with such illusions and miracles, that he
gat thereby many folowers. He gat great sommes of money by these crafty pretenses.

Furthermore he practiced Magic long time before Christ's passion, no man
letting him. But after that Philip the Apostle came into Samaria, and taught
the Gospel of Christ, Simon also and many other were won thereby to the
heavenly verity, he among other dissembled, that he him self embraced the
Christian Religion also, and received Baptism. He also followed Philip a
certain space, being allured by his wonderful miracles. But when John and
Peter laid hands upon the Church of Samaria, seeing that the holy ghost was
meruelously exhibited by the^, at the length opened that which he hid and kept
secret in his heart, impude^tly asking of the Apostles, that he also might
give the holy ghost by layeng on of hands, and offered the^ money for a reward.
For he thought, that they did it by some Magic art of which he was not
conning. But Peter perceiving his wickedness, Act. 8.
grievously rebuked him, saying, Pecunia tua sit tibi in perditione^ quonia
donum dei existimasti pecunia parari. Thy money perish with the, because thou
thinckest that the gift of God may be obtained with money. Thou have neither
part nor fellowship in this business, for thine heart is not right in the sight
of God. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness and pray to God, that if it be
possible the wicked thought of thine heart may be forgeuen thee, for I see,
that thou art of a bitter gall and bound with iniquity. Simon then also feyned
a certain humility, and desired, that the Apostles would pray for him. But
afterward he became never the better, but rather worse and worse. For what
things soever he had learned out of the Gospel, of Christ, of the holy ghost,
and of man's salvation, he presumed wickedly to transfer the same to him self.

He took unto him a certain harlot named Selene or Helena out of the common
brothelhouse of Tire of Phenice, saying that she was the first conception of
his mind, and the mother of all, by the which in the beginning he conceived
in his mind to make angels and archaungels. Ireneus.


Some said, this Selene was yt Helena for whose sake the battle of Troy was
made. He came to Rome in Claudius ye emperors time when he could abide no
longer ye light of the gospel, which shone every where, he gat him into Asia,
Justinius.
and there obtained in short space, his image to be openly set up.

Philaster writing of the departure of Simon, says, that when he fled out of
the City of Jerusalem. He came to Rome, and there conte^ded with Peter before
Nero the emperor, and being overcome with the Apostles words, and stroke^ of
an angel, he deserved such a death, yt he showed to all men an evident plage
of his falsehood and of his magical practice.

Epiphanius says, that he fell down, and died in the midst of Rome.
Theodoretus says, that he called Peter to strive with him for worcking
miracles, and Simo^ Magus taking upon him to fly being of great height in the
air (for some say that he did fly by ye ministry of devils) was cast down by
Peter's prayer, so yt falling upon the ground he died immediately.

Infantes ought not to be partakers 7.
of the Lords Supper.
IT is not unknown, yt the Eucharist in ye time of Innoce^tius, Cypriane and
Austen was ministered to the infantes of the faithful, as well in Europe as in
Africa neither it is read, that the custom was otherwise in all Asia.

We read a certain history how that a femall infant in the time of
persecution was brought by her nurse to the Sacrifices of the Gentiles, and
afterward (peace being restored) she was brought by her mother to communicate
with the faithful, of who^ S. Cyprian makes large mention.

Augustine also makes mention in many places, that the Euchariste was
ministered to the yonglings.

After those fathers times, that universal custom began to be abolished by
little and little, until a contrary custom took place, In so much that at this
day he is to be counted an heretic, which judges, that the Euchariste ought
to be ministered to infantes.

The Church of Lotharingia even at this present time does remain in ye steps
of that custom. for there, when an infant is christened, ye Priest which
baptized him, brings to the altar one part of the host (as they call it)
taken out of the cofer, and shows it to the people, then he puts it again
into the cofer, and reaches forth his two fingars wherewith he handled that
part of the bread, to be washed with wine, and droppeth the wine into the
infants mouth, which was baptized, saying, Sanguis domini nostri Jesus Christi
proficiat tibi in vitam eternam.

The old fathers were moved to Minister the Sacrament to infantes by this
saying of Christ, John. 6.
Nisi manducaueritis carnem filii hominis and biberitis eius sanguinem non
habebitis vitam in vobis, that is. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. VVherupo^ they
thought it necessary, that infants should be admitted to the Sacrament, that
they might be made partakers of the grace of Christ, and of everlasting life.
But that which our savior Christ speaks of the spiritual eating and
drincking of his flesh and blood, they did understand and wrest to the
Sacramental ceremony.

But the latter writers were moved to deny infantes the use of the Sacrament,
by these words of Paul. Probet seipsum homo, and sic de pane illo edat, and
de poculo bibat, that is. Let a man try and examine him self, And so let him
eat of the bread and drink of the cup, for by that saying they framed this
argument. Infantes can not prove them selves, therefore it is not lawful for
them to eat of the bread and drink of the cup of the Lord.

They that brag and boast, that the fathers did agreablie expound the holy
Scriptures, may here se how diversely they intepreted them.

Cypriane, Augustine and Innoce^tius were not ignorant of this Christ's
sayings. Nisi manducaueritis, etc. Except you eat the flesh of man and
drink of his blood you shall not have life in you.

How then did the old fathers understand the Apostles words, that they let
not the infantes. And the later writers did understand them so, that they
judged that they ought to restrain the infantes from part a king the Lords
supper. Again how did they understand Christ's words, when they gathered by
them, that infantes of the Christians could not be saved unless they were
partakers of the Lords supper: and the other contrariwise judged, yt no such
thing ought to be gathered of those words, In so much that they affirm, that
infantes of the faithful, may be saved without partaking of the Sacraments?

By this diversity of expositions they do accuse one the other, of error, yea
in a matter of great importau^ce, concerning the salvation of infants, toward
whom next after our own salvation we cannot be more affected. Is this a
congruent expounding of the Scriptures? I do not taunt the fathers, God forbid,
but I do disco^me^d their perverse frowardnes, which do condemn the gifts of
God, of heresy in those men which do interpret the Scriptures in our time,
because in some places they do differ one from an other.

If the diverse expositions of the Scriptures be called heresy, let the
fathers be called heretics, John. 7.
either let them hear this saying of the Lord. Nolite iudicare secundum
faciem, sed iustum iudiciu^ iudicare. Judge not according to the outward
appearaunce, but judge righteous judgment.

The labors and payns of learned men either old or new, are not to be
condemned, because they expound the Scriptures diversely every man for his
understanding. But their worckes are so much the more to be read. For the
diversity of judgments and expositions, does profit a wise man, so that no
man do rashly condemn the writer, that dissenteth from him, or breaks the
bond of peace in the Church.

Again to the matter, I judge that it may be well weighed and considered if
the doings of the old fathers which admitted infantes to ye Lords supper be
discretly distinguished from the cause that moved them thereto. And also if we
do judge of their doings according to other godly and probable reasons. Of
which sort I will bring forth some to be considered of the reader.

The first is this. The Sacrament or sign ought not to be denied to him which
is partaker of the thing signified.

The second is. Because Christ is a savior to his whole body the Church, and
because infantes do pertayne to the integrity and perfection of the
Ecclesiastical body.

The third is, because Christ said. Sinite paruulos venire ad me, and ne
prohibeatis eos. etc. Suffer little ones to com unto me, and forbid the^ not,
for theirs is ye kingdom of heaven, for by these resons we may gather thus.
First if he may be partaker of ye sign which partaketh the thing signified:
Infants also of the faithful be partakers of the death of Christ, that is, of
the redemption, which is purchaced by it. Therefore they may be partakers of the
sign and Sacrament of his death, that is, of the Lords supper.

Secondly, if infantes do pertayne to the Church, which is the body of Christ:
It follows that they do belong to that communion, by which (as the Apostle
says) we be all one body, which be partakers of one bread and one cup Christ
is the meat of the whole body, therefore he is the meat also of the infantes.

Wherefore like as the infantes of the Hebrews did no less pertayne to the
Pascha (being a Sacrament of their redemption,) then their fathers: So also our
infants do so well pertayn to the Sacrament of our new Pascha, as well as we.

Thirdly if Christ him self vouchesaued to have infantes to come unto him, to
embrace and to lay his hands upon them, and to bless them, how shall we judge
them unworthy to be admitted to the Sacrament of his body and blood, for so much
as no man judges the Sacrament to be preferred before Christ him self?

Now to the place of saint Paul, let a man prove him self, 1. Cor. 11.
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. It may be
answered, that it ought to be understand only of them which stand in danger
to eat the bread, and to drink of the cup of ye Lord unworthily, as the text
it self manifestly declares. But this is not to be fered in infants of the
faithful, whom we may not well call unworthy of the Lords table, for that they
be worthy by the grace of Christ, being incorporate to him in Baptism,
although they cannot for their age either believe or confess their faith, or
prove them selves, which things are well required of them that be of age.
VVheras the Apostle monisheth us to prove our selves before we do partake of
this bread and cup of the lord, he does it not to the end yt our coming to the
Lords table should be obtained of this study of prouyng our selves, but that
we should not rashly and lightly receive the sacrament of grace abusing it, and
sinning against the body and blood of our Lord.

This reason restrains not the infants of the faithful from being partakers
of the body and blood of Christ.

After this manner might some man object for the defense of geuyng the Sacrament
to infantes, and to defend the doings of the old fathers, who taught that
infantes ought to communicate.

Obiectio.
Some man will say. Than you do allow the doings of the old fathers, and so ye
may condemn that which has been used in all Churches after the^.

Responsio.
Neither the one nor the other is to be condemned, nor we will be authors to any
man to enterprise to bring again the communion of infantes into the Churches,
or to judge that it ought to be brought in again, for by that way we may
minister occasion of discord, but let those things which concern their
salvation in Christ remain sound.

To be short, this saying of Saint Augustine is not to be allowed: that if
infantes do dye without the external partakyng of the Sacrament, they cannot
be saved: but the judgment of the Church at this day (which is that the
external partakyng of the Lords Supper is not necessary) is to be allowed.
Nor they are to be gaynesayed which do affirm, that infantes ought not to be
admitted to the communion, for certain inconveniences.

To prove them selves. 8.
1, Corin. 11.
SAint Paul does not in this place require, that we prove and try other
persons, but that we prove our selves. For this proof respects the
conscience and inward mind. We are wont to try gold and money, whether they
be counterfeict or no, and shall we not much more now try and prove our
conscience, before we come to this table more precious then gold.

Question.
What manner of probation ought this to be, or how ought we to try our selves?

Responsio.
In the late Romish Church the chiefest part of this probatio^ was attributed
unto auriculer confession. For the papists did co^mau^d all the^ which would
receive the Sacrament, diligently and straightly to examine their life, and
that they should exonerate the^ selves of all their sins into the Priests
ears.

But S. Paul requires an other manner of preparing and probatio^. This
probation consists in two things, that is, in faith and repentance. Faith
receives doctrine, and repentance requires conversion of life. First
therefore let man prove him selves, that is, let him be armed with faith, when
he comes to this holy mystery, 1. Cor. 13.
as Paul says in an other place: Vosmet ipsos tentate, si estis in fide, ipsi
vosmet probate.

Secondly let not our minds burn with filthy lusts of avarice, hatred,
whoredom and such like, but let our life be pure and adourned with good works
and so let us come to this heavenly banquet: Notwithstanding they are not to be
heard, which will bind and refer this probati^ to such purity of life to be
had in our good works, as ca^ scarcely be found. But obedience begone in us of
a godly life and a set purpose to go forward in godliness pertain to this
probation and proof. Therefore if thou aspire with an earnest and serious mind
to the righteousness of god, and if thou be humbled with the knowledge of thine
own misery, and do rest wholly in ye faith of Christ, the^ persuade and
resolve thy self to be a worthy gest of this mystical table, I mean, a worthy
gest, who^ God does not exclude, although there be imperfection in thee and some
thing to be desired in thee. For faith, but eue^ bego^ does make at length of
unworthy me^ worthy persons. For other wise a perfect and absolute probation,
which requires all kind of purity, can not be had in this life. Wherefore
the wicked opinions of the Anabaptists and their solemn deuocions, are
greatly to be improued, who coming to the lords table bind them selves with an
horrible obtestacio^, that they are so perfect, that they fear not straight
way to dye, because they think them selves to have so great love and
charity toward their brethren, as Christ had, hanging upon the cross.

Original sin of the 9.
Virgin Marie.
THere has been very much contention between the learned, whether the virgin
Marie were conceived and borne without Original sin, or no. Some doctors
affirming it, as Chrysostom and Theophilacte. Other do deny it. The Thomistes
hold the affirmative. The Henricistes and other, defend the negative. Petrus
Galatinus does make a long discourse of this matter, bringyng in objections
which seem to prove the affirmative, and he makes answer unto them, and
attempteth to confute them, and to prove the contrary. But so hot a prouer as
Galatinus is, and so cold probations saw you never. I speak under correction
of the learned.

I will rehearse unto you the words of a godly Bishop and constaunt Martyr of
England concerning this matter. Being occasioned (said he) by some men which
gave to much devotion to our Lady without judgment, as though she had not
needed Christ to save her. To prove Christ her savior, to make Christ a whole
Savior of all that be or shall be saved: I reasoned after this manner. Either
she was a sinner, or no sinner. There is no mean, if she were a sinner, then
she was preserved from sin by Christ: so that Christ saved her, and was
her necessary savior, whether she sinned or no Now certain authors (said I)
as Chrysostom, Theophilact, and other, writes as though she had been some
thing faulty in her time. Also I said, that certain Scriptures stands some
thing to the same, unless they be the more warely understood. As these
Scriptures. All have declined, that every mouth be stopped, and all the world
is bounden in danger to God. Again, all have sinned, and need the grace of
God. Also death passed through into all men and women, for as much as al have
sinned. But to these Scriptures I said, it might be answered, that the
privilege of one or of a few do not derogate or minishe the verity of an
universal exposition in Scriptures. And as to ye doctors I said, that other
mo says otherwise, and for as much as now it is universally and co^sta^tly
received and applied, that she was no sinner, it becomes every man to stand
and agree to the same, and so will I (quod I) nor any man that wise is, will do
the contrary: But to my purpose, it is neither to nor from, to prove neither
this nor that, for I will have her saved, and Christ her Savior, whether ever
she was a sinner, or no sinner. And to that, (some said) what need you to
speak of this? I answered, great need: when men cannot be contented, that she
was a creature saved, but as it were a Sauioresse, nor nedyng of salvation, it
is necessary to set her in her degree, to the glory of Christ, creator and
savior of all that be or shall be saved. Good authors have written, that she
was not a sinner: but good authors never wrote that she was not saved, for
though she never sinned, yet she was not so impeccable, but that she might
have sinned, if she had not been preserved. It was of the goodness of God that
she never sinned It had come of her own ilnes, if she had sinned. There was
difference betwixt her and Christ. And I will give as little to her as I can
(doing her no wrong) rather then Christ her son and Savior should lack any
parcel of his glory. I am sure, that our Lady will not be displeased with me
for so doing, for our Lady sought his glory here upon earth, she would not
defraude him now in heaven, but some are so superstitiously religious, so
preposterously devout toward our Lady, as though there could not to much be
given to her. Such are zeleous without knowledge and judgment, to our Ladies
displeasure. No doubt, our Lady was through the goodness of God, a good and a
gracious creature, a devout handmayd of the Lord, endued with singular gifts
and graces from above, which through the help of God she used to Gods
pleasure, according to her duty, so geuyng us ensample to do likewise: so that
all the goodness that she had, she had it not of her self, but of God the
author of all goodness: the Lord was with her favorably, and powered graces
into her plentuously: as it is in the Aue Marie. The son of God when he would
be come man to save both man and woman, did chose her to his mother, which
love he showed to her alone and to none other, of his benign goodness, by the
which she was the natural mother of Christ: and through faith in Christ, she
was the spiritual sister of Christ, saved by Christ, blessed by hearing
Christ's word, and keeping the same. It should not have auailed her to
salvation to have been his natural mother, if she had not done the will of his
heavenly father. By him she was his mother, by him she did the will of his
father: She was the handemayden, he is the Lord. The handemayden did magnify
her Lord, the handmayden would that all should magnify the Lord, to whom be
honor and glory. Amen.

These be the words of that godly and constant preacher. But whither he
considered and had a respect to the corrupt time, when he spoke these words,
or else that he would give no offense to the weakelynges not able to receive as
yet whole meat, he seems in these words to grant the scholasticall
distinction De duplici redemptione, id est, subleuatiua, and preseruatina. The
schole men say that Redemptio preseruatiua, is more noble and more perfect,
then Redemptio subleuatiua. As for example. It is much better to preserve a man
from receiving a wound, then to give him remedy after the wound is given. So
is it more noble and much better to preserve one that he fall not into sin,
then to deliver him from sin after his fall Even so the Virgin Marie, and
none but she, was redeemed by Christ, Redemptione preseruatiua, which far
excels Redemptionem subleuatiuam, wherwithall sinners are redeemed from
sin. Thus reason the scholemen.

But if the Scriptures be well weighed and understood, it will manifestly
appear that none, no not the virgin Marie was exempted from Original sin
(Christ always excepted)

Saint Paul writing to the Romans does say. De fide ad petrum part prima q.
24.
Omnes in Adam peccauerunt and egent gratia Dei. All have sinned in Adam and
want the grace of God. Whereupon it follows necessarily that Marie sinned in
Adam, and that Prima materia eius, was infected with the sin of Ada^, and so
corrupted in original sin.

Secondly if Marie should have been conceived without Original sin, she should
have been begotten Sine concupiscentia, without lust, De fide ad petrum.
which Saint Augustine does deny, his words be these. Hold steadfastly and
doubt not by no means, that every person which is conceived by copulation of
man and woman, is borne with Original sin, and subject unto death. And all
that be borne with lust of copulation, are conceived with Original sin.
Then seeing that the virgin Marie was begotten by the copulation of father and
mother, she must needs as other are, be begotten in Original sin.

Thirdly if the virgin Marie should be utterly void of sin, Christ had not
been an universal redemer, 3. did. quest. 3
which to grant were very inconueniente. Therefore Christ was also her
redemer and Savior, as she sings her self in her song, saying. Et
exultauit spiritus meus in deo salutari meo, and my spirit rejoiced in God my
savior. Now redemption or salvation does presuppose sin, for none can be
said to be redeemed or saved, except it were from some sin. The redemption
which the scholemen call Preseruatiuam, seems more subtle then sauerie.

Fourthly and finally, Aquinas writes after this manner. Alius error fuit
eorum qui dicunt, quod peccante Adam, Dominus aliquid incorruptum and non
infectum in Adam conseruauit, per quod natura humana seruari posset, and quod
hoc ide^ transfusum est sine aliqua infectione ad beata^ virginem, and exinde
formatu^ est corpus Christi, hoc aute^ erroneu^ reputatur propter duo, that is.
There was an other error, of which they say, that when Adam sinned, the Lord
preserved some thing incorrupt, and not infect in Adam, by the which the
nature of man might be saved. They also say, that the same thing was transfused
without any infection into the virgin Marie, and that of that, the body of
Christ was fourmed and made. But this is erroneous for two causes, first,
because after this position, Christ should not be the son of the virgin, nor
should be borne of any stock or lineage but only of Adam, for that part
because it remained incorrupt in the nature of man, should be far fet and
strange from all other, being borne of Adam, and should be proper and
connaturall only unto Adam, as much as concerns the first state.

Secondly, because the due order of signification should be taken away, for as
it was not decent, that any should satisfy for Adam and his corrupt
succession, which were not of his stock, so it had not ben mete that the
son of God should have healed by satisfaction, a nature infected, unless he
had taken that thing which before was infected. Therefore it is to be said,
that the flesh of Christ, as concerning being in the flesh of the parents,
yea and in the virgin Marie, was infected with sin before it was taken. But
in the very actual taking of the flesh, it is purged from all infection, so
that concerning the flesh of Christ, there is found no spot in it. These be
the words of Thomas. By which it appears that the flesh of the Virgin was
infected with original sin. He that will read more of this matter Pro and
contra, Let him read Galatinum, in his book, De arcanis Catholicae veritatis.

Democritus. 10.
DEmocritus was a philosopher borne in a city called Abdera, who receiving of
his elder brothers the portion of his fathers inheritance, being kindled with
the great desire of knowledge of things, went through the greatest part of the
world. He returnyng afterward into his country, being in great penury, gave
him self to the conte^placion of natural things, in a certain orchyard near
to the walls of his City.

It is reported, that he, what thing soever chanced by fortune, or what soever
he heard of the mutabilitie of things, fell into a maruailous laughter. And
therefore by the figure, Antonomasia, all dissolute laughters be called
Democriti.

At the last (as Cicero says) he pulled out his own eyes, and made him self
blind of purpose, that he might the more narowly and nearely search out the
secrets of nature.

He died at the age of.109. years He said, that al things were made, Exatomis,
and yt there were many worlds, and those corruptible, he so excelled and
profited in all kind of Philosophy, yt he might have been called, (...), sieve
quinquertio. For he attained to the knowledge of things natural, moral,
mathematical, all the liberal sciences, and to the connyng of all Arts.

His father was marvelous rich, for he made to the whole army of the
soldiers of king Xerxes, a solemn feast.

He had a very excellent saying, which is this: Co^uenie^tius est, vt
parcitate^ in tuo serves, quam luxu^ in alieno: parcitas enim est remediu^
necessitatis vt medicina da^noru^, that is. It is more convenient to be
sparefull of thine own, then to be prodigal of an other man's, for parcitie is
a remedy of necessity, even as medecin is of hurtes.

Laertius writes that there were six Democriti.

Vincentius. 11.
THere were many of that name. But ye first Vince^tius was a very godly man,
borne in Spain, and scholar to Sixtus Bishop of Rome.

He suffered very cruel martyrdom at Vale^ce in Spain, with Valerius ye
Bishop of that city, under Dacianus the president. In so much that being
cruelly handled in prison with hunger, and noise of chains, and bearing great
yrons upon his hands and neck, he suffered deadly punishment in all his
limbs. Which martyrdom s. Austen declares in a sermon, saying: Magnu^ and
admirandu^ spectaculum noster animus caepit. etc.

Our mind conceived a great and marvelous spectacle, and we saw with our
inward eyes, not a cruel and pernicious pleasure taken of trifles, as it is
wont to happen in places appointed to behold games, but a very profitable and
fruitful pleasure, when the passion of Vince^tius was read. It causes me to
tremble, to behold the vnuinceable stomach of this martyr, stryuing with very
sharp conflict of the flesh against ye cruelty of Dacianus, and against the
pains of death, and at length by the help of god ouerco^ming al torments For
Dacianus caused this godly man first to be racked and tormented in his whole
body in Equuleo, that is, a place made of burning plates, in likeness of an
horse, and the^ his body so racked and rent, to be diversely wounded, and torn
in pieces with cards or hooks. And yt he might more cruelly vex him, he made
the torme^tors to whip and beat him, with much more cruelty, as S. Austen
declares.

Saint Augustine also in an other sermon speaks of this Vincentius, after this
sort. Blessed Vincentius was truly called Vincentius. For he most strongly
overcame all the perils of death. He overcame in words, he overcame in pains,
he overcame in confession, he overcame in tribulation, he overcame being
burned, he overcame being drowned, he overcame being alive, he overcame being
dead. For when he was dead, it is said, that angels spoke thus unto him:
Agnosce, O vincenti, quia pro cuius no mine vitiliter decertasti. etc. Know
thou, O Vincent, that he for whose sake thou have manfully fought does keep a
crown prepared for thee in heaven, which has made thee a conqueror in
pains.

His passion and noble Triumphs Prudentius has expressed in very elegant
verses.

Saint Augustine also in many sermons declares, how much the martyrdom of
Vincentius is to be had in reverence and praised.

This Vincentius, whereof mention is made in the Prelection before, was a French
man borne, a Monk and Priest of a monastery in the I Will of Lirinense. He wrote
two books, Contra omnes haereticos, he wrote a book also, Pro antiquitate,
and vniuersitate Catholicae fidei. He lived in the year of our Lord.430. as
Gennagius writes.

There was an other Vincentius, which was a French man also, a black friar.
He wrore.iiij. great books, the first entitled, Speculu^ historiale, the
second, Speculu^ natural, the third, Speculu^ morale, the.iiij. Speculu^
Doctrinale, beside other works, he lived in ye year of our Lord 1240

Aaron. 12.
AAron was the son of Amram, he was Moses brother. He was very eloquent the
Orator and interpreter of Moses, he was the first high Priest called of God by
Moses to ye ministry of ye Leuitical priesthood. He bare the type and figure
of the high Priest Christ. Numb 12.


It is recorded, that he with his sister Miriam murmured against his brother
Moses, and therefore provoked the Lord against him, he was let to enter into the
land of promise, because he was somewhat unfaithful at the waters of
contradiction.

He had four sons. Ithamar, Eleazarus, Nadab and Abiud. When he was.123.
years of age, he died in the mount, Hor, an hill of the Idumeans. Ahora^, in
Hebrew, is in Latin, Mons fortis, vel mons cantici seu laudis a Ranan,
laudauit. A strong hill, or an hill of singing or of praise.

Because I have made mention of Aaron, being high Priest, I will give you some
notes, concerning his apparel and the signification thereof.

There are nou^bred nine kinds of the apparel belonging to the Priests: some
nou^ber but eight, but Josephus recites tene. First of all the Priests were
washed with clean water before they went to do Sacrifice, and then they did
put on their holy garments. There was certain apparel common to the high
Priest and to the other Priests.

First the Priests had lynnen breches to cover their priuities, which
breeches did reach from their loins, unto their thighs, the higher part
whereof was made first above the huckle bone, much like unto our trussed hose,
that when they should do sacrifice, and draw or bear any burden, if they fell,
the thing that ought to be close, should not be seen. Then they put on a short
and straight coat without sleues, which sat plain up on the body, without
plaite or wrinkle, and reached down to the calfe of the leg.

Thirdly, they had a girdle which girded the same coat unto them. This girdle
was made of purple scarlet, fine linen, and blew silk. The ends of the which
girdle should hang down to the calfe of the leg, but in their ministry they
cast it upon their left shoulder.

The fourth kind of garment was a round cap, or a myter, which covered the
head to the ears.

The fifth manner of garment was the Ephod, which was the utmost part. It was a
roabe made of linen. Such a garment did David wear when he daunced before
the Arc. This Ephod was not much unlike our Surplices.

These five kinds of garments were common both to the high Priest and to the
inferior priests. The other four sorts of garments were proper only to
the high priest. The first garment was called Megil, which was a broad garment,
re^aching down to the heels, made all together of blew silk, and was al
whole, saving that it had two holes to put out the priests head and his arms.
It had beneath in the skirts.72. bells of gold, and so many Pomegranets of blew
silk, so set, that between every two bells was a Pomegranate, and between every
two Pomegranates a bell, which was done for this cause that when Aaron
ministered, a sound might be heard when he went into the holy place before the
Lord. For if he had gone without this garment, they should have died.

The second garment of the high priest was an Ephod, nothing like the Ephod,
mentioned before, for it was not linen, but made of cloth of gold, and was
girded unto him, wherein was the breast plate, with the.xii. stones, which was
tied about with two chains to two Onix stones, and beneth with two laces. In
the two Onix stones were engraued the names of the twelve tribes of Israel vi.
upon the one stone, and six upon the other, which two stones were upon the
shoulders of the Ephod.

The third garment was called, Rationale, which the Hebrews call hosen, which
was the breast plate of judgment, so called, because the high priest could not
give judgment without that on his breast. It was made of gold, blew silk,
purple scarlet and fine trimmed linen. It was four square, and double a hand
breadth long, and a hand breadth broad. It was full of places for stones even
four rows of stones, which stones were according to the names of the children
of Israel. In this breast plate was put also these two words, Vrim, and Thummim,
which were upon Aarons heart. Vrim signifies light, and Thummim perfection.
Vrim also does signify knowledge, Thummim holiness, showing what virtues are
required in the Priests.

Some interpret and turn Vrim Thummim, (...), that is, doctrina and veritas,
doctrine and truth, whereby is signified, that Priests ought to be able to
preach doctrine, but yet none other but true doctrine.

The fourth and last kind of garment was, a myter, and there was made a plate of
pure gold, which had graven thereon, sanctum domino, holiness to the Lord. It was
set upon the high Priests for head. And this plate of gold was tied with blew
silk lace upon the front of the myter.

These garments had a godly and manifold signification. God him self declared
by Moses the use and the end of them, that they were instituted unto the glory
and comlynes of the Priests, which garments did not only procure an authority
unto the Ministers, being occupied about the sacrifices, but also made the
sacrifices commendable. For they must needs appear glorious, which are
celebrate with so great pomp and preparaunce.

Also, it was profitable and necessary, that the people being very prone to
embrace the rites of the Heathen, should be kept within the compass of their
duties by these ceremonies.

Furthermore, they do exhibit Christ the true and high priest to be considered
of us. He was appareled with the garment of justice, temperaunce and virtue,
which garment he has common with us, for it behooves al Christians to put upon
them, Christ.

Christ excels as an high priest, not only in that he sanctifies us, and
indueth us with virtues, but also has certain peculiar properties, as a true
God and Savior of the world. He bears us on his shoulders and in his breast,
as precious stones, for we be not vile, but precious in his sight. The light of
the eternal wisdom shines out of the breast of Christ our Bishop. For in him,
as in a cheste of the everlasting wisdom of God, are al treasures of wisdom
and knowledge laid up. He is the light of the world, he is truth and
perfection, that all the world of only Christ may ask justly laws, oracles,
and whatsoever needs to the obtaining of perrfection, and true blessedness. He
is Sanctus sanctorum, the divine Majesty and holiness it self, upon whose head
the crown of glory does well and rightly sit, who only does sanctify, reigns
glorious, and lives for ever.

Finally, these ceremonies were ordained for the priests, yt they might
understand by their apparel, what was required of them, and of what conditions
they ought to be. Let priests be always prepared to their office. Let them
walk honestly in the sight of God and men. Let them keep a temperaunce, and
be void from riot and evil lusts. Let their loins be girded with the girdle
of justice and truth. Let their breasts, sides, and backs be sensed with the
word of God. Let their heads be covered with the helmet of salvation, in
Christ our Savior. Let him be the head of the Ministers, and ministry, but
especially let him be a vocal Priest speaking in the Church. For if the priest
be dum, he shall die, but if he do boldly preach the name of the Lord, and his
law, he raises up a sweet savor of Pomegranates in the Church. Therefore,
under the shadow of the garments, are covered manners, virtues, and vices. Next
after preaching, nothing does more commend and set forth man, then garments.
Such as the mind is, such almost are the words and garments. Therefore the
garment signifies a man's conversation. Whereupon we are commanded in holy
talk to put on an other garment, when conversation is required to be changed.
In so much that a good part of priestly doctrine is contained by a shadow, what
becomes them in this apparel of Aaron.

Phinees. 13.
PHinees was the great priest of the Jews, son to Eleazarus the high priest,
and was ordered the same year that Othoniel was made priest, but how long he
sat, it is uncertain. He was a stout and valiant man, and vanquished many of
his enemies (before he was priest) when Joshua made him general of the armies.
But after he was made priest, he continually served God with all good and
virtuous life, reverence and fear. And therefore the Lord him self gave him a
covenant of peace. He seemed from his youth to have a fervent zeal to God. For
when the sons of Israel, that is, the sons of Belial had done sacrifice to
Belpehor in Moses presence, and had eaten the sacrifices of the dead, as the
Heathen were wont to do, and when Phinees saw the captain of the tribe of
Simeo^, named Zambri, in the presence of all the people, come to a Madianite
woman, a fair harlot, he rises up, and with his iaueling in his hand, entered
in a rage into the tent, and stroke them both in doing the deed through the
priuities, and slew them. For the which act the lord said forth with to Moses:
Phinees my servant, the son of Eleazarus, son to Aaron the Priest, has
turned away my wrath from Israel, because he was zealous for my sake among them.
Therefore I have not consumed the children of Israel in my ielousy. For that
cause the Lord appointed to him a perpetual priesthood. He being aged, died in
the favor both of God and man, and was buried in the burials of his fathers,
and is worthily numbered among the saints of the old law.

A Calfe. 14.
A Question might be demanded, why they made the image of a Calfe, rather than
of man, or of any other beast.

Responsio.
It is not unlikely, that they by a peruers emulation did follow the Egiptians,
which did worship, as their god Apim, that is, Taurus, an Ox or Bull in the
similitude of a Calf. And to this they fell by reason of daily familiarity with
the Egiptia^s. For although they were sundred from the Egiptia^s, yet they were
sometime co^uersant with them. And here is to be considered what mischief the
company and evil examples of naughty men do gender and bring. The Egiptians,
after they had worshipped for a certain time a live Bull or Ox, than they
drowned him, and sought for an other Ox or Bull with great mourning, as Strabo
and Pliny also do write.

Saint Ambrose does say, that by this Calfe was signified, that Hieroboam
should in long time after set up golden Calfes, and cause the people to worship
them.

Question.
Many call into question, whether Aaron sinned or no, in causing this Calfe to
be made?

Responsio.
Some write, that he offended not: other write that he grievously offended.
Theodoretus says, that Aaron was not in so great a fault, his words be these:
Aaron propositu^ in vitulo formando quaerendu^ est, ita enim fiet vt omnino
venia indignu^ fuisse non iudicemus etc. That is: The purpose of Aaron is to be
sought out in making the golden Calf, for so it shall come to pas, yt we may
judge Aaron not utterly to be unworthy of pardon and forgeuenes. For when his
brother Moses had been in the hill by the space of.xl. days, and the people
were in such a rage, that they would return again into Egypt, Aaron first
attempted to mitigate and assuage their fury with gentle words. But when he
perceived he could not preuail, he required the earings of the women, yt he
might something that way turn their minds (loving jewels) and draw from them
the rage of superstition, and did (as it were) set one soldiour against an
other in the front, but he could not this way pacify their fury. Therefore he
was of necessity constrained to fashion a Calf. Wherefore such a purpose and
intent was to be forgeuen of the great goodness of god, which Moses himself
declares in Deuteronomie, where he says: I desired my Lord God for my brother
Aaron, and he died not. Thus much Theodoretus. Diodorus is also of this opinion.

Other learned fathers, to who^ also ye scolastical divines do co^discend, do
hold yt Aaron did greatly offend, because he feared man more then god, by which
fear he consented to ye sin of ye hebrews, and as S. Paul says, not only they
which do il, ar worthy of death, but also they which consent to ye doers If you
will object, that he did it for fear of death, yet he cannot thereby be excused
from sin. For he being as it were, a spiritual governor, should rather have
suffered corporal death, Eccles. 4.
than to have consented to the idolatry of the people. For it is written: My
son, be not ashamed to say the truth for thy life. Again, strive for the
truth unto death, and defend justice for thy life.

Caietanus writes of Aaron, as follows: Insaniuit ipse long magis quam
alii, nam alii non nisi elohim and elohe (quae sunt nomina co^munia)
attribuerunt idolo: ipse autem in co^municabile et ineffabile nomen tetra
grammaton attribuit idolo, nullo ad hoc instigante: and quod peius est voce
publica. etc. That is: Aaron was much more mad than the other people, for other
attributed unto ye idol no names, but these names, Elohim, and Elohe, which are
common names. But Aaron attributed unto the idol the unspeakable name of God,
the name Tetragrammaton, no man inciting him unto it, and that he did also with
a public proclamation, which is wurst of all. This is written here, even as
the sin of Peter is written in the new Testament (which sin of Peter
notwithstanding was much less than this) to the commendacion of Gods divine
grace, which took Aaron after so heinous sin, to be notwithstanding the high
priest.

Other do by this, excuse Aaron, and do say, that when Aaron named the great
name Jehovah, he meant, that the sacrifice should be offered only to the living
God, and not to the Calfe.

Apostata. 15.
THat man is called Apostata, which swarueth from his captain, and flees to
his enemies, or from the Christians to the Ethnicks or Jews.

Moonkes also, which swarued from their institution and orders, were called
Apostatae.

This kind of swaruing is called Apostasia.

Apostata is a Greek word, and signifies in Latin desertor, defector, a
swaruer.

Baalistes. 16.
BAal and Baalim in the Hebrew, for the most part, are vain gods and idols of
the Gentiles, because they are Lords over them, of whom they are worshipped.
For Baal signifies a Lord, Master and Husband, and sometime it is a common
name of the heathen gods. For the Hebrews do seem to use this word
indifferently for all idols of the Gentiles. After this manner they served
Baalim, that is al manner of Heathen idols, whereupon it is put for every idol.
In so much that this word Baal, in the scriptures often times does signify all
manner of idolatry. For Baal signifies not only Dominum, Hiere. 9. Hier in Os.
2
Lord, but it is taken also sometime pro adamato, a lover, as appears in
Oseas the prophet.

Bell or Baal (or in the latin Belus) was the first king of the Assirians.
psalm. 105. Romans 1.
In honor of whom Ninus his son set up an image, and pardoned al them which
had recourse unto it: which manner of idolatry afterward crept in among the
common people, so that now of the original or head, the whole body of idolatry
takes his name.

Baalim is a word of the masculine gender, and Astaroth of the feminine gender,
1. Saw. 7.
and by these two words the gods and goddesses of the Gentiles are signified.

The scripture in many places is wont to term them with filthye names, that it
may the more call men from the worspipping of them.

The Hebrews call idols molestations and griefs contemptuously, that they may
declare, that they bring nothing but calamities, when foolyshe men do hope for
salvation of them.

But because mention is made of Baal the idol, I have thought good to speak
somewhat of idolatry both concerning the word, and the matter.

Idolatria, idolatry is a Greek word, (...), that is, of woorshipping, (...),
that is, of an idol or image, which signifies none other thing than the
worshipping of idols.

(...) is derived (...), which signifies forma, a form or shape which men
have invented unto them selves, to represent a God with all. And as there are
found diverse and sundry kinds of matter, whereof the idols are made: so there
are diverse kinds of idols. If it be stone, wood, or metal, whereof the god is
made, and in it to be worshipped, those are gross and most manifest idols.
Sometimes the matter of them is spiritual, which than happens, when those
forms and images are none other things the^ conceptions of the mind, by which
me^ do imagine to represent God him self, not as the scripture sets him
forth, but according to their own phantasy and rashness.

Wherefore there are two sorts of idols, according to the condition of the
matter, of the which the one is called external and visible, the other
internal and invisible, which is imagined in mind.

Also there are two true kinds of worshipping of God, the one is inward, when
we believe in God, put our trust in him, and give him thanks, and submit our
selves and al ours unto him, and call upon him deuoutlye in our prayers. In
these actions consist the inward worshipping of God. The other kind of
worshipping of god has external notes, by the which we testify this our mind,
as in prostrating of the body, in bowing of the knee, in uncovering the head,
in speaking and in exercising those rites and ceremonies, which are instituted
of God. And this is ye outward honoring of God. But it is to be noted, that
such external signs, as of bowing the body and the knees, and such like are
done also unto creatures, as unto Princes and Kings, which represent the
authority of God, unto men here in earth, and execute his office in the
administration of things. And then truly they are to be esteemed no otherwise
then certain manifest testimonies, by the which al they which are appointed in
this inferior place, do declare truly and from the bottom of their heart, that
they are contented for Gods sake to be subject, and to obey such higher powers,
as far as godliness, and Gods word does permit.

But we must take heed, least in our inward judgment we attribute more unto
them, than is meet or expedient, and look for greater things at their hands,
then their authority and power is able to perform: for otherwise we shall not
avoid idolatry.

Wherefore, if any man by bowing him self unto his Prince, would signify
thereby, that the Prince cannot err, and that it is lawful for him to do what
he list, to his pleasure, and to command whatsoever he lists, such a one
without doubt should commit idolatry, both inwardly and outwardly.

Whether this fault be in the bondslaues of the Pope or no, we may gather of
this, that they so humble them selves unto him, that they do kis his feet.
They declared that they were so subject unto him, as unto the only Vicar of
Christ upon earth, and as to the universal Bishop of the Church, who cannot
err in the faith, unto whom only power is given to discern and judge of
religion, and of Christian doctrine at his pleasure.

Let this therefore be a sure and a firm rule, that the exterior humbling of
the body, whenever it is a token and witness of the mind, attributing unto a
creature more then is lawful, or such things as are proper unto God only:
that then it does pertain unto idolatry, for they are not referred unto God
him self, or unto the obedience of his commandments, but unto vain forms
and shapes, which we feign to our selves, and conceive in our minds.

Two places of the scripture offer them selves here to be discussed, which
make for the confirmation of the doctrine which we entreat of. Actorum. 10


The first is in the Acts of the Apostles, of Cornelius the Centurion, who
fell down prostrate unto Peter's feet, when Peter came unto him, but Peter
could not abide it, but reproved him, saying: Ne sic feceris, surge, ego quoque
homo sum. Do not so, arise, for I am a man also. Apo. 22.
We read also in the Apocalips, how that John fell down before the Angel,
but he charged him that he should not so do, saying: Conseruus tuus sum. I am
thy fellow servant.

These two places might be thus understood, as though Peter and the angel
condemned these actions as idolatrous, and as though the Centurion and John
should give unto them some divine honor, and should give more reverence unto
them, than is meet to be given unto any creature. But such impiety is not to
be thought to have been in any of them. The scripture is a witness unto the
Centurion, that he feared and worshipped God.

How can we think therefore, that he would take Peter for a God, or at the
least wise would give any divine honor unto a creature? And it is not likely,
that John being an Apostle, could not discern an Angel from God. If that none
of them would worship a creature in stead of the creator, it follows,
that it is not lawful to exhibit this kind of outward reverence to
creatures. Wherefore it should seem also that this reverence ought not to be
done unto princes. To this I answer, that we ought to put a difference between
worldly honor, and divine honor.

Also, we must understand, that these two men, that is Cornelius and John
did not mind by this their woorshipping, to take Gods honor from him, and to
give it unto men: yet it might be thought that they fell to an inordinate
sign of reverence, and so offended in excess, and passed their bounds, but
committed not idolatry. But there is less fear of committing idolatry toward
Princes, than toward ye Angels or Ministers of Christ. For they, because they
execute a spiritual function, the honor which is done unto them, does come
nigher unto a religious adoration.

Wherefore the bowing of the knee, and the incuruation of the body in them
selves, are not condemned, but in that they are done for the cause of religion.
Wherefore in this case a moderation is to be used. And let this be sufficiently
said of this matter. Take this also by the way, that this does also pertayne
unto idolatry, when we worship the true God by other means and rites then he
would have us, or has prescribed and appointed unto us.

If we do otherwise, we shall worship an idol, according unto the second form
of idolatry, spoken of before, that is, when we feign unto our selves in our
mind and thought some God, which is delighted with honor invented by man,
whereas there is no such God at all. Wherefore in this doing we shall not
worship the true God, but an idol which we have conceived in our mind.

And surely Paul is thus to be understood in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, where he says: Scimus quod idolum nihil est in mundo. We know
that an idol is nothing in the world. Paul does not mean, that there is no
idol, as concerning the outward shape and form, for no man doubts, but
that the idols have place, either in some extern matter, or in our minds.
Wherefore he means not the sign of the idol, but the thing, unto the which
the idol is referred: meaning, that the thing it self which is signified by
the idols, is nothing, because there is no God any where, which would be
represented or delighted with such images.

Concerning the name of Baal, it is to be noted, that a goodly Epitheton of God
is expressed thereby. For Baal in the Hebrew betokens a Lord, a Master, a
Husband, which all things agree in very deed unto God. For he is the Lord of
all, he is the teacher of all true wisdom, he is the only husband of the
Church. Therefore they do not err, who considering the properties of God, do
call him by this name Baal. Nor the Grecians are to be reprehended, when they
named God (...), because with that title they declared God to be the author of
life.

Of the Romans also God was called Jupiter, as they would say, helping Father.
These words therefore are worthy to be attributed unto God. And it might be
that the Elders which so spoke, had respect to the true God, Prince of all
things: but afterward, it was most wicked and detestable to give these
properties to planets, stars, men, beasts, images, whereupon althinges were
filled with idolatry.

Paphnutius. 17.
PAphnutius (as Epiphanius says) was the son of a certain woman, very famous
in confession of the faith. Tomo. 2. Lib 2. haeres. 68.
He was brought up from a boy in soletary places, called (...), for the which
cause Epiphanius seems to call him an ancher.

He was liberally instructed, and a very continent and chaste man in all his
life, and most famous in constancy of Christian faith and piety. For when he
was bishop of a certain city in the upper Thebais, Eusc li. 8. c. 12 Lib. 1.
cap. 7.
at what time Maximinius the Emperor used great persecution in those parts,
his right eye was put out, and the hamme of his left leg burned, or (as
Theodoretus writes) he was adjudged to dig in the moynes, having one of his
arms cut of.

But after that Constantinus the Emperor had restored peace and quietness to
the churches, Paphnutius also was restored to his Church, and came after into
the Synod of Nice, being sent for of the Emperor, where Constantinus had him in
great reverence, above al other men, in so much that he sat at meat familiar
with him, and calling him oftentimes into his chamber, kissed the place of his
eye that was put out.

Paphnutius in that Synod of Nice, besides that he was a constant defender of
the right faith, did also one very godly and wholesome act for the Church,
which is this.

Some of the bishops went about to appoint a new law in the Church, that is,
that priests, bishops, and deacons (which had been married when they were
layme^) should not company and lie with their wives, but should forsake them,
and lead a single life: which law had been almost allowed, unless Paphnutius,
perceiving the perilous and grievous enterprise, and the great dangers that
might ensue, if the bishops had resisted them. For he rising in the midst of
the Synod, said: It is a hard thing, that such a yoke should be laid upon
godly men, which being done, I foresee a great peril to hang over the church.
Why do not you permit and suffer, that which the scripture not only
grants, but also does very well comme^d and adourne? For it says, that
marriage is honorable, and a bed undefiled. Furthermore, all men cannot always
observe and keep a like this straight and hard law: yea how shall the chastity
of their wives be kept?

The Synod received and allowed the judgment of Paphnutius (which was
unmarried) to be godly and wholesome.

Paphnutius was present also in the Synod of Tire, in which, when he perceived
that Athanasius (which came thither with him) was unjustly dealt withal of his
adversaries, he took Maximinius, the bishop of Jerusalem by the hand, and
counseled him to arise and depart, because is was not lawful for them, being
Confessors, to be present at a malignaunt counsel.

Besides his great piety and sincere doctrine, and constant profession, he was
famous also in doing miracles and cures of perilous diseases, in driving out
devils. etc.

Septuaginta. 18.
ELeazarus, brother to Simon Iustus, was Bishop in the five and thirty year of
the reign of Ptolemy, after the death of his brother Simon, and sat.xvii.
years. In the time of his bishopric, one Demetrius told this Ptolemeus
Philadelphus, king of the Egiptia^s, who^ he had made ruler of his library,
that it was showed him, that there was a law given to the Jews by the mouth of
the living God, which law it was not lawful for any man to translate, but only
for the^ which worshipped God, adding also this, that one Theopompus atte^pting
the same, was made blind, and that he repenting was restored to health. And he
said further, that the law written in figures and the Hebrew tongue, could not
be translated without great labor.

The king being glad of that which Demetrius told him, sent letters to
Eleazarus, with great rewards by his ambassadors. For Ptolomeus the king had
not long before, at the instant request of Aristenus his familiar friend, set
at liberty all the Jews, which were in bondage in Egypt. The tenor of the
Epistle, which the king sent to Eleazarus, was this, Lib. 12.
as Josephus testifies.

Gentem tuam, quae secus nos erat, liberate donaui. etc. That is: I have set
at liberty thy country men the Jews, which were under my dominion, supposing
that this my deed pleases God. I have also appointed some of them to my wars,
and other of them, whose trusty service I had tried, I have placed in my court.
I have determined to put your laws in my library. Thou shall do well therefore
to send me Elders and learned me^, which can well interpret them. I have sent
over an hundred talentes of silver to offer sacrifices. etc.

On the other side, when the king had received Eleazarus epistle with the
interpreters, he gave ten beds with golden feet, and al implementes thereto
belonging, to Eleazarus, in token of a certain benevolence. He gave him also a
cup of.xxx. talents, x. stools, purple, and a beautiful crown with many other
things, which he had bequeathed to the God of heaven.

Now Eleazar sending to the king that which he requested, said thus: I have
chose^ six of the best learned out of every tribe. It may be the part of your
godliness and justice, after the copy and translation written out, to send it
again unto us by the bearers hereof. And after a certain space when the Elders
were come from Jerusalem, to the king being in Alexandria, they were entertained
of him very honorably, and most courteously. And when they offered to the king
the role of the law written in golden letters, he asked the^for books. And
also when they had opened and showed the fine thinnes of the parchment, and the
incomprehensible joining together of them, the king marueiled yt they were so
wonderfullye compact together, and rendering them thanks, he placed them every
one in several Cells, commanding al things necessary to be ministered unto them.
Who in the space of.72. days translated the law out of the Hebrew into Greek,
so that they all agreed in one and the self same translation (as witnesses S.
Austine) without any disagreing either of words or of sense, De ciuita. de lib.
18. cap. 42
which law being received and approved of the Jews, which then were in those
places, Demetrius offered to the king. Then the king seeing what was done, and
setting a side the law, greatly meruailed at the knowledge and wisdom of the
Elders, and talked long with Demetrius, marueiling yt neither historiographer,
nor Poet had made mention of ye law, which was so wonderfully made and
ordained. And when he calling the interpreters unto him, thanked them, and sent
them home again, giving to every one of them three very rich stools, and two
talents of gold, and one cup of the weight of one talent, with the whole
cupboorde and feasting table, desired them, that they would often resort unto
him out of Iewry.

Who when they had instructed and taught the king in the knowledge of the
only God, and in the government of his kingdom, thanking him much, returned
to Eleazarus with very many rewards.

These interpreters were in number.72. Albeit they are commonly called
Septuaginta, for the more brief and expedite speech. Like as the judges of
Rome, which gave judgment, who excelled at the tilt, were called centumuiri,
but they were in number an hundred and five.

Justinius declares, that king Ptolemei caused.72. Cells to be made for these
interpreters, that he might thereby be fully certified and attain the truth, by
the fidelity and consent of their interpretation, and willed every one of them
to repair to his own Cel, where he should translate. And after they had done,
he conferred together al their interpretations, and found them to consent in
every point.

In apologetico ad ge^tes.
Justinius also does confess, that he saw certain remnauntes of th^se houses in
the high tower called Pharus, at Alexandria.

Tertullian says, that Menedemus, a Philosopher of the province of Iewry, did
much marvel at the one consent of their interpretation.

Saint Hierome sometime does attribute much to them, saying, that they were full
of the holy ghost, affirming also that often times they did translate
vnexpertly, and very ill. But he scoffeth and mocketh at the Cells, writing
thus. Nescio quis primus author septuaginta cellulas Alex andriae mendacio suo
extruxit. etc. That is: I know not who was the first author of this lie, that
there were seventy Cells, builded at Alexandria, in which houses, the
interpreters being separated, did write and interpret all a like. For so much
as neither Aristenus, which was Ptolemeus familiar friend, nor Josephus (who
was long time after) recorded any such thing. But they both wrote, yt they
assembled together in one large place.

Great learned men do attribute to the.70. interpreters so much, that they
think nothing to have been translated of them, but that the holy ghost it self
has spoken and ratified it. Unto these therefore, al students of Gods book
(having any sight in the toungs) ought to repair and run, as the Heart runs
to the fountains of water, according to the saying of the Prophet. But (under
correction of the better learned, and that I may speak it with their patience)
many places are found in their translations more perplex, and wrapped in
greater darkness, then they be in the Latin version, which might chance partly
through the phrase of the Hebrew tongue, being far dissonant from the Greek
phrase, partly through the corruptinge of the text, or the negligence of the
Printers. Some perchance may note in me presumptuous rashness, that I which
have tasted of the holy tongue, but tanquam canis e Nuo, do take upon me to
show their errors and negligence in translating. But I will (by Gods grace)
show manifestly not a few places, wherein they have swarued from the true text,
and from the mind of the holy ghost. Notwithstanding. I do gladly attribute so
much to their antiquity, and to the judgment of the holy fathers, (who had
them in great reverence) as may be attributed to them.

First I will declare, how they dissente from the Evangelists (who doubtless
were full of Gods spirit) and specially in that point, which touches the
mystery of our faith.

Saint Matthew allegeth this place out of the old Testament. Vocaui filium meum
ex Aegipto I have called my son out of Egypt: and he refers this sentence
unto Christ. Now the 70. interpreters translate: Israel dilectus meus, vocaui
illum ex Aegipto: Israel my beloved, I have called him out of Egypt. They do
not refer this prophecy unto Christ, but to the people of Israel. They
utterly take away the mystery from Christ, that they may save the faith of
their history, which declares that ye people of Israel were delivered by the
mighty hand of God, from the bondage of Egypt. And note one thing more, which
is, that they corrupt the text and Hebrew verity, for it is plainly read in
the Hebrew according as Matthew does allege it.

Nota.
This one place does greatly make against the^, which conte^d and hold, yt the
hebrew text was rather corrupt, then yt the 70. interpreters did err.

(...).
When the 70. interpreters did so translate it, either they knew the mystery,
or else they were ignorant of it. If they were ignorant of it, the^ they had
not the holy ghost in all their translations. On the other side, if they knew
it, and would not utter it, and consent to the truth, that spirit was rather
diabolical, then holy, and as Saint Hierome says, it was manifest sacrilege.

Obiectio.
Origene, when he corrected the old Testamente according to the Hebrew verity,
he withdrew nothing from the translation of the 70. interpreters, but noted
only (Asteriscis quibusdam) what things were added Ergo, there is not so great
fault to be found in their translation.

Responsio.
Origene does show a certain modesty in him self, who would not be se^e to
curious in other men's works: yet Origene was none of them, who assarted, that
all the doings of the 70. interpreters were done by the holy ghost, for he does
manifestly dissent from them. It is written of the.70 interpreters in the
Psalm thus: Attollite portas principes vestras: You princes lift up your
gates. But Origene says, that this was not spoken to the princes, but to the
gates, as it is in the Hebrew. For it is commanded unto the gates that they
should lift up their heads, and open them selves unto Christ, as a victor and
conqueror.

Therefore certain of the fathers followed other translations made and done
after the 70. interpreters, as the translation of Aquila, Symmachus, and
Theodotion. Yea the Church at the first did not receive the translation of the
70. interpreters upon the Prophet Daniell, but setting that a part, followed
Theodotion his translation. This they would not have done, if they had thought
ye tra^slatio^ of ye 70. interpreters had been so perfect, that no man should
have sought the truth of the text, but out of the^.

Whereupon Saint Hierome does cite above an hundred times, Symmachus, and
Aquila, and does perferre them before the 70. interpreters. And so does Origin
cite Aquila.

Genesis 48.
Jacob says in Genesis: In caetu illorum non laetabitur gloria mea. But the 70.
interpreters read: In congregatione illorum non innitentur epata mea. I pray
you what affinity or nearenesse have these two words, Gloria and epata
concerning ye sense? truly none. The cause of this error was this. The
consonant letters in the Hebrew tongue have their significations of the vowels
or punctes, which are set underneath them. Now there be two words in the hebrew
very much like both in writing and in sound. These be the words Chauod, which
does signify Gloria, and Chaued, which signifies Eper, a liver. And there is
no more difference between them, but that the one is written with Vau, holem
and signifies glory, and the other is written with Zere without Vau, and that
signifies a liver. It is therefore manifest and plain, that they fell into
this error through the similitude and likeness of these two letters.

The like is in the Prophet Jonas, where they put Acuaed, id est, seruus, for
this word Iuri, id est, Hebraeus, they were deceived by the likeness of the two
letters Daleth and Resc.

In the.58. Psalm they put Manus, pro pedibus, for where they read: (...). id
est, manus suas lauabit in sanguine peccatoris It is in the Hebrew Peamaiu, id
est, vestigia, footesteps.

Again in the.36. Psalm they put an affirmative, where there is a negative.
For where the Hebrews do read Quonia^ non pacifice mihi loque bantur, the 70.
interpreters do read: Quoniam pacifice mihi loqueba^tur. But that the sentence
ought to be read negatiuely, the words following do declare, which be these Et
iracundia dolos cogitabant.

Truly it is to be meruailed, that such an error has continued in the Church
so many years, and has been espied almost of none, or at the least of very
few. The Latin interpreter might be in the fault (I speak this in defense of
the 70. interpreters.) For if this Greek particle, (...), Quidem, be turned
into (...), Non, the matter were plain, and then ye sentence would agree with
the Hebrew verity and the mind of the Scripture.

This place among many other does signify unto us, that those commentaries
upon the Psalms, which go in S. Hieromes name, are not of his doing, for they
do expound this verse of the Psalm after the text of the 70 which, S Hierome
being most expert and perfect in the Hebrew tongue, would never have done.

Furthermore, in the.37. Psalm they peruerte all things, and take from us a
great and high mystery. For where it is written in the Hebrew Schechon aeraetz
v rech Emunah. id est, inhabita terra^, and pasceris in veritate. that is.
Dwell in the land, and thou shall be fed assuredly: they have translated:
Inhabita terram and pasceris in diuitiis eius: Dwell in the land, and thou
shall be fed in the riches of it. But that this word Emunah, does signify
Veritatem, and not Diuitias, I will bring against the^ their own authority and
translation in an other place.

Where it is both in the Hebrew text and in the Latin text in Psalm. 39. Non
abscondi incorde meo veritatem tuam, the.70. do read: (...). so that this word
Emunah, has none other signification but Veritatem, unless it betokens
sometime, Fidem. faith fidelity or assurednes, which is far from the
signification of riches.

Beside these errors, what a ridiculous interpretation, is this, in the.72
Psalm? Erit firmamentum in terra in summis montium. Where in the Hebrew it is,
Frumentu^, or Placenta frumenti. Now there is a great difference in all the
three tounges, that is, in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, betwixt Firmamentum, and
Frumentum, Firmamentum, in the Hebrew tongue is called Rakia, and Frumentum, is
called Dragan, Firmamentum, in Greek is, (...), vel (...), and Frumentum is,
(...), vel, (...), Firmamentum in Latin, does signify in English stabilitie
or the ground of a matter, sometime the firmament or heaven: and Frumentum,
betokens all manner of corn, but it is most used for wheat or Rye. I beseech
you, who, (unless he were blind and utterly ignorant) would have translated the
one for the other, Firmamentum, for Frumentum.

Lyranus making mention of this place does say, that the Latin book is
corrupt, and that Firmamentum, is written for Frumentum, but that is most
untrue, for as it is in the 70. interpreters, so it is in ye Latin text. Where
the Latin book has Firmamentum, the Greek has (...). which is al one.
Therefore this error is to be imputed unto the.70. not unto the Latin book, or
to the Latin interpreter.

Here by the way, (and yet not out of the way,) I will show you how fondly, yea
rather how stretchedly Petrus Galatinus does allege and bring some of ye
hebrew Rabbines to confirm by this text in this Psalm, the sacrifice of the
Mass, and the leuation of the hest, as they call it.

Rabbi Solomon does interpret the.72. Psalm of king Salomo^. Whereupon, he
expounds these words in the same Psalm ( Orietur in diebus eius iustitia,
and abundantia pacis, donecauferatur Luna. In his days shall the rightuous
flourish, and abundance of peace shall be as long as the moon endures) after
this manner: In ye days of Solomon shall the rightuous be multiplied, and the
abou^dance of peace unto the worlds end. Notwithstanding (as Galatinus
writes) when he came to these words: Erit frumentum in terra, vel erit
frustum frumenti in terra in capite montiu^, that is, an handful of corn
shall be sown in the earth even in the top of the mountains. He being not able
to conceile the truth, uttered these words against him self, saying. Magistri
nostri bonae memoriae exposuerunt, hoc esse genus place^tarum in diebus
Messiae, and totum Psalmum de Rege Messia explanauerunt, that is, our Rabbines
of famous memory have expounded this kind of cakes or wafers to be in the
days of Messiah, and do interpret all the whole Psalm of king Messiah.

Galatinus alleging many other of the Rabbines, their gloses and their books,
does conclude, that this same Placenta, or cake should be Messiah him self, he
brings in Rabbi Berachias in ye name of Rabbi Isaac, saying after this sort:
As there was a first redemer, that is, Moses: so there shall be a last redemer.
For as the first redemer caused Manna to descend, so shall ye last redemer,
that is Messiah, shall be a cake of wheat in ye earth, according to this saying
of the Psalm: Erit place^ta frume^ti in terra that is (as Rabbi Ionathas
expounds it) there shall be a sacrifice of bread in ye top of the mountains of
the Church, that is, a cake of bread shall be a sacrifice above the heads of the
Priests which be in the Church. Thus says ye Chaldey translation of Rabbi
Ionathas, Lib. 10. ca. 4.
as Galatinus allegeth. And (says he) what is more rightly signified by the
mountains of the Church, then Prelates and Priests, in who^ the Scripture is
fulfilled and verified, when they lift the body of Christ over their heads? O
fourefolde, nay forty fold blindness and ignorance, so to add and
diminishe the Scriptures, so to rack and rent the Scriptures from the true and
natural sense.

This Psalm concerning ye type, is wholly written of the kingdom of Salomo^,
concerning the verity and perfect acco^plishing thereof, it is made and meant
of Christ and his kingdom. It contains partly deprecations and prayers,
partly the Prophetical description of the kingdom of Christ.

Some write, (and that very well) that this Psalm was made of David, for the
good success of the kingdom of his son Solomon, and that it was given to
the people to be song. For after thend of the Psalm, these words be added:
here ends the prayers of David the son of Isay.

And it appears manifestly, that when Solomon his son was consecrate and
invested into the kingdom, that David not long after ended his life, that it
may be well believed, this Psalm to be the last prayers and vows of king
David, in which prayers he does not only desire the success and felecitie of
his son Solomon, but also does touch the felicity, the power, the
righteousness, the amplenesse and continuance of the kingdom of Christ.

Some verses are applied both to Solomon, being a type, and also to Christ.
some only unto Solomon, and some to his subjects and there felicity, as the
16. verse, which is this: Sit pugillus frumenti in terram satus in caput
montium, strepitum edant, sicut libanus fructus eius, and floreant de ciuitate,
sicut herba terrae, that is, an handful of corn shall be sown in the earth,
even in the top of the mountains, and the fruit thereof shall shake the
trees of Libanon, and the children shall florishe out of the city like the
grass of the earth. He prays in this verse for many things, first that there
might be abounda^ce of corn, and that the earth might be fertile. The wheat in
that Region is both higher and greater in the stalk and grain, than it is in
other countries. He prays that it may be grown as high as the hills are, and
that it might be so thick, that it might make such a noise when it is shaken
with the wind, as ye trees that grow upon the mount Libanus do, when they are
shaken with the wind. It is spoken as it were (...). Secondly he prays and
wishes, that the subjects of his kingdom, might florishe and increase, both
in number and in prosperity of all things. And these things did happen to the
kingdom of Solomon, as it may be gathered out of histories. But to draw this
verse unto a Cake above the Priests head, as Galatinus, Lyranus, and other do,
is an allegory, not so far fet, as foolish. Haec (...).

To our purpose again. In the.88. Psalm, they translate: Medici susci tabunt,
for Mortuisurgent. But in this they were deceued with the ambiguitie of the
word, for it signifies Tam medicum, quam mortuum. But when it signifies
Medicum, it comes of this. Radical, Rapha. And when it betokens, Mortuum,
it comes of this Radical, Raphah, with He, in thend, id est, dissoluit.

They do sometime obscure the whole text, when they had leauer use the dark
Hebrew phrase, then to speak plainly in the Greek tongue, into which tongue,
they translated the text. An example. They read in the 40. Psalm: Holocaustum
and pro peccato non postulasti. In which words there is no sense. But it is
in the Hebrew, Holocaustum and peccatum non postulasti Where this word,
Chataah is taken for oblation offered for sin, as Ascham, Delictum, is taken
for an offering Pro delicto, as it is often read in Leuit. and in the Prophet
Esaias, where he says: Sacerdotes comedunt peccata populi mei, hoc est,
sacrificia oblata pro peccatis populi. And in this signification Christ is also
called, Peccatum, id est, hostia pro peccato. What shall I say more of the^?
They do sometime pervert the very co^maundeme^ts of God, as in the twenty of
Leuiticus, they turn, Sponsam pro nuru, a wife, for a daughter in law. For
where the true translation has: Si quis dormierit cum nuru sua, vterque
moriatur, they read: Si quis dormierit cum sponsa sua, which is against the
mind and meaning of God.

Furthermore, that they know not the signification of some Hebrew words, this
manifestly declares, yt they have left some hebrew words in the holy
Scriptures untranslated, as in the book of the kings where they say: (...).
i. fissuras vel rimas domus continebunt, leaving this Hebrew word
untranslated, Bedec, written in the Greek letters, and vnexpounded, which is
to be meruailed at. For that word is common to the Hebrews, it signifies a
place broken, or ruinous. Our vulgar translation does wonderfully err,
expounding Bedec, for Sarta tecta domus, which is an house substantially
repaired, which has no cleft nor hole in it, yea and which is so well
reedified, that it might be lawfully and openly set and let to any yt would
hyre it. If S. Austen had known this, or at the least well weighed it, when he
wrote so much in the commendacion of the.70. interpreters, Li. 2. de doc. Christ
he would doubteles have written otherwise then he did. But S. Austen must be
pardoned, for he knew not the Hebrew tongue. Yea he began to learn the first
elements of that tongue, when he was much past threscore years of age.

But because ye shall not think, that I have them not in reverence, and do
not well judge of them. I will now show what is to be commended and allowed in
them. In certain places they do better and more truly expound both the words
and sentences, then the Latin interpreter. And they do often times (omitting the
words) exhibit a mystical sense. As in Exodus: Moses ignorabat, quod cornuta
esset facies eius. This is our vulgar translation: where it is in the Hebrew:
Luxit cutis faciei suae. Now the.70. interpreters for the other put these
words, Quod aspectus cutis vel coloris faciei suae erat glorificatus, that the
sight or skin of his face was made glorious.

Also in the 40 Psalm, where it is written in the Hebrew Imgillath Sephaer, id
est, in volumine libri, in the roll of the book it is written of me, they
turned that place, In capite libri scriptum est de me, in ye beginning of the
book it is written of me. By ye which interpretation they explain unto us by
the authority of tholde Testament, that Christ the son of God was creator of
heaven and earth, who speaks of him self these words: In capite libri
scriptum est de me, that is, in the beginning of Genesis, it is written of me.

Obiectio.
But it is written in the Hebrew Bimgillah, in volumine, and not, In capite
libri, therefore they have not truly translated.

Responsio.
This does withdraw nothing from the mystical sense of Christ. For the Hebrews
by this noune Meggillah, volumen, do understand the v. books of M^ses, which
being written in certain rolls, they even at this day do honor and worship
in their sinagoges upon the Sabbath days. Or if any will defend this their
translation concerning the mystery, he may say, that this word Megillah, does
not only signify a book, of this verb Galal, id est, voluit. but does also
signify Apertione^, of this verb, Galah, id est, aperuit. And the sense may
be this. In apertione libri scriptum est de me, that is, in ye very opening and
beginning of the book of Genesis. And this sense did so greatly please some,
that they did affirm to be written in the Hebrew in Genesis: In filio creauit
Deus caelum and terram. Which opinion S. Hierome has very well refelled,
saying that it may be so taken concerning the mystical sense, but not after
the signification of the word. For it is not there Beuen id est, in filio, but
Bereschith. id est, in principio.

Beside this, where it is written in our common translation: Gene. 49.
Non auferetur sceptru^ de Judah, and dux de faemore eius donec veniat qui
mitte^dus est. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a law geuer from
between his feet, until Shiloh, come. The.70 interpreters did translate,
Donec venerit cui reposita sunt, that is, to whom they are laid up in store,
they mean the scepter and kingdom. And this translation (as some think) is
much better then the version of the Latin interpreter, who was deceived by the
likeness of, He, and Cheth. And yet I can not say properly, that he was
deceived. For Schiloh, with He, (as some learned men do write) does come of
this verb Schalah, which signifies to pacify. And so Schiloh, is as much to
say, as Author pacis, or, pacificator populo dei promissus. And this is none
but Christ, who is the prince of peace. But Shiloh, written with Cheth, does
signify Missus, which moved him so to turn it. Yet he seems to be ouersene
in this, that he translated it into a participle of the passive voice, for the
Hebrew tou^g has not participles of preterpassiues, nor of the future passiues.

Some learned men write, that Shiloh, with He, does signify Filiu^, and that
He, is set in the steed of Vau, as ye would say, Filius eius. Other again do
say, that He, is not put for Vau, but that the word is written with He, by the
mind of the holy ghost, to signify Christ the son of a woman. For He, is a
note of the article of the feminine gender.

Again, where the.70 interpreters do translate Cui reposita sunt, it stands
not best, for the text. For Origenes does say, that he found diversity of
translations in certain books. In one book he found, Reposita sunt, in an
other he found Repositu^ est, so that it ought to be referred to the scepter
or kingdom of Christ. And this word, Shiloh, can in no wise be the plural
noumber, but this is not to be greatly maruailed at of the.70. for they do in
many places turn the singular noumber into the plural noumber.

To make an end, that I may not omit any thing which may make for the honor
and renown of the 70. I will now make mention of such places, which (as some
do say) both Christ and thapostles do use their translation, contrary to the
Hebrew verity.

But let us diligently enquire whether it be so or no. I will bring forth two
places, one out of the Gospel alleged by Christ, an other out of the Epistle
to the Hebrews alleged by Paul.

The first is, psalm. 8.
where christ says: Exore infantiu^ and Iacte^tiu^ perfecisti laude^, as
the.70. did interpret it. But it is in the Hebrew Issarta or, fundasti
fortitudinem, that is out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, thou have
ordained strength: The.70. do read, (...), i. perfecisti laudem, and so does
also the Latin interpreter. And in deed this word, (...), does signi- Laude^,
but take away the circu^flexe acce^t, and then, (...), does betoke^ Validu^, or
fortem, seueru^, pugnace^, and the^ it is one with ye hebrew word, Or.

Furthermore this greek verb, (...), i, co^ponere, does not always signify,
Perficere, but Aptare, to make mete, frame or to apply, and it may ^roperly
signify, Fu^dare, to ordain or build, for to build is nothing else but to
frame and to join one thing with an other, and so there shall be no discrepa^cie
between Christ, the.70. and the Hebrew verity. And doubtless it is so to be
read, and the book of the.70, ought to be corrected, yt they should be driven
to consent with Christ, which always spoke Hebrew, and not Greek, rather then
Christ to be drawn to them.

Heb. 2.
The other place is alleged of Paul in thepistle to ye hebrews, Minuisti eu^
paulominus ab angelis, here S. Paul followed the.70. although this hebrew word,
Elohim, may as well signify God, as angels. S. Hierome does hardly consent with
Paul, saying, that it is in ye hebrew, Deo, and no^ angelis. But under Hieromes
patience, Elohim, does not only betoke^ Deu^, God, but also angels and
judges. And I marvel that S. Hieromes memory so failed him, who following the
interpretation of Aquila upon the vi. chapter of Genesis, does in his
annotations refer this word Heloim, to angels.

To be short, it is to be lamented, that the books which we have now in the
name of the 70. be so corrupted. And it is not meet nor right, that the fault
and negligence of the printers should be imputed unto the^, for there be
infinity errors in those books by the inuersion of letters. One for example.
There is put, (...), for, (...), Locus pro conuiuio.

All such things and other of greater weight ought to be amended by the great
diligence of them, which are cunninge and expert in the Hebrew and Greek tongue.

Ezechiel. 19.
EZechiell was a Prophet, who when he was led prisoner with Ioachim the king
into Babylon, prophesied the calamities of the Jews, and sent his Prophecies
out of Babilo^ into Jerusalem to Sedechias the king, which believed him not,
neither the other prisoners also, for that they saw the City of Jerusalem was
not destroyed, which Hieremy had prophesied should be destroyed.

In the thirty year of his age and fifth year of his captivity, he began to
write his book of Prophecy, which book is neither to eloquent nor to rude,
but between both. Hiero.
The beginning and end thereof is darcke and obscure, and some say, that the
book was written of certain wise men, and not of Ezechiell. And therefore the
Hebrews do not suffer them to be read, but of very well learned men. Certain
of the Jews, that is, of the tribe of Dan, and Gad (whom he Prophesied should
not return to Jerusalem) killed him at Babylon. He was counted a martyr and
buried in the Sepulcher of Sem, the son of Noe, and of Arphaxah, his son.
Ezechiell in Hebrew betokens Fortitudinem Domini.

Rites. 20.
THis word, rites, is derived and comes of this Latin word, ritus, which
signifies in English an approved use and custom, which all men do ratify
and allow.

Festus says, that ritus, is an approved use or ceremony in doing Sacrifice.
Howbeit, he also says, that it is taken and used more generally for any manner
of use and custom: Whereunto Cicero seems to agree, saying: Dehiis qui omnia
pecudum ritu ad voluptatem referu^t, de amicitia.
that is, of them which after the manner of brute beasts, do refer all
things to pleasure.

Person, time, and place: and first of the person. 21.
THe circumstaunce of the person puts us in remembrance of many things.

First, that we do weigh and consider who speaks or entreats, whether he be
a Prophet or any other man. If he be a Prophet, whether he speaks in his
own person, or in the person of an other. If he speak in the person of an
other, whether he speak in the person of God or of man: and whither of a godly
or ungodly man. Then it is to be expounded, whither he speak of him self or
of an other. For the writers of holy Scriptures sometimes do speak in the
persons of other men, and sometimes in the persons of wicked men, and in the
persons of their enemies.

In the book of Ecclesiast. where it is entreated De summo bono, many things
are spoken in the name of the ungodly, which deny the providence of God, and
the blessed and fortunate life that shall follow and succeed the painful and
unfortunate life in this world.

It is requisite, that we use the same circumspection in the book of Job,
where diverse persons are brought in speaking. Furthermore, the Prophets in
their own persons oftentimes do reuele and make manifest the judgments and
councels of the wicked.

The Apostles also likewise often times do set forth and propose the objections
of the adversaries.

The history of the Gospel comprehends many things that were spoken of the
slanderous Jews, and many things also which were spoken godly, both of
Christ and of other godly men.

The godly Eunuche grants, that he was in a scruple and doubt, because he
knew not whither the Prophet spoke these words: Act. 8.
Tanquam ouis ad occisione ductus est, of him self, or of any other person.

Furthermore it is expedient to consider, unto whom the words are directed,
whether to superiors or else to inferiors, to all men or else to few men, to
good men or else to evil men, to sluggishemen, or else to quick men, to
enemies, or else to friends. For the Prophets and Apostles are wont to temper
their sayings and preathynges, for the dispositions and conditions of those
that were assembled.

Whereupon ye se, that Christ orders his talk far otherwise to the proud
Pharisees, Scribes and Lawyers, then to the lowly common sort of people, or to
the disciples which were better instructed and taught.

Saint Paul writes more sharply to the Hebrews (whose sluggishe minds were to
be stirred and excited by threatenings and examples of the law) then to the
Romans or to the Corinthians, which were both more diligent, and also never
before bound to the law.

He wrote otherwise also to the Galathians, being seduced and almost swarued to
the Iewishe Religion: then to the Philippians or Thessalonians, which were
constant and steadfast in the sound doctrine which they had once received. I
speak especially of these parts of the Epistles, which beside the intreatyng
of doctrine, do conteyne reprouinges, corrections, exhortinges. etc.

In the new Testament are many things spoken which concern all men, and also
there are many things to be applied to few men, which use and enjoy one
certain state of life. As for example: Christ says to his Disciples. Dico
autem vobis amicis meis, and cetera, that is. Luke 12.
I say unto you my friends, do ye not fear them that kill the body, etc.
which words were namely spoken to the disciples. But they must so be taken,
that they may be understand to pertayne generally to all faithful beleuers.

Again, where Christ says to the Disciples. Reges gentium dominantur eis, et
qui potestatem habent super eis, benefici vocantur, Luke 22.
vos au tem non sic, that is. The rulers of the people are Lords over the^,
and they which govern the^ are called gracious, but ye shall not be so. These
words do not pertain to all me^, but properly to the disciples and to their
successors, as to bishops and governors of ye Church (as witnesses S. Peter.)
For they must not be Lords over other men, but must leave that jurisdiction to
the politic rulers, from whom these words of Christ does derogate nothing
of their dignity, for that in other places of the Scripture the function of
Magistrates with evident sentences is approved.

Of this circu^staunce S. Austen gives a very good rule saying. Lib. de doct.
christ. 3. ca. 17
Erit hoc in obseruationibus intelligendaru^ scripturarii. etc. yt is, we must
observe and mark this thing in understanding the scriptures, yt we know ye
some things are commanded generally to all me^, and some things again unto
every particular states of persons: yt the medicine may pertayne not only to
ye universal state of health, but also that it may be ministered to the
particular infirmity of every sick member of the body.

Time.
The time is diligently to be expe^ded in all words and deeds. We must respect
what has been done, commanded, or expounded before ye law, under ye law, in ye
time of ye gospel. Some things do often times seem not to correspo^d to ye laws
of charity, or else to be reputed and taken for absurdities, which (when ye
times are duly perpe^ded and vewed) ar found to be contrary. VVher upon s.
Auste^ writes very well, sayi^g: Caud^du^ ne forte quod in scripturis
veteribus. etc. we must take heed, least yt thing in ye holy scriptures, Lib.
3. de do^ christ. cap. 18
which of ye times be not understand figuratively, but properly, be not a
flagitious or an heinous deed, least any man may think, yt the same may be
tra^sferred to these our times for ye use of life. He says also in an other
place. Ibid. 22.
Multa su^t q^ illo te^pore officiose facta su^t. etc. yt is, there have been
many things done at that time godly, which cannot now be done but filthily and
with absurdity. Austen means of Poligamie, that is, plurality of wives and
concubines, which although it were granted and permitted to be lawful for the
old fathers, yet we of this time may not follow their doings.

The Apostle Paul in the weighty treaty of justification by faith with out
works, while he does prudently perceive, Rom 4.
that it was spoken of Abraham, that he believed, and that his faith was counted
to him for righteousness long before he was circumcised, reasons and
concludes by that circumstaunce, that Abraham was justified before
circumcision.

Likewise he teaches, that God gave the promise that is, the blessing and
justification without the help of the law, Gal. 3.
for so much as the law was made four hundred and 30 years after that Abraham
was justified.

The diligent observation of this circumstau^ce of time profits much to the
reconciling of those places of the Scripture, which do seem in appearaunce to
disagre. Lib de verb. dom. Ser. 16. Exemp. ad Hiero.
Whereupon this saying of Austen is used of many, and taken for a Proverb.
Distribuite tempora, and concordat scriptura. Divide the times, and the
Scripture does agree, for he with a marvelous wisdom by marking the
diversities of the times, reconcileth those places in which Saint Paul often
affirms the law to be abrogate: and openly reproves Peter, absteyning from
certain meats, and in which places also, he is mentioned to circumcise
Timothy, and that he shaued his head, and purified him self with other in the
Temple of Jerusalem.

Therefore in the preaching of the Prophet, in disputations, in Histostories, in
the Psalms and the Gospel, it is requisite, circumspectly to distinguish,
first in what time (for there is a time of the Gospel) a time of mercy, a time
of wrath and anger, a time of peace and war, a time wherein the Church does
florishe, and a time again where it is oppressed: Secondly of what time,
whether of the time past, present, or to come. And thirdly in what age any man
has spoken or done any thing.

Place.
The place also must be circumspectly weighed. Saint Luke writes, that all
things were common to the brethren at Jerusalem, and that Ananias with
Saphira his wife, were sodeinly slain, because they laid up and kept back
sum of the money, which they took for their goods and lands that they
sold. It was expedient, that such things should be done, for a time among the
Jews, whose goods were cruelly spoiled of their enemies, and among whom there
remained very many hipocrites, to be feared with the threatnyngs of the law.
But among other Churches it ought not so to be done, and especially in the
Churches of the Gentiles, for by such examples their minds might have been
rather alienated from the Gospel, then induced unto it.

Paul also shore his head to purify him self at Jerusalem, which thing
(undoubtedly) he would not have done in any other place.

Manner or way, in words.
There is also a circu^stau^ce of manner to be observed, both in the words and
deeds.

Concerning words, if we respect the manner, the sentence which seemed to be
sharp, is soft and gentle. And again, that sentence which seems to be soft,
is found sometime sharp.

Concerning the deeds, that action is commendable, which otherwise might be
esteemed and taken for flagitious and heinous. And that action also which
appears to be blameless, yet sometime is found to be faulty.

Examples of manner or way concerning words.
Our savior Christ said to his mother the virgin: woman, what have I to do
with thee? Also he calls the Jews Serpents, John. 2. Ibid. 12.23. 8. Math.
16.
and the generation of Vipers, and the children of the devil. And he calls
Peter, Satan, al which words seemed to have come from one of an impatient and
angry mind.

But if ye ponder them in the manner, convenient and agreing to his purpose, ye
shall perceive, that he spoke nothing worthy of blame. For his words which he
spoke to his mother, do import a very profitable admonition, to acknowledge the
great power of his divine nature, and also to wait for the opportunity of
working miracles. Therefore they were spoken gently, and not contentiously.

Again, it is manifest to all them that consider the circumstaunces, that
those words which he spoke to the wicked and obstinate Jews, appeared very
bitter and vehement, but yet he spoke with a zeal, to the advancement of the
glory of God, and for their salvation.

Furthermore, we must weigh and consider, whither any thing be spoken and
proposed simply or doubtfully, affirmatively, definitiuely, or leaving it
unresolved. As where Christ says: Ma. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
that some did geld them selves for the kingdom of heaven. Again, other
things are persuaded and counseled, as the Apostle counsaileth and persuades
to embrace virginity. Some things also are severely and straightly commanded,
as chastity in wedlock, whereby the bed is kept undefiled, and adultery avoided.

To this agrees very well saint Hierome, saying: Scito in scripturis diuinis
quaedam prohiberi. etc. Know thou, that in the holy scriptures, ad Demet.
some things be forbidden, and some things commanded, some things granted,
and some things counseled. Ill things be forbidden, and good things
commanded, mean things are granted, and perfect things persuaded.

Examples of manner or ways in actions and deeds.
This circumstaunce ye may read, Gene. 14. Exodus 12.
where Abraham vanquished seven kings, and led away a great pray, and where the
people of Israel spoiled the Egiptians.

Oseas the prophet received the harlot. Also, where David did eat the show
bread, the priests killed, and did sees flesh on the saboth day.

In which actions, if ye rehearse the law of battle, Hos. 1. Math. 12.
the force and strength of charity, wherewith one brother is bound to help an
other, the commandments and ordinances of God, urgent necessity, finally,
the godly affectes and minds of the doers: ye shall find all things to be
very well done.

As for example, when some do relieve the poor brethren, it happens sometime
that one man does it with a very godly mind, only respecting the glory of
god and his neighbors benefit, and an other man does it not of a godly mind,
seekynge his own glory among men, and distributing nothing of his own. And
therefore ye one may be judged to do an acceptable thing to god, and the other
to offend and displease god.

Cause.
THis circumstaunce saint Paul respected, when he sharplye reproved Peter, for
that he abstained from those meats which before he compained with the Jews,
he frelie did eat in the presence of the Gentiles.

Some will think, that Paul did this thing wickedlie and sediciously: Hiero.
in comment. ad Gal
and Porphitius therefore contemptuously envied the dignity of the Apostles,
and all our religion. But if any man will search and examine the sondrie and
weyghtie causes, which moved Paul, he shall easelye perceive, that he was
wisely and justly stirred thereunto.

First, Peter did it, against his own conscience for fear of the Jews: for
he knew that the law was abrogate, and that nothing was to be called common,
which god has sanctified.

Secondly, by his example other were forthwith brought into error, being
enforced to suppose, that Moses law was needful to salvation.

Thirdly, the weak consciences of the Gentiles were offended, which judged
that they were worthy of eternal damnation, if they should not observe such
ceremonies, either judging that the doctrine of eternal salvation was never
syncerely preached unto the^ before that time.

Fourthly, he greatly embased the dignity of Christ, for somuche as he seemed
to signify unto the Gentiles, that only Christ was not sufficient for our
justification, but that the rites of the law were needful to be observed.

Fiftlye, the whole doctrine of the liberty of the gospel obtained by
Christ, which was lately planted in the churches, and began to have luckly
success, was perverted

Had not saint Paul I pray you just cause to reprove Peter's error, which
contained so many and great incommodities by that his one deed?

Instrumentum.
This circumstaunce also is worthy to be perpended and weighed. Samson is
reported, Iud. 15. 2. Sam. 17.
to have slain a thousand Philistines with the iawe of an ass. David
vanquished Goliath only with a slynge.

In these examples the marvelous powers, and goodness of God does appear, for so
much as with so base instruments, so worthy acts were don.

To this circumstaunce pertains this saying of Paul: Quae erant imbecillia
in mundo eleg^t deus, vt pudefaceret ea quae sunt robusta. etc. That is, God
has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the mighty things. ^.
Cor. 1.


Again he says: Experimentum quaeritis in me loquentis Christi: 2. Cor. 13 2.
These. 2.
seek ye experience of Christ that speaks in me. The Lord will destroy that
wicked man with the spirit of his mouth, and he shall be abolished by the
clearenes of his coming.

Cathedra Mosis. 22.
IT appears in the holy scripture, Nehem. ca. 8. et alibi.
that there was a chair made and set up in the temple, in which the Priests
preached and interpreted the law of Moses unto the people assembled together,
like as pulpets are set in our churches.

To sit in the chair of pestilence, or of the scornful (that is of
blasphemers, which do deride and mock the word of God, his help and
salvation. etc.) signifies, to declare, and to teach after the manner of
pestilent men, which do contemn and deride godly and honest things.

The chair of pestilence is, when a man takes ye counsel of wicked me^, that
is, to teach and defend what thing seems to them good and godly, and not to
will to condemn the way of sinners, that is, to hear the law and word of God,
which condemns al our doings.

So David heard of the prophet Nathan, like as the Gentiles heard of the
Apostles.

To conclude, to sit in the chair of Moses, is to teach, profess, and to
read Moses law, but to sit in judgment seat of Caesar, is to judge according
to Caesar's law, whereupon this word chair signifies doctrine.

To say and not to do. 23.
SOme men say, that evil and wicked Ministers cannot minister the Sacraments
in the church of Christ, and preach the word of God with fruit and profit. But
Christ is clean against them, who pronounced this of the Scribes and
Phariseis, being wicked and froward persons. Quando sederint super Cathedram
Mosis, quae dicunt, facite. etc. When they sit in the chair of Moses,
whatsoever they say: Math. 23.
do you. Saint Paul also unto the Philippia^s says, that he was very glad,
Phil 1.
that the Gospel was preached, although that some did it of contention and
envy, that they might bring saint Paul in hatred with the people. Verily, if
the Apostle had not known, that the Gospel was preached of the wicked with
some fruit, he should not have had an occasion of gladness, but rather of
sorrow. What shall we say also of Christ, which both called and suffered the
traitor Judas to teach the Gospel? And he suffered some other to cast out
devils in his name, when notwithstanding they would not follow him. This our
savior would not permit to have been done, except some profit thereof did
redound unto the Church. Let us reason, a contrario, In the church sometimes
there may be a doctrine taught, which is neither good nor godly: and I pray
you, may there not out of the church, likewise be exhibited some things that
be good and profitable? Peter was in the congregation when he perniciously
dissembled, whereupon Paul was constrained to resist him openly in the face. In
the same church was saint Cypriane, who against the truth would have them to
be baptized again, that were christened of heretics. Wherefore whereas these
so worthy men swarued from the truth being conuersaunte in the church, it
remains, that it is not impossible, that sometime the word of God and the
true sacraments should be administrated without the church. And in
sacraments it is not to be considered, who gives them and who receives them,
but the thing is to be weighed by it self, for the which God would have the
sacrament to be most holy and pure.

With banquettes. 24.
I Do not a little marvel of certain fond men, which would have the supper
of the Lord to be ministered with a great solemn feast, or banquette,
because mention is made in the Epistle to the Corinthians, of a great supper in
which the rich and poor did feast together. But if the words of Paul be
well expended, they shall find there that Paul would have no such
banqueting. His words be these. number domos non habetis ad edendu^ and
bibendum? Have you not houses to eat and drink, as though he should say,
the quantity of meat and drink is not required to the sanctification or
celebration of the Lords supper: for what soever it be, (be it never so little
of the holy Symboles) is sufficient to the celebration thereof, whereby we see,
that Paul does condemn and reiecte that manner of banqueting, which the
Corinthians used in receyuinge the Lords supper. For the church ought not to
assemble together, but only to hear doctrine, to offer prayers, to render
thanks, to confess their faith, to receive the Sacraments, and to other godly
exercises. If any other thing be done in the church, it is done out of
season, for every man has his house appointed him to feast, to banquet, to
eat, and to drink.

The sacraments are not instituted for the necessity of the body, for that
end Manna, and water out of the rock were given to the Jews: but the
Sacraments of the gospel pertayne not to that end. All the holy Fathers both
of the Greek church, and also of the weste church, be of that judgment.

One form of Baptising of children.
It is lawful in the action of baptism, to recite goods promises, to recite
the Symbol, to require the faith, either of the adulte which come to be
baptized, or of them which bring infants to baptism.

It is lawful also to pray and call upon the Lord, which prayers in the
beginning were short, but in process of time they grew without mesure, having
added unto the^ not only long benedictions, but also diverse rites and
ceremonies.

Tertullian writteth, saying: De coron. militis
Aquam adituri sed and aliquanto prius in ecclesia sub Antistitis manu
co^testamur, nos renu^ciare diabolo, and po^pae, and omnibus Angelis eius. etc.
When we come to the water, we stay somewhat before in the church under the
hand of the priest, and do proteste, that we will renounce the devil, his
pomp, and all his Angels. After that we be thrice dipped in the water,
answeringe no more then the Lord has determined in his Gospel, and than being
taken out we taste of milk and honey. And from that day we abstain from
being washed by the space of a whole weke.

Here you may se by the words of Tertullian, what rites were added unto
baptism: as abrenunciation, three immersions, tasting of milk and honey,
abstinence from washyng. In his first book against Martion he makes mention
also of oil.

Saint Hierom testifies, that wine was added to the milk, he writes in his
commentaries after this manner. Domiuus prouocat, vt non solum emamus vinum, sed
and lac, quod significat innocentiam paruuloru^, Li. 15. in Esa.
qui mos ac typus in occid. ecclesiis hodie vsque seruatur, vt renatis in
Christo vinum and lac tribuatur, that is. The Lord does provoke us not only to
bye wine, but also milk, which signifies the innocence of infants, which
manner and type is even at this day observed in the west churches, that wine and
milk be given to them that be borne again in Christ.

Saint Augustine in certain places of his works does show, that diverse
prayers and manners were used about baptism, he makes mention of exorcismes,
and exusflations against the contrary power: he speaks of godfathers which
promise faith for the infants, he makes mention also of oil wherewith the
christened were anointed.

Long time after Augustine Rabanus Maurus bishop of Men's makes rehearsal of
many more ceremonies of baptism, as to sign him that was baptized with the
cross in his forehead and in his breast to bless salt and to put it into his
mouth, of a whit cloth which we call the Chrisom. All these things and many
such other were added from time to time by men. But if antiquity seem to
defend the manner of these rites, who dare deny the authority of the Apostles
far to excel their authorities, for the Apostles were long before them.
Therefore it shall be best to cleave to, and follow the steps of the Apostles,
as well in the ministry of baptism, as in other godly ministrations. As for
the consecratyng of the water by the priest, which saint Ciprian requires to
be had in baptism, I say, that the exemplers of the holy scriptures ought to
be of more force and value, then the authority of Ciprian.

The scripture records, that John the Baptiste and the disciples of Christ
baptized in water not consecrated.

Who consecrated the water to the Eunuche, whom Philippe christened? and to
many other.

If ye will understand by consecration, not that the water ought to be
exorcised, anointed, crossed, etc. but only to be appointed to holy uses: we
say, that that consecration ought to be admitted. In deed the water of baptism
is holy, not for any words spoken over it, not for any characters added unto
it, but by the institution of God, and for the holy use, and prayers of holy
men.

Celebration of Easter. 25.
THere arose a great contention between the East churches and the west churches
about the celebration of Ester, because the priests of the weste churches
thought their tradition of the Apostles, Peter and Paul in celebrating Easter,
not to be neglected: and the priests of Asia affirmed, they would follow the
tradition of saint John. In so much that Victor bishop of Rome feared not to
excommunicate the priests of Asia. And in so doing, he was greatly reprehended
of the blessed martyr Ireneus.

Howbeit Socrates the famous historiographer, was bold, openly to gain say
both the traditions. For after certain places of the holy scriptures alleged,
he adds, that the Apostles constituted no traditions for the celebration of
Easter. These be his words. Nusquam apostolus nec ipsa euangelia iugum
seruitutis illis imponunt, qui ad praedicatione^ accedunt. etc. The Apostle in
no place, neither the gospels them selves do lay the yoke of bondage upon
them, which come to the preaching, but only men by a certain custom have
celebrated the feast of Easter, and other holy days in all places (as they
listed) to cease from labors, and in remembrance of the passion. Neither our
Savior nor the Apostles commanded us by any law to observe this feast,
neither does the gospel or the Apostles threaten us with punishment, as the
law of Moses did.

Also a little after he says thus. Mihi videtur, quod quemadmodum multa, etc.
that is. I think, that the feast of Easter (as many other things) in every
place has by a custom ben celebrate, because none of the Apostles (as I said)
established nothing of it.

Polycarpus. 26.
POlycarpus was famous among the Apostolical men, Irene. li. 3. contr. he. c.
3.
which lived next after the Apostles time, for he was John the Apostles
scholar.

Like as the dignity of the Apostles was great, which had received the
doctrine of the gospel immediately after Christ, so the worthiness of Polycarpus
is greatly to be esteemed, which had received the doctrine of Christ out of the
lively mouths of the Apostles, as out of a most pure fountain. He was not
only taught of the Apostles, but also familiarly conuersaunte (as Irenaeus
says) with many, which had seen the Lord Jesus.

He was B. of Smyrna, constituted and appointed there by ye Apostles.

Furthermore Irenaeus testifies, that Polycarpus wrote a very absolute and
perfect Epistle to the Philippians. But in this our time there is an epistle
extante, entitled, Epistola Polycarpi, ad Philippe^ses, which whether it be
Polycarpus his in deed, let the diligent searchers of antiquity weighe and
judge. For although it does not conteyne any manifest error, yet it may move
suspision to the diligent reader: for he says that he was induced by the
Philippians to write, but he does manifestly declare, what was the cause or
scope to which he directed his epistle.

Not withstandyng it appears, that Polycarpus in that epistle entreated well
of the article of Christ, and of his expiation, of the sin of all mankind,
wherein he employed great labor and trauail: for he does adourne it with
testimonies both of the old and new Testament, and condemns all men which
dissent or deprave that article. For thus he says. Omnis qui confitetur Iesum
Christum in carne non venisse etc. 2 John 1.
Whosoever confesses not that Jesus Christ came in the flesh, he is
Antichriste, and whosoever confesses not the mystery of the cross, he is the
devil. And whosoever shall peruerte the words of the Lord, and turn them to
his own desire, and shall say, that there is no resurrection nor judgment, he
is the first be gotten son of Satan.

Of salvation he says: Gratia salui facti estis, non ex operibus, sed in
voluntate dei per Iesum Christu^. You are saved by grace, not by works, Ephesians. 2.
but in the will of God by Jesus Christ, he speaks of the end of works.

Ireneus says, that he taught certain errors, which the very heretics
that were without the church, durst not teach. Eus. li. 5. c. 20


He was of great authority, not only with his own churches, but also with
foraine churches.

Hierome says, that he was chief ruler of al Asia, In Catal.
because he had to his masters and teachers the Apostles, and them which had
seen Christ.

Ignatius writes, that when he went to suffer death, he did betake the cure
and over sight of the church of Antioche to Policarpus, as to a most famous
and faithful Pastor.

Irenaeus also writes, that Polycarpus converted at Rome, many that were
infected with the heresy of Valentinus and Marcion.

Nicephorus writes, Lib. 4. ca. 39.
that Polycarpus and Anicetus the bishop of Rome, varied somewhat in
judgments, howbeit they did lovingly communicate together, in so much that
Anicetus permitted Polycarpus (for reverence sake) to minister the Sacrament
in the church: which thing is an evident testimony, that the doctrine of the
liberty of ceremonies at that time, was freely and without perturbation of the
church, retained.

The same Irenaeus writes, that when Marcion one a time met Polycarpus and
said unto him: know thou us? Polycarpus answered, I know, that thou art the
first begotten son of Satan.

It appears out of the Epistle called Smyrnensium, that he was grave and of
holy manners.

The manner and cause of his death was this.

Marcus Antonius Verus, With them that held the Empire, moved cruel
persecutions against the christians, as well in all places, as at Smyrna. This
very godly man Polycarpus could not be condemned of any wicked deed, but was
adjudged to death, because he had taught and set forth wholesome doctrine
throughout all Asia, having thrown down and destroyed the Idols of the
heathen.

Not only the magistrate of Smyrna commanded the godly and reverend old man
to be taken and put to death, but also Polycarpus scholars brought forth
evidence against him, and judged him worthy of death, and of their own accord
with furious hatred carried small boughs to the fire. He was buried and
martyred at Smyrna about the year of Christ.170. He himself said, that he
served Christ.86. years, which is to be understand immediately after his
conversion.

Blasphemia. 27.
BLasphemia, is a greek word spoken in dispight of God, and it is divided into
two parts. The fiyst is blasphemy against the holy Ghost, which is a
continual blamyng of the inspiration and works of the holy Ghost: for when
the holy Ghost does so evidently work in the minds of men, that they cannot
cavil nor excuse them selves by ignorance, yet they strive against their
conscience, against the revelation of the holy Ghost, which they know to be
most true and good. As for exemple: The Pharisees being overcome in their own
consciences with most manifest miracles, could not but grant the doctrine
and gestes of our Savior Christ to be godly. Nevertheless they did enuiously
and falsely accuse Christ, that he did all things by the help and instigation
of the deuell, but Christ refelled them with four sillogisticall arguments.

1. Argument.
The first, if one devil cast out another, then are they divided a sondre, and
contrary the one to the other, but the devils are not repugnaunt nor divided
among them selves: Ergo, I cast not out devils by the power of Beelzebub.

2. Argument.
You see that your children cast out devils by the power which they have
received of me, but none of you will say that your children will cast devils
out by the power of Beelzebub: Ergo, you ought not to say that I cast out
devils by the power of Beelzebub.

3. Argument.
The kingdom of God and the devil cannot stand both in one place: but the
kingdom of God is come upon you, by virtue whereof I cast out devils: Ergo I
cast not out devils by the power of Beelzebub.

4. Argument.
Forthly and finally you see, that none is willing to depart from his hold,
except he be vanquished by a greater power, and by a stronger then himself,
but I being stronger then he, take away his armor and divide the spoils.
Ergo I cast not out devils by his power.

But this (says Christ) I have to say to you: every sin of blasphemy shall be
forgeuen unto men, but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, shall never be
forgeuen.

In that you have called me a Samaritane, a winebibber, a gluttonous person,
and that you seek to kill me, it may be forgeuen you, for you may pretend
ignorance: but where you rail against the divine Majesty of God, ascribing
that thing to the devil which is wrought by gods holy fingar, it shall not be
forgeuen you.

Here falls out two goodly doctrines, the first, we ought to suffer patiently
those things that are spoken against our own persons, and not to revenge it,
nolite resistere malo, diligite inimicos vestros, benefacite iis qui vos
oderunt, (says Christ) but we ought with an other manner of zeal to defend
gods cause, and to refell those things which are spoken against his honor
and divine majesty. Moses patiently suffered the murmuryng against him, but
when he saw gods glory defaced, he slew 23000. at one clap. Let us expende a
little nerer the words of Christ, and so shall we the better consider what the
sin against the holy ghost is.

The holy and learned Fathers, and namely Augustine that diligent searcher of
all the scriptures, had much a do about this place, and confesses plainly,
that there is not an harder place in all the scriptures the^ that, and therefore
he durst not entreat of it. But it is out of all question, that such a sin
there is, and that it is irremissible, and because occasion of this place so
serves, I will by gods grace show the judgments of great learned men, and so
much the more, because I intend to touch in the end that detestable vice of
desperation.

The scholasticall doctors define the sin of the holy Ghost to be, if any
person do neglecte or reiecte heavenly inspirations and godly suggestions,
which does move him not to sin, and yet willingly will sin. For example: If
any man be tempted or moved to sin, and then presently the severity of gods
judgment do fall into his mind, and teaches him that God will revenge and
punish sin, if he notwithstanding of a purpose do vilipende and contemn this
suggestion, and had rather taste of the pains to come, then forsake his
present pleasure: this man does sin (say they) against the holy Ghost. And of
this sin they reckon to be six spices.

i. Presumptio. 3. Impugnatio veritatis. 5. Obstinatio. 2. Desperatio. 4.
Inuidentia fraternae gratiae. 6. Impoenitentia.
This is the censure of the scholastical men concerning the sin against the
holy Ghost. It is requisite and necessary thoroughly to expende and weighe the
words of Christ. Quicunque dixerit verbum aduersus filium hominis, Math. 12.
remittetur illi. Qui autem dixerit aduersus spiritu^ sanctum, non remittetur
illi, neque in hoc mundo, neque in futuro. Here we see, that Christ calls
this sin blasphemy and railynge. Sin properly and commonly is that which is
don against the rule of godlynes. Blasphemy is when a man does not only pass
the limittes of virtue and honesty, but also when he checketh, taunteth and
rayleth at that thing, which he knows to be good.

Example.
He that does not obey the magistrate in all lawful and honest things, does
sin and offend. But he which does check tau^te and rail, does cut and bite
the magistrate, is a blasphemer of the magistrate.

The son who does not obey his parents, sins: but he which raileth upon
his parents, is a blasphemer of his parents. So in the words of Christ, it is
well to be noted, that he does not say, qui peccauerit aduersus spiritu^
sanctum, sed qui dixerit aduersus spiritum sanctum conuitium. So that the sin
against the holy Ghost is always coupled with checks, rebukes, slanders and
contumelious words, which words be spoken of a set malice, and an envious
despighte, being well known and against a man's own conscience, Therefore the
division of the scholemen into those vi. kinds before named seems not to be
consona^t with the words of Christ. For it may be, that he which does this day
presume of Gods mercy without all godly worcking, and that he which does this day
despair of Gods grace, that he which is this day obstinate and impenitent, may
to morrow repent and redress those vices. But if they continue to the end in
their former sins, then it is, Peccatum ad mortem, And S. Austen calls this
sin against the holy ghost Finalem impaenitentiam.

It may sufficiently appear by the Scriptures, that every sin against the holy
ghost, is not so condemned of Christ, that it is utterly vnforgeueable, for
then their sins should be vnforgeueable, which ignorauntly resist the
preching of Gods holy grace, but unto such is not denied the place of
repentance, nor remission of sins, as appears in the Acts of the
Apostles, when Stephen had said to the Jews, you stifnecked people, Act. 7.
and of uncircumcised hearts, you always resist the holy ghost: yea when he
was stoned to death: he praying said: Domine ne imputes cis peccatum hoc, quia
nesciunt quid faciunt.

To be plain and short, there be two kinds of blasphemies: one is of the^
which do persecute and rail upon Gods verity and truth thorough ignorance.
These be like unto them, which railed upon the son of man by reason of his
humble and lowly living, as Paul him self did, unto such remains a place of
repentance. And for such we may pray, for they sin not unto death, so the
Apostle speaks of him self. 1. Timo. 1.
Qui prius blasphemus fui and persecutor and contumeliosus, misericordiam
consecutus sum, quia ignorans feci. etc.

The second kind of blasphemy is, when a man does not ignorau^tly, but
wittingly, willingly, enuiously, of an obstinate malice against his own
knowledge and conscience, blaspheme and rail upon the truth of Gods Gospel,
with opprobrious and slau^derous words. And for these we may not pray, for
they sin unto death against the holy ghost.

In this predicame^t were the Pharisees, the Scribes and they which said (In
Beelzebub eiicit demonia.)

In this predicame^t were Iulianus Porphirius, and Alexander, the copper Smith.

Finally in this predicament are they which did once know the truth, and
earnestly embrace the verity of Christ's Gospel, but now turnyng their
sails, have revolted, and do most dispightfully, and cruelly persecut,
blaspheme and rail upon the same.

There is a notable and singular well learned man, beautified with all kind of
good literature, which writes, that as long as we be in this life, we ought
not to despair of salvation, unless we sin against the holy ghost, which
sin (says he) forasmuch as we understand it not but by some private
revelation, hope on it never to be cast of. The primative Church (says he)
had the gift of proving of spirits, by the which they knew this kind of
sin, but in these days, when we do not certainly know that a man is deteyned
with the same sin, we ought to hope well of all men, be his sins never so
great, and never so many.

Saint Augustine for this has two comfortable sayings, Quicquid egeris,
quantumcumque peccaueris, noli desperare, Nam si adhuc in mundo es, si deus te
saluare non vult, ex mundo auferet, qui tibi parce^do clamabit, ne recederes,
iam parcendo clamat vt redeas.

The second saying: Pro peccatis tuis ne attendas pro quo oras, sed attend
quem oras: magnitudinem morbi tui vides, and potentiam medici non vides.

These be comfortable sayings against the bottomless sin of desperation. God
of his mercy and gracious goodness save and deliver all Christian hearts from
these and such like detestable and damnables falls.

Judas Iscarioh. 28.
IVdas was the son of one Simon, surnamed Iscarioh, either of the tribe of
Issachar or else of his fact, for Iscariotes signifies Virum occisionis. How
he lived before he was Apostle, it is uncertain. But after Christ entered into
his ministry, Judas was chosen into the noumber of the Apostles: for they
were Christ's best Disciples, being daily conversant with him, and learning the
true doctrine of the kingdom of God. They saw his miracles, and they were
brought up with him to this end: first, that they might teach and do miracles
there with Christ by the commandment and will of Christ, which granted them
this power by his omnipotent word. And also that after his resurrection they
might preach his word through the whole world. Neither any man among all the
Disciples was admitted to that office but only the iwelue. By this it
appears, that Judas at the beginning was not the worst Disciple of Christ.
Christ also declared, that he loved him, because he chosed him into the number
of the Apostles. And although he knew, that he would betray him, yet he called
him, and bestowed so great benefits on him, that he might testify, that he
would gladly have him saved, and that he did not allow his perdition nor
desperation by the sin committed. But Judas neglectyng these so great
benefits, and being werie of the poverty and dangers which he was compelled
to suffer for Christ, did cast in his mind how goodly a thing it was to have
money, and to have to his friends men of great authority, as were the Bishops
and Priests, being rich and plentiful in all worldly wealth: whereupon he
weighed with him self, by what means he might obtain these two things, how
be it he did not forth with utter that thing which he kept secret in his
heart. Notwithstanding Jesus Christ the searcher of men's hearts, perceived his
secret thoughts and pretenses, and might have repelled him forthwith as a
wicked Apostata, and unprofitable servant: but of his great beniguitie he
suffered him, and friendly warned him, to leave of from so wicked enterprises,
but all in vain.

VVherby it is manifest, how pestilent a thing it is to set our minds wholly
upon the getting of riches, and also how great offense it is to flatter
ecclesiastical men (as they are called) which be of great power and
authority, molestyng Christ and his doctrine with great hatred (as it has
chanced in all times, and also now in Antichrists reygne it is plainly
verified,) which to do, is nothing else but to betraye Christ and his kingdom,
for that the holy spirit is abolished, and so great an obstinacy grows in
such men's hearts, that when they hear the word of God, they contemptuously
neglect and hate it, never ceasing from persecuting the true teachers, in so
much that they seek pretenses of most manifest and wicked deeds, yea, and do
defend them with very deuelishe unshamefastness.

Bethel. 29.
BEthell was a City in the costs of the tribe of Benjamin, and Ephraim. It
was distant from Jerusalem three miles. Genesis 28.
It was first called Luza. But after, when Jacob being in that place, saw the
Lord standing upon the ladder, he called it Bethell, that is, the house of God.

In this place Bethell, 3. Reg. 12. 4. Reg. 2
Hieroboam set up the idolatrous worshippyng of one of the golden calves. In
this place the children which mocked Elizeus the Prophet, were torn and rent
and killed of Bears.

Seven thousand. 30.
THe number of seven, is taken in holy Scripture for a perfect number, an holy,
and absolute number, and does contain great mysteries, as in that saying of
Peter to Christ: Math. 17. 3. Reg. 19.
Shall I forgive seven times? It is taken also for an indefinite number and
multitude, Luke 8.
as in this place (I have left seven thousand) that is a great multitude and
number. Likewise in Luke, where it is spoken of one of the Mary's out of whom
were cast seven devils, Prou. 24.
that is a great number. Likewise in the Proverbs. Septies in die cadit
iustus. Seven times in a day the righteous man does fall. Et septies in die
laudem dixi tibi, Seven times in a day I prayed to thee. Again the university
of creatures consists in the number of seven. The earth is distinct by seven
climates. The heaven by seven Planetes: The time or week by seven days. In
the Scriptures it may be taken both in the good and evil significations. In
the good part in the Psalm Eloquia domini, eloquia casta, argentum igne
examinatum, Psalm. 11.
purgatum septuplum.i. multipliciter.

In the ill part (as in Matthew) Assumit alios spiritus septem nequiores. Math.
12.
He takes seven other spirits worse then him self.

Here ends the first Tome, both of the Praelections, and also of the
Miscellanes.
Certain Miscellanes to be added, as here does follow, whereby ye may easily
see by the Folios where they should be placed. Place this Miscel. in folio.76.
before Johannes Euangelista.
Antichriste, 25.
ALthough certain of the scholasticall divines do say that Antichrist shall be
born of the nation of the Jews, and of the tribe of Dan, and that (as S.
Ambrose writes) he shall come of the Circumcision, or else be circumcised: yet
great learned men, which with deep judgments have read the Scriptures, do
write that he shall not be one personal man only, but that under the name of
Antichrist is meant and comprehended the whole kingdom of false teachers,
bearing rule in the Temple of God, and that in a great City, which has rule
and dominion over kings of the earth, professing Christ outwardly in doctrine,
but yet denieng his merit and office, which shall make diabolical laws, and
forbid Marriage and meats, to deprave and corrupt the true worship of Christ,
and to mayme and abridge the ceremonies instituted of Christ, and to alter and
change them to an other end, then for which they were ordained, which shall
bear both the swords politic and ecclesiastical. He shall show him self as
it were a God, as to be the vicare of Christ and the head of the Church, and to
have power over all Magistrates, and to be above all Councels, and in whose
breast all laws as well divine as humain, are written and laid up, and one that
may prefixe and revoke the Articles of the faith, and to have power to command
the Angels of God, unto whom all men ought to obey in every respect, under
pain of damnation, and who ought to be judged of no man, yea although he
deceive innumerable souls, and not to be demanded why he does thus, Origene
writing upon Matthew says: Generaliter vnus est Antichristus, species autem
illius multae. etc. that is: Generally there is but one Antichrist, but the
spices be many, as though he would say, generally there is but one lie, but
concerning the difference of false doctrines, there ar found many lies. Saint
Bernard writing upon the Psalm, seems to touch Antichrist very nerely in the
prelacie and other ecclesiastical offices of the Church. His words be these:
Pro Episcopatibus and Archidiaconatibus imprudenter hodie decertatur. etc. that
is. Now there is shameless strife for Bishopprickes and Archdeaconries, that
the revenues of the Church may be wasted upon superfluous and vain uses. It
remains therefore that the man of sin, the son of perdition, a devil not
only walking in the night, but also in the noon day, may be now revealed,
which is not only transfigured into an angel of light, but also is extolled
above all that is called God, or is worshipped as God. By these words of
Bernarde it appears unto whom the words of Saint Paul ought to be referred,
least any man might impute them to the new writers, as though they were the
first that referred Antichrist unto the chief Bishop of the corrupt state of
the clergy. He openly declared, that in his time the revelation of Antichrist
might be gathered by the symonie, bying and sellyng, ambition and riot of the
ecclesiastical persons. And here is to be noted that Saint Bernarde did
acknowledge not only that Antichrist, which is against Christ, but also he
which does thrust him self into the Church instead of Christ. So that
Antichrist may be called, both the adversary and also the vicare of Christ. As
he is not only called Antistraticos, which sets him self against the
captain of any host, but also it is he which instead of the captain,
intrudeth him self into the soldiers, and bosteth him self to be captain.
For this preposition (...), does signify in Greek both Contra, against, and
Pto for, so that he is properly Antichrist, which is both the adversary and
vicare of Christ. Wherefore who soever shall take power upon him in the Church
and exercise dominion and rule over the people of the Lord, he is the member
and companion of Antichrist: That auoureth of an old wives tale which is feined
of Nero the Emperor that he should be taken out of the world, and should come
again to vex the Church with his tyra^nie, and that the minds of some, were
so bewitched, that they thought Nero to be Antichrist. But Paul in the Epistle
to the Thessalonians speaks not of one man, but of a kingdom which should be
invaded of Satan, that he might erect the seat of abomination in the midst
of gods Temple, which we see to be accomplished in the Papacy, although that
defection now grow somewhat larger. For Mahomet has caused the Turks to
swerve from Christ. I am not ignorant that some of the old divines do hold,
that Antichrist shall be borne in Babylon, and that these words, Fiat Dan
coluber in via, are referred to Antichrist as Saint Ambrose, Theodoretus and
other do expound that place, but how aptly, I refer it to the judgment of
the learned reader.

Place this Miscel. in folio. 83. before Paralogismos.
The greater part. 35.
IN the time of Achab king of Judah the greater part overcame the better. When
Vrias the high Priest, did winck at the idolatry of the king, and other
princes and Magistrates consenting to the same: The king did shut the Temple of
the Lord, and took away the holy seat, and caused the Ministry of the word
and the ordinary use of the Sacrifices to cease. Notwithstanding there was an
holy Church in Judah, in the which Esaias the Prophet, with few other taught the
true worshipping of God.

Under Manasses nephew unto Achab the greater part overcame the better, when
sincere doctrine and the lawful celebration of the Sacraments (circumcision
only excepted) was banished. And this apostasy from God, continued until the
Church was reformed of the most godly Josias. Nevertheless there was a Church
in Judah, and Prophets sent, although the greater part of the people with their
governors did follow and defend impiety, and the defection of Manasses.

Under Jeroboam king of Israel the greater part overcame the better, when ye
king deposed and put out of office the Leuits, the doctors of ye law and
preachers of the sincere verity, and gave unlearned Priests and Pastors to
the people. He built also new Temples, made Idols, and golden Calves, he
instituted a new kind of worshipping God. He made new altars and appointed new
feasts, and did so much abrogate the true worshipping of God, that there
appeared in Israel no one toke^ of the Church of God. And yet there is no
doubt, but God reserved to him self a Church at that time, unto which he sent
his Prophets, although they were persecuted and driven from place to place of
the greater part.

Under Jeroboam the second of that name, Amos the prophet, a pastor and
heardma^ of Tecoa, taught the true doctrine of God (the greatest part swaruing
from God.) Yea and the high priest Amazias commanding him to go unto the land
of Judah, to preach there, and that he should not preach hereafter in Bethel,
because it was the foundation and temple of the king.

Under Achab the king ouercomming all men before him in all kind of impiety,
the greatest part overcame the better, when the said Achab had filled all
places in Israel with superstitious Idolatry and sacrileges, and did also
persecute most cruelly the prophets for teching the sincere doctrine of God.
Notwithstanding there was found in Israel a true church of God (Elias the
great and excellent Prophet of God setting forth the true worshippyng of God)
and mightily inueighyng against the king, against his false Prophets, and
against the people.

By these preside^tes and examples it may be gathered, that the greatest part
is not the best, and those things which do please them most, are not always
to be commended. To this purpose do pertayne also the goodly sayings and
examples of the heathen.

Diogenes going on a certain day into the theater or playing place, did thrust
him self in when the people were coming forth. And being demanded why he did
so, he answered, I have been accustomed so to do all the time of my life,
meaning to be the part of a wise man to dissent in all actions from the
multitude, because the greatest part of men are led, not by reason, but by
affections.

Phocion when he had made to the people of Athenes a goodly oration, and
perceiving that he had pleased all men, and that his oration was commended of
the greatest number, turnyng to his friends said: Quid number mali quippiam dixi
imprudens? What, have I spoken any evil thing like an unwise man? He was
persuaded that nothing could please the greatest number, which swarued from
the right and sound judgment.

Policarpus being commanded to render a reason of his faith unto Herod the
proconsul, required a day to answer. The proconsul would he should defend and
excuse him self before all the people. Unto whom Policarpus answered saying:
Non faciam quu^ principibus and potestatibus honos debeatur, modo non sit
contrarius: populo aute^ furenti satisfacere nemo possit. I will not do so, for
so much as honor is due unto princes and to the higher powers, so it be not
contrary to God. But the raging and wood people no man can satisfy.

Place this Miscel. before Jerusalem. folio. 86.
Paracletus. 37.
THis word Paracletus comes of this Greek verb (...), which signifies,
Rogare and exhortari, to desire, pray or exhort. It betokens also to be a
sollicitour, an advocate or a patron for any other person. The Grecians of the
later time use it for a comforter, an aider, a fautor. Therefore the Lord
promises to his disciples that he would send them the holy ghost, as a
comforter which should confirm them in all truth and verity.

Paraclytus, written with Ypsilon, signifies an infamous and notorious
offender. For (...), in composition betokens Praeter, or Sinc, and (...),
signifies noble, glorious, laudable, so that ye may call him (...), which is
ill reported of, not praise worthy, or of no renown.

(...), with Iota in penultima, signifies Assessorem qui vna discumbit, him
that sits down by one.

(...), signifies also a loud crier or talker which molesteth men with his
clamorous talk, and so Sophocles uses it.

Ibicus, calls, (...), Diluculum the dawning of the day, because at that time
it is lawful to hear and to speak, which in greek they call (...).

Place this to the end of the third Prelection. folio. 91.
Obiectio.
THe Church has and may constitute and make Articles of yt faith without
Scripture, as tharticle of transubstantiation, the article of reservation, the
article of elevation and such like.

Responsio.
Saint Paul does manifestly say, Fides est ex auditu, auditus autem per verbum
dei, Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. All the scholastical
men have always in their mouths the object of says to be the verity
revealed of God, and contained in the Canon of the Bible. It is therefore not
only folly, but also great impiety to affirm that the Church may make any
Article of the faith without the Scripture.

What blasphemy is it in that Cochleus does say that tharticle of the Trinity
cannot be proved out of the Scripture? And it is also most false that he does
impudently asserte the Church to have been before the word. For when faith
makes the Church, and leans to the word of God, it is manifest the Church
also does lean to the word it self as to the foundation. But the foolish
man dreameth and judges dotingly no word to have been before Moses, and
being blinded of the devil, cannot or else will not see Moses to have written of
the word of God spoken to Adam of the blessed seed to come, that should
break the Serpents head. He understands not this word, and the faith of
this word to constitute and make the Church.

Obiectio.
Christ promised the holy ghost to be always present to the Church that he may
lead her to al truth. Whereby Fisher Bishop of Rochester proves, that we ought
to give as good credit to the Church, as to the Apostles.

Responsio.
This heresy is one of the pestilent heresies of the Manichies, which heresy
Saint Austen most pithily, and learnedly does confute. For the Maniche makes a
preface before his heresies, that he is the Apostle of Christ, and the
providence of the father. And by this contendeth that he ought to be believed as
much and as well as thapostles. Unto whom Saint Austen answers that he will
not receive any new word, nor other from that which was delivered of
thapostles and received of the Church. His words be these, written in the
book Contra Faustum Manichaerum. Distincta est a posterioribus libris
excellentia Catholicae authoritatis veteris ac noui Testame^ti quae Apostolorum
confirmata temporibus per successiones Episcoporum and propagines Ecclesiarum
tanquam in sede quadam sublimiter co^stituta est, cui seruiat cuius fidelis and
pius intellectus, ibi si quid velut absurdum mouerit, non licet dicere, author
huius libri non tenuit veritatem, sed aut calex mendosus est, aut interpres
errauit, aut tu non intelligis. etc. The excellency of the Catholic or
Canonical authority of tholde and new Testament, is distinct from the books
of other that come after, which canonical authority confirmed in the time of
thapostles and by the succession of Bishops, and by spredding abroad of the
Churches, is constitute and set as it were the highest and chiefest seat, unto
which every faithful and godly understanding ought to serve and give place. If
any absurd thing be there moved it is not lawful to say, the author of this
book did not hold the truth, but it is lawful to say, the book is faulty or ye
interpreter erred, or you understand it not. In the works of the posterity
(which are contained in books innumerable) yet by no means ar they equal, or
are to be compared to that most sacred excellency of the Canonical Scriptures,
yea if in any of them there be found the same verity, yet that authority is
far unequal. Wherefore in them if any thing seem to be dissonant from the
truth, because they are not understand as they are spoken yet the reader has
free judgment to approve that which pleases him, and to improve that which
offends him. This much S. Austen.

Obiectio.
Saint Austen says, Euangelio non crederem nisi ad id me moueret Ecclesiae
authoritas I would not have believed the gospel, unless the authority of the
Church had moved me thereto.

Therefore by the testimony of Saint Austen the authority of the Church is to
be preferred before the Scriptures.

Responsio.
Let us examine the words of Saint Austen a little nerer and we shall find
these words of Saint Austen to make rather against our adversaries then with
them. Saint Austen does manifestly say that he will not believe the Maniche or
his word as the Scripture, because the Scripture was distinct before the
Apostles from all books, and was confirmed, they being alive, and afterward
received of all men in the Church without any contradiction. Therefore it is
manifest that they falsify the words of Saint Austen, and do allege them
contrary to their consciences, for the word not written, and the doctrines of
men besides the scriptures. Against the which Saint Austen does (as it were)
Ex diametro fight. For he does evidently forbid any doctrine to be received
in the Church as the word of God, which was not confirmed in the time of
thapostles, and received in the Church as the word of God. And that this is
the mind of Saint Austen: Gerso^ affirms, and confuteth the impudency of
them which attribute power to the Church to judge of the Gospel, and to make
articles of the faith without the Scriptures. His words be these. Ex istis
deducitur quod mayor fuit ecclesiae primi tiuae authoritas, quam nunc sit Papae
and Episcoporum, and quod non est in potestate concilii, aut ecclesiae mutare
traditiones datas ab euangelistis. Et paulo post. Sicut quidam delirant, nec
habent, quo ad hoc, quod est facere aliquod pure de fide parem authoritatis
firmitatem. Licet enim ipsorum institutiones in dubium vocare. Et hic aperitur
modus intelligendi illud Augustini. Ecclesiae non crederem nisi me compulisset
authoritas ecclesiae. Ibidem enim sumit ecclesiam pro primitiua congregatione
fidelium illorum qui Christum audiuerunt, and viderunt, and eius testes
fuerunt. etc. Of these things it is deduced that the authority of the
primative Church was greater, then the authority of the Pope is now and other
Bishops, and that it is not in the power of any council or the Church to
alter or change the traditions given of the Evangelists. And a little after he
says: Nor they have not (as some dote) the like firmness of the authority
concerning this, that is, to make any thing to be of faith pure, for it is
lawful to call their institutions to doubt. And here is opened the way to
understand that saying of S. Austen: I would not have believed the Gospel,
except the authority of the Church had compelled me. For S. Austen takes the
church there for the primative congregation of those faithful which heard
Christ, saw him, and were witnesses of him. This is the mind of Gerson
concerning these words of Saint Austen, Euangelio non crederem. etc.

These words also may be understand after this manner: Saint Austen did not
say, nisi mouisset authoritas ecclesiae. But does significantly say: nisi
commouisset, signifiyng the authority of the church by her self not to have
been sufficient, but the two articles of the christian faith, that is, the
instincte of the holy spirit, and the study of the word of God to move the
minds of the elect to believe.

Nor this argument is any thing worth. Saint Austen would not have believed
the gospel except he had been moved of the church, Ergo the judgment of the
church bears rule over the scripture. I will make you the like form of
arguments.

John came to bear testimony of the light Christ, that all might believe by
him. Ergo, John is to be preferred before Christ.

Again, many of the Samaritanes believed in Christ, through the words of the
woman of Samaria. Ergo, the woman of Samaria is to be preferred before Christ.

Again, let the women be subject to their husbands that they which believe not
the word, might he won without the word by the conversation of women. Ergo the
conversation of women is better then the word.

What fond man, what dolte, or what ass would thus argue or reason after this
manner? Truly none except he were destitute of the common senses.

To make Austenes words plain, you shall note that S. Austen had much to do
with the Manichies, who without all controversy would have credit to be given
unto them, and yet did not show the verity which they boasted and promised to
have. And also that they might purchase faith unto their master Maniche they
made a pretense and alleged the gospel. Now S. Austen demands of them what
they would do if they chanced upon such a man which believed not the gospel,
and asks them with what kind of persuasion they would lead him unto their
sentence. And afterward S. Austen does say: I would not have believed the
gospel, except the authority of the church had compelled me: signifieng, that
when he was an alien from the faith, he could no otherwise be induced to
embrace the gospel, or the infallible verity of God, except he had been
convinced by the authority of the church. And what marvel is it, if one not
yet knowing Christ, have respect of men? Therefore S. Austen does not in this
place teach that the faith of the godly is founded upon the authority of the
church, nor does understand the certainty of the gospel to depend thereof, but
does show, simpliciter, that the gospel would be most uncertain to the
infidels that they might be won to Christ by it, except the authority of the
church do impell them, so that the church is (as it were) Isagoge, by the which
we be prepared unto faith.

Obiectio.
Tertullian says, Quodcunque primum est, id rectum esse, adulterum vero quod
posterius. Whatsoever thing is first, that to be right and true, and that
which is last, to be counterfayted and corrupted. Ergo, the doctrine of the
church of Rome which was before this new doctrine, is more true and right,
than this doctrine which came in of late.

Responsio.
These words of Tertullian do fight for the authority of the Scriptures,
against al doctrines given after, and against the word not written: for there
was disputation of the doctrine of the Manichies to be received for the
Scripture and the word of God: which Cerdon, Marcion and Praxeas did contend,
with whom Tertullian had much to do. But he answers, he would not stand to
their prescriptions (we may call them well enough proscriptions) unless they
would admit them whole Scripture received of the Church, and would acknowledge
the authority of the church, testifieng of the scriptures. For the church is
as testis and witness of the doctrine of the apostles, which the apostles would
to be firm and perpetual. The church has now no respect to those traditions,
which the Apostles would not to have been observed for ever. For now none do
observe the tradition of the apostolical Synod concerning the eating of blood
and strangled meats.

Saint Cypriane has a short sentence, but yet sure and firm of all such
traditions. Non hominum consuetudinem, sed dei veritatem sequendam esse, nec
curandum quid homines ante nos senserint, sed quid Christus ante omnes
mandauerit. We must not follow (says he) the custom of men, but the verity of
God, nor we ought to regard what men have judged before, but what Christ has
commanded before all

To conclude S. Hierome has a notable sentence for the perspicuitie and
authority of the scripture. He writing upon this verse of the psalm. Dominus
narrauit in scripturis principum populorum qui fuerunt in ea. The Lord has
showed in the scriptures of princes and of the people which were there. Nullius
hominis quantumuis sancti aut docti scriptum habet authoritatem, quia dominus
narrauit in scripturis populorum and principum. The writing of no man, be he
never so holy or well learned, has authority, because the Lord has declared
in the scriptures of the Princes and people, of the people because the
scriptures perteine to all the people and not to the priest only, of the
princes which were in her, see what he says (says S. Hierome) which were, and
not which are, nor shall be. That is, that besides the canonical scripture of the
prophets and of the Apostles, whatsoever shall be spoken afterward, may be cut
of and have no authority.

Although therefore any man after the Apostles be holy, although he be eloque^te
or learned, yet he has no authority. He has the like sentence which is
common. Quicquid ex scriptura non habet authoritatem, eadem ratione contemnitur
qua probatur.

Thus I have at the full declared unto you all the first general part of my
partition, and because time draws away, I will now end, and until the next
repairing hither, I commit you to God, to whom etc.

Place this Miscel. before Iouinianus. in folio. 94.
Brothers wife. 4.
IT is not only forbidden by the Scriptures for man to marry his brothers
wife, but also by the ancient and learned fathers, and by certain general
councels. Tertullian the most eldest writer of all that were since the time of
the apostles, does writ that this Leuiticall forbidding that a man should not
marry his brothers wife, was brought in, taught, and ordained, specially and
by name, even of Christ him self and his apostles, because that all the whole
Church and company of Christ's faith should observe and keep it with all
reverence.

Because (says he) that certain persons sometimes do say that they have nothing
to do with Moses law, which Christ doubtless did not take away, but fulfilled
and made it perfect, do sometime take those things of the law that likes them
and make for their purpose. Plainly we also se this that the law is departed
and gone as touching this point: that according to the mind and saying of the
apostles, the burde^s of the law which our fathers were not able to bear, be
utterly ceased and taken away. But as for those things that pertain to
justice and virtue do remain whole, not only reserved, but also amplified and
increased, so that our justice and goodness which be Christian people, should be
much greater and perfecter then the justice of the Scribes and pharisees, and
be such justice as a very just man ought to have. And our chastity likewise
should excel and pass theirs, and in no point be less then theirs. Now
because it is commanded in Moses law, that a man should marry his brothers
wife, that is departed with out children, because he should stir up sede, or
get issue to his brother. And because this thing may happen oftentimes to one
person, as that one woman may be married to six or vij. brethren one after
another, for lack of issue by the former brother according to the subtle
question of the Saduces in the Gospel: therefore some do think that the
oftennes of Marriage is promised also in other cases. But these men should have
understand first of all the reason and consideration of this precept, and so
they should have known that this reason is now ceased, and is one of the
things which be now void and of no strength nor authority. For a man was
bound of necessity to marry the wife of his brother, which was departed without
children. First because that as yet that old blessing of God (increase you and
multiply) ought to run forth and continue. Second, because the children were
punished for the fathers faults. Thirdly because the dry and barren persons
were had for defamed persons. Therefore, ordinance was made that they should
have issue by other of their kin, as ye would say by a proctour, and begotten
after the death of the father: because that they which were departed without
issue, not by the fault of nature and by prevention of death, should not
therefore be judged accursed and unhappy. But now the blessyng of increasing and
multiplieng bodily and carnally is ceased, because the world is at an end. For
the Apostle induces and counceleth us saying: There is no more but that they
also which have wives should be, as if they had none, because the time is
short. And again. The sour grape that our fathers did eat, that is, the
sin that they did eat, does no more stonish or set on edge the teeth of the
children: for every man shall dye for his own sin. And moreover the barren
now be not only without infamy and rebuke, but also have deserved favor and
thanckes of God, being invited and admitted into the kingdom of heaven. And
therefore now this law that a man should succeed into his brothers marriage, or
that he should mary his brothers wife, is now utterly dead and buried, and the
contrary of this law takes place, that a man should not succeed into his
brothers Marriage, nor marrye his brothers wife. And by this (as is said before)
that law which is ceased and is no more of strength, because the reason of it
is ceased or taken away, cannot be a convenient proof for another thing. This
much Tertullian.

Chrysostom does plainly an stiffly hold that fable and tale that the Saduces
made upon the woman, that they said was married to seven brethern, to be but a
fancy and thing feigned and imagined. For the Jews (says he) be such men,
that we see the^ eue^ now at this time to be mightily afraid to marry with
their brothers wives, because as ye would say, they think surely there should
some mischief come of it. And notwithstanding that the law should constrain
and bind them to marry their brothers wives, yet for all that we see them
many times little regard it, and make light of it, and not to do it.

Isichius says: it is in very deed uncomely and as nigh to the life of brute
beasts as can be, for a man to be married and to meddle with his brothers wife,
or with any of his kinsmens wives, namely them that be nighe of blood.
Wherefore God commands and decrees that he which marries of this fashion,
shall die without children. Doubles because that he misusing himself does mar
and confound, and utterly disorder the law of bringyng forth children. Again
Isichius says thus. These things be not spoken of only to the Jews, which
because they be circumcised and have Moses law, think them selves alone from
all other nations, but they be spoken to every man, woman, and child, which
entend to serve God. Saint Augustine writing against Faustus, says thus.
Certain laws of the book of the old Testamente we do not keep now a
days, because such laws were made only to be a shadow of things to come. And
those laws though they were convenient and fit to be commanded and suffered
for that people, and for that time, yet we now a days that be christian
people, ought not to keep them bodily, or as the bare letter and words do
speak, but we must consider what they signify, and we be taught by the
Apostles own writings, that we must keep such laws spiritually, not
corporally. For when we read any such thing in the instrument of the old
Testament, which in the new Testament we either be not commanded to keep, or
utterly forbid to keep them, we must not rebuke it, but we must seek out the
ghostly meaning of it: for in so much as we do no more observe it, that proves
not that it is damned and in no wise to be received, but that it is fulfilled.
And therefore this same self thing that Faustus, because he does not understand
it, has laid against Christian men, as a crime and grievous offense: serves
for nothing else in the world, but only to show mistically under a figure and
cloud, a spiritual purpose, and it is this: that every preacher of the Gospel
is bound so to labor in the Gospel that he stir up sede to his brothers
departed, that is, to Christ, which died for us. And the seed that shall be
stirred up, must have the name of the brother that is departed. Wherefore we be
called Christians, and therefore without doubt, we now be bound to fulfill and
keep this law, not carnally by bodily generation after the old meaning and
taking of it, but spiritually and by ghostly generation, and after the true
understanding. And for this the Apostle Saint Paul fulfilleth this law
spiritually, where he is angry with the^ whom he says him self to have
engendered and gotten through the Gospel and the word of God to Christ Jesus,
his brother, and not to him self nor to any other man. And therefore does
sharply blame and rebuke them which would be called Paulius or Paul's men.
What (says he) was Paul crucified for you? or were you Baptized in the name
of Paul? As if he had said, I begat you to my brother which is dead, that is,
to Christ. Be you called therefore Christians, Christ's men, not Paulius or
Paul's men. Again Saint Augustine in his book of questions upon the
Leuiticall, and in that work also that he named the mirror, says that this
forbode that a man should not marry his brothers wife, and all other things
that be forbid in the xviii. chaptre of Leuiticus, we be bound without doubt to
keep them now in the time of the new Testament and law of the Gospel, when the
obseruaunce and keeping of the old shadows and bodily or outward tokens are
taken away. For what soever thing (as he says in an other place) does help
and serve for good manners and virtue, like as they were not ordained to betoken
any thing, but to show us how we must live: so they ought not by any
interpretation or understanding be applied to any signifieng or tokenyng, as if
they were but signs and tokens of things. But as many as be of Christ's
Religion or belief, be bound of necessity to keep them ever, so as they be
spoken. And in another place he also says. Although in times past men married
their sisters, yet that thing was done because necessity compelled men to it,
for because then were so few people. But this thing was not so old nor at any
time so necessary, but it is now as damnable, because Religion forbids it:
for it ought to be done than when it might, because that by marrieng of sisters
there might be plenty of women, and so that by process they might take wives
which should not be their sisters. But afterward once that this necessity
ceased, and that there were women enough, this thing ought not only to be
undone, but also if it were done, it should be a crime not to be spoken. For I
wot not how (says he) there is among all the points of man's shamefastnes
one certain natural and commendable point which is this, that to whatsoever
woman we be bound to do honor with reverence and shamefastnes, our carnal
lust, yea though it be for generation, yet because it is carnal lust, we
refrain it from that woman specially, considering that we do see married
folk, namely such as have shame and honesty, to be ashamed of such lust.

And in the council of Agathen it is ordained in this manner. We reserve
utterly no manner of forgeuenes nor pardon nor dispensation for inceste in
Marriages, but we will in any wise that they be punished, except only they
heal their adultery by departing the one from the other: for as for incestuous
persons, we judge them not worthy to have any name of Marriage, seeing it is a
deadly thing, even to make any token or mention of such persons. And we judge
them to be incestuous persons which by carnal medlyng have defiled their
brothers widow, which was in manner his sister before, or he that has taken
to wife his sister germane, and he that has married his stepmother. etc.

All these persons we doubt not but they have been before time and by this
our constitution be incestuous persons. And we command that they pray and
abide among them that be yet unchristened and but only learners of the
Christian faith, and not to come among Christian folk until they have
sufficiently repented them self and amended that they have misdone.
Furthermore in the council of Neocesar, and in the Synod of Gregory the younger
it was decreed according to the words of God, that a woman which had been
married to two brethren should be put back from communion and from receiving
the Sacrament until she dye. And a man that had married his brothers wife
should be an anatheme. In the which Synod all together answered, an anatheme
be he, that is as much to say, as damnable to everlasting death.

To conclude, where VVickliff did hold that the prohibitions of Matrimony
written in the Leuiticall law, were only Judicial precepts of Moses, and
therefore the causes of divorce brought in by the mean of kindred and
affinity, to be only the ordinance of man, his sentence was condemned as
heretical in the great convocation which was had first at London, and last at
Oxford.

PRAELECTIO PRIMA TOMI SECVNDI.
WE have dwelled a great while from the port, unto which we purposed and
promised to arrive. Therefore, that these two Verses of the Poet may now be
verified (Sed ne forte meo nimium de call receda^,

Deseret hos cursus, versa carrina vagos:)

Least peradventure I may seem to go to much astraie,

The boat turning, shall now leave his wandryng way:

I will repair forthwith to the text of the first Epistle of saint Peter,
which begins thus. Petrus Apostolus Jesus Christi. etc. Peter an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, to the strangers that dwell here and there, throughout Pontus,
Galatia, Capadotia, Asia, and Bithynia, elect according to the fore knowledge
of God the father, unto sanctificacion of the spirit, through obedience and
sprincklyng of the blood of Jesus Christ: grace and peace be multiplied unto
you.

In this Epistle, I note three things.

First, Quibus sit scripta, To whom it was written,

Secondly, Quis scripsit, Who wrote it,

Thirdly, Quid sit scriptum, What is written,

Concerning the first. Lyranus and Beda in his commentary do think, that
this Epistle was written unto them, which were converted from the Heathenesse
religion, unto the Law of Moses, whom we call in Greek (...). They were called
Proselites, which being of diverse sects and factions, were converted to
Moises law. They are called in Hebrew Gerim. And they be properly those,
which of Heathen men (being newly institute in the Laws and Ceremonies of
Moses) did profess the Judicial law, they were not Jews by nation, but by
adopcion. Whereupon it is said in the Acts of the Apostles: Jews and
Proselites. Acts. 2.
But this is not true, that Lyranus and Bid do write. For it is not in the
Greek: (...) but (...): that is, to the strangers, which strangers were
Jews, to whom Peter was appointed to be an Apostle. And (...), in Greek, may
be called in Latin populares, that is familiare friends, companions, of the
same town or city, or, as we call them country men, which were dispersed
here and there, although certain learned men do judge the contrary. But the
turmoiles and troubles of the wars, under the kings of the Assirians, of the
Babilonians, the Persians, and of the Macedonians, did disperse and scatter
abroad the Jews, some to this place, and some to that place.

Nor it follows, that Peter preached the Gospel before unto them, because he
sent this Epistle unto them. For Paul writes an Epistle unto the Romans,
whom notwithstanding Iunias and Andronicus, 1. Iunias.
did first of all other institute in christian religion. So Peter does write
here to them that were in Galatia, and in the less Asia: 2. Andronicus.
yet notwithstanding, they were first instructed in the faith by Paul. In
fine, Peter does testify to al these in his Epistle, the faith weiche they
received, whether it were of Paul, or of Peter of himself, or of any other, to
be the true faith of a true christian.

These words of the text before rehearsed, are nothing else, but, (...) that
is, the inscripcion or title, which Paul uses in the beginning of all his
writings, saving in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

Thus much for the first note, that is, to whom this Epistle was written.

Now to the second note, I will show you what manner of man he was that
wrote it: and first I will touch his proper name.

The proper name of Peter was Simon, which signifies in the Hebrew audiens,
vel, obediens, hearing or obeiyng: It comes of the radical Shamagh or Shamah,
which signifies audire, parare, exaudire, obtemporare, that is, to hear or
obey.

He took this name Cephas (which is a Syrian word) of Christ, who gave it
unto him: which word in Greek is called (...), and does signify in Latin
a rock, or a stone. For as rocks and hard stones are wont to be laid in
the foundation of any buildyng: so the faith of Peter, and of the whole
church, does stay upon Christ, the firm and immovable rock, upon whom the
whole church is builded.

I marvel that the Papists be not ashamed, to translate this word Cephas,
to signify caput, a hedde. Every blind Ass may perceive much diffrence
between (...), and (...), in Greek betokens in deed, an hedde: but Cepha
bekeneth a stone, which is a Caldei word. Christ did not say, tu vocaberis
(...), but (...) which signifies in Hebrew properly a rock. And by a
metapher, it signifies also a tower, or a castle.

In deed if Christ had used this Hebrew word, they might have had some
occasion (at the least apparantlie) to have named Peter the chief tower, or the
chief hedde. But for asmoche as Christ used the Caldei word (Cephas) which
always does signify a rock, or a stone, nor is translated to any other
significacion, they can take no handfaste by this name, 3. Soch lips
to make Peter hedde of the church. But as the common Proverb is, Similes
habent labra lactucas. Soche lips, soche Lettuse: soche books soche bookemen.
They read this corrupt gloss, in a certain spurious book, going in the name
of Anacletus.

By this word Cephas it appears, that the Hebrew tongue was not the common
toungue unto the Jews, in the time of Christ, but rather the Caldean or
Syrian toungue, which both be very nere unto the Hebrew toungue.

Thus much for the name. And now to the person.

He was born in a town called Bethsaida, situate by the sea side of Galile.
His fathers name was Ihon, and therefore he was called Simon Bariona, that is,
Simon the son of Ihon, for so the Jews called their children, as Bar
Ptolomei, the son of Ptolomie. He had a brother named Andrewe, who both
gatte their livings by fisshing in the sea. And by this it appears, that in
his youth he was not learned, and that he would have continued a fissher, so
long as he lived, if he had not been afterward called of Christ to an higher
funccion and office.

Some write that he was a citezen of Capernaum.

Nicephorus describes the stature and form of his personage. Peter (says
he) was no gross man, but somewhat high and tall. He was of a pale and
whitelie face. He was of a pale and whitelie face. The here of his hedde and
his bearde, were curled and thick. He had a long nose, not copped in the
mids, but priest down and somewhat flat. He was the hearer and disciple of
Ihon the Baptiste, and brought to Christ by his brother Androwe. And when
Christ saw him, he said unto him. Thou art Simon the son of Ihon, thou
shall be called Cephas. Math. 8. Luke. 4. i. Corin. 9.


It appears by Mathewe and by Luke, that he was a married manne, and had a
wife: for they write that Christ healed Peter's wives mother of a fever in
Capernau^.

Likewise Paul records, that Peter did lead about his wife with him.

Eusebius also declares, that Clement writes, 4. Lead about. Stroma. libri.
7.
Peter and Philip to have given them selves to the procreacion of children.

And Clement writes, that when Peter saw his wife lead to death, being glad
of that her calling, he exhortyng and co^fortyng her, did call her by her
proper name, saying: Heus tu, memento domini: O wife, remember the Lord.

The most part of the history of Peter, may be gathered out of the
Evangelists, and Acts of the Apostles.

He walked on the sea. He confessed Christ to be the son of the living God.
Math. 14. and.16.
He ascended with Christ into the mount, where he heard Elias and Moses talk
with Christ. He paid tribute for Christ and him. 5. Talk with Christ. Math.
17. Ibidem. Math. 26. Acts. 2.
He boastyng his strength and constancy, before any peril tasted: in the time
of Christ's Passion, at the voice of a handemaiden, denied and forswore Christ
his master, three times.

After the resurreccion, he was commanded of Christ, to feed his sheep, and
demanded three times, whether he loved Christ or no. After the ascencion he
chose Matthias, into the number of the twelve Apostles, in the stead of Judas
the traitor. He preached a Sermon in the feast of Pentecoste, in which he
converted three thousand hearers. He healed the man that was lame from his
mothers womb. He killed by the power of the word Ananias and Saphira his
wife, for liyng unto the holy ghost. He healed Eneas sick of the palsy, and
raised from death to life Tabitha, 6. Tabitha.
that godly woman. He reprehendeth Simon Magus, and bids him repent of his
wickedness. 7. Simon Magus.


Certain learned men call into controversy, where Peter suffered death,
whether at Rome or no. But some hold, that Peter never came to Rome.
Notwithstanding, Ireneus, Tertullian, Dionisius and Lactantius plainly
affirm, that Peter and Paul preached at Rome. And Ireneus says, that they
founded and constituted the church of Rome, at that time when Mathewe wrote
his Gospel. 8. Caius. Acts. 13. and.14. 3. Tomo in Genesim.
But Eusebius writes, that the Gospel of Matthewe, was writ in the third
year of Caius the Emperor, and in the year of Christ.41. when Peter yet
remained at Jerusalem, and when Paul and Barnabas went first to preach to
the Gentiles. But he came not to Rome in that journey.

Origenes says, that Peter was constituted and placed at Rome, about the end
of his life, and there martired.

Many do affirm, that Peter came to Rome in the time of Claudius, some say
in the second year, some in the third, and some in the fowerth: and that he
was resident and preached there.xxv. years. Which thing if it be so, by
likelihoode saint Luke would have recorded it, in some place of his writings.

Furthermore it is manifest, that in the sixth year of Claudius, and the.48. 9.
Claudius.
of Christ there was a counsel celebrate at Jerusalem, where Peter was
present. Neither it is mentioned, that Peter came from Rome to Jerusalem.
Which thing undoubtedly Luke (if it had been so) would not have omitted.
Finally, Paul writing to Rome, about the.xiij. year of Claudius, and the.55.
of Christ (at what time Peter is thought to have been at Rome) saluteth by
express names, many mean men of the Christians: but he speaks not one
word of Peter, whom in an other place of his Epistles, he names Columnam
ecclesiae, a pillar of the church.

Eusebius reports, that Peter came to Rome in the second year of Claudius,
and was Bisshoppe there by the space of.xxv. years, and that he died the last
year of the reign of Nero, 10. Nero.
who reigned.xiiij. years. Of this mind and opinion is also Hierome in his
work De viris illustribus.

But if we confer more nerelie and more diligently these things, with
those things which Paul wrote to the Galathians, we shall perceive this
computacio^ of Eusebius to be false. For there Paul reherseth, that in the
fowertenth year after his conversion, he ascended to Jerusalem, and that he
found there, Peter Ihon and James, and this was the sixte year of Claudius.
Yea, Peter was yet at Jerusalem, in the nineth year of the reign of Claudius.
Nor it is like that Peter came to Rome, as long as Claudius lived, but that he
came to Rome after the death of Claudius, when Nero had reigned certain years,
under whom he was slain and martyred. The manner of his death Egesippus
describes after this manner.

When a precept and commandment was given out by Nero, to apprehend Peter, he
was desired to go to some other place. He refused saying, he would not do it,
least he should seem to depart for fear of death. It is a good thing, says
he, to suffer death for Christ, which offered himself to death for all men,
and said that it should not be death, but immortality. It seemed to him an
unworthy thing, that he should aduoide and fly from suffryng death of his
body, which by his doctrine had enforced many to offer them selves to death
for Christ. He said it was his duty (according to the word of the lord)
that he should also give glory and honor to God in suffering death: but the
people prayed him with tears, that he would not leave them (through his death)
doubtyng and waueryng among the storms of the Gentiles.

Now Peter being overcome with their weeping, promised, that he would depart
out of the city. And the next night, when he had saluted the brethren, and
had prayed, he marched forward alone in his journey: when he came to the gate
of the city, he saw Christ coming toward him, and falling down, said,
Lord, whether go thou? Christ said to him, I come again to Rome to be
crucified, Peter understood, that it was spoken of his own passion and death,
because Christ seemed to suffer in it, which suffers in every of his
members, not with the grief of the body, but with a certain compassion of
mercy, or else with the solemnizacion of his glory. He retournyng went into
the city again, and there was taken of the persecutours, and adjudged to be
hanged: but he requested that he might be put upon the cross, with his feet
turned upward, because he was unworthy to be crucified in soche sort, as
the son of God suffered, which he obtained, and so died. Saint Ambrose
writes of the death of Peter and Paul, after this sort. Non sine causa
factum putemus, quod vno die, vno loco vnius tyranni Apostoli tolerauerunt
sententiam, vna die passi sunt, vt ad Christum pariter peruenirent. Vno loco,
ne alteri Roma deesset: sub vno persecutore, vt aequalis crudelitas vtrumque
constringeret. Dies ergo pro merito, locus pro gloria, persecutor decretus est,
pro virtute. That is. Let us think it not to be without cause, that the
Apostles suffered the sentence and judgment of one tyraunte in one day, and
at one place: they suffered in one day, that they might go both together
unto Christ, they suffered in one place, least Rome should be without the one of
them, they suffered under one persecutour, that like and equal cruelty might
oppress both of them. The day therefore was for their merit, the place for
their glory, the persecutour was appoinied for their virtue and constancy.
Haec Ambrosius.

Thus much for the second part. And now I will come to the third part, that
is, I will show and declare, what is written of Peter.

Peter wrote two Epistles to the Jews, dispersed and scattered in Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadotia, Asia, and Bythinia.

In the first Epistle he entreats and discusseth three special places, and
intermingleth them together, by sondrie ways and means. For first, he
exhorts his countremen, to persevere constantly in the true knowledge and
faith of Christ our savior. Secondly, pacientlie to suffer the cross of
tribulacion, the compaignion of their confession. Thirdly, that every one in
their vocacion, do worship God in godly conversation of life.

By the end of the Epistle it appears, that it was written from Babilo^.
Although some do interpret Babylon to be Rome: notwithstanding it is most
like to be true that Peter meant Babylon the Metropolis or chief city of
Caldea.

The disposicion of the first Epistle of Peter.
In the first Chapter, four things are specially to be noted and marked.

First, he gives thanks unto God the father, that by his great mercy,
through his soonne our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, has called us to
salvation and eternal glory, which he will surely give to all faithful
beleuers.

Secondly, he aduertiseth them, that there is one only true doctrine of God,
and of our salvation to be obtained of Christ, that is, the same doctrine,
which has been showed of God by the Prophets and Apostles.

Thirdly, he exhorts to embrace the same doctrine with a sure faith, and to
obey it in all our life.

Fourthlie, he adds to the same exhortacion, the sonnne of the doctrine of
the Gospel, concerning redemption by the blood of Christ, and regeneracion
which is done by the word of God and by faith.

The second Chapter.
In the second Chapter, first he goes forward in his exhortacion begone,
and teaches them to aduoyde sin, and to worship God in sincere faith by
inuocacion by propagacion of the doctrine, and by integrity of manners.

Secondly, he profoundly and godly entreats of the buildyng of the Church
upon the stone, that is, Christ, the firm and sound foundation. Of the
priesthood common to all Christians, of the spiritual Sacrifices, which he
sets against both the Leuiticall sacrifices, and works done without
faith. He also entreats of the pains of the contemners and enemies of the
Gospel.

Thirdly, he retourneth to his exhortacion, that they should practice good
works, and repress evil lusts, that God may be glorified.

Fourthlie, he commands to obey Magistrates, and politic laws.

Fiftlie, he gives monicion, not to abuse the christian liberty.

Sixtlie, he exhorts to patience by the example of Christ's patience in his
passion. And by that occasion he adds in the end of the Chapter, the
doctrine of the cause and fruicte of the passion of Christ.

The third Chapter.
In the third Chapter he entreats, first of the duties of wives toward
their housebandes. Secondly of the duties of housebandes toward their wives.

Thirdly, he gives general precepts, how to maintain concord, and
innocence of life.

Fourthlie, he teaches comfort in adversity, which chances and happens
unto us for righteousness sake, and confession of the true doctrine, and among
other places of consolacion, he brings forth the example of Christ.

Fiftlie, by this occasion he intermingleth the doctrine of the Redemption,
purchased by Christ. Of which discourse this is the sum and pithe, that is,
that the only passion and death of Christ, was the substanciall sacrifice
and propiciacion, not only for men then living, but also for all that were
departed from the beginning of the world.

The fourth Chapter.
In the fourth Chapter, he returns to his purpose, declaryng that forsomoche
as Christ suffered, the just for unjust, it becomes us also to exercise
righteousness, and innocence of life, and to suffer persecucions also. For
these are the two principal and chief parts of the fourth Chapter.

First, he exhorts to avoid sin, and to obedience.

Secondly, he entreats of suffryng patience in the cross of Christ.

The fifte Chapter.
In the fifte Chapter, first he entreats of the offices and duties of the
pastors and ministers of the Church.

Secondly, of obedience and reverence due unto them.

Thirdly, of humility, contrary to pride and impacience.

Fourthlie, of the faith that rests in God. Fiftlie, of sobriety. Sixtlie,
of vigilancie. Seuenthlie, of resisting the assaults of the devil, by sure,
and steadfast faith and inuocacion of God.

Finally, he concludes his Epistle, with a notable prayer.

This is the sum of this present Epistle, which we intend to entreat of.
As for the second Epistle, saint Hierome says, that many deny it to be
Peter's, and that by reason of the dissonaunt style, from the first Epistle.

Eusebius writes of this Epistle, after this manner. Petri Epistola vna quae
prior dicitur, citra controuersiam recepta est: ea vero quae posterior dicitur
non esse legittimam accepimus, and tamen quia multis videlitur esse vtilis, cum
alijs est vsurpata scripturis, that is, one of the Epistles of Peter, which is
called the first, is received without all controversy and doubt: But that
which is called the later Epistle, we have received and learned, not to be
legittimate. Notwithstanding, because many thought it to be profitable, it is
used with other scriptures. As for other books which go in Peter's name, are
coumpted Apochriphall, as these following bearyng these titles. Euangelium
Petri, Liber Actorum Petri, Liber praedicationis Petri, Liber Apocalypsis
Petri, and Liber Iudicij.

Because perchance you may conceive, that I have stand verse long in
discussyng of these three parts before me^cioned, that is: First, to whom this
Epistle was written. Seco^dlie, who wrote it. And thirdly, what was written.
That I may not seem tedious unto you, I will go forward in the text, to
the next word, which is, Apostolus.

Petrus Apostolus: Peter the Apostle. He calls himself an Apostle, which
signifies a Legate, or Ambassador, which does his message by mouth,
which he has received in commandment. Therefore he says, I am the
Apostle of Jesus Christ, sent to teach and preach of the same Christ. And
here note, that whosoever do preach the doctrines of men, are excluded from
the function of Apostleship: for he is the Legate of Christ, who does that,
which Christ has commanded him. If he preach any other thing, he is not
Christ's Legate, nor is to be heard.

Tertullian very learnedlie and godly agrees to this, writing after this
manner.

De prescri. hereticoru^.
Nobis vero nihil ex nostro arbitrio indulgere licet, sed nec eligere quod
aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit. Apostolos domini habemus authors, qui nec
ipsi quicquam de suo arbitrio quod inducerent elegerunt sed acceptam a Christo
disciplinam fideliter nationibus assignauerunt. That is. It is not lawful for
us to fantasy or favor any thing of our own arbitrament, nor to choose that,
which any manne has brought of his own will. We have the Apostles of the
Lord, for presidentes and aucthoritees, which did not choose any thing, that
they might bring in, by their own arbitremente and will, but that discipline,
which they received of Christ, they did faithfully assign and contribute to
other nations.

Note here also, that none takes upon him, to be a Legate or Ambassador,
unless he be assigned and appoincted thereunto. So none ought to usurp the
office of the Legate of Christ, unless he be called thereto (as Peter was.) And
because I have incidentlie made mention of calling, I will declare unto you
what calling in this respect is, and how many kinds of calling there be.

Calling to the ministry, is nothing else but a lawful constitucion, of a
conueniente and mete minister. It may be also called an orderyng or election:
albeit the one word is taken more largely then the other. Election goes
before by nature, for whom we choose, them we call. Ordinance comprehends
both. There are commonly nombred four kinds of callynges, whereof the two
first are legittimate, and the two later are illegitimate and unlawful. The
first kind of calling is that, whereby ministers are called, neither of men,
nor by man, but by God only. Like as Esaie the Prophet, and the Apostle
Paul are read to be called. This calling for the most part, is confirmed by
signs and miracles, and is called a divine and secret calling.

The second kind of calling is done of God, but by the ordinance of men.
In which kind saint Mathie, Luke and Timothy are readde to be ordained and
made ministers of the Church. This kind is in this time ordinary, public,
humain and vulgar, in which God calls, geuyng necessary gifts to the
ministers, and appoinctyng laws to those that do elect and choose them, who
following and obseruyng these laws, do ordinary choose him, whom they do
conjecture to be first called of God, by certain presidentes and tokens. By
signs I understand gifts necessary for ministers.

The third kind of calling, comes of men, but not of God, as when any
unworthy manne is ordered, for favor and for rewards. In this behalf they
that are ordered do offend God, as well as they that order them. They that
are ordered do offend, when aspiryng to the ministry, either they do not
understand, or will not understand, them selves to be unmeet, as persons
destitute of necessary gifts. Or else they offend God, when they be
instructed enough, in the knowledge of the scriptures, yet they come not to the
office for a right end or way: forasmoche as they do not respect the
glory of God, but have a regard to their own private lucre. For there is
required of them that be ordered, a testimony of their own consciences, and a
secret calling, by the which we do assuredly know our selves to be stirred
and moved of God to take the function, not through ambicion, not through
covetousness, not to live easily and idlelie, nor by any other corrupt
affeccion, but by a pure fear and love of God, and to the edifiyng of the
Church of God. Of which testimony saint Paul writes very eligantlie, and
most godly to the Thessalonians. The testimony also of other that be
learned, and well expert in things, is required to the orderyng of them. For
we all do stand in our own conceits, and do judge our selves worthy, to
whom the governance of the Church may be committed, but we deceive our
selves most shamefullie.

They also which do order ministers, do offend God, when they do not
respect what God by his holy laws, would have to be done, and what the
condition and state of the Church requires to be done: but do respect the
commodity and profit of him that is ordered, therefore many times unworthy
ministers are ordered: or else they that be unlearned, and not of a sincere
life: or else they that be learned enough but not of very good integrity of
life: or else they that be simple and good Christians but yet are evil and not
wise pastors, which all are induced and brought to the ministry by favor,
oe else by gifts. Wherefore they provoke the great wrath of God upon them,
and do make them selves partakers of al their sins, whom they order
ministers.

The old writers do call this iniquity, Simonie, Simonie.
to be punished not only with continual reproach, but also with eternal
death.

Anthenins the Emperor, writing to Armasius, says thus. Let no man buy the
office of Priesthood with money. Let it be esteemed how much every priest
deserves, not how much he is able to give. Let the profane burning desire of
coueteousnes cease from the altars.

Let so chaste and humble a prelate be elected in our time, that to what place
soever he shall come unto, he may purify all things, with the integrity of
his own life. And let him be ordered (non precio, sed precibus) not by price,
but by prayers.

Thus much says the Emperor Anthenius. Who (if he should in these days
come to Rome) he would think that he came into a strange world, yea, into
the mart of Simon, not of Simon Peter, but of Simon Magus.

The fourth kind of calling is that, wherein every manne by his own private
arbitremente, Jeremy. 23.
does intrude him self into the ministry, not being ordained of God neither
by man. Of these men did the Lord speak by Jeremy, saying. Ipsi currebant
and ego non mittebam eos. Ciprianus ad Antonia^
They did run, and I did not send them. Ciprian calls them scismatikes,
which do usurp and take to them selves a priesthood, or bishopric, no
man geuyng it to them. And this kind of calling is called improperly a
calling.

Therefore it is manifest, that there is no need of a public and lawful
calling of ministers in the church. For many causes, but chifly also for these
causes, that is, that thinstitucion and ordinance of God be not neglected. And
that ecclesiastical discipline be retained. And that all me^ may know in the
church, who be ministers, and who not.

Albeit, the Apostle Paul at the beginning, was sent not of men, nor by me^,
but only of God, yea, by the commandment of the holy ghost, he was
separate with Barnabas, Acts. 13.
from the Church of Antioche, to preach and to minister the word of God to
the Gentiles. In like manner many have been called, and sent of God, whom
notwithstanding it behooved to be ordained by men. Hebreo. 5.
For Paul says. Nemo hoc sibi honoris vsurpat, sed qui vocatur a deo sicuti
Aaron. No man takes unto him this honor, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron. And again he says. Quomodo audient absque predicante? Roma. 10.
Quomodo autem predicabunt nisi missi fueri^t? How shall they hear, without a
preacher? How shall they preach, unless they be sent?

Thus much for calling to the ministry, which I have spoken of incidentlie,
but to my purpose again.

Petrus Apostolus, Peter the Apostle.

12. Primacie above other.
The old and ancient fathers, did call Peter the Prince of the Apostles, not
because they thought him to have the primacie, above the other Apostles (as our
late writers do defend directly against the scriptures) but because he was
more arde^t in all his doings and sayings with the Lord, then the other
Apostles. And because there was a more copious and aboundaunte grace given unto
him above other. And thirdly, because he was more bold, and more forward
then the rest, although it behooved him not, without some great mystery, to
be the example and president, both of man's infirmity, and also of true
repentance.

Well, I have been somewhat long. Time will not suffer me at this present, to
wade any further in the text. Therefore, I will now make an end, at my next
coming, I will go forward in the text. In the mean time, I will leave you to
the tuicion of almighty God, to whom be honor and glory now and for ever.
Amen.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea.
1. Iunias.
IVnias was a notable Jew, conversant among the Apostles. He was converted to
the faith of Christ before Paul. He is thought to have been one of the
seventy disciples. Paul saluteth him remainyng at Rome. Roma. 16.


2. Andronicus.
ANdronicus was kinsman to saint Paul, and turned to the knowledge of
Christ by that Sermon, which was made by Peter in the day of Penthecoste,
and from thens went to Room, where he spread and sowed the seed of the
Gospel about four and twenty years, before Paul came to Rome. Some suppose
that he was of the number of the seventy disciples, and that he governed
afterward the Churches in Pamonia.

3. Soche lips, soche Lettuces.
THis Proverb in Latin (Similes habent labra Lactucas) is spoken when like
does happen to like. As when to an unlearned Master, there chances a dulle
and untoward schollare: to a naughty people, a naughty Magistrate: to a
froward wife, a froward housebande. To be short, when evil things happen
to evil things, and worthy things to worthy things. This proverb did
spring of an Ass, eating Thistles. The Lettuse is a tender and a soft herb,
yet is it like the wild Thistle. Therefore as the Thistle is full of pricks,
and has for the most part sharp leafes, stalk and flowers: so the Asses
lips be hard and rough, so there is no other Lettuce more mete for the Ass,
then the Thistle.

Julius Capitolinus does testify, In vita pertinacie Imperatoris.
that Thistles were wont to be served of many at feasts, instead of Lettuse.

Saint Hierome does use this proverb, after this manner. Secundum illud
quoque, de quo semel in vita Crassum ait risisse Lucilius, Similem habent labra
lactucam, Asino Carduos comedente: videlicet vt perforatam nauim debilis
gubernator regat, and caecus caecos ducat in foueam, and talis sit rector,
quales illi qui reguntur. that is. According to that also whereof Lucilius
does write, that Crassus laughed never but ones in all his life, hearing this
proverb (Soche lips, soche Lettuces) when the Ass did eat Thistles.
Whereby is signified, that a weak governor and master, might rule and
direct a ship full of holes, and that the blind do lead the blind into
the ditche, and that when there be soche rulars as they are, which are ruled.
Haec Hieronimus.

This Crassus was the graundfather of that Crassus, who fightyng against the
Parthians was slain. He is nombred among them, which never laughed in their
lives, and for that cause they be called, (...). Marcus Tullius, Plinius, and
other do write, that Crassus never laughed in all his life time but ones.

4. To lead about a sister to wife.
This note is largely declared before, in the first Tome, look the place.

5. Talk with Christ.
THe apparition of Moises and Helias, and the communicacion of Christ with
them, do make very much, to the declaracion of the kingdom of Christ. Yet
a question may be moved, whether Moises and Helias were truly and in deed
present, or else, whether some vision only were offered to the disciples sight,
as oftentimes the visions of things absente, chanced to the Prophets.
Although this thing be disputable in vtramque partem (as they say) yet it is
more probable, that they were brought in very deed unto that place. Neither
it is any absurdity, that the dedde be brought for a time into life again, by
his arbitremente and will, who has both bodies and souls in his hand.

Moises and Helias, rose not then to the^ selves, but to be present unto Christ.

Question.
How did Peter and the other two, know Moises and Helias, whom they never
saw before?

Responsio.
When God brought them up into life, he gave also certain signs and tokens,
whereby they might be known: and also some write, that they were known by the
communicacion, that they had with Christ. Again, if it be demanded why
these two appeared, rather then any other of the number of holy fathers, this
reason ought to suffice and satisfy us, that it might evidently appear, that
there was none other scope to the law and the Prophets, but Christ only,
for it was a great corroboracion of our faith, that Christ came not without
testimony, and that he was commended in time paste of God. Therefore in
Moises, the Law, in Helias, the Prophets were represented. For although Helias
left nothing written behind him, yet he excelled as chief of all others after
Moises. He restored again the worshippyng of God, when it was greatly
corrupt, yea, he was an incomparable deliverer, and defender of the Law and
true godliness, then almost extincte and clean put out. Therefore the
co^municacion of Moises and Helias with Christ, was a consent of the Law and
the Prophets with Christ. And it behooved the Apostles to be confirmed and
resolved, that this religion which Christ preached unto them, was no new
Religion, or lately sprung up, but that it was testified and declared in the
Law and the Prophets. For unless the disciples had been confirmed of this
thing, with substaunciall testimony, that Christ taught nothing contrary to
the Law and the Prophets, they would have always doubted, and could not with
a constaunt mind have preached the Gospel.

Question.
What was the tenor of the co^municacion, which they had with Christ?

Responsio.
To this saint Luke answers, who writes these words. Luke. 9.
Qui visi in gloria dicebant excessum eius quem completurus erat Hierosolymis.
Which appeared in glory, and told of his departing, which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem. He calls the death of Christ, a departing out of
this world. Furthermore, this talk ought not to be restrained to the private
persons, of Moises and Helias, but rather to the legacy and office in time
paste, enjoined unto them. For the Lord would them (although they were
dedde, and had run the course of their vocacion) to establishe again with
their own voices that thing, which they taught in their life time.

Other learned men do bring other reasons and causes, why Moises and Helias
appeared, rather then other.

The first reason is (say they) because the people said, that Christ, was
Helias, or Hieremie, or one of the Prophets, he brought therefore with him the
chief of the Prophets, that the difference of the servants and master might
be discerned and known.

The second reason is. Because the Jews continually accused Jesus, as a
transgressour of the Law, and as a blasphemour, vsurpyng to him self the glory
of God. But that he might show him self to be giltlesse, from both the
accusacions, he brings forth them, which excelled both in the law and in
propheciyng. For Moises gave the Law, and Helias was very zealous for the
glory of God.

The third reason is, that they might know, that Christ had power over death
and life, and therefore he brought Moises, which died naturally, and Helias,
which yet had suffered no corporal death.

The fourth reason, the Euangeliste himself declares, that is, to show the
glory of the cross of Christ, Luke.
and to mitigate the fear of death. For they did speak (as an other
Euangeliste declares) of Christ's departing, which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem. VVhereupon he brings forth the^ which set them selves forward
to death, for those which pleased God, and for the faithful people: for,
both of them offered them selves voluntarily to tyrauntes, Moises to Pharao,
and Helias to Achab.

Hilarious.
The fifte reason is, because Christ would have the disciples to be humble and
meke as Moises was, and fervent and zealous, as Helias was.

These be the censures and opinions, of certain scholasticall divines.

6. Tabitha.
OF this woman Tabitha, how she was revoked from death to life of Peter, Acts.
9.
mention is made in the Acts of the Apostles. It is marvel, that certain
learned men, would have this word Tabitha to be a verb, and therefore
expound these words in Mark Tabitha cumi, Mark. 5.
id est, respice, vide: for Tabitha is a Noune, and not a Verb, and an
Assirian word, which signifies to them a certain beast named Caprea,
which beast does see wonderful quickly.

They which be expert in the Hebrew do write, that this word, Tabitha
does come of this radical Nibbat, i. vidit and so the Greek word (...),
does signify Capream, which word, (...), is deduced of this verb (...),
id est, video, whereupon they which have very quick sight are called (...).

Ioannes Capnion does think, that we should read Thabia, and not Tabitha. As
for the place in Mark, where it is written, Tabitha cumi, hoc est, puella,
tibi dico, surge. Saint Hierome does say, that the text is corrupt, and
that in two points.

First, that the word is not Tabitha, but Talitha, with this letter l.
which is a Syrian or a Chaldean word, and signifies, puellam, a maiden, and
so it is written, both in the Greek books, and also in the old Latin books.

Secondly, these words (tibi dico) are none of the text, but are added,
whether of the Evangelists, or of other it is uncertain. And here again it
may appear, that Christ did not use the pure Hebrew tongue, but the Syrian
tongue, which was the populare and common tongue used of the people. If he had
spoken Hebrew, he would have said Tabitha which betokens in Hehrue,
puellam, and not, Talitha which is a Chaldeon word.

7. Simon Magus.
NIcephorus records, that in the time of Nero the Emperor, Simon Magus
wrought wonders at Rome by wicked means. He had a very great Dog, tied at
his gates, by which he kept away those, that would come to him, if they
pleased him not. It fortuned that Peter came to see, and talk with Simo^, who
seeing the woodde Dog to press upon him, understanding that he had been
occasion of many men's death before time, he loosed the Dog, and bid him
tell his master in man's voice, that Peter the servant of Christ was come.
The dog does the message, as he was commanded. They that were then present
with Simon, were astonished at it. To whom Simon answered, that it was no strange
thing: and that he also could do the same. Then he bad the dog forthwith, to
call Peter the Apostle unto him, who came in and talked many words with
Magus: But Peter overcame Simon Magus, in woorkyng many miracles: whereupon
much people were converted to Christ, and received Baptism. Simon Magus also
by the help of deuels, wrought many wonders. For he caused Images to move,
vessels and other implementes to remove them selves to and fro, of their own
accord, and he him self being compassed with fire, did not burn. Also he did
fly in the air. He made bread of stones. He put on him the shape and form of
a Dragon, and of sondrie beasts. He was seen to have two faces. He
tra^sformed him self wholly into gold, with his word he opened doors that
were fast shut and barred: and broke in sonder iron bands. In ba^kettes he
exhibited Images of all manner of shapes: He caused many shadows to go before
him, which he feigned to be dedde men's souls. Not only he transformed him
self into what likeness he would, but also he changed other men into sonderie
forms of sonderie beasts. He doing sacrifice upon a time, under the pretense
of amity and friendship, badde to the banquet certain men, which had attempted
to prove and convince him to be a crafty knave, and by that means he made
them subject to sondrie incurable diseases, and to be molested of fearce and
cruel deuelles. Now when Peter did certain wonders like unto those (which he
did in very deed) but Simon in apparaunce and false shows, Nero the Emperor
sends for them both, and expels the^ out of Rome. But afterward he
wickedly set his mind most, upon the crafty and vnpure deceiuer Simon Magus.
Haec Nicephorus.

Aegesippus records the like saying, Peter and Paul were at Rome, who by the
renoume of their works, caused Nero to be their enemy, who was inueghled
with the false entisement of Simon Magus, who by his Magic promised Nero,
that he would help him in obteinyng against any enemy the victory, to subdue
any nation, and promised him long life. And Nero, which did not duly examine
things, credited him to much. To be short, Magus was in the chiefeste seat
of amity and friendship with him. And albeit he had proved the power of Peter
in other parts to be great, notwithstanding coming to Rome before Peter,
was bold to boast, that he raised up again the dedde to life. At that time
there died at Room a noble young man, kinsman to the Emperor, whose death all
for the most part lamented. Many to prove whether he could be revived or no,
by any means? Went to Peter, who was counted famous in workyng soche
miracles, and desired him to revive him, but the Gentiles believed not that he
could do it. But some gave counsel to send for Simon Magus, and when they
were both present, Peter said, that he would give the first place to Simon
(who bosted so much of his own power) that he should resuscitate the dedde if
he could. If he could not revive him, then that he would not want to pray,
that Christ would help the dedde man, that he might rise again. Simo^ thinkyng
that his deceites should much pre^uaile among the Gentiles, did propone this
condition, that if he could raise up the dedde man, Peter should be killed:
But if Peter could prevail against Simon, that the like vengeance should be
taken upon him, Peter granted the condition. Simon begins, and comes to
the bed, and after he had begone to inchau^t and mutter, certain Magical
verses, the dedde man seemed to wagge his hedde. Then the Gentiles cried out and
said, that he was a live, and talked with Simo^. They were much moved with
Peter, because he durst compare him self, to so great a power. The holy
Apostle required silence, and said. If the dedde man be alive, let him speak.
If he be raised up from death, let him arise, walk and talk. He said that
it was a fantasy, not a verity, that he seemed to move his hedde. Let Simon
(said he) be put a side from the bed, and then they should not se the dedde
man shake his hedde. Simon was led away from the bed, the hedde moved not
at all. Peter stood somewhat far of, and after he had prayed secretly a
little space, with loud voice said. Young man arise, the Lord Jesus make
thee whole. And forthwith the young manne arose, spoke, walked, and did eat
meat. And Peter gave him to his mother. And when Peter was desired, that he
would not depart away from the young manne, he said: he will not forsake
him, which made him to arise again, whose servants we are, and said to
the young man's mother, take thou no care for thy soonne, fear not, he has a
keeper. And when the people fell upon Simon Magus to stone him: Peter said. It
is enoughe punishemente for him, that he knows his crafts to be nothing
worth, let him live, and see Christ's kingdom to increase, although it be
against his will. Magus was vexed and grieved, at the renown of the Apostle.

But he takes heart and stomach again, and assaiyng eftesones, what he could
do by his Magical practices, he gathers the people together, and says,
that he is hurt of the Gallileans, and that he will leave the City, which he
was wont to defend. He appointed a day, and promises to flee, that he might
be received into heaven, which would be open for him at his pleasure. He
went at the day appointed into the Mount, where the Capitolie stood, and
castyng him self down from an high rock, began to flee. The people
marueiled, and had him in reverence, many of them saieyng, that it was the
power of GOD, and not of man, which did flee- with his body, and that
Christ did no soche thing. Then Peter standing in the midst of them, said.
LORD Jesus, show that his crafts are vain, let not the people, which give
credit to him, be deceived with his fantastical shows. Let him fall
down LORD, but so that he living, may acknowledge, that he could do nothing.
And forthwith after Peter had spoken these words, he fell down, but yet he
died not with the fall. but having a broken and maimed leg, he went to
Aricia, and there died. Which thing, when Nero heard, being sorrowful, for
the cause of so great a friend, and disdeignyng that a man profitable and
necessary for the common wealth, was taken from him, began to seek causes
and quarelles to kill Peter.

8. Caius Caligula.
CAligula was properly named Caius. He was the.iiij Emperor of Rome, and
surnamed Caligula, either for that he first did wear hose decked full of
precious stones, or rather (as some say) of wearyng Buskins, that soldiers
used in wars, the soolles whereof were driven full of little nails: for he
thought it to be a most acceptable and pleasant thing to the soldiers, if
they should see him, being an Emperor, to differ nothing in apparel, from a
common soldier. He was a very wicked manne, for he defloured his two
sisters, and at length banished them. Also when he had married the wife of
Memnius, one of his noble capitaines, he constrained Memnius ever after, to
write and call him, the father of his wife. He was also a very cruel manne, in
so much that he was said oftentimes to have cried out, saying: I would that
the whole people of Room had but one neck, because I would destroy them
all, with one stroke, and therefore commanded very many noble men to be
slain. He never did any noble act, either at home, or else where, but
coueteously spoiled all men. He nombred him self (as Eusebius records)
among the Gods, and commanded Petronius, the ruler of Siria, to set his
Image at Jerusalem, under the name of Great IVPITER, commaundyng also the
same to be done in all the Sinagoges of Iewrie. Being without wit, and of
very little learning envied all men, and therefore had almost caused the
verses of Homere to be burned, and the Images and books of Virgill, and Titus
Liuius to be abolished and defaced in all libraries, saying, that Virgill was a man of no wit, and that Liuie was a babbler, and full of words. He set
at liberty Agrippa Herodes soonne, whom Tiberius the Emperor, had cast into
prison, and made him king of Iewrie, and banished Herod the Tetrache, with
perpetual exile, into the city of Lugdune in France. It is reported, that he
had a cheste, filled full of diverse poysones, which was cast of Claudius
into the sea, whereof the sea being infected, a great multitude of fisshes
died. He was of an insatiable lust, and of a wonderful riotte and dissolute
life, whereby he so much loved women, that besides his sisters with whom he
had committed inceste, he also loved a strompette, who was commen for a little
money, whose name was Pyralis. He fleshely laid wait for all honest matrons,
whom he calling with their housebandes to supper, defiled, and openly at the
table, communed of their filthy and carnal copulacion, praisyng some of them,
and dispisyng other some. When he had spente and wasted away with great
prodigality in riotte, banckettyng, and in sumptuous and unprofitable buildyng
all the money, which Tiberius the Emperor heaped together, turned then his
mind to rapine and extorcion, deuisyng soche tributes and taxynges, as were
never hard of. He made void the testamentes and wills of rich men, and so
got to himself heaps of gold, in which he might tomble and wallowe.

After his death two books were found, the one having this title Gladius, the
other having this title Pugio, in which the names of them were contained, whom
he had appointed to death. There were many conspiracies made, against this
cruel beast. But the last had the best success. It was practiced by one
Chaereas Cassius Tribunus, and Cornelius Sabinus, for when Caius did ouerse,
and look upon certain children, which would have played a play: Chaereas
came behind him, and smote him with a sword upon the neck, on the other
side, Sabinus thrust him to the heart, and so killed him, having thirty
wounds, and so died the.xxix. year of his age, when he had reigned.iij. years,
x. months and.viij. days (as Tranquillus writes.

9. Claudius.
Claudius was uncle to Caligula, and the fifth Emperor of Rome. His said
nephewe kept him as prisoner, and for a mockyng stock, but he by the help
and industry of Agrippa king of the Jews (as Josephus records) when his
nephewe was slain, obtained the Empire. He was cou^pted a man godly, saving
that he was always vnmoderate in meats and wine, and in Dice plaiyng. He
caused the Islande Britain to yield unto him, and he added to the Romain
Empire, other little Islandes called Orcades. He expelled out of Rome the Jews
making a tumulte, and quickly appeased certain sedicions sturred up, and
raised in Iewrie, by certain false Prophets. He had.iij. wives (as Josephus
writes.) Of the first named Petina, he begat Antonia, which Petina being
dedde, he married Messalina, kinswoman to Messala the Orator, of who^ he begat
Britannicus, and Octauia. Last of al he married Agrippina, Germanicus his
daughter, having before a son named Nero, for the love of which Agrippina,
he killed Messalina, when Messalina was ded, Agrippina fearyng lest Britannicus
the son of Messalina when he came to age, should take thempire of his father,
poisoned Claudius for her son Neroes sake, after this manner. Claudius was
very much delited with eating of Mushrumes, and called the^ meat of the
gods, because they sprange and grew of their own accord Which when
Agrippina had marked and perceived, she infected with poison certain Mushru^s,
being well and delicately boiled, and gave them her self to him to eat, being
dronken. But when she saw that he would recover, by reason of vometyng, and by
solublenesse, she caused Xenophon the Phisician, to give him feathers dipte in
poison, to put in his throat, to make his vomit continue, and so it came to
pass, as his wife would have it: for he being brought into his chamber, died
there, no man knowing it beside his wife, whose death she conceled, until
Nero her soonne, by the voices of her friends, was elected and created
Emperor. Britannicus, and Claudius his soonne was omitted and put by, as the
younger soonne of Claudius. And when Nero was enhaunsed to the Empire,
furthwith she sent Burrus ganerall of the wars, and with him valiaunte
Tribunes of them, which were manumissed and made free, who lead about Nero by
the tents, and commanded that they should worship him as Emperor. And Nero
being thus promoted, requited his mother, by taking from her, her life, which
she deserved for her wickedness.

This Claudius reigned thirtene years, eight months and.xx. days. Plinius
writes, that his mother Antonia never spit all the days of her life. She was
wont to call him (Portentum hominis) as one which was begone of nature, but
not yet perfited.

Cuspinianus writes, that he did in his youth, use the compaignie of obscure
and base men: and that after supper he would fall a sleep, and that then
bones were cast at him, and that they would smite him with a whip or rod. He
never had his health in his youth, and therefore became both unlusty in
body, and dull in wit. Sextus Aurelius named him vecorde^, that is, one
mad, or out of his wit. After that Caligula was slain, and when a great
tumulte rose among the soldiers, to enquire who smote and killed Caius, and
all the city being in an hurly burly: Claudius fearyng least he should be
drawn to punishment for the same, hid himself, and was found at the last, in
an ill favored den or cave: and was brought (as Josephus writes) by a
friendly soldier, to the rest of his compaignie, and was there saluted
Emperor, and was brought to the palace of Rome, and created Emperor by the
soldiers.

Cuspinianus also writes, that this Claudius in his youth had two wives. The
first was called Aemilia Lepida. The other was named Lucia Medullina, and by a
surname she was called Camilla, who in the same day, which was appointed to
the marriage, died. After that, he married Plautia^ Herculanillam, from whom he
deuorsed him self, for reprochefull whoredom, and suspicion of murder.
Thirdly, he married Aeliam Petinam, of who^ he begat Antonia^, but afterward for
small offenses, he forsook her. Tha^ he married Messalina, who was coumpted
notorious, for her unchaste life. At the last he married Agrippina, as is said
before, who poisoned him.

10. Nero.
OF Nero, Plutarchus writes after this manner. Agrippina having a soonne by
Donictius Anabarbus, married Claudius, which was afterward called Claudius
Nero. He rulyng in the Empire in these our days, killed his own mother, and
did almost through his wickedness and madness, subvert and overthrow the whole
Empire. Haec Plutarchus.

After that Claudius had adopted him to his soonne, at the age of a leven
years, he was delivered to Seneca a senator, to be instructed and taught. A-
little after, he showed great cruelty unto Lepida his aunte, which was fallen
at variaunce with his mother. Lepida was condemned to dye, Nero accusyng her,
when he was.xvij. years old, after that Claudius was dedde, he went to the men
of war, of whom he was saluted Emperor: and being set in a horselitter, he
was carried of the soldiers unto the court, where he was honorably received
of the Senators and Fathers. He received of the Empire certain foretokens. For
when he played the Tragedy of Troie (Claudius being present) with other noble
men's children: all the people cast great favor toward him. Some write,
that dragons were present at his nativity, and in his infancy, as kepers of
his life, and he was wont to show that he saw one serpent at the least,
always in his chamber. When his father Claudius was dedde, he made to him a
most solemn, sumptuous and honorable funeral, and commanded, him to be
coumpted in the number of the gods, besides many other notable honors. In the
first beginning of his Empire, he committed to his mother Agrippina, the charge
of all things: and in the first five years of his reign, he was of soche
liberality, clemency and gentleness, that he passed al Princes that were before
him. He either forgave, or else diminished, grievous taxes and paime^tes. When
one Burrus being general of the army, would have punished two thieves, and
required of Nero that he would subscribe to the libell of condemnacion, he
against his will, taking the paper in his hand, cried out and said. Quam
vellem nescire literas. Would to God I knew no learning, nor letters. Which
noble voice worthy a Prince, moved Seneca, to write a book, De clementia
Neronis. He was so gentle and so favorable to all degrees, in so much that he
would admit them to come to salute him, and also to salute them him self by
name. He redressed ill manners. He did moderate sumptuous buildings. He
repressed the outrageous license of chariotte men. He builded houses by the
water side with porches and sellers, to stay and to quench fire, if any
should chance to the city. He made many good laws, by the which he
restrained corrupters of testamentes. But although he did these and soche like
things, with great honor at the beginning, yet at the last, he forgettyng
the Imperial dignity, did so apply his mind to the study of Music, that
he did not only omit nothing, both for the conseruacion of soche artificers,
and also for the cause to make fine and clear voices, but also did come himself
(in Theatrum, that is, the plaiyng place, and song him self openly many days
together, and played many Tragedies, being one of the plaiers him self. He had
a marvelous delight to play upon a Harp and Lute, and so at the last he
opened his wantonness, his fleshely pleasures, his riotte, his avarice, and his
cruelty. In the dawnyng of the day, he went to Tauernes, and wandered about
the streates, and whom soever he met, he would either beat them, and wound
them, or else throw them into the sinckes and kenelles. On a certain day,
when a sedicion sprange in the plaiyng place, among the disardes and
counterfeite plaiers, he him self threw stones among the people. He brake the
hedde of him, which was then Praetor. He gave him self to soche banckettyng and
gurmandise, that he would sit from middaie to midnight, eating and drinkyng,
having in his compaignie whores and buggerers. It is so horrible to rehearce,
how shamefully he abused Spolus the Eunuche, and Doriferus, who was made a free
man. Sextus Aurelius does at large declare, and describe his filthy and
fleshely life. He carnally defiled his own mother and when Seneca admonished
him, to beware of the discease of his mother, who was a woman both cruel and
imperious: he received emonges his co^cubines a certain harlotte, very like to
Agrippina-He wallowed in all kind of mischief. He was most prodigal, as well
in geuyng, as in buildyng. Insomoche when all his riches were spente, he
turned him self to extorcion, to sacrilege, to spoylyng and robbyng of the
Temples of the Gods, and so became most cruel. He killed Britannicus, being
at supper with him, causing a certain woman named Locusta (to whom he for that
purpose gave rewards) to prepare poison, and so destroyed him. Not yet
staiyng, he attempted to poison his own mother Agrippina, whom when he
perceived to defend her self with medicines against poison, he caused the
great beams of the chamber where she lay, to be made loose, and so to fall
upon her being a sleep. But this his deuelishe devise being known, he caused a
Ship to be made, and fastened together, in the which he set his mother, but
the ship being drouned) she escaped safe by swimmyng. When this was declared
to Nero, by one that was a free manne, he cast the messenger into prison, and
sent certain persons to his mother to kill her. As Soon as Agrippina saw the
Centurion coming toward her with a naked sword in his hand, she puttyng
forth her belly, cried out, that he would strike that part first, for this
belly, this belly (says she) is to be perced through with Iron, which has
brought forth soche a monster. Then the Centurion thurst his sword into her
belly, and so slew her with many wounds. After this horrible murder was
done, Nero being both without fear and shame, beheld the carcas of his mother
being slain. He caused his aunte Lepida to be destroyed by Phisicians, and many
other of his aliau^ce and kindred, he caused to be destroyed. He killed Seneca
his master, and Burrus also, one of his governors. At the last, when a
blasyng Star appeared in the element, by the space of six months
continually: and when two conspiracies were made against him, and yet neither
of them took effect: and when also he ceased not to kill whom he pleased, and
for what cause soever he would, he began to play the cruel tyrant, in the
end with the Senators, and purposed to take away, and to destroy that noble
order. He caused the city to be set on fire, findyng fault at the ill
favored building thereof (which fire continued six days and six nights)
and he him self beheld the fire, singing in a plaiers garmente, the burning of
Troie. But at the last, when France and Spain declined from him. He was
greatly discouraged, and when he hard at diner, Gabba saluted Emperor, he
ouerthrewe the table, and in a great rage and fury, brake two goodly cups
of Crystal, and lay as one almost dedde, without voice or speaking. Then
like a furious and mad man, he went to the Theater, to behold plays, and
imagined to destroy with poison, the whole Senate, to burn the whole city,
and let out the wild beasts upon the people, to tear and devour them. He
was wonderful troubled with anguishes and tears, and greatly molested, with
cruel and terrible dreams. At the last receiving poison of Locusta his
woman, in a golden box, he attempted to fly away. But when every man had
forsaken him, and his very fre^des had shut their doors against him, and could
find none that would cut of his hedde, he ra^ hedlong to Tiberis the river,
there to droune him self, but he was let by one Phaon. Then he went to a
certain village, four miles from the city, where he heard, that he was
adjudged an enemy of the Senate, and that the horse men sought for him, he
thruste a knife into his throat, or as (Aurelius writes) he thruste him self
through with his own sword, his filthy Eunuch Sporus, helpyng him to rid
him self. And so he that shamefully lived, more shamefully died, being of the
age of.xxxij. years, and that day, in which he killed his wife Octauia, when
he had reigned.xiij. years and.viij. months, whose death brought soche
gladness and joy to the city, that the people went through the city, their
heddes covered with cappes, as though then they had gotten, all liberty and
fredome.

Some write, that when burning of the city was laid to his charge, he caused
the fault to be put upon the Christians, and therefore began a persecucion
against them, in which persecucion, beside many other, he killed Peter and
Paul.

He was (said other) of so great riotte and prodigality, that he would bathe
in cold ointme^tes, and fish with nets of gold, having cords of purple.

In him the whole family of the Caesar's finished, and was consumed.

Some write, that upon the place where he was buried, there grew a nut tree,
upon which certain deuelles satte, keeping the place, and did hurt, rent, and
tear many that came that way.

Other do suppose, Nero not to be killed, but to be taken away alive, and to
be reserved and hidden in some place, until he shall be revealed, and restored
again to his kingdom: whereupon many do judge, that this Nero shall be the
Antechriste to come.

11. Simonie.
I Remember a pretty story of a certain Patron, who had a benifice void in
his hand, and it was a good fat benifice. A certain scholare of Oxford, who
was handsomely learned, was commended unto him, for the obteinyng of the same
benifice. When the scholare came before him, the Patron asked of him, who was
Melchisedeche father, and who was his mother. The scholare being somewhat
troubled, said: Sir, if it please you, I cannot tell. For saint Paul says
that Melchisedech, was without father and mother. Tushe, tushe, said the
Patron, thou art not learned, thou gettest no benifice here. The scholare
departed, and told one of his fellows, who was also well learned, how he had
spedde. What (says the other scholare) thou art a fool: I warraunt thee, I
will so instruct thee, that thou shall be sure of the benifice. Thou know,
that the Rabbines of the Jews do write, that Sem the eldest son of Noe was
father to Melchisedech: canste thou remember this (says he) yea very well
says the other. Now take away M. from this word Sem, what remains then,
there remains (says he) Se. well, says he, now will I provide for thee a
bag of twenty pound of money, and go to the Patron, keeping the bag of
money under thy cloak. And when thou come to him: say: Sir, now if it please
you, I can tell who was Melchisedech, his father and mother. Who, says the
Patron: for sothe Sem, Noes son. Now sir, take away M. what remains, Se,
says the Patron: well, then there is his father says the scholare. But who
was his mother, says the Patron: forsothe here she is, says the scholare.
And with that pulled out his bag of money, and gave it the Patron: yea Marie
(says the Patron) this is well said. Thou shall have the benifice. But if
it please you, says the scholare, set the fathers name and the mothers name
together, and what is it then: Marie, Semonie, says the Patron, Dear sister
to Simonie, says the scholare. Well says the Patron, go, go, take the
benifice to thee. It is to be feared, naie, rather to be lamented, that the
most part of Patrons within this realm, have (thus) learned the name of
Melchisedeches father and mother. For it is with them, as it is with the
Lawiers: no penie, no Pater noster No bribe, no benifice.

12. Primacie above other.
BEcause mention is made, of the primacie of Peter, I will discourse, whether
the Ecclesiastical power (as the papists now a days do usurp it) by the
prerogative, as they think of Peter, leineth upon the word of God, or no.
Secondly, I will show in what poincte Ecclesiastical power agrees with the
Law: and word of God. Thirdly, how far Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
pertains to Temporal Princes.

Concerning the first, it is to be noted, that the name and title, of the
Ecclesiastical power or jurisdiction (among our adversaries) is nothing else,
but to make laws and statutes, to bind all Christians, yea, princes to
affirm and grant, that all causes do pertain, to the bishop of Romes
jurisdiction, and are to be sued in his Court: and that he may remove
Princes from their kingdoms, and put in their place, whom he pleases, set at
liberty subjects from the oath of due obedience, to excommunicate, and to
interdite. And that he has authority to send some men, yea living, to
hell, and other (whom he pleases) to heaven: and what not to do?

This power our adversaries contend to establishe, which by Gods grace, we
will now sincerely and truly examine.

The first and chiefest place, is this saying of Christ in Mathewe. Tu es
Petrus and super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam mea^, and portae inferi non
praeualebunt aduersus eam. That is. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Out of
the which text, if it be granted to have this understanding, that it
signifies the church, to have been builte upon Peter, then must needs follow
(as they say) a manifest probacion, of the fulness of their power and
authority. But it is not to be granted. For, let it be that Peter were first
and chief of the Apostles, and that the Church was builte, upon his private
person (which were an absurdity to grant) yet what foundation soever the
Church has it must needs be redeemed with the blood of Christ, growyng by
faith in Christ, and condescendyng to his laws. Now, if the Church be the
true and proper spouse of Christ, she takes him only for her Lord and
houseband, in the chiefeste liberty she rests in him, as in the hedde, and
depends of him, who brought to pass, that we are no more under the Law, but
under grace, waxyng so strong by his free gift, that being released from the
care of a scholemaister, and endued with the spirit of God, by his grace we are
justified by faith, which woorketh not by coercion, but by penalties, not by
menaces and terrors, but only by true love. But it appears not by that text
that the Church was builded upon Peter, unless under the name of Peter, we
understand the whole congregation of the faithful, and true Christians, or
else understand the confession of Peter. For what could be spoken with more
weight, then that the gates of hell should not prevail against the Church.
But if the gates of hell (which as Hierome, Origin, and Ambrose do say, be
vices and sins) can not prevail against the Church, no man will say,
that it ought to be understand of the bisshoppe of Rome, which is a mortal
man, for so much as Solomon says. Septies in die cadit iustus. Seven times
in the day, Prouer. 24.
the just man falls. And Paul says. Omnis pontifex ex hominibus assumptus
circumdatus est i^firmitate: Hebre. 5.
and propterea debet quemadmodum pro populo ita and pro suis peccatis immolare.
That is. Every high priest taken from among men, is compassed with
infirmity, and therefore he is bound to offer for sins, as well for his
own part, as for the peoples. And this also is to be considered, that some of
the Bisshoppes of Rome, were Simonicall men: some were Idolatours, some were
scismatikes, some were Heretics, some were given to this vice, and some to
that vice, and some were wrapped with all manner of vices, as the Chronicles and
histories do record. Among whom, as there were many, that repented of their
former evil life past, against whom, through their faith in Christ, being the
true foundation of the Church (the gates of hell and their sin prevailed
not, so they prevailed against others, which died no better, then they lived,
but heapyng sin upon sin, had a more miserable end, then they had life.
Whose evil ends, do most certainly resolve and prove, that Peter and his
successors in the Church of Rome, were not those against whom the gates of
hell should not prevail. But it was the faith, and very confession of Peter,
De incar. dn^i sacram.
against which they did not prevail, For (as saint Ambrose says) these
words, (the gates of hell shall not prevail against it) were not spoken of
the person of Peter, but of his faith.

The said Ambrose says also in an other place. Dicit dominus ad Petrum. Super
istam petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam: Ad Ephe. 2.
hoc est in hac catholicae fidei confessione statuo fideles ad vitam. That is.
The lord said to Peter. Upon this rock will I build my Church, that is, in
this confession of the catholic faith, I appointe all the faithful to life.

Saint Hierome also says thus. Secundum autem metaphoram petrae, Super
Matheum. xvi.
recte dicitur ei, aedificabo ecclesiam meam super te. That is. By a
metaphorical speech of the rock, it is well said to Peter, I will build my
Church upon thee. Which sentence saint Augustine confirmyng, says. De
ver. dn^i. sermo. xiii.
Super hanc petramque confessus es, super hanc petram quam cognouisti dicens:
Tu es Christus filius dei viui aedificabo ecclesiam meam. Super me aedificabo
te, non me super te. That is. Upon this rock, whom thou have acknoledged
saying: Thou art Christ the soonne of the living God, that is, upon my self
being the soonne of the living God, I will build my Church. I will build
thee upon me, not me upon thee. For, like as he was first called Simon, and
afterward (as Beda and Hierome do testify) for his strong faith, and steadfast
confession, Christ named him Peter. So we also (as witnesses Origin) if God
the father, which is in heaven, In Math. Homi. i.
reuealyng it unto us, do confess and acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the
son of the living God: we shall be well called Petri, Peter's. for the rock is
every man, which is a follower of Christ, the rock is Christ, who (as Beda
testifies) has given the partaking of his name to him that faithfully
knowlegeth, loves, and confesses him, that is, that he might be called Petrus
a petra, Peter of the rock, upon which rock, the church is builded. For, no
man can lay any other fou^dacio^, beside that, which is already laid, which
is Christ Jesus. Acts. iiii.
This rock is so firm and sure, this foundation is so stable and steadfast,
that it will never suffer the upper work, to fall or decaie. For we read in
many places of the scriptures, that he is called the corner stone, strength,
and sure foundation of the Church. Chrysostom also says: Super hanc petram,
non super hunc Petrum. etc. Upon this rock, and not upon this Peter. For, he
did not build his church upon man, but upon faith. And what is meant upon
the rock? It is upon the confession. If Christ had meant by these words, the
church to be built upon Peter, that it should be governed by his arbitrament
and his successors: where he said in a certain place, dic ecclesiae, he would
have said dic Petro and successoribus suis. If thy brother offend thee, tell
Peter and his successors. Which sense Aeneas Siluius, one of their own
company rejects, saying. The yoke of Christ is sweet, and the burden of
Christ is easy. But tell you how easy, if Christ commands that, which is
impossible? He should have commanded an impossibility, if in every
controversy, he should have commanded all the world, to have come unto
Peter. For* how could Peter visit the church, dispersed every where, as in
all cities and tounes. The congregacions, which then were in the Acts of the
Apostles, called Ecclesiae.

Saint Gregory upon this matter, writes thus: Si in mea correptione
despicior, Ex regist. li. 4. operis. 38
restat vt ecclesiam debeam adhibere. If in my correccio^ I be despised, it
remains that I ought to provoke, and call upon the Church. Furthermore,
Aeneas Siluius upon these words, Dic ecclesiae, tell the church says thus.
Behold, Peter is sent to the counsel, the verity sends the high bisshoppe
to the counsel. Why does he this? That the Bisshoppes of Room should not
disdain to agnise some power in earth, to be above them, which power they
should ask counsel of, and be contented with the determinacions of the same.
VVhereupon, Peter was otherwise named Simon, which word Simon (as I have
said before) in the Hebrew toungue, betokens obedience one that is obedient.
That all men might perceive, that obedience is necessary, yea, in the
Bisshoppe of Rome.

Gerson Gerson.
proves this sentence, saying. Peter played the Jew ones by dissemblyng, and
Paul withstoode him to the face. Peter brought in a new thing into the
Church of God, when he went into the Centurion being a Gentile, whereupon
there arose a murmr in the Church of GOD, so that Peter was enforced to
follow the doctrine, which the Scripture taught, that is, to be ready to
give accoumpte, before the whole Church, of his doctrine. So were Simachus,
Marcellinus, and also Gregory, obedient to the judgment of the counsel, not
by humble condescent (as some do feign) but of bounden duty.

Saint Hierome also affirms, that the whole christian world, Ad euagri.
concerning authority, is greater then one city, that is, Rome.

That in these words, Dic ecclesiae, the multitude of the faiethfull is
signified, the Apostle Paul proves, saying. Ego quidem hoc decreui, vt his
qui hoc patrauit congregatis vobis in meo spiritu tradatur Sathanae. I have
determined this that he, which has committed this fact (when you be
assembled together, and my spirit) be delivered to Satan. And saint
Augustine upon the same text, writes thus Hoc modo iudicaui, vt vos in vnum
absque vlla dissentione congregati. etc. That is. I have judged, that you being
assembled together, without any dissencion, with whom my authority, and the
power of Christ will work, do deliver this man to Satan.

Furthermore, that this power of the Church, was granted to Peter, Math. xviii
in the name of the multitude. Beda upon this text. Si pecauerit in te frater
tuus, If thy brother shall offend thee, proves and writes thus. Haec
potestas sanctae ecclesiae, episcopis specialiter commissa est. Quantum vero
omni ecclesiae data creditur. That is. This power of the holy Church, is
committed specially to bisshoppes, but it is given generally to the whole
Church. For, that the Lord in an other place, gave unto Peter, power to bind
and to lose: he gave also undoubtedly, the same to all the Apostles, in the
person of Peter, which did bear the type of the Church. Which thing
Augustine declares, Super Joan
saying thus. Petrus cum claues accepit, ecclesiam sanctam significauit. etc.
That is. Peter when he received the keys, signified the holy Church: for if
in Peter there were not a Sacrament, and mystery of the Church, the Lord
would not have said unto him, Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum, To thee I will
give the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

The same also does saint Hierome and Augustine prove, by these textes.
Accipite Spiritum sanctum, quorum remisceritis peccata remittuntur eis. Receive
you the holy ghost, whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven unto
them. And tibi dabo claues regni coelorum, to thee I will give the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, which keys saint Augustine calls scientiam and
potestatem discernendi, that is, knowledge and power to discern and judge.

Saint Ambrose also affirms, that all priests in saint Peter, De
dignita. sacerdotali.
have received the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

Also Origin says. Putas soli Petro dantur a Christo claues regni coelorum,
Homili. i. in Math.
and nemo alius beatoru^ accipiet eas. etc. Dooest thou think, that the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, were given of Christ to Peter only, and that none
other godly manne should receive them? If then, saying. Dabo tibi claues regni
coelorum: To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, were common
among them all. How shall not all things, which were spoken before to Peter,
seem to be common to all the Apostles? For, in the Gospel of saint Ihon,
Ihon. xx.
Jesus geuyng the holy ghost to his disciples, when he breathed upon them,
and said. Accipite spiritum sanctum: quorumcumque remiseretis peccata,
remittuntur eis: si cuius quorumcunque autem retinueritis, retenta sunt. That
is. Receive you the holy ghost, whose sins you shall remitte, they are
remitted, and whose sins you shall hold and retain, they are retained. As
though it were said, that all the Apostles were constitute and made, soche as
Peter was. Luke. xxii.
And when Christ said in an other place. Rogaui pro te Petre, ne fides tua
deficiat: Sed tu ali^quando conuersus confirma fratres tuos. I have prayed for
thee Peter, that thy faith fail not: therefore being converted, strengthen
thy brethren.

Does he (think you) signify soche a prerogative of Peter, as though upon
Peter alone, the church should be builded, the other Apostles being excluded?
Did he pray (says Augustine) for Peter, and not for Ihon and James, and the
residue of the Apostles?

It manifestly appears therefore, that in the person of Peter, all the
Apostles were contained and signifies, because Christ says in Ihon: Ego pro
hijs rogo quos mihi dedisti: I pray for those, which thou have given to me.
Whereupon we may understand by Peter, a very plentiful Church, as
Augustine declares in many places, specially where he says: Quaedam dicuntur
quae and si proprie ad Apostolum Petrum pertinere vidiantur, nunquam tamen
habent illustrem intellectum, nisi cum referuntur ad ecclesiam, cuius ipse
cognoscitur in figura gestasse personam. That is. There are some things
spoken, which although they seem properly, to pertain to the Apostle Peter:
yet they never have a plain and clean understanding: but when they be
referred to the church, whose person Peter did bear in a figure.

Joan. vltim.
Now to an other place, which they allege, to establishe their usurped power.
By these words of Christ, Petre amas me? Pasce Oues meas. Peter loueste thou
me? Feed my Sheep. They understand the chief gouernemente and charge of the
Church, to be given to Peter. But to feed the Sheep of Christ (as Beda
records) is to confirm them that believe in Christ, that they slide not,
nor fall from the faith: and diligently to attend and take heed, that they
profit and increase more and more in faith.

They therefore (as Augustine says) which do feed the Sheep of Christ that
they would have the^ to be their own, and not Christ's sheep, are convinced,
that they love not Christ, either through the desire of glory, or of bearyng
rule, or of getting goods, and not for the zeal of obedience, and helping
their neighbor, or pleasyng God. And in his book, De agone Christiano, he
says. Non sine causa inter omnes Apostolos huius Ecclesiae Catholicae personam
sustinet Petrus, huic Ecclesiae claues regni coelorum datae sunt. Not without
cause, Peter among all the Apostles, bears the person of the Catholic
Church, to him the keys of the kingdom of heaven were given: And when this
(love thou me? Feed my sheep) was spoken to him, it was spoken to all.

Cyrillus upon these words. Petre amas me? Peter do thou love me? And Peter
answeryng, yea Lord, thou knoweste that I love thee) writes after this manner.
Altius quidam haec oration certe parturit: nam quoniam cum alijs Apostolatus
nomine Petrus ab ipso Christo decoratus ter in tempore passionis negauit, iure
nunc ab eo terna dilectionis confessio petitur, vt terna negatio aegnati
confessionis munero compensetur. Ita quod verbis commissum fuit, verbiscuretur,
etc. This communicacion does gender and importe, some deper and higher
matter. For, because Peter being enobled of Christ him self, with the name of
the Apostleshippe with other, did thrice deny Christ, in the time of his
Passion. Now by right is required of him, three confessions of his love, that
the three denialles might be counteruailed and recompensed, with equal number
of confessyng. So that, that which is committed in words, is cured with
words. Christ asked of him, whether he loved him more then an other? For he
which experted greater clemency of the Lord toward him, ought by right to
be affected with greater love. For, although generally all the disciples were
stricken with great fear, when the Lord was betrayed, yet the fault of Peter
was greater, which denied Christ in so short a time. Because therefore, he
obtained remission of his sin, by greater clemency of the savior, greater
love by right is required of him. For, he to whom more is for given, ought more
to love. And a little after in the same Chapter, Cirillus does conclude and
say. Terna igitur confessione Petri, trinae negationis delictum euacuatum est.
etc. Therefore, by the third confession of Peter, the crime of the three
denialles, was made void and put away.

And where Christ said, feed my Lambs, he renewed that dignity of the
Apostleship unto Peter, least through his denial, which chanced by human
infirmity, he should seem to be abased and made weak. Haec Cyrillus.

So by the judgment of Cyrillus, this place makes nothing for the prerogative
of Peter: nor for the usurped authority of the Bisshoppe of Rome, as they
falsely allege. But they be rather the reconciliacion, recantacion, and the
penance of Peter, for his former fall (as Cyrillus writes.)

Therefore, when our adversaries do not understand, in Peter the rock, and
will not believe, that the keys of the kingdom, be given to the Church, they
themselves do leese them out of their own hands. Beda also upon the same
place says thus. Quod Petro dictum est oi^bus Christi discipulis dictum est.
That which was spoken to Peter, was spoken to all the disciples of Christ. For
the other Apostles were the same, that Peter was, all were Pastors: one flock
is showed and declared, which then was fed of all the Apostles, with one
consent, and after that was fed also of their successors, with common cure
and charge.

De digni. sacerdo.
Furthermore, Ambrose upon these words (feed my sheep) does consent to the
former doings, saying: Quas oues and quem gregem non solum tunc beatus
suscepit Petrus, sed and nobiscum eas suscepit, and cum illo eas nos suscepimus
omnes. That is. Which sheep and which flock, not only Peter then received,
but also he received them with us, and we all received the^ with him.

Gloss. ordi. Math. 16.
But forasmoche as all Bisshoppes and priests, have the same authority, which
Peter had, notwithstanding Peter took it, specially that all men may
understand, that he, which has separate him self from one unity of the
faith, can neither be loosed from his sins, nor enter into heaven. And Hierome
said, from the unity of the faith, not from the unity of Peter, or of the
bisshoppe of Rome.

But they that judge Rome, or any other place, to be the Sea of Peter, they
seem ill to interpret all the words of Christ in Mathewe. Math. 23.
For, when Christ says: The Scribes and Pharisees satte in Moises seat, no
man doubts, but the Law of Moises given of God, and his pure doctrine, is
signified by Moises seat. So the seat of Peter, yea, rather of Christ, in
which Peter, and the other Apostles sat, was nothing else, then the pure
Gospel of Christ. And like as Christ admonished his disciples, to beware of
the Leven of the Pharisees, which was their own doctrine, beside the law of
Moises. Likewise, he commanded us to beware of false Prophets, that is, from
them that teach their own doctrine, and not the law and doctrine of God.
Which interpretacion saint Augustine confirms, expounding th^se words.
Super Joan. tractatum. 46.
The Scribes and Pharisees do sit in Moises seat. Do you that, which
they bid you, but do not that, which they do. What other thing (says
Augustine) said he, but hear you the voice of the Pastor, by his servants:
for in sittyng in Moises seat, they teach the law of God, therefore GOD
does teach by them: but if they will teach their own doctrine, do you
not hear them, neither do as they say. For soche men do seek their own
things, and not Christ's. Whereupon it appears, the seat of Moises, is the
law of Moises, and that the seat of Christ, in which Peter and the other
Apostles satte, is the Gospel: and they which do not teach the Law of
Moises, nor the word of God, do not sit in Moises seat, nor in Christ's
seat, nor in the seat of Peter, nor of the other Apostles, but sit in their
own seats, coming before Christ, and enteryng by the window, not by the
door, as thieves and murderers, do take unto themselves honor, not being
called of God, as Aaron was. Upon which sentence, Chrysostom writing, Homil.
39.
says. Oi^s christianus qui suscipit verbu^ Petri, thronus fit Petri, and
Petrus sedet i^ eo. that is. Every christian, which receives the word and
doctrine of Peter, is made the throne of Peter, and Peter sits in it. And in
an other place he says. Videte fratres quomodo sedetis super cathedram, non
enim cathedra facit sacerdotem, sed sacerdos cathedram. etc. Take heed
brethren, how you sit in the seat, for the seat makes not the priest, but
the priest makes the seat, neither the place sanctifies the man, but the
man sanctifies the place. He that sits well in the seat, receives the
honor of the seat He that sits ill in the seat, does injury to the
seat. And therefore, an evil priest gets blame by his priesthode, and not
dignity. But let us grant, that the seat of Peter was the place, where he
was president and present. Cregorie notwithstanding, affirms the Churches of
Alexandrina and of Antioche to be no less Peter's seat, then the church of
Rome. Therefore, it appears by the premissis, that this Ecclesiastical power
(whose fulness some men do put in the bisshoppe of Rome) has no soche
foundation in the scriptures, as the adversaries do allege. For, if the
private person of Peter, were not the foundation of the church, but that the
church was build in soche significacion, as he bare the person of all the
Apostles, and forasmoche as he first pronounced the confession of the
christian faith, that they which do succeed Peter in his seat, may
challenge Peter's prerogative by this title, then that he which succedeth in the
kingdom of Spain, after the Emperors death, may therefore challenge the
Empire of Room, because the king of Spain (while he lived) had that honor.
Neither Peter was called the chief of the Apostles, or the foundation of the
church, because he was presidente over this Church, or that Church, but by a
special prerogative, he was as one chosen emonges them all, to stand instead
of the rest. And Peter's confession, flesh and blood did not reveal, but GOD
the father, which is in heaven. Like as Carolus of late, was not Emperor of
Rome, because he was king of Spain, but he was Emperor, because they which
had authority to elect, did so choose him. So Christ did choose Peter, before
he was bishop of Rome. In the seats of Bisshoppes stands succession, not in
virtues and merits. For, often times evil men do succeed good men, and good
men do succeed evil men. If Christ had given this prerogative to the Sea of
Room, it should have remained, Peter being dedde. But forasmoche, there was no
mention made of Rome, why do we call Rome the first and chiefest seat,
rather then Antioche, and why is not Antioche preferred before Rome, for
somoche as Peter had his seat at Antioche? Yea rather, why should not
Jerusalem excel all other Sees, where Peter satte many years, before he ever
saw Rome. Where also he received the holy ghost, where first he began to
preach the Gospel, and made these.iiij. solemn sermones. One of the eleccion
of Mathie into Judas room: the second of the sendyng of the holy ghost. The
iij. to the people, when he made him that was lame from his mothers womb, to
go upright again. The fourth, to Annas, Caiphas, and the other Priests,
seniours, and Scribes. Furthermore, for that he wrought so many miracles at
Jerusalem, in so much that the people brought forth the sick into the
streates, and laid them on couches and beds, that when Peter came by, at
the least his shadow might ouershadowe the^. A great number of the cities
also, round about Jerusalem came together, and brought them that were sick,
and vexed with unclean spirits, which were all healed. Furthermore, Christ
so greatly esteemed Jerusalem, that from thence he commanded the Apostles to
take their journey, to preach the Gospel, and remission of sins, not only
to the Jews, but also to all nations. Christ also for badde to swear by
Jerusalem, because it is the City of the great king. Of this city did the
Prophet Esaie Prophecy. De Syon exibit lex, and verbum domini de Jerusalem.
Out of Syon the law of the Lord shall come, and the word of the Lord out of
Jerusalem. There only in times paste, was the chiefest priesthood, there was
the temple, altar, Sancta sanctorum, Sacrifices and oblacions. From that day
in the which I brought my people out of the land of Egipte (says the Lord)
I have not chosen any other city to build an house in it for my name, but I
have chosen Jerusalem, 4. Reg. xxi. 2. Par. 33. Esaie. 41.
that my name may be in it. And to Jerusalem (says he) I will give an
Evangelist. And the book of Sapientia, by which Sapience, authors will have
Christ the word of God, and the second person in divinity to be
signified, says. In ciuitate sanctificata requieui, and in Jerusalem
potestas mea. that is. Eccle. xxiiii
In the well-beloved city have I rested, and in Jerusalem was my power. And the
lord says by the Prophet Zachary. Habitabo in medio Jerusalem, Zacha. 8.
and vocabitur Jerusalem ciuitas veritatis. etc. I will dwell in the middeste
of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called the city of truth. Behold, I
will save my people, out of the land of the East, and of the VVeste, and I
will bring them, and they shall dwell in the mids of Jerusalem, and they
shall be my people, and I will be their God, in verity and righteousness.

All the whole scripture is full of the commendacion, and praise of Jerusalem.
Contrariwise, Rome is called Babylon, to whom the Lord threatetened
malediccion, and curse in the Apocalips (as witnesses Hierome, and Tertullian.)

Therefore, it should have been much more likely to be true, that this
principality and prerogative, should have been left at Jerusalem, which
city God has always best loved, whose cure and charge, Christ himself did
peculiarly regard. Peter also was bisshoppe of Antioche, before he came to
Rome. And if they obiecte and say, that Peter after he left first Jerusalem,
and then Antioche: and at last went to Room, then they must grant, that the
eleccion of Peter, to have appointed and ordained, the primacie of the church
of Rome, and not the gift and grant of Christ. And so by this reason, in that
church the chief authority was founded, of the man Peter, and not of Christ
being God, except they will contend and cavil, that it was done by the
permission of God. By the like reason, all tyrannical power is of Gods
suffraunce. But if by that argument they contend, that the prerogative of
Peter, was left at Rome, rather then at any other place, because Peter died at
Room, why does not Jerusalem far excel all other places, where Christ
our savior suffered death.

Thus much concerning the primacie, which they challenge by the authority of
Peter.

That the Ecclesiastical power leans upon Gods word.
NOw to the second note, which is to prove, that Ecclesiastical power (as is
before declared) does lean upon Gods word. Christ in the last of
Mathewe did say, not only unto Peter, but to all the Apostles. Euntes docete
omnes gentes, and accipite spiritum sanandum, and quorum remiseritis peccata.
etc. Go and teach al nations, and take the holy ghost, and whose sins you
do forgive, they shall be forgiven. Upon the which words, Chrysostom says.
Quae potest mayor authoritas inueniri? What greater authority ca^ be found
then this? By these words of Chrysostom to prove, that all the Apostles had
as great authority as Peter. I frame this argument.

There is no greater authority, then to receive the holy ghost,
and to teach the Gospel, and to remitte sins.
But the holy ghost was received of all the Apostles: To teach
and remitte sin, was given to all the Apostles.
Ergo, all the Apostles had that authority, then which
there was none greater.
Upon this we may conclude, that Peter had no greater authority, then the
other Apostles had.

Saint Hierome and saint Cipriane do write, that all the Apostles did
receive equally and indiffrently, like authority and pastoral cure. Saint
Augustine in his questions does write, that in one and the self same day
(that is the day of Pentecoste) both the law was given, and also the holy
ghost fell upon the disciples, that they should take authority, and have
knowledge to preach the Gospel.

What thing could more plainly and manifestly declare, the equality of Peter,
and of other the Apostles, then these phrases spoken so generally? Besides
this, the disciples asked of Jesus, who was the greatest in the kingdom of
heaven? He by and by, setting a young child in the mids of them, made this
answer. Math. xviii
Amen dico vobis. etc. Verily I say unto you, except you be turned, and become
as this little one, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Who soever
therefore shall humble himself, shall be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

Beda does say, that this question was proposed of the Apostles, because they
did strive of the primacie and chief room, and therefore, that he set a
young child in the mids of them, that they should learn not to seek the
premacie and chief place.

Saint Hierome writing upon Mathewe, does say, that although this sentence
may be general against all, which do offend any, yet by the sequel of
the words, it may be understand, to be spoken against the Apostles, who
demaundyng, who was the greateste in the kingdom of heaven, did seem to
contend among them selves, of the chiefest room and dignity. And if they
had continued in the same fault, they might have lost by their offense, those
whom they called to the faith, when they saw the Apostles, dispute among them
selves, of honor and dignity.

Chrysostom agreyng to the same, does say, Quicunque desiderarit primatu^ in
terris, inueniet in coelo confusionem. Whosoever shall desire chief rule in
earth, shall find confusion in heaven, nor he shall be coumpted among the
servants of Christ, which attempteth to have chief room.

That the other Apostles had like fellowship, equal honor and power with
Peter. Ciprianus and Anacletus do consent. Paul also speaking of him self,
says thus: Nulla in re inferior, fui summus Apostolis. ii. Cori. xii.
I was in nothing inferior to the chief Apostles. Who, if he ought to have
acknowleged the primacie in Peter: undoubtedly, he being so worthy an Apostle,
would not have so said. And in an other place he says. ii. Corin. xi.
Arbitror me nihilo in feriore^ caeteris Apostolis. I think my self nothing
inferior, to the other Apostles. Again, in an other place he writes thus: i.
Corin. iiii.
Sic nos existimet homo vt ministros dei, and dispensatores mysteriorum dei.
Let a man so think of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the
mysteries of God. And the gloss upon the words of saint Paul, in the
Epistle to the Galathians, where he says, that he conferred the Gospel, with
the other Apostles, writes thus. No^ didici ab alijs tanquam maioribus, sed
contuli cum illis tanquam amicis and paribus. I have not learned of others, as
of greater, but I have conferred with them, as with friends and equalles.
Ambros. ad Galath. i.
And saint Ambrose upon these words of Paul (when Peter was come to
Antioche, I withstoode him in the face) writes thus. Hoc non audebat facere,
nisi sciret se non imparem. etc. He durst not have done this, except he had
known him self, not to be inferior, for they did not communicate with me,
says Paul, but I did communicate with them. And upon these words also of
Paul, James, and Ihon, Galath. ii.
which were cou^pted to be pillars, gave to me and to Barnabas, the right
hand of fellowship, that is (says saint Ambrose) aequalitatis, of
equality. And they gave the right hand, that is, help (says he) not a
commandment, whereby equality might be signified. Ambrose also confirms
the same, in an other place, saying. Caeteri Apostoli videbantur maiores, quia
priores. etc. That is. The other Apostles were coumpted greater, because they
were before Paul: and Paul was coumpted the least, because he was the last
of the Apostles. Whereby he does declare, the dignities of the Apostles, to
be distinct and severed, not by merits and authority, but by time, being in
all other points utterly equal. It appears by the premises, what a power,
and how great a power was given of Christ, to ecclesiastical men, that is, to
his Apostles: and that it was given to all the Apostles, in like measure, and
not according to the state of the primacie, which now is usurped. If by
thordinaunce of God one had been made ruler over the rest: how chanced it,
that in the primative church, the contrary was observed and kept? Does not
the Ecclesiastical history testify, that three Patriarchs were present in
the counsel of Nice the bishop of Rome being absent, who is rehearsed there,
the fourth in order. If there be by the law of God, vnus pater patrum, and
all things ought to be reduced to one, why, by a word composed of Greek and
Latin, are recited four Patriarchs, that is Patres Patrum, whche are not
ioigned by any relacion, or conference among them selves: but as rulers over
other, by diverse powers and authorities, and they them selves were subject to
no man. And in the same order the bishop of Room is rehearsed the last.
Whom, if by the law of God, he should have been chief in rule, to set in that
order, it were impiety: if by the law of man, he should have borne rule, it
were no part of justice and equity, to place him in the last room. But in so
godly and so holy a Counsel, as that Counsel of Nice was, it is more like,
that all things were most justly and uprightly observed, decided, done, and
concluded.

Neither it is credible, that if the Bishop of Room, ought to have been
compted hedde of the church, the foundation of the church, the chief ruler of
the Church, the only and chiefeste vicare of Christ, that those holy
fathers, either were so ignoraunte, what they ought to do, or so ungodly,
that they would not do that they ought to do. Libr. 9. cap. 38. and histo.
Eccle. lib. v. cap. xxiiii.
And (as out of the same tripartite history it appears) the Bishops of the
East Church, boldly resisted the Bishop of Rome. Also concerning the
obseruacion of Easter, the bishop of Rome could prevail nothing, with the
bishop of Lugdune.

Pelagius.
Furthermore, Pelagius the second bishop of that name writes, that it is
lawful for no man, to arrogate unto him self, the name of an vniuersalle
bishop. These be his words: Pelagius writes to all bishops, saying: Let no
Patriarche at any time, be called universal bishop For, if one patriarch be
called universal, the name of Patriarche is derogated from the others. But,
let this be far from faithful me^, that any man would take this unto himself,
whereby he may seem in any part, to diminishe the honor of his brethren. etc.

Which saint Gregory also confirms, 99. disti. ca. Nullus.
writing thus to the Patriarch of Alexandria. Ecce in praefatione epistolae,
quam ad meipsum, qui prohibui, direxistis: superbae appellationis verbum,
vniuersale^ me Papa^ dicens, imprimere curastis. Lo, in the Preface of the
Epistle, which you have directed to me my self, which have prohibited: you
have caused me to be called, by a proud name, calling me universal Pope.

Again, he writes thus to Mauricius the Emperor: Gregor. in regist. lib. 4.
Epistola. 30.
Ego au^t fidenter dico quod quisquis vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari
desiderat i^ elatione sua, Antichristum precurrit. etc. That is. I boldly say,
that whosoever calls him self universal priest, or desires in his pride,
so to be called, is the forerunner of Antichriste, because he proudly
prefers him self before other, and is lead into error. For, like as the
Devil will seem to be above all men: so also does he, which desires to be
called an only priest, above all other priests.

Saint Hierome says: Sicut presbyteri sciunt se ecclesiae consuetudine, In
episto. ad Titum.
ei qui sibi praepositus est, esse subiectos. etc. Like as priests do know
them selves to be subject, by the custom of the Church, unto him, which
is made ruler over them: so let the bishops know, that they are greater then
the priests rather by custom, then by the verity of dispensacion, given of
the Lord.

He says also in an other place: Ibidem.
Apud veteres ijdem Episcopi and Presbyteri fuerunt: quia illud nomen
dignitatis est, hoc aetatis. With the old fathers, the bishops were the
same, that the Priests were, for the name of the one is a name of dignity,
and the other, of age and time.

Again, he says thus: Manifestissime comprobatur, Ad Euagt.
eundem esse episcopum atque praesbyterum. etc. It is most manifestly proved,
that a bishop and priest be all one. But forasmoche as, that after one, was
chosen, which was set above the other, it was done to redress scismes, least
every manne drawyng to him self the authority of the church of Christ, should
break the bond of unity, by drawyng it to him self. For, at Alexandria, from
the time of Mark the Euangeliste, unto the time of Heraclas, and Dionisius the
Bishops, the Priests did always name one, chosen among them self, and
placed him in a higher degree: Like as when an army does make an Emperor,
or Deacons do chose one among them, which they know to be industrious, and
an expert man, and do call him an Archdeacon.

And a little after Hierome says: Vbicunque fuerit episcopus, sieve Rome, sieve
Eugubij, sieve Constantinopoli, five Rhegij, sieve Alexandriae, sieve Tanis,
eiusdem meriti eiusdem est and sacerdotij. etc. That is. Where soever the
bishop shall be, whether at Rome, or at Engubium, whether at Constantinople,
whether at Rhegium, whether at Alexandria, or at Tanes, he is of the same
merit, and of the same priesthood. The power of riches, and the hu^blenes of
poverty, makes not a bishop the higher or the lower, but all are the
successors of thapostles.

In the Nicene counsel it was decreed as follows: Statutum est, vt apud
Alexandriam, and in vrbe Romae vetusta consuetudo seruetur. etc. It is decreed,
that the ancient custom be observed, both at Alexandria, and also in the
city of Rome, that is, that the one bear the charge, and cares of the
Churches of Egipte, and the other, of the churches pertainyng to Rome.

In other books, this decree is read after this manner: Antiqua^ co^suetudo
seruetur per Aegiptum, Libiam, and Penthapolim; ita vt Alexandrinus episcopus
horum oi^m habeat potestate^: quia and vrbis Romans episcopo parilis mos est.
etc. Let the ancient custom be observed through Egypt, Libia, and
Penthapolis, so that the bishop of Alexandria, have power over all these,
because the like manner and custom, Conci. 3. ca. 26. and distin. 99. cap. i.
is granted to the bishop of Rome. In the counsel of Affrike, many things
are decreed, which do plainly declare, that it was decided, and commanded to
be observed, that no one bishop, that is, the bishop of Rome, should be set
above the other bishops. In that counsel it was first decreed, that the
bishop of the first See, should not be called, Princeps sacerdotu^, head of the
priests, or high priest, or any soche thing, but only he should be called the
bishop of the first See. Geraldus in Chronica. Cap. xxv.
For, at that time there were.iij. Patriarchs, of which every one was called
bishop of the first See, that is, the bishop of Antioche, of Alexandria, and of
Rome. And in the cou^saill of Mileuitanu^ it is decreed. If the bishop of the
mother Sees, shall be negligent against heretics, let the diligent bishops that
be round about, assemble together, and let his negligence be showed him, that
he may not excuse him self. etc.

It pleases also, that if priests, deacons, and other inferior clerks, in
soche causes as they have, do co^plain of the judgments of their own
bishops, that the bishops, which be nere joined, do hear the^, and finishe
between them, what matter soever it be: but let the other bishops be had, and
admitted by the consent of their own bishops. But if they think that they
ought to appeal from them, let the^ appeal no further, but to the counsel
of Afrike, or to the chief rulers of their province. If any shall appeal to
places beyond the seas, let him be received of none within Afrike, to the
Communion.

The counsel of Nice also decreed, that causes should not be determined
without that Province, in which they sprang and rose. And that they, which
were excommunicate, in one Province or Country, should be received and
admitted again of none to the communion. Nor the Bishop of Rome is excepted.
Of this there is extant, an Epistle of the counsel of Afrike, to Celestius
then Pope of Rome. At this counsel, saint Augustine was present.

But after that, Boniface Bishop of Rome entreated and desired, Paulus Diaconus
de gestis Roma. lib. xviii.
Phocas the Emperor, to confirm and ratify by laws, the primacie of Rome,
which then had no good ground. For, the ancient Bishops of Room, in the
Sinode of Calcedon, refused the universal prerogative, being volu^tarilie
offered to them, neither any of them used that honor. And Ihon the Patriarche
of Constantinople, was the first which durst call him self universal Bishop.
For which cause he gat great envy, and stirred up an hurly burly, through the
whole world, by his contencion, about the primacie. But the Bishops of
Rome, first Pelagius, and then Gregory resisted him very mightily, nor would
attribute unto him that honor. Notwithstanding, they only suppressed Ihons
enterprise. For after that, rose Boniface the.iij, who by themperor Phocas aid
and help, obtained that honor and primacie, for him and his successors, and
that not without great contencion, because the bishop of Constantinople, did
stiffly hold and affirm, that the prerogative belo^ged to him.

But Iustinianus, a very good and godly Emperor, declares in his laws that
the city of Constantinople, in Ecclesiastical causes, enjoyed the prerogative
of Rome. And in the later time, the Sea was removed to Auinion, and there
continued a certain space, and was called Peter's seat. Whose prerogative, if
it be local, ought not to have been translated to any other place: if it were
personal, then it died, and ended with the person of Peter, unless we will
consider, that confession of faith, to be in Peter. VVhereupon it would
follow, the prerogative not to correspond to them, which do succeed in the
seat of Peter, but to the^ that succeed in the confession, and dignity of
Peter that is, as witnesses Hierome, that the authority may be understand to
be granted of God to bishops, in what place soever they should sit. Neither,
when God gave the^ this authority, he gave the^ also dominion and rule. For,
of bearing rule, he says thus: Reges gentiu^ dn^antur eis, vos au^t non sic:
Luke. xxii.
sed qui mayor est in vobis, fiat sicut minister, and qui princeps, sicut qui
ministrat. The kings of the gentiles reign over the^, but you shall not be so,
but let the greatest among you, be as the least, and the chiefest, as he that
serves. By the which words, De conside. ad Eugeniu^ liber. ii.
Bernard plainly affirmyng, al bearyng of rule to be prohibit unto the
Apostles, does enueigh against the^, which will challenge unto the^ selves
dominion and bearing of rule, saying to the bishop of rome: ergo tu aude
vsurpare aut dn^s apostolatum, aut apostolus dn^m: plane ab vtroque prohiberis.
etc. Therefore, be thou, either as lord, bold to usurp the Apostleship, or else,
as an Apostle, challenge bearyng of rule: truly thou art prohibit from both.
If thou will have both: thou shalt lose both. Or else thou shall be coumpted
one of the^, of whom it is spoken: Oze. viii.
Ipsi regnauerunt, sed no^ per me. They have borne rule, but not through me.

Ex quadrunio. Romans xiii. i. Peter. ii.
Whereunto agrees well this saying: Gladiu^ xerceat, qui accepit gladij
potestate^. Let him practice the sword, which has received the power of the
sword. Powers are ordained of God, to take the sword, for the punishment of
malefactors, and for the praise of good men. Of the^ that usurp the sword it
is written. Math. xxvi
Oi^s qui accipit gladiu^, gladio peribit. He that takes the sword, shall
perish with the sword. Remember thou the words of Christ, if thou do
profess thy self to be the disciple of Christ: Luke. xxii.
the princes of the Gentiles bear rule, you shall not do so. If thou do
accept the ministry of Christ, if thou do not refuse the yoke of the Lord,
persevere in that vocacion, in which thou art called, and leave chief rule of
the people, to the laity. Saint Peter also says Rogo vos, praesbyteri, qui
and ego presbyter su^. etc. The elders, which are among you, I beseech you,
which am also an elder, and a witness of the suffringes of Christ, and also a
partaker of the glory, that shall be reveled, feed the flock of God, which
depends upon you, caryng for it, not by constrainte, but willingly, not for
filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as though ye were lords over Gods
heritage, but that ye may be examples to the flock.

3. what authority seculer princes have, in causes ecclesiastical.
NOw to the third note, which is, what authority Seculer princes have, in
causes Ecclesiastical. In which part, first shall be showed generally of al
kings, what authority they have, and then peculiarly I will speak a word
or two of the kings of England.

First, God has expressed his will, of the power of kings, not only in the
universal order of nature, but also in the holy scriptures, both of the old
Testamente, and of the new.

In the examples of nature, the chief Philosophiers, Plato, Aristotle, and
Apollonius, did see and feel, that as generally, there is one chief creator
and maker of all things, and as among the stars, the Son bears the chief
light. As among Bees, there is one chief king: as the flock and heardes of
beasts have one guide and ruler. Finally, as the Cranes do follow one leader,
so there ought to be in a common wealth, one king as head, to who^ all the
members may consent. And this reason of the common wealth, declared by the
instincte of nature, God has more evidently opened, in the holy scriptures,
and makes often mention of kings, and does approve, and allow their
authority, with his own mouth, in diverse and sundry places of the scriptures.

First, it is written in Genesis: Terra sacerdotum, quae Rege tradita fuit
eis. Gene. 47.
The land of the Priests, which was given to them of the king.

By which words it manifestly appears, that their land pertained to
kings, that it was given to the Priests of them, and that it was ruled of
kings, at whose hands, the priests received all the possessions, which they
then had. Again in Deuteronomie, it is said: Cum ingressus fueris in terram,
Deute, 17.
que dn^s tuus dabit tibi. etc. When thou shalt come unto the land, which
the lord thy God gives thee, and shall possess it, and shall dwell therein,
if thou say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about
me: Tha^ thou shall make him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall
choose. From among thy brethren, shall thou make a king over thee: thou shall
not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother. And when he shall sit
upon the throne of his kingdom then shall he write him the law, repeated in
this book of Deuteronomie, by the priest of the Lenites. By which text it
manifestly appears, that all nations (at that time) had kings, and that they
were first constitute among the people, by Gods appointment, who were commanded
to write the book of the law: that is, that kings should not only have and
keep the book, but that they should command it to be observed and kept, in
somoche as it might be their office, to correct and punish the offenders,
and it is the priests office only to preach, and to exhibit an example of
the law to other, if it be required.

Furthermore, the pre-eminence of a King, is declared in the book of Esdras:
Rex autem super omnia praecellit, and dominus eorum, Esdras. 4.
and omne quod dixeri illis, faciunt. etc. That is. The king is yet greater:
for he rules all things, and is Lord of them, so that they do all things,
which he commands the^. If he bid them make war, one against an other,
they do it: If he send the^ out against the enemies, they go and break down
mountains and walls, and tounes. They kill, and are killed, and do not omit
the commandment of the king: If they overcome, they bring all to the king, as
well the spoils, as all other things. And those also, which go not to war
and battle, but till the earth: for when they have sown it again, they
reap it, and bring it to the king, and compel one an other, to pay tribute
to the king. Yet he is but one man: If he bid kill, they kill. If he say,
spare, they spare. If he bid the^ smite, they smite. If he bid the^ make
desolat, they make desolat: if he bid build, they build If he bid cut of, they
cut of: if he bid, plant, they plant. So all his people, and al his armies,
obeie one man: in the mean while, he sits down, he eats and drinks,
and slepeth. For, these keep him round about: neither can any one go, and do
his own business, neither are they disobedient unto him.

Aaron also the high priest, said unto Moises, which had the room of a
prince and king: Ne indignetur dn^s meus. Let not my lord be displeased. etc.
And Achimelech the high priest, Exo. xxxii.
called him self the servant of king Saul: Misit rex ad accersendum Achimelech
sacerdotem filium Achitob. i. Reg. xxii.
etc. that is. The king sent to call Achimelech the priest, the soonne of
Ahitus, and all his fathers house, to wit, the priests that were in Nob: and
they came all to the king. And Saul said: hear now thou son of Achitus. And
he answered, here I am my lord. Tha^ Saul said unto him: why have you
co^spired against me, thou and the son of Ishai. etc. And Achimelech answered
the king, and said: Be it far from me, let not the king impute any thing,
unto his servant, nor to all the house of my father, for thy servant knew
nothing of all this, less nor more.

Seeing then, that the high priests, called kings their Lords, and them
selves the servants of kings: it may very well be concluded, that kings
are above bishops and priests, and that bishops and priests, ought to be
subject and obediente to kings. In like manner of argumentacion, did saint
Peter conclude and prove, i. Peter. iii.
Sara to be subject unto Abraham, because she called him lord, by whose
example, other women also ought to be obedient, and subject to their
housebandes. Neither by any other argument or reason our savior Christ
proves David to be inferior to Messia, Math. xxii
but in that he called him Lord, Psalm. Cx.
saying: Dixit dn^s dn^o meo. The lord said unto my lord.

This thing also is here to be marked and noted, that the king adjudged the
high priest unto death, saying: morte morieris, Achimelech, tu and domus patris
tui: Thou shall surely dye, Achimelech, thou and thy fathers house. Neither he
is to be reprehended, for that he gave sentence of death, against the high
priest, but because he gave wrong sentence, against the innocent.

iii. Reg. ii.
Solomon also, which with like authority, condemned Abiathar the high priest
unto death, has at no time been reprehended of any manne, because he gave
just sentence upon Abiathar, which had deserved death.

By which words it appears, that, authority to correct and punish
offenders, pertained only to Princes and kings, and not to Priests.

iiii. Reg. 18.
Furthermore, Ezechias the king, took away the high places, and brake the
Images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brazen serpent, which
Moises had made: for unto that time, the children of Israel did burn incense to
it. And why may not the abuse of ecclesiastical things, and of al things,
which are within the church, now a days, pertain to the examinacion and
correccion of the prince? If it appear that God is dishonored by them? As
Ezechias the good king did, to whom there was none to be compared: who kept all
the commandments of the lord, among all the kings of Judah. He executed his
power and authority, within the precinct of the temple, and he brake by a
new commandment, the serpent erected before by the commandment of God:
when he saw it to be worshipped, against the glory of God. If that a king
might change those things, which GOD had commanded to be done, yea, and
that within the Church, how much more may he alter the things commanded by
man, if they be abused?

Again, this also makes for our purpose, which is written in Paralipo. 2.
Para. xix
thus: Constituit Iosaphat Iudices terrae, in cu^ctis ciuitatibus Judah. etc.
Iosaphat set Judges in the land, throughout all the strong cities of Judah,
city by city. And said to the Judges: Take heed what ye do: for ye execute
not the judgments of man, but of the lord, and he will be with you in the
cause of judgment. Wherefore, now let the fear of the lord be upon you:
take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the lord our God, neither
respect of persons, nor receiuyng of reward.

Moreover, in Jerusalem did Ieosaphat co^stitute the Levites, and of the
priests, and of the chief of the families of Israel, for the judgment and
cause of the lord: and they returned to Jerusalem: And he charged them,
saying. Thus shall ye do in the fear of the lord faithfully, and with a
perfect heart. And in every cause that shall come to you, of your brethren that
dwell in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and precepts,
statutes and judgments. ye shall judge them, and admonish them, that they
trespass not against the lord, that wrath come not upon you, and your
brethren. Thus shall ye do, and trespass not. And behold, Amariah the priest
shall be the chief over you, in all matters of the lord, and Zebadiah the son
of Ismael, a ruler of the house of Judah, shall be for all the kings affairs,
and the Levites shall be officers before you. Be of good courage, and do it: and
the lord shall be with them which be good.

Now, I will briefly confer and examine, these sayings before rehearsed: The
judgments of the people of Israel, were the judgments of God, and were all
decised by the prescripte word of God. Which law and judgments, the
priests and Prophets did interpret: but the Judges were elect and chose^
out of every tribe in all cities: unless there arose any doubt. For, then the
matter was brought to the high priests and Judges at Jerusalem (who at that
time bare rule) that they might give sentence together. Neither it was lawful
for any man, to reject their sentence, under pain of death. So also did the
Judges rule in other cities beside Jerusalem, where king Iosaphat judged and
decised all matters, together with the priests, with the Levites, and with the
rulers of housholdes.

If kings and Princes, were Judges of the Law of GOD, and of those things,
which are prescribed by the word of God, whereof they were neither authors,
nor teachers: how much more may they be Judges of all those things, which
are established and decreed by men?

2. Paral. 29.
Ezechias in the first year of the first month of his reign, opened the doors
of the house of the Lord, and repaired them: and he brought in the priests
and the Levites, and gathered the^ into theast street, and said unto the^,
hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now your selves, and sanctify the house of the
lord God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness, out of the
Sanctuary.

And a little after in the same place it is said, how he appointed the
Levites, in the house of the Lord, with Cimballes, and with Harpes, according
to the commandment of David, and Gad the king of Seer, and Nathan the
Prophet.

Also Ezechias commanded, to offer the burnt offering upon the altar. etc.

For asmoche then, as the priests did all things in the Temple and
Sanctuary, according to the commandment of kings and princes, and did obeie
them in offryng Sacrifices, and in the prayers, which were made in the temple:
it manifestly appears, that it is the office of kings and princes, to
command priests, in causes ecclesiastical, and contrary, it is the duty
of priests to obey kings. 2. Par. xxix xxx.xxxi.
Much more of this matter, ye may read in the book of Paralipomenon.

In the book of the Machabees, it is written, how Alexander the king wrote to
Ionathas, saying: Nunc constituimus te hodic summum sacerdotem ge^tis tuae. i.
Maca. x.
We appointe thee this day, the high Priest of thy people, that thou may
be called the kings friend.

i. Mac. xiiii.
Likewise Demetrius appointed the high priesthood to Simon, he made also
Alchinus high priest. i. Maca. vii.
Antiochus appointed Jason, first of that name, to be high priest, and
remouyng him, gave it to Menelaus: who also being removed, he made Lysimachus
chief priest.

And thus you se, how the collacion, and translacion of the high Priesthood
does pertain always to princes. But now contrary, the high Bishop of Rome
takes upon him to confer, and give Empires and kingdoms, to whom pleases
him. Which thing was never read, nor heard of, neither in the old Testament,
nor in the new. In the new Testament also, Math. xvii.
the authority and power of princes, is confirmed by the mouth of Christ, and
especially when he said to Peter: Go and pay tribute to Caesar, Ihon. xix.
for thee and for me. Likewise he said to Pilate. Thou should have no power
over me, except it were given thee from above. The like is read in many other
places of the new Testament, as in saint Paul to the Romans, where he
says: Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. He excepteth neither
Peter nor Paul, neither Priest, nor Bishop, neither Cardinal, nor Pope. Roma.
xiii.
Finally, he excepteth none, except him, that will purchase to him self
damnacio^.

If any will say, that Paul speaks not here of the Civil magistrate: let
him first expende, that Christ taught the Apostles, to flee the highest and
chiefeste room. Secondly, that he calls them, of whom he here speaks,
Princes, and that they ought to be feared of evil dooers. Now, the name of a
Prince, is not wont to be attributed, specially in the new Testamente, unto
priests, unless it be by perticulare addicion, as Princeps sacerdotum,
princeps Synagogae. etc.

Again, where saint Paul says, a little after in the same place: Non sine
causa gladium portat. He bears not the sword, without cause. Who would
expound it of the Apostles, and their successors? Is it mete, that they
should be compassed and trained, with Sergeauntes, sword bearers. etc. Non
episcoporu^ [inquit quida^] arma sunt gladius, and fascis, sed pedum and Mitra.
The sword and the Axe (says one) are not the weapons of Bishops: but the
Shepheardes staff and the Mitre.

Finally, Paul speaks here of soche Magistrates, to whom he teaceth to pay
tribute. But tributes were not paid to priests, but to Caesar's and Emperors.
By many other arguments, it may be proved, that this place of Paul ought to
be expounded of the Civil magistrate, to whom every soul, yea, the high
priest him self, ought to be subject. And to this agrees the aunciente
learned fathers.

Origin upon this same place of Paul, writes after this manner: Iudices mundi
partem maximam legis dei implent: omnia enim crimina, quae vindicare vult deus
non per Antistites, and principes Ecclesiaru^, sed per mundi iudices voluit
vindicare. etc. The Judges of the world do put in ure, the greatest part of
the Law of God: For, all faults, which God will have revenged and punished,
he will not have them to be revenged by prelates, and rulers of the Church,
but by the Judges of the world.

Contra epi. Parmeni. liber. i.
Saint Augustine also says. Propter quid ergo gladium portat, qui dictus est
minister dei, vindex in iram eis qui male agunt. For what cause therefore
dooetb he bear the sword, which is called the minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon them, which be evil dooers? Except peradventure they
would contend thus, to be spoken of Ecclesiastical men (as some of them
both ignorant and unlearned, are wont to understand this place, that by the
sword may be understand spiritual reuengement (which woorketh
excommunicacion. But the most provident Apostle, does sufficiently open in
the text following, what he means. For, he adds this: Propter hoc enim
tributa praestatis. For this cause also, you pay tributes.

Chrysostom, and Theophilacte, writing upon the same place does say:
Vniuersus erudit, sieve sacerdos sit ille, sieve Monachus, sieve Apostolus, vt se
principibus subdant. Paul teaches all men, whether he be Priest, Monk, or
Apostle, that they submit them selves to Princes.

i. Timo. ii.
Saint Paul writing to Timothe, commands to pray for kings, and all that
be set in chief authority, that under them we may live a quiet life.

Baruch. i.
So Hieremias commanded the people to pray, for the health of Nabuchodonosor,
and his sons.

i. Epistle. ii.
Saint Peter does co^mau^d us, to be subject to the king, as to the chiefest.

Obiectio.
Although these places, and authorities do testify, that soche power is
granted to kings: yet they do not show, that all manner of power, is
granted unto them. And therefore, these scriptures do prove nothing, whereby
we may grant the power and authority, over Ecclesiastical things, to be
permitted to kings and princes.

Responsio.
First, let us se how much, the true natural sense of the scriptures do
grant. Then, how far the use and practice of the old fathers, have
confirmed them.

For the first, it is said in the scriptures, that princes be a terror and
fear to the evil doers, because they bear the sword. And in this place,
there can be none other sense, then, that unto him (what soever he be, when
soever it be, and how soever it be) the Princes sword be a terror and fear.
The scripture speaks to all, and understands of all, who soever does ill,
that they must be under the kings power, which may inflicte pain to the
transgressors, and defend the innocent, and the well doers.

For the second, saint Gregory writes to Maurice the Emperor, Ad Mauri.
li. iii. epi. 61.
after this sort: Dominus meus fuisti, quando adhuc dominus omnium non eras.
etc. Thou waste then my Lord and master, when as yet thou wast not Lord of
all persons. Behold, Christ shall answer by me, his and your humble servant,
saying: I made thee of a Notarie, the chief ruler and Earl of the watch men.
Of an Earl, Caesar, of Caesar, an Emperor, and not only that: but I made thee
also a father over Emperors. I have committed my priests to thy hand and
power, and do thou withdraw thy soldiers from my service? I being
subject unto your commandment, have caused your law to be sent through
diverse parts of the earth. And that the said law, does not agree to the
omnipotente GOD: behold, I have signified and showed, to the most renoumed
Lords by my writing. On both parts therefore I have done my duty, which
have both given mine obedience to the Emperor, and also have not hold my
peace for God, in that which I thought good.

Again in an other Epistle, written to Theodorus, Epist. 64.
Gregory has this sentence: Valde mihi duru^ videtur vt ab eius seruitio,
Imperator milites suos subtrahat, qui and ei omnia tribuit, and dominari eum
non solum militibus, sed etiam sacerdotibus concessit. It seems very heard
unto me, that the Emperor should withdraw his soldiers, from the service of
him, who has both given to him all things, and also granted him to be
Lord, not only over the soldiers, but also over the priests.

Saint Augustine writing to Bonifacius, says: Epistol. 50.
Quomodo reges domino seruient in timore, nisi ea quae contra iussa domini
fiunt religiosa seueritate prohibe^do atque plectendo. Aliter enim seruit, quia
homo est. Aliter quia etiam and rex est. Quia homo est ei seruit viuendo
fideliter: quia vero etia^ rex est, iiii. Reg. xix
seruit leges iusta precipientes, and contraria prohibentes conuenienti vigore
sanciendo. Sicut seruiuit Ezechias lucos and templa Idolorum, and illa excelsa
quae contra praecepta dei fuerant constructa, destruendo. etc. That is. How do
the kings serve the Lord in fear, but in forbiddyng and punishyng with a
religious severity those things, which are done against the commandment of
the Lord. For, he does otherwise serve as he is manne, and otherwise, as he
is king. As man, he serves him, by godly living. As king, he serves by
establishyng, by convenient force, Laws, commaundyng just things, iiii. Re.
xviii
and forbiddyng the countrary. So Ezechias served GOD, in destroiyng the
Temples of the Idolles, and those high places, iiii. Re. xxii
which were builded contrary to the commandment of God. So served Josias, in
doing the like So served Darius, Dani. xiiiii.
in giuyng Daniel power, to break the great Idol, and in casting his enemies
to the Lions. So served Nabuchodonosor, Daniel. 3.
when he forbadde by a terrible law, all men dwelling in his kingdom, from
blasphemyng God. In this therefore kings serve the Lord, forasmoche as they
be kings, when they do those things, to serve him, which they could not
do, unless they were kings. And a little after he says. Acts. xxi.
Neither the Apostle Paul, had regard to his own transitory life, but to
the Church of God, when he brought to pass the counsel of them, which had
conspired to kill him, to be opened and showed to the chief captain. Acts.
xxii.
He doubted not also, to call for help to the Roman laws, declaryng that he
was a citizen of Rome, whom it was not lawful for the^ to beat, and that he
might not be delivered to the Jews, which desired to kill him, he appealed
to Caesar, being then an Heathen prince, and not Emperor of Room. By which
he manifestly declares, what the faithful ministers of Christ ought to do,
when they might find christian Emperors, the church being persecuted.

Liber. iii. cap. li.
To this purpose makes also that, which saint Augustine writes contra
Cresconium saying: In hoc Raeges [sicut eis diuinitus praecipitur] deo seruiunt
in quantum reges sunt, si in suo regno bona iubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum
quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad diuinam religionem.
That is. In this kings (as it is commanded them of God) do serve God, as
kings, if in their kingdom, they command good, and forbid evil things,
not only these things, which pertain to humain and common society, but also
to godly religion.

Lib. i. ca. xii
Thomas in his book de regimine principum, says: Hoc officium rex se
suscipisse cognoscat, vt sit in regno, sicut in corpore anima, and sicut deus
in mundo. etc. Let the king acknowledge him self, to have taken this office,
that he be in his kingdom, as the soul is in the body, and as GOD is in the
world. Which if he diligently consider in time, the zeal of Justice is
kindled in him, when he does expende him self, to be set to exercise
judgment in his kingdom, in the steed of God. In the other he purchases,
the leanitie of mekenes and clemency, while he coumpteth all that be subject,
to his rule and government, as his own proper members. To this agrees that,
which is read in Quadrunio ecclesiae, where it is written thus. Ipsis
principibus a Christo ecclesia dei est commissa, vt eam tueantur and defendant,
and sieve augeatur pax, and disciplina ecclesiae, sieve soluatur, ille ab eis
rationem exiget, qui ipsorum potestati ecclesiam suam credidit. etc. The
church of God is committed of Christ to princes, that they may govern and
defend it, and whether the peace and discipline of the Church be increased or
diminished, he will require an account of them, which has committed his
Church to their power and rule.

Isidorus writes also agreeable to the same. His words be these. De regum cura
et authori.
Qui intra ecclesiam positi contra fidem and disciplinam agunt, tigore
principu^ terreantur, ipsamque disciplina^ quam ecclesiae humilitas exercere
no^ praeualet, ceruicibus superborum potestas principalis imponat. etc. They
which being within the church offend against faith and discipline, let the^
be feared with the rigor of princes, and let the principal power lay that
discipline, which the humility of the church is not hable to execute upon the
necks of the proud.

And in an other place he says. Cognoscant principes seculares se deo debere
reddere rationem propter ecclesia^ quam a deo tuendam suscipiu^t. Let the
secular princes know that they ought to give an account to God for the church,
which they have received of God to be defended.

In the tripartite history this chief and peculiar charge of the church is
mentioned in the Epistle which Constantine sent to the Bishops assembled at
Tyrus. The tenor of the Epistle is as follows. Lib. 3. cap. 7.
I know not what troublesome and tempestuous things have been decreed in your
council: for it appears, that the verity is oppressed by a certain
tumultuous and disordered discipline. For you not weighing what does please
God, through contention which you have against your neighbors, do declare,
that your requests and demaundes are invincible. But there is need of Gods
providence, that the contention which is manifestly approved may be appeased
and notified unto us, if you there meting together have done any thing without
any favor and enmity. Wherefore I will and command you all with all
expedition to assemble before me, that you may show and declare by your selves
the integrity of your doings. etc. as you may read in the place before
alleged, where you shall find, that Constantinus had not only a great care over
the church, but also had the Bishops subject unto him.

A goodly example for the same purpose also Socrates declares of the Emperor
Theodosius. His words be these: Determinata fide cuiusque religionis, episcopi
ad aulam vocati conueniunt. Lib 5. cap. 10.
etc. When the faith of every Religion was decised and determined, the Bishops
being called and sent for came to the court. Nactarius and Aegelius the
presidents of the Omusion faith were present. Demophilus of the Arrians sect.
Eleusius and Cyzicenus of the Macedonian sect, were also present. When they
came together, the Emperor received them, and taking the doctrines written,
goes aside and very earnestly prayed to God, that he would aid and help him to
chose the truth. Then reading every ones doctrine, did reprove and tear all
the doctrines, which brought in a separation of the holy Trini ie, and praised
and embraced only that doctrine, which did contain the Omousion faith. etc.

Do you not see here, that the Emperor was the judge of Ecclesiastical
doctrine? Iustinianus has almost omitted nothing in his laws, that pertayneth
to the piety of divine things. He made statutes of faith, of heretics, and
of churches, of Bishops, of the clergy, of Marriage, and and of all such like
causes. Which he would not have done, without the example of his ancestors
and predecessors, unless he had been persuaded that it pertayned to his office.

In England here many Princes are provided by laws, that the chief rule and
authority should be conserved unto them.

First concerning appellations, it was enacted after this manner. If there be
appellations, let them proceed from the Archedeacon to the Bishop, from the
Bishop to the Archbishop. And if the Archbishop be negligent in ministering
justice, let them provoke to the king, that by his commandment the
controversy may be determined in the Archebishops court. So that it shall not
be lawful to go any further without the kings consent.

And in an other place it is said. It is not lawful for the Archebishops,
Bishops and other persons of the Realm to go out of the realm, without the
kings license. And if they will go out (so that it pleases the king) they
shall find sureties that neither in going nor taryeng, they shall bring any
hurt, either to the king, or to the realm.

Turstanus elect Archbishop of York, obtained license of the king, to go to
the council appointed of Calixtus. Yet he was deposed and gave his oath, that
he should not receive his consecration of the Pope.

Now if he took an oath that he should be consecrate of the Pope, does it not
appear him to have counted the pre-eminence of the kings authority, in
co^seruing the liberties of the realm, to be above ye Pope? I might bring in
here Canutus king of England, which made laws ecclesiastical, as for example:
That there should be no merchandise, no hunting, no worldly business done upon
the Sunday, and that every Christian should communicate at the least thrice in
the year.

Also if any woman (her husband being alive) did commit adultery, and the
matter being proved, that she should lose her ears and her nose. Furthermore,
that every widow should live without an husband by the space of xij. months.
Otherwise she should leese her dowry.

King Edgarus made laws, that the tithes should be kept holy from ix. of the
clock at night on the Saturday, unto the day light of the monday following.

Edmundus the king gathered a great counsel at London about Easter, at which
Odo and VVolstan the Archbishop were present, where he made these laws: He
that committed fornication with a Nun, let him be punished as a murderer,
and that they which committed perjury, should be separated for ever from the
company of God.

Iue king of the Saxons enacted, that if any servant should work upon the
Sunday by his masters commandment, he should be made free. Also that every
child should be christined within thirty nights under the pain of thirty
shillings. Furthermore if any did fight in the church, he should pay C.xx.
shillinges.

Aluredus the king of England made these laws, that if any committed
scortation with an other man's wife, he should for amends pay to her husband
xxx. shillings. Also if any man forsook his christianity, and became an
heathen, he should leese his life. If any minister denied Baptism to any that
had need thereof, he should die for it.

By these examples you may evidently see, that kings and princes did
intermeddle in causes ecclesiastical, which power was not denied unto the^,
but also granted to be theirs by certain Bishops of Rome, as it appears in
the Epistle of Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome, which he sent to Lucius then
king of Britanie. In the which Epistle he calls the king Vicarium dei,
saying these words. Vicarius vero dei estis in Regno illo: You are truly the
vicare of God in that kingdom.

It manifestly appears also Ex Matheo Parisiensi, that authority of the
inuestiture of Bishops did pertain to kings. He rehearses that Henry the king
gave the Archbishoppricke of Canturburie to Radulphe then Bishop of London, and
did inueste him by the ring and the staff.

The same king also (as Matheus writes,) gave the Bishoppricke of Winchester
to Vvillia^ Gifford. Notwithstanding the statute of Vrbanus the^ Bishop of
Rome, forbidding, yt no clerk under ye ce^sures of ye church should receive of
the hands of any prince, any ecclesiastical dignity.

There be innumerable like examples left unto us by the^ which wrote the
Chronicles of England. If any man will cavil, that these laws before
rehearsed and being made about matters ecclesiastical, do importe temporal
authority and not spiritual, let him know, that Linwood upon the
co^stitutions prouincials does consent to the premises in these words. Ea
su^t mere spiritualia, quae non sunt mixta cum aliquo temporali, vt pote
fornicatio, adulterium, baptisma, haeresis and eiusmodi. Those things be mere
spiritual which are not mixed with any temporal thing, as fornication,
adultery, baptism, heresy, and such like. I could bring in here ye letters
of VVillia^ Conqueroure, the oration of Edgarus to the clergy of England, and
the Epistle of one Cassidore to the church of England, if time would suffer
me. But to avoid tediousnes in this matter, I make an end.

The second Prelection of the second Tome.
IN our last lecture I declared unto you the argument of the Epistle, which did
consist in three points. The first was, to whom it was written. The second,
who wrote it, and what manner of man he was. The third, what was written. And
in this last part, I entered into ye text, discoursing unto you these two
words, Petrus Apostolus: Now, by Gods grace, we will go forward in the text

It follows: Electis iuxta praefinitionem De patris per sanctificationem
spiritus in obedientiam et aspersionem sanguinis Jesus Christi: Gratia uobis et
pax multiplicetur. That is: Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father unto sanctification of the spirit, through obedience and sprinckling of
the blood of Jesus Christ: grace and peace be multiplied unto you.

Out of this text I will deliver unto you three lessons. First, how we be elect.
Secondly, what election is. And thyrdly, to what end we be elected. But first I
will move two questions.

Question prima.
The first question is this: how did Peter understand and know that these me^
to whom he wrote, were elect and chosen to be saved? For the election and
choosing of God is hydden secret, and can no otherwise be known, but by a
singular and special revelation of ye holy spirit, as Paul says: Reposita est
mihi corona iustitiae: the crown of righteousness is laid up in store for me.
2. Tim. 4.
And as every man is certain and assured of his own election by the testimony
of the spirte: so of other no man can give certain judgment.

Responsio.
We ought not to be scrupulous and inquisitiue of the election of our brethren.
We must esteem and judge their election by their vocation and calling. So that
whosoever we see to be chosen into the fellowship of the church by a true and
lively faith, them we count to be of the number of the elect. For God does
segregate and deuyde them from the world, which is an argument, a sign and
token of election. And it is not material though some fall and fail, for in
some there is nothing but mere hypocrisy and dissimulation. Notwithstanding,
when we do see ye right notes and true signs of Gods election in our brethren,
our charity and love can do no other but judge that they be elect, not that we
know the hyd and secret counsel of God, but that we judge it, ex effectu, as
Peter did here: For he says, ex sanctificatione spiritus, through the
santifying of the spirit.

For as much therefore as Peter did know and see in them, that they did behave
them selves as men regenerate and begotten again with the spirit of God, and
did lead an holy conversation: Peter does number them among Gods elect. And so
ought we to judge of our brethren.

Question secunda.
The second question is this: Is every man elect, so that he may persuade him
self to be assured thereof? How say you than to this saying of Ecclesiastes:
Nescie homo vtrum amore an odio dignus sit. Cap. 9.
No man knows whether he be worthy love or hatred. And if this be true, then
can not a man be certain, that he is in the favor of God.

Responsio.
In deed this place of the preacher has been most shamefully abused of our
adversaries, 1. Solomon.
in that they do detorte and wrest it, that a true christian man ought to
doubt, whether he do please god or no. For Solomon speaks not here of ye
court and judgment of conscience. For who knows not him self to be worthy
hatred, when he does sin and transgress Gods co^mmaundement? Who is
ignorant, but that God is offended with wickedness? This place therefore does
seem rather to be spoken of thexterne and outward discerning and judging the
godly from the ungodly.

God does pour and exhibit often times his gyfts indifferently without respect
of persons. He gives riches, strength of body, learning, worldly wisdom,
eloquence, health and beuty, as well to the ungodly, as to the godly. No man
knows, concerning this outward show and externe gifts, whom god loves, or
whom god hates. For as well may the reprobates have them, as the elect. And I
pray you, what should move Solomon in that place to say; that no man should be
assured of gods favor? All that be true Christians, and surely cleave unto
Christ, do know them selves to be elect in Christ, before the foundation of the
world was laid. They know, I say, by the word of god, that they be beloved unto
god the father, because he gave his only begotten son to dye for them. And
what is the faith of a christian man, but an assured trust in the mercy of god
for Christ's sake?

Furthermore, the promise of god is most firm, true, and sure: qui crediderit,
saluus erit,, he that believes (says Christ) shall be saved. Now if thou believe
the gospel, thou art than certain of the remission of sins, than art thou
assured of gods favor, than need thou not to doubt of everlasting
salvation. Paul says to the Romans: Spiritus Dei testatur cum spiritu
nostro, Cap. 8
quod simus filii Dei. The spirit of god bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the children of god

Certain of the scholastical divines, which be of the sounder judgment do
expound this place after an other manner. This text (say they) may be referred
to just and wise me^, who although they employ al their diligence toward
others, to make them good and perfect, yet they know not what the event of
their labor will be, they know not whether they will become grateful or
ungrateful subjects, whether they will deserve love or hatred. Solomon raygned
most wisely in peace and abundance of riches: yet when he was dead, his
subjects being vnmyndeful of al his benefits, complained of servitude and
bondage.

David a most noble Prince, delivered Israel from al their enemies: yet both in
his life time and after his death they were a most unthankful people. For when
he lived, they revolted from him, and went to Absalo^, and to Seba, and when he
was dead, they utterly fell from his house, and went to an other in the time of
Roboam.

Other writers refer this text unto God, after this sense: God (say they)
has whom he loves, and whom he hates, some he has elected, and some he has
rejected, as it is written in the Prophet Malachy: Jacob dilexi, Cap. 1.
Esau autem odio habui. Jacob I loved, Esau I hated. Notwithstanding, no man of
him self can judge by the outward show whom God has chosen, nor whom he has
forsaken, no man can judge, whether one be elect or reject, neither by his
prosperity nor by his adversity, for these things happen indifferently, as
well to the wicked, as to the good. And who does know whether a man suffers
any cross or affliction, to his proof or to his punishment. Truly none ought
to judge of the event of things whether they be good or bad, for he is
acceptable to God, whom god favors, and whosoever believes truly in god,
whether he suffers adversity or prosperity.

On the other side god hates him which does not believe, whether he be
fortunate in this world or unfortunate. Vniuersa aeque eueniunt iusto et
impio. All things come a like to all, and the same condition is to the just,
Eccles. 9.
and to the wicked. If only good things should happen only to the good, and
evil things should chance only to the evil, then we might easily judge, who
is in gods favor, and who out of favor, but we see by experience the outward
event to be equal, as well to the just, as to the unjust.

To the just that live uprightly, and be friendly and loving to their
neighbors many promyses are made. As where it is said in the Scriptures:
Estote misericordes, Luke 6.
and misericordiam consequemini. Be merciful, and you shall obtain mercy,
give and it shall be given unto you. Notwithstanding, often times prosperous
things do happen to the very oppressors of the poor, as unto Antiochus,
Nabuchodonozor, Herod, and other mo.

Again, on the contrary side, the holy Scriptures do manace and threaten evil
things to those which live uncharitably and unmercifully toward their
neighbors. As where it is said: Qui obturat aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis
etc. He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, Prou. 13.
shall cry him self and not be heard.

Again in an other place it is written: Viduae et pupillo no^ nocebits. et ce.
You shall not hurt the widow and the fatherles, Exodus 22.
for they shall cry to me, and I will hear the^. So you see that to the good,
blessing, to the wicked, cursing is promised in the law, and yet we see the
good often times subject to malediction, and the wicked to be partakers of
benediction. We see some which make their bodies a lively Sacrifice unto God,
we see other that live dissolutely, and in all kinds of pleasure: yet the one is
not one hear the more fortunate in this world then the other. We see some which
be perjured persons, to live most welthely, we see other that be constant,
faithful, and true, to live in much misery. So that by the outward appearance
and show we do not nor can judge who is in Gods favor, and who is out of
favor.

Some of the divines which be of a more subtle judgment, do expound this
place of Solomon of final perseverance. For no man (say they) does know
whether finally or in thend he shall be received into glory, or sent into pain.
For he that is good this day, and as touching present justice, is worthy of
love: may be the next day or within few days after in Gods disfauor.

Wherefore, although for a time a man be good, and so accepted of God: Yet it
follows not that he persuade him self in his own conceit, he shall so
persist and finally persevere. For many be called, but few are chosen, and as
saint Paul says: Qui stat, 1. Cor. 10.
vidiat ne cadat, he that stands, let him take heed he fall not. And in an
other place: tu fide stas, noli altum sapere, sed time: thou stand fast in
faiih, be not to hie minded, but fear.

Saint Peter exhorts them that are called to make their vocation sure through
good works.

Finally, they which according to present justice be worthy hatred, ought not
to be judged, that they shall so continue unto thend, for he that is now bad,
may to morrow be good, as Paul, Zacheus, Matthew, Marie Magdalene, and the
theife that hanged upon the cross, with other.

This shall be sufficient for the question. Now to the first limme of our present
division in this lesson, that is, how we be elect.

This election does flow and spring not out of our selves, not out of our
frewil, not out of our obedience, but as Peter says here, Secundum
praecognitionem Dei patris, by the foreknowledge of god the father, for the
prescience of God is the very well and offspring, is the first and chief cause
that god did know with him self, before the world was made, whom he would
elect and choose to salvation. But here is one caution and rule to be
observed, that is, to weighe diligently what manner of thing the prescience or
foreknowledge of god is.

The schole men do say that god did and does foresee the merits, deserts, and
works of every man, and so does discern the reprobates from the elect, as
every one shall be worthy of the state and condition for his works sake. But the
Scripture does always and every where set forth the purpose of god, in which
only our salvation is grounded against our merits and deserts.

Therefore, when Peter here does call them elect by the foreknowledge of god the
father, he signifies that the cause thereof depends of none other thing, but
that it ought to be sought only in god and of god. Therefore, gods prescience
and precognition does remove and put a part all the respect of the worthynes
of man. And seeing that the will of god is the chief, principal, and first
cause of our election) before the which will of god, there ought none other
cause to be admitted) it is, not meet nor like, that god should be moved of
our good works and merits, which he saw before. And against this sentence
speaks saint Paul to the Corinthians, saying: Quid habes quod non accepisti?
et si accepisti, quid gloriaris, quasi non acceperis? What have thou, which
thou have not receued? and if thou have receued, why do thou boast, as
though thou have not receued? And here I do marvel of our adversaries, which
faint that there is Vniuersalis gratia, an universal grace set by the benefit
of god before all men, which grace they that will, do choose, and they that
will, do and may refuse. Against this opinion speaks saint Austen saying:
lib. de praed. cap. 8.
Quid oramus pro nolentibus credere? nisi vt Deus operetur in illis et velle.
Why pray we for those that will not believe? but that god may work in them to
will.

Saint Hierome writes thus: Velle, et currere meu^ est, sed ipsum meum, sine
Dei semper auxilio non erit meum, dicit enim Apostolus: contra. Pela. ad
ctesiphontem.
Deus est qui operatur in nobis velle et perficere, that is to will, and to
run is my part, but the same mine, with out always the help of God, shall
not be mine, for thapostle says: It is god that works in us to will, and to
bring to pass. These assertions do not prove, that we should count our selves
(as they say) Solu^ passive, to the choosing of good things, for we are moved by
the spirit of good, and being impelled, we also do that which Thapostle says
to the Romans: Qui spiritu Dei aguntur, hi sunt filii Dei: They that are
moved by the spirit of God, be the sons of God. cap. 8.
And a little before he said: Per spiritum adoptionis, quem accepimus, clamamus
Abba Pater: by the spirit of adoption, which we have received, we cry, Abba
Pater. cap. 8.


To this makes that which we read in the Prophet Jeremy of the saw, which
first is moved of the sawyer, and afterward* being impelled, it cutteth the
wodde. Even so our mind is first moved by the instinct of the holy Ghost, and
so being impelled of it, brings forth good deeds.

The.2. Limme of the division is, what is election?
The scolemen do call gods prescie^ce that knowledge in God, by which he knew all
things before they were, or be, and does see and behold presently all things
both that are, that were, and that shall be.

Predestination is an eternal decree and everlasting purpose of God, by the
which he does decree and purpose to save man, prefixinge and appointyng unto
man a most sure term and time both of life and death.

Many climyng wits dispute curiously and busily of this matter, so that not
only the salvation of man's soul, but also the glory of God among them of the
simpler sort is obfuscate, darkened, and brought in peril.

Here mu^te be a great caution and heed taken, that to much here be not given
to man's wit, but that we depend here only of the oracles and testimonies of
the scriptures. And therefore we ought ever to have in mind and before our
eyes the words of saint Paul, (when we shall speak of predestination) which
cries and says: O altitudo diuitiarum sapientiae, and scientiae dei, Romans 11.
etc. O the depnes of the riches, both of the wisdom, and knowledge of god,
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways paste findyng out? For who
has known the mind of the Lord? or who was his counsailour? or who has
given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed?

Let us be mindful of the godly admonition of Jesus the sone of Sirach, cap.
3.
saying: Altiora te ne quaesieris, and fortiora te ne scrutatus fueris, sed
quae praecepit tibi Deus, illa cogita semper, etc. Seek not for things that be
to high for thee, and search not out those things which are to weighty and
hard for thee, but always have in mind the things that God commands thee,
and be not curious in his manifold works. For it is not necessary for thee to
see those things which are hid in secret.

2. Praedestinatio
Therefore, I will talk as reverently and as confortably as I can of this matter
of Predestination. Which shall be discursed in the third part of the partition

The third limme is, to what end we be elect.
The end of predestination is Christ the son of God, for god has decreed and
purposed to save as many as have communion and fellowship with his only
begotten son Jesus Christ, as Paul says: elegit nos Deus in Christo,
antequam iacerentur fundamenta mundi, Ephesians. 1.
etc. God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world was
laid, that we should be holy and irreprehensible before him through charity,
which has predestinate us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto him self,
according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherewith he has made us accepted in his beloved son Christ.

Therefore, whosoever be graffed in Christ, they are predestinate and elect. For
as saint John says: qui habet filium, vitam habet, qui non habet filium Dei,
vitam non habet. 1 John. 3.
He that has the son, has life, he that has not the son of God, has not
life. And again in the gospel Christ says himself: haec est voluntas eius,
Cap. 6.
qui misit me patris, vt omnis qui videt filium, and credit in eum, habet
vitam. This is the will of my father, which has sent me, that every one which
sees the son, and believes in him, has life.

Wherefore, if you ask, whether you be elect unto life, or predestinat to
death, that is, if you be of the number of them that shall be damned or saved? I
answer: If you have communion with Christ; you are predestinate unto life, and
be of the number of the elect: but if you he separate from Christ, how soever
you seem to excel in virtues, you are predestinate unto death. For the
predestination of god does not lean, nor is moved and directed by our
worthiness or unworthiness, but of the mere grace and free mercy of God the
father, and has a respect only unto Christ. And therefore our salvation can
not be, but certain and sure.

They are much seduced and deceived, which do judge them that shall be saved to
be predestinate unto salvation for their good merits and works, which god did
foresee in them: Ephesians. 1.
for the Apostle says: elegit nos in Christo, in sese, iuxta beneplacitum
voluntatis suae, vt laudetur gloria gratiae suae. He has chosen us in Christ,
according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace. Cap 9. 2. Tim. 1.
And again to the Romans: non est volentis, neque currentis* sed miserentis
Dei. Again he says: Deus salucs nos fecit, and vocauit vocatione sancta etc.
God has saved us, and called us by an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his purpose and grace, which is given to us by Christ
Jesus, before the world was made.

Our savior Christ also says: oues meae vocem meam audiunt, etc. My sheep
hear my voice, and I know them, and they do follow me, and I do give them
everlasting life, John. 20.
nor they shall dye for ever, neither shall any man take them out of my hands.

Obiectio.
Christ's sheep being endued with a sure and steadfast faith, do cleave fast unto
Christ, and do feel that godly drawing, of the which Christ speaks in the
gospel: nemo venit ad me, nisi pater meus traxerit eum: no man comes to me
unless my father shall draw him. Cap. 6.
But, when I do not feel this drawing, I do not cleave with a steadfast faith
hnto the son of God: Therefore, I am not of the number of the elect.

Responsio.
We must beware that we conceive not vain opinions of the drawinge of god.
God did draw Paul violently, but yet he draws not every man by ye heir of ye
head. Cap. 10.
There be means how god does lead and allure man unto him. He does not always
draw him, as one would draw a stock. Paul says: fides ex auditu, auditus
autem per verbum dei: faith comes by hearing, Cap. 4. Cap. 9.
and hearing by the word of god. Therefore, god draws thee, when he preaches
the gospel unto thee by his ministers, when they touch thy heart, when they
excite and stir thee to prayer, by the which thou may call for his grace,
help, illuminyng, and drawing.

If thou do not presently feel and perceive in thy mind a most perfect
faith, do not despair. The scripture says: The earth brings forth fruit
freely, and of her own accord, but first it is grass, then it is stalk,
and last of all it is full corn. Even after that manner has faith her
increase. The Apostles (as Mark records) prayed, saying: Domine adauge nobis
fidem: Lord increase our faith. Likewise it is mentioned in the.9. of Mark,
how a certain poor wretch having his son vexed with a devil, cried out
unto Christ: age, si quid potesdomine, subueni misertus nobis. O Lord, if thou
canste, help, having pitye on us. And furthwith he heard the Lord saying unto
him again: If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that does
believe. This poor miser cried out again: O Lord help mine incredulity. Here
you may see that this man did believe, feelyng faith in his mind given him of
god: yet he judged it to be so weak, that it needed the help of god. And this
faith of his, if it had been compared, or co^ferred with an absolute and
perfect faith, it might seem rather an incredulity, then a faith. Yet see
what this little faith did, it did bring and restore his son unto recovery and
health.

If any man therefore does feel faith to be in his mind (although it be
imperfect, slender and weak) let him not despair, but cast himself wholly
upon the mercy of God. Let him not presume of his own power and free will,
let him pray, and call incessantly for the increase of faith, let him remember
the comfortable words of Christ: petite, and dabitur vobis, quaerite, and
inuenietis, pulsate, et aperietur vobis: Ask, and it shall be given to you,
seek, and you shall find, knock, Math. 7.
and it shall be opened unto you. These and such like comfortable places of the
scriptures ought more to move and confirm our minds of the great good will of
god toward us. then the suggestions of the diuil to fear us. By the which
suggestions and temptacions he goes about not only to subvert and overthrow
the hope of our election, to make god suspect unto us, as though god did hate
his creature, and had rather have it lost, then saved.

Let us firmly printe in our minds that god has elect and chosen us in
Christ, and for Christ's sake has predestinate us to life, and does increase
the same faith to them that shall ask and pray for it, and inspireth us, that
we may truly pray and ask, for these and such other like gifts.

Thus, I have discoursed the three parts of this prelection, according to my
promise. Now, let us go a little further in the text. It follows: In
obedientiam et aspersionem sanguinis Jesus Christi, through obedience and
sprinklynge of the blood of Christ, that is, says Peter, the true sa^ctifieng
of the spirit is to obey the gospel, and to believe in Christ, which has made
us worthy of eternal life, by the sheddyng of his own blood, and by
sprinklyng of our conscience with the same blood.

And here Peter seems to have had a respect to the old ceremony of blood
sprinkling. For even as it was not enough then among the Jews, that the
sacrifice should be offered, and the blood thereof shed, unless ye people had been
sprinkled with the same: So now at this present it shall profit us nothing that
Christ's blood is shed, unless our consciences be cleansed and purified therewith:
which thing is done by the ministry of the holy ghost, which does sprinkle
our consciences with Christ's blood, to wash them withal.

David speaks of this kind of sprinkling, saying: Asperges me domine hysopo,
and mundabor, lauabis me, and super niuem dealbabor: sprinkle me, Lord, Psalm.
51.
with hysope, and I shall be clean, thou shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter
then snow.

Leu. 14. 3. Sacrificiu^.
We read in Leuiticus of the sacrifice that did purify and cleanse from the
leprosy. They took two sparows, one of them was killed, and put in an earthen
pot, having fair and clean running water, the other sparow being a live, his
wings with Ceder wodde, and scarlet cloth with bysope were dipped in the blood
of the slain sparrow, and he that was infected and diseased with the leprosy
was sprinkled with all. The sparow that was slain, signified the humanity of
Christ, which was put to death. The sparowe that was left a live, signifies
the godhead of Christ, which was impassible and could not be hurt.

The leprosy of the body betokens the sin of the soul. Hisope is a low
herb, and of a sweet savor, and it signifies our faith, by the which our
hearts are purified. And now cries David, saying: If thou O God shalt
sprinkle me with thy grace, and with faith, as it were with a bundle of hysope
dipped in the blood of Christ, and so shall wash my spots, than shall I by and
by be made clean, and I shall become whiter then snow. I know Lord, I know,
says David, that I need not the slaughter of goats and bullocks, but this I
know, that the purifyeng and clensing of the soul is set only in the faith of
Jesus Christ, with whose blood, whosoever is sprinkled, he is washed and
cleansed from all his sins. And unto this end alludeth saint Peter here in
this place.

Now, the whole mind of Peter in this place is this: we be predestinat,
elect, and chosen of God unto salvation. This election is not disposed and
dispensed rashlye, but by the redemption of Christ, in the which is declared
both the mercy and Justice of god. In this Christ only we must believe, and
obey his doctrine.

Therefore, they are much deceived and do greatly err, which preach, brag
and boaste only of election, and do reiecte, and neglecte faith, the fruits of
righteousness, fervent and devout prayers, as things unprofitable, as though
the election of god should be a rash and a bare thing: quos praesciuit, eosdem
praefiniuit, conformes esse imaginis filii sui: Romans 8.
those which he knew before (says Paul) he also ordained before, that they
should be like fashioned to the shape of his son. etc.

Now let us gather together the whole sum of Peter's mind, which is this.

Our salvation flows of the free election of god, but this election must be
considered with the experience of faith, in that that god does sanctify us
with his holy spirit.

Finally, there be two effects or ends of our vocation, one is obedience, by
the which we must understand newnes of life, the other is the sprinklynge of
Christ's blood, by the which is notified the remission of sins, and both these
are the works of the holy ghost. And thereupon Peter concludes, that we ought
not to separat election, from vocation, nor the free justifying, of faith from
ye newnes of life.

It follows in the text: gratia and pax multiplicetur uobis, grace and peace
be multiplied unto you. There is nothing that ought more to be wished and
desired of us, then to have god favorable and merciful unto us, which is
signified here by this word gratia. And after to desire that prosperity and
good success of al things may flow and come from god toward us, which is
signified by this word Pax. For howso ever all things in this world be
luckie, pleasante, and fortunate unto us: yet if god therewith be not favorable,
that blessinge and success which we have, is turned into curse.

Therefore the only fou^dacion, ground and stay of our felicity, is the favor,
and benevolence of god, by the which favor it is brought to pass, that we
have the fruition of the very true and sound prosperity. Yea, and that our
salvation and health is promoted and furthered in the very storms of
adversity. Gratia and pax: Grace here, I say, betokens the favor of god,
which although it begin here in us, yet it is requisite and necessary that
it wax and grow in us daily more and more, until our dieng day.

He that knows and surely believes: that god is favorable unto him, that man
has peace and quietness of conscience, and needs not, no nor does fear
neither the world, nor yet the devil, for he is surely persuaded, that god
will deliver him from Satan, sin, and death, and from all other
incommodities.

Grace, I tell you, betokens here, fauorem, gods favor, by the which we are
not only made amiable, acceptable, and beloved unto god, but also we obtain
all spiritual dowries and gifts, which either pertain to all godliness, or else
to the utility and commodity of our neighbors.

Pax: Peace here signifies the success and good going forward of al things,
even as we would desire and wish them. And this grace and peace does Peter here
pray and desire unto them, to whom he wrote this epistle, some say, that
peace betokens here the quietness of conscience.

Obiectio.
But I pray you sir, did not Peter know, that all the true and faithful
disciples of Christ should bear the cross, and sustain afflictions and
persecutions in the world? And why then does he wish all things to be
prosperouse and luckly unto them?

Responsio.
It is most true, that godly and faithful men are subject, and like to
sustain, as long as they live here in this world, persecutions, afflictions,
and adversities, at one time or other. Notwithstanding, god does with his great
favor and mercy so adourne and deck his holy saints, that the very
reproaches and troubles of the world, do turn to their profit and glory. And
god does so comfort them in their adversity, that even then be they most
quiet, most ioiful, and most rejoicing, when they be in the middle of death.
What presidentes have we had, I pray you, these late years, of those godly
Martyrs, which testified christ's truth be sheddynge their blood? This grace and
favor of God is given unto man without his merits or deserts.

Saint Ambrose interpreting this word, grace, says after this manner: quia
hoc constitutum est a Deo, et cae. because god has ordained, that they which
believe in Christ, shall be saved without works, by faith only, we shall freely
obtain remission of sins.

I do not a little marvel, that some of the schole men are such stout
defenders of man's power, and so small favorers of the grace of Christ, that they
are not ashamed to say and to write, that the very infidels and heathen, which
are destitute of the gospel, may with their moral virtues deserve (as they term
it) prima^ gratiam, the-first grace. Which doctrine, because they would make
it seem and appear more probable, they affirm, that such works done before
faith, do not merit and deserve Gods favor and grace simpliciter, absolutely,
but as they term it, de congruo, with a conuenience and meetenes. Mary, say
they, we dare not affirm, that they merit de condigno.

Although these moral actions and virtues may be nombred generally among those
things, that be called, bona, good: yet as concerning the auctors and workers
of them, from whom they come, because they be without faith, those actions and
moral virtues are very sin, and do displease god. For as long as we be
without Christ, the holy ghost declares us to be the sons of wrath: that is,
hated of god.

Our savior Christ says: qui non credit in filium, non habebit vitam
aeterna^, and ira dei manet super eum: he that believes not in the son, shall
not have eternal life, and the wrath of god shall abide upon him. Therefore,
forasmuch as god does have us, how can we do works that be pleasant and
amiable unto him?

Secondly, Paul calls those glorious and noble works, which he did in his
Iudaisme, before his conversion, dross and dounge. Phil. 3.


Thirdly, the prophet Esaie writes: Iustitiae nostrae vt pannus menstruatae.
Al our righteousness are as a disteyned and foul cloth, which sentence, whether
it be taken and referred to them that be alredie justified, either to those
that be not yet regenerated, the sequel is al one. For if the works of ye
justified be counted no better before god, what manner of works are theyrs to
be counted, which are not yet come unto Christ?

Luc. 17
Fourthlye, Christ says to his Apostles: quum feceritis haec omnia, quae facere
debetis, dicite, serui inutiles sumus: when you shall do all those things,
which you ought to do, say, we be unprofitable servants. Which sentence, if
it be verified of the beleuyng, what, I pray you, may be thought of the works
of Infidelles?

By these testimonies, and such other like places, it is and may be
sufficiently proved, that their doctrine is vain and most foolish, which
say, that Infideles may merit primam gratiam de congruo, as they term it. But
because they would have their voluntary and will works to be esteemed and
maintained, they have an other folish distinction concerning them which be not
Infidels, but beleuyng, and those works they call, opera supererogationis, the
works of supererogation, which to do we are not bound, but may choose whether
we will do them or no, but if we do them, we do more, say they, then we are
bound to do, and therefore we deserve gratiam dei, the favor of god de
condigno, as they term it. And if you would know, what these works of
supererogation be, you may learn them out of their popish and peuishe books,
some of them I will rehearse: to hear six or seven masses on a day, to go on
pilgrimage from post to pillar, to make choice and difference of meats, as to
put more holiness in fish then in flesh, to build monasteries and chauntries,
to make vows, and to profess single life, to forsake father, and mother
without their consent and good will obtained, to become monks, friars, chanons
and Nuns, etc. But who having any salt in him (as the proverb says) will not
count these things to be vain, fond, superfluous and foolish, for the which
the Lord shall say at the day of the judgment, as it is written in the prophet
Esaie: quis haec requisiuit de manibus vestris? who required these things a
your hands?

Saint Augustine writes: quum dicitur toto cord, tota mente, tota anima, et
omnibus viribus, Lib. de doct. christian.
nullam partem reliquit tibi vacantem: When the Lord said thou shall love thy
Lord god with all thine heart, with all thy mind, with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength, he left no part in thee void, wherewith thou may love and
serve God more then thou art commanded.

The same Austen again says in an other place: quum non plene, dum hic
viuimus, Lib. de spirit. et litera.
deum cognoscamus, plene illum non possumus diligere: nullus enim plus diligit,
quam cognoscit: forasmuch, while we live hear, we can not fully know god, we
can not therefore fullye love him: for no man loves more then he knows etc.
Well I have very long detained you. It is time to end. Thus you have heard the
whole Epigraphe or inscription of this epistle, wherewith Peter saluteth and
wishes well to them, to whom he writes. After the inscription follows that
part, which is called exordium, or proaemium, that is, the beginning or
entrance of his matter. But to discourse any part thereof, I will differ it
until the next readyng day. In the mean time I commit you to the tuition of
God.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea praelectionis secondae. Tomi. 2.
Solomon. 1.
Solomon was the son of David, begotten of Bethsabe, who was the wife of
Vrias. He had an other name, which was Iedida, that is, dilectus domini,
beloved of the Lord. He was brought up from a child by his parents in godliness
and learning, and delivered unto Nathan the Prophet to be taught and
institute: who after he had received him, for his noble and clear wittte,
called him, amabilem. His father, yet lyuinge, he received the kingdom after
he began to reign (which was as many do write, at his age of twelve years)
God appeared unto him in his sleep, and bad him ask what he would. He required
not long life, neither riches, nor reuengeme^t of his ennemies, but desired
intelligence and wisdom, that he might righly govern the people committed to
his carge. God therefore did adorn and beautify him with such excellent
prudencie, that he excelled all other wise men, not only those which were
foreine, but also those which were noble among the Israelits. But when he came
to mature and ripe years, forgetting god the grau^ter and geuer of all his
honors and riches, went up to the mount, and falling down on his knees,
worshipped Moloch the Idol of the Egiptians, and many other Idols of the
Gentiles. And also being old, he lived filthely and fleshly with a great number
of women, not only with the women of his own country, but also took many
other strange women. He had.700. wives, and 300. co^cubines, which turned
away his heart from god unto their false gods, pretendinge politickely (as it is
thought) to have peace with kings and princes adjoining nighe unto him.
Notwithstanding, he greatly offended god therein. Whereupon saint Augustine
writes thus: Solomon bonis initiis malos habuit exitus: Lib. de ciuit. dei 17.
cap. 2. Ecclesiasticus cap. 47.
Solomon with his good beginnings had evil endings. For prosperity often times
ouercometh and blinds the minds of wise me^. Jesus the son of Sirach says
of Solomon after this manner. collegisti quasi aurichalcum aurum, and vt plumbum
collegisti argentum, and denudasti femora tua mulieribus, etc. Thou haste
gathered gold as tin, and haste had as much silver as lead, thou did bow
thy loins to women, and wast overcome by thy body, thou did stain thine
honor, and have defiled thy posterity, and have brought wrath upon thy
children, and have felt sorrow for thy folly. So the kingdom was divided, and
Ephraim became a rebellious kingdom. Nevertheless, the Lord left not of his
mercy, neither was he destroyed for his works, neither did he abolish the
posterity of his elect. etc. This sad and fearful example does teach us to
beware that we be not to proud in prosperity. It can not firmly be gathered
out of the holy scriptures, whether Solomon (at the time of his death) did
earnestly repent of his impiety or no. Notwithstanding, saint Hierome,
Ambrose, and Chrysostom do write, that he repented before his death. Whereupon
the hebrews entitled his book called Ecclesiastes, poenitentia Salomonis, the
repentance of Solomon. After he had lived 94. years, he died, and was buried
in Jerusalem.

He wrote 3000. books of sentences, and 5000. books of songs and modulations:
he wrote of the nature of trees, from the low hysope unto the high Ceder
tree. He wrote also of the properties of beasts, birds fishes, and serpents,
etc.

There be extant of his books three in number: the book entitled the proverbs,
the book entitled Ecclesiastes, and the book entitled cantica canticorum.

Lib 7. de ciuitate dei. cap. 20.
Saint Augustine writes, that the west church received the book of wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus to be the books of Solomon.

Some record, that Solomon did institute certain exorcismes, and incantations
against wicked spirits, by the which sicknesses and diseases might be
mitigated, and eased.

Praedestination. 2.
BEcause certain hie climing heads make no difference between predestination
and destenie: I will deliver somewhat worthy note, what destenie is, and how and
in how many points it differs from predestination and gods providence. And
to make the matter more plain, I will speak a word or two de prouidentia Dei,
of the providence of god, of the which much me^cio^ is made almost in every
part of ye scriptures.

John. 5.
First, Christ says: Pater meus ad hoc vsque temporis operatur, and ego operor,
my father works hitherto, and I work.

Heb. 1.
Again, saint Paul writes: Deus per filium secula condidit, moderaturque,
and portat omnia verbo potentiae suae: God has established the world by his
son, and does rule and moderat all things by the word of his power. Cap. 2.
Again, in Daniel: Domini est sapientia, and fortitudo, ipse est qui mutat
tempora et quae fiunt in tempore, abiicit Reges, and instituit Reges, dat
sapientiam sapientibus, and scientia^ iis, qui pollent intelligentia. Wisdom
and strength is the lords, he chau^geth the times and seasons, he takes away
kings, he sets up kings, he gives wisdom to the wise, and understanding to
those that do understand.

Again in the psalm it is written: magnus Dominus noster, and magna est virtus
eius etc. great is our Lord, and great is his power. Psalm. 147.


There be infinite other places, beside these, in the scriptures, abunda^tly
testifieng, that god by his providence does govern all things that be in the
world, and specially man, being the possessor of the world, for whose sake al
things be made.

Obiectio.
For as much as al things in the world are done by the providence of god, there
is no cause, why we should put to our endeavor and industry: we may live idly
and careless, it is sufficient that we be enforsed of God. For if he shall need
our endeavor, he will violently, will we, nill we, drive and force us to that
which he will have to be done by us.

Responsio.
We see holy men in ye scripture both to judge and to speak more sincerely,
and more reuere^tly of ye providence of god. The Angel said plainly to Loath:
festina in zoar, et illic seruare: neque em^ facere possu^ quicquam, Genesis 19
donec tu illuc venias: make have to zoar, and there be preserved, for I ca^ do
nothing before you come thither. Lo, here is Loath with his family saved by ye
providence of god: the citizens of Sodom, and all the cities round about are
destroyed. Yet the labor and will of Loath is required in the very work of this
his preservation. I can do nothing (says the Lord) until thou come thither.
David evidently says: Ego in te speraui, dn^e, dixi deus meus es tu, in manu
tua sunt te^pora mea: I have trusted in thee, o Lord, I have said, thou art my
god: in thy hands are my times. Notwitsta^dyng, he which had cast him self
wholly upon the divine providence, took diligent advise, how he might by his
diligence and industry escape and avoid the crafty assaults of his father in
law Saul: neither he does despise nor refuse the help and policy of his
wife Michol. He does not reply against her, saying: All things are done by the
providence of god, therefore there needs no policy or means, the almighty god
can deliver me out of the hands of my fathers soldiers, or else he ca^ save
me by some other miraculous means. Let us therefore quiet our self, and suffer
god to work in us. He understood the providence, that as ye divine providence
does work by means, and by a certain order: so he did know it to be his duty
in the fear of god to submit and refer himself to ye same means, and to put
away all lettes. S. Paul heard ye Lord saying evidently: sicut Hierosolymis de
me testificatus es, ita oportebit te and Romae testificari: Acts. 23.
As thou have testified of me at Jerusalem, so you must bear witness of me also
at Rome. And although he doubted not ye promises of god to be true, nether was
ignorant of the power and efficacy of gods providence: nevertheless, he sent
his nephew privily unto the chief officer, to show him, that the Jews had
conspired his death, and to desire him that he might not be brought forth at
their request.

Again, Paul sailyng on the sea Adriaticum, and being very nere unto a most
dangerous shipwrake, said unto the seldiors in the ship, which were very
fearful: hortor vos, vt bono animo sitis: iactura enim animae nulla erit ex
vobis, sed tantum nauis etc. I exhort you to be of good courage, for there
shall be no loss of any ma^s life among you, save of the ship only: for there
stood by me this night the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve, saying:
fear not Paul, for thou must be brought before Caesar, and lo god has given
unto thee all that sail with thee: wherefore sirs, be of good courage. I believe
God, that it shall be so as he has told me. But afterward, when the mariners
went about to go out of the ship, Paul said: nisi hi in naui manserint, vos
salui fieri non potestis: Except these men abide in the ship, you can not be
saved.

Therefore, means and midles do pertain to the providence of god, by the which
god works, which are not to be neglected. For neither the air does make the
earth fruitful, the waters do flow to and fro, nor the earth brings forth
by their own power, but by the power and devise of god. And although godly and
holy men do judge, that nothing is done here through their deserts, Math 5.
as our savior Christ says: Pluit pater super iustos, and iniustos: The
father raineth upon the just and unjust: yet they do not forget the prophets
words, saying: si volueritis, and audieritis, bona terrae comedetis: si vero
contumaces fueritis, gladio deuorabimini: If you consent and obey, you shall
eat the good things of the land: but if you refuse, and be rebellious, you
shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

By these places, authorities, and testimonies it is substa^tially proved, that
god has a great care and regard toward us, and that he with his divine
providence does defend us against all sicknesses, diseases and dangers: and
that as he has created all creatures to the behoof and use of man: so he does
conserve and apply the^ to the commodity and profit of man.

This shall be sufficient de Dei prouidentiae, of the providence of God. Now a
word or two of fatum.

I intend not to speak of fatum here, as the Poets, the Philosophers, and
Astronomers do define and discourse it. For to grant Fatum after that manner,
were to grant, that al things chance by mere necessity, which is a
doctrine both heretical and diabolical. But I will speak of, Fatum, so much
and so far, as the divines grant it.

What destenie is, after the censure of the divines.
First, the divines do define destenie to be a certain disposition in things
moveable, by the which the providence of god knitteth all things in order. Or
thus, destenie is an ordinance or constitution of the second causes, to bring
forth their effects in the inferior things, according to the direction,
which they have of god. This ordinance may be two ways considered: first, as
it is joined in the prospecte of the mind of god, ordenyng and dividing all
things in their places, times, mouings, and manner: and so it is called the
providence of god.

Secondly, the same ordinance is digested and applied by times in the middle
causes appointed of God to bring forth their proper effects: and so it is
called fatum, destenie. Vvherby it is manifest, that the will and providence of
God may by called fatum, destenie, causaliter.

But the same disposition and order of the second causes, concerning their
effects dependyng of the will and providence of God, may be called fatum
essentialiter.

The disposition of the second causes (as Thomas says) is called fatu^ a
fari, to speak, as though you would say, Lib. 3. cont. entiles. c. 93
the pronouncing and utterance of gods providence. For God pronounced his
providence, per fatum, by destenie, even as man utters what he has conceived
in his heart, by voice and words. And like as an artificer declares the form
and fashion of that he makes, conceived in his mind, by the effect and
finishing of the work, by the dispositions of times: so does god by his
providence, simpliciter, dispose what things he would have done, and per fatum
does administer them diverse ways, and at sundry times. And upon this three
things may be observed, and ratified: first, what things are subject to
destenie, and what things not subject to destenie. For, in so much as destenie
(as the divines say) is an ordinance of the second causes to the effects
foresene of God, it follows, that only those things are subject to destenie,
which are subject to the second causes, neither are they subject to destenie.
As for example, the creation of the first things, that is, angels, celestial
bodies, time, and matter of the four elements, the first substance of all
kinds of things, which were brought forth in the beginning, the glorifieng of
the heavenly substaunces, the justification of the wicked, and the souls
which are always created a new. For all these things did flow, and were
created of God immediately, nether could they, nor can otherwse be brought
forth. Therefore, they are not subject to destenie, for those things that are
done of the superior, are not changed or altered of the inferior. Whereupon
Boethius says: Those things which are most nere to the divinity, being
established and made sure, do excede wholye all fatal order. But those things
that are removed, and somewhat a far of from the first cause, the further they
be of from it, so much the more they are subject to fatal order.

Therefore, those things which are done of God, are subject only to him. But
other particular and natural effects are subject to the mouings of the
elements, and the mouings of the heavenly bodies, and of that part which is
called primum mobile, and finally to the providence of God, of whom al things
have their stedfastnes, and without whom nothing continues in his own state.
For, if you take away the first, the second also is taken away. Secondly, it is
to be considered how the faithful christians may grant, that there is fatum,
destenie, for if destenie be taken for the disposition and constellations of
the stars and planets (in which any man is conceived or borne) enforcing all
the inferior effects beside the will, and without the work of God: so fatum is
to be denied, as Gregory says: absit a fidelium cordibus, vt esse fatum
aliquid dicant: that is, let it be far from the hearts of the faithful, to say,
that there is any destenie. But if fatum be taken for the disposition of the
second causes, and for the ordinance of human actions, being referred to the
providence of god, as appointed by him, and spoken before him: so may we
grant, that there is fatu^, destenie, although the holy fathers have refused to
use this word, fatum, by reason of those men which wrested this word to the
violent disposition, and fatal necessity of al things. Vvherupo^ S. Augustine
says: Si propterea quis res humanas fato tribuit, Lib. 5. de ciui dei. cap. 1
quia ipsam dei voluntate^ vel potestatem fati nomine appellat, sententiam
teneat, and linguam corrigat: If any man do attribute human affairs to
destenie, because he calls the will or power of god by the name of Fatum,
destenie: let him refrain his judgment, and amend his tongue. Thirdly, it is to
be considered how the providence of god and destenie do differ. For the
disposition of things, which are to be produced, governed and conserved, by the
prospect and regard of God, is called the providence of God. But the same
disposition in the middle causes ordained of God to the bringing forth of the
effects, and declared in times, is called destenie. Also they differ in this,
that as well necessary things, as things that happen, are subject to the
providence of God: yea destenie it self is subject to the divine providence:
but only moveable things are subject to destenie. Furthermore, they differ in
this, that the divine providence being constitute and set in God the high and
chief ruler of all things (as Boethius says) consists in God, and destenie
consists only in the second causes. Also they differ in this, that the divine
providence is called destenie causaliter, in as much as the fatal disposio^
depends and comes of gods providence. But the disposition of the second
causes, in it self, is called destenie essentialiter.

Finally, they differ, because the providence of god is always immovable,
remaining, permanent, and causes al things to be moved. But destenie, for
so much as it is in things moveable, is also moveable. To be short, that there is
no such fatum, as the Stoiks do imagine, I will make it plain by exhibiting unto
you certain verses, which are recited in a certain interlude or play
entitled Aegio. In the which play.ij. persons interlocutorie do dispute, the
one alleging for the defense of destenie and fatal necessity, and the other
confuting the same.

The names of the interlocutors be, Larymos, and Phronimos.
Larymos.
NOne of you all can destiny deny,
For all things do chance by mere necessity.
And that will I prove by sufficient authority,
Both of Astronomy, and also divinity.
And first to begin with Gods own book:
God does al things foresee and forelooke.
And that thing which he does once foresee.
Must needs be so, and can none otherwise be.
Man is also ruled by the constellation
Of the bodies above after Ptolemies relation.
Of Lucanus also this is the sentence:
That man is ruled by destenies violence.
Praeceps agit omnia fatum.
And beside the doctrine of all the Astronomers,
It is also the mind of Poets and Philosophers,
Quod regitur fatis mortale genus,
Et venit ab alto quicquid facimus.
To be short and to avoid prolixitie,
Now shall you hear a doctor of divinity.
Austen in his book of the heavenly city
VVriteth these words of fatal destenie:
Destenie (says he) is a certain disposition
Of causes, and is also an order and a production
Of things, them either to prosper or else to spil,
Beside Gods purpose, and beside man's will.
Phronimos answers.
The wicked doctrine of fatal necessity
I will prove to be a detestable heresy.
If man by the course of bodies above
From sin him self could not leave nor remove,
And if one should be a theif by fatal necessity,
Then we must needs reason and contend,
That the creatures of God are not all good,
Contrary to thapostle Paul's relation,
Which al creatures to be good made declaration.
And by this doctrine it should follow than,
That there could be no sin committed by man.
For that which is evil is done always
By man's free will, as the divines do say,
And by the suggestion of the wicked fiend,
Et per fomitem peccati, that is in man's mind.
And by the doctrine of the Stoikes necessity
God to him self should be clean contrary
For if he bid us to do good, and enforce us to do il.
Who then his co^mau^dements is able to fulfill?
Of this also should ensue a damnable clause,
That God of al ill should be the original cause.
It follows also by this heathenish necessity,
That all transgressors are punished unjustly
For, you can not say that to be ill done,
Which a man by no means is able to shun.
Out of this also it does follow and fall,
That in vain are made the sciences all:
As Geometry, Phisike, and moral Philosophy,
Arithmetike, Music, and also divinity
For what shall we need to teach and exhort,
Or the sick to help with medicines comfort?
What shall it avail to rebuke any sin,
Or to repe^tau^ce by preaching any man to win?
What shall it boot to fast and to pray?
Or any good thing to do or to say;
If all things by destenie should chance and fall?
Marie it forces not then what we do at all.
And to be plame, if this doctrine should be known,
The whole life of man should be quite overthrown.
Ambrose in his book called Exameron
Does profoundly condemn this opinion.
What need (says he) any laws to be made?
Or in a Realm any acts to be had,
To preserve the good in quiet safety,
And to punish the ill for their iniquity.
If things should chance by mere necessity.
Why labors the ploughman to sow his corn?
Why trauaileth the merchant like to be forlorn
In the sea? why do other men take care and pain,
To obtain to them selves commodity and gain?
All occupations and arts are in vain.
Thus writes Ambrose wonderful plain.
God forbid (says Gregory) that any christen heart
Should with the opinion of destenie take any part.
For none but God, which gave the creation
Does take of our life thadministration.
Ptolomie the prince of the Astronomy scoole
Does say that a wise man the planets may rule.
And Bugufarus upon the centiloquie
VVriteth thus concerning destenie:
The effects of the planets a wise man may let,
By the force of wisdom, which in him is set.
And Abraham Auenar an astronomer of Chaldie
Does overthrow this fatal necessity.
If to heaven with prayer man lift up his voice,
Against destenie he shall triu^phe and rejoice,
Authorities against destenie we need no more.
But yet let us bring an example or two.
A certain man beholding Plato his face
Did him much dispraise and greatly disgrace,
And judged him to be a corrupter of youth,
A liar, a dissembler, no teller of truth.
To whom Plato answered making relation
That he had overcome the planetes inclination.
By knowledge, and learning, and wise government,
And by godly virtues daily intertainement.
Jacob and Esau makes for this matter
As is in Genesis the xxv. chapter.
They were two twins you shall understand:
The one holding the others heel in his hand.
Although they were borne at one hours instant
Yet were their lives very much discrepant.
Were not some (says Ambrose) from grace rejected,
And into Gods favor again elected*
Were the Apostles redeemed by the force of nativity,
Or did the coming of Christ them bless and sanctify?
The theif was not saved by destenies devise,
But the confession of faith brought him to paradise.
What say you to them whom death had devoured?
And by Thapostles again to life were restored*
Did destenie to life restore them again?
Nay, it was God by thapostles, as the Scriptures said*
Now to make up and knitte the conclusion,
We have brought destenie to utter confusion:
Of the which Bardazanes was the first author,
And the sect of the Priscillianistes was the next fautour,
Which in the council of Tolletane holden in Spain
The names of heretics for this did sustain.
And as for the authority which thou broughtest out of Austen,
He spoke it in the Stoikes, and not in his own person.
Larimos replieth.
Nay, then I ask you an other question,
And give me thereof some pithie solution.
What say you to the words of Sirach and Amos?
I durst lay a noble, I shall you appose.
Both good things and also things ill
The Lord does appointe them and fulfill.
Riches, poverty, life, and death.
This the book of Sirach says.
Is there (says Amos) any ill,
In a City, but it is the Lords will?
So although ye deny destenie:
Yet grant, God to be the author of iniquity.
Phronimos answers.
God save me from that opinion.
But now will I answer to thine objection.
There be, says Austen, two kinds of ills
Which spring out of two contrary wills.
Est malum culpae, est and malum paenae.
The il of sin, man's will does commit,
The ill of pain, Gods hand does inflicte.
Not that ill of it self is Gods punishment,
But so counted of them, to whom it is sent.
As a child which is both wanton and wild,
Does fear the rod, which makes him mild,
Although he hate it wurse then a serpent,
Yet is the rod a very good instrument:
So the punishment which God does send
To cause the sinful man to amend,
Is counted of the sinner to be very ill,
Because it likes nothing his will.
And the pain which he does sustain
He does much abhor and greatly disdain.
But although it be against his lust,
Yet is Gods punishment both good and just.
So that of ill God is a just revenger,
And not of sin to be counted an author.
I thought good to inserte these verses for the better explanatio^ what Fatum
is, and also for the confutation of that detestable article which affirms
God to be the author of sin: from which opinion God preserve every christen
heart.

Sacrificium. 3.
THe ignorance of them is to be laughed at, which make no difference between
Sacramentum, and Sacrificium, where there is a very great difference.

A sacrament is that in which God does exhibit and give us some thing: as in
baptism he gives unto us by the holy Ghost original justice, and wipeth away
the original sin.

Likewise in the supper of the Lord Christ exhibiteth unto us his body and
blood to be eaten and dronken, which when we receive worthily, then we receive
by faith remission of sins, consolation and grace.

Sacrificium est, quum nos* Deo aliquid offerimus and damus: A sacrifice is,
when that we do offer and give some thing to God.

And where our adversaries do obiecte against us that we have no true Church,
because we have taken away the daily Sacrifice, that is, the Mass (as they
call it) and so have no Sacrifice left: we answer.

First, that there be six kinds of Sacrifices, which the Church does offer
daily unto God.

The first kind is the Sacrifice of a contrite mind, and of an humble
spirit: Of the which David does speak in his Psalm: Sacrificium Deo
spiritus contribulatus, cor contritum and humiliatum, Deus no^ despicies: A
troubled spirit is a Sacrifice to God, a contrite and an humble heart, Psalm 51.
O God, thou will not despise.

It can not be declared how acceptably the divine majesty does behold that
heart, which does vex it self with the labor of repentance, which does
mollify his heart with weping and tears, which beating it self with the
mortar of Gods love, with the pestle of wisdom, does make of it self a most
sweet and precious ointment, which being laid up in store in the beautiful
box of faith, and seasoned and made sweet with a most fragra^t and pleasant
powder of prayers, does consecrate and sanctify it self unto the Lord. It can
not be, that the heart so moved and affected can be despised of God. What other
thing did that ointme^t signify, which that sinful woman did pour out of an
Alabaster box upon the head of Jesus?

The second kind of Sacrifice, is, Vituli labiorum the calves of the lips: Heb.
13.
of the which Saint Paul speaks saying: By him therefore we offer the
Sacrifice of laud and praise always unto God, that is to say, the fruits of
those lips which confess his name. And in this kind are contained prayers,
confession, giving of thanks, and invocation. Cap. 4
Of this manner of Sacrifice speaks Oseas.

The third kind of Sacrifice is benificence, mercy, pity, alms showed and
exhibit unto the poor: of the which Micheas the Prophet speaks after this
manner: Indicabo tibi, homo, quid sit bonu^ offerre, and quid Dominus requirat a
te: vtique facere iudiciu^, and diligere misericordia^: Cap. 6.
I will show thee, O man, what it is to offer good things, and what God
requires of thee: to do just judgment, and to love mercy.

Also S. Paul in the Epistle to the Philippians calls that alms, Cap. 4.
which came from them, sent unto him by Epaphroditus, and an odor that smells
sweet, a Sacrifice accepted and pleasant unto God.

The fourth kind of Sacrifice is the mortification of the flesh by the
spirit, in the which we offer our bodies a lively, holy, and acceptable
Sacrifice unto God. Of this kind writes Saint Paul in the Epistle to the
Romans, saying: I beseech you brethren by the mercifulnes of God, Cap. 12.
that you make your bodies a quick Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
that is to say, that you kill and slay all your fleshly concupiscence and
carnal lusts. And so bring your flesh, through the help of your spirits,
under the obedience of Gods holy law.

By these words it may appear, that the supper of the Lord is not a Sacrifice
propitiatory, to be offered of the Priests for the expiation and remission of
sins, both of the living and of the dead.

And we shall not find in all the holy Scriptures, that the Ministers of the
new Testament be called either Sacerdotes, or Sacrifici. For that is
attributed wholly and only unto Christ. And as it is written in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, the Priesthood was translated upon him. And for as much as he
remains for ever, he needs no successor.

Obiectio.
The Prophet Malachie does entreat of the sacrifice of Minhah, which he
calls Oblationem mundam and puram, a pure and clean oblatio^ that should be
offered to the name of the Lord in every place, from the rising of the sun,
to the going down of the same, so that his name should be glorified among the
Gentiles. And by this Sacrifice he meant none other thing but the Mass, in the
which fine and pure matter should be offered.

Responsio.
This objection is very infirm and weak. For Ireneus interprets that place
of bread and wine, and other gifts which the faithful did offer in the Lords
supper.

contraiudaeos et aduersus marcionem.
Tertullian expounds that place of Malachie of spiritual oblations, as of
prayers, thanks giving, invocation and godly sermons.

S. Austen does consent to the same exposition. Saint Paul says: That Absque
sanguinis effusione non fit remissio peccatorum: Without shedding of blood,
there is no remission of sins. And yet there is no blood shed there (say
they) but it is done Incruente.

See, I pray you, how they cast doung in their own eyes, and vomit out their
own shame.

But of Hostia incruenta, I have spoken before in the first Tome.

Obiectio.
The Priesthood after the order of Melchisedech is now extant and remains in
the Church. Wherefore as he offered bread and wine unto God: so we do offer in
form of bread and wine the son of God. For to every figure the thing that is
figured does answer, and is also more noble and worthy then the figure.

Responsio.
The history of the book of Genesis does not record that Melchisedech offered
bread and wine unto God, but that he brought forth bread and wine unto Abraham,
and his host being weried, to refresh and comfort them. And so Rabbi Solomon
does interpret that place.

Again, the Hebrew word, Hozi, does not signify to offer, but to bring forth a
thing. And Rabbi Solomon does testify, yt Melchisedeth did testify by this
gift and good handsell to Ahraham, that he took it not in ill part, that his
posterity was slain of Abraham.

Saint Ambrose does evidently say, that these things were offered to Abraham,
and not unto God.

Obiectio.
This word, Missa, is an Hebrew word, as it appears in Deuteronomie, where
is written this word, Missath, cap. 15.
which word signifies Spontaneam oblationem, a free offering. Ergo the Mass
must needs be a Sacrifice, for Missa is derived of this Hebrew word Missath.

Responsio.
The Greek Churches never used this word, nor called at any time the Lords
supper by this name, Missa. Furthermore, if this word Missa were derived of
this word Missath, it should be written Missah with Hae in the end: but it is
no where so written. It is therefore rather derived Amittendo of sendyng,
because that in the time of the Lords supper every faithful man did send his
gifes to the Lords table. Or else it is called Missa, for that they which were
then Cathecumeni (which were not yet christened) were sent forth out of the
Church, when the Minister begone to celebrate the Lords supper. For they were
suffered to tarry no longer, by the reason they were not Baptized.

Rabanus says: Missa tempore sacrificii, quando cathecumeni for as mittuntur,
clamante Leuita, si quis cathecumenus remansit, exeat for as, Lib. 1.
institutionem. ca. 32
and inde Missa, quia sacramentis altaris interesse non possunt, qui nondum
regenerati esse noscuntur: The Mass (says he) is in the time of the
Sacrifice, when cathecumeni were sent forth, the Deacon crying, if any of the
cathecumines remain here, let him go forth. And thereupon it is called, Missa,
the Mass: because they which were not yet known to be regenerat, might not be
present at the ministration of the Sacrament of ye altar.

Innocentius says: Lib. 6. de sacra altaris myste. cap. 12
Officium diuiditur in Missam cathecumenorum and fidelium: Missa cathecumenorum
est ab introitu vsque post offertorium, and dicitur Missa ab emittendo, quae eo
tempore, quo sacerdos incipiebat Eucharistiam consecrare, cathecumeni for as de
Ecclesia emittebantur: The Missall office is divided into the Mass of the
cathecumines, and the Mass of the Christians. The Mass of the cathecumines
endured from the entrance until after the Offertorie. It is called Missa of
sending forth, because at that time, when the Priest began to consecrate the
Eucharist, the cathecumines were sent out of the Church.

And by this it appears, that this word Missa, is neither an Hebrew word,
nor yet does signify a free offering.

I heard once a bacheler of divinity (who was resident in the cathedral
Church of Exeter, and did read there the divinity Lecture) say, that this
word Missa comes of this word Massa, a lompe of dowe or flower, out of the
which was taken and made the fine cakes called the hosts, Which definition
(although he were ignorant of the Hebrew and Greek tongue) he seemed to take
out of Petrus Galatinus: whose words, concerning this matter, I have recited
before.

This shall be sufficient for this word Sacrificium.

Gratia and pax.
GRatia has in the Scriptures manifold significatio^s: First, it is taken for
the gift and participation of the holy ghost, which is given freely. Cap. 1.
And so S. Paul uses it in the Epistle to the Romans, saying: Per que^
accepimus gratia^: by who^ we received grace, which some do interpret the gift
pertaining to the Apostleship.

2. Cor. cap. 8.
Secondly, Gratia signifies benificence and alms, and so it is used in the
Epistle to the Corinthians: Et in hac gratia abundetis: that you be bountiful
in the same grace. 2. Cor. c, 1.


Thirdly, Gratia betokens Gaudiu^, joy and gladness: as in ye Epistle to the
Corinthia^s: Hac confidentia volui prius venire ad vos, vt secu^da^ gratiam
haberitis: In this co^fide^ce was I minded first to come unto you, that ye
might have had a double grace. And we have a phrase in ye Latin tou^g, by the
which it is said, those things, which be delectable and pleasant, are said
Habere gratiam: to have a grace.

Fourthly, Gratia is taken often times for mercy, which is called in the holy
tongue Chen: which the 70. interpreters do translate (...), that is,
Misericordiam, as well in remitting of injuries, as in co^tributing faculties
and goods.

Fifthly, Gratia signifies swetenes, and the comlines of communication: as Paul
commands our co^municatio^ to be seasoned with wisdom, with a pleasant
comelines. Prou. 10.
And so Salomo^ requires: Vt iustoru^ sermo gratiosus sit: that the
communication of the rightuous men be sweet and comely.

Sixthly, Gratia signifies sometime Corona^, the crown: as in the Proverbs: Vt
addatur gratia capiti tuo: that the crown, which thy father promised thee,
may be set on thy head.

Finally, and specially, Gratia signifies the favor of god: and so the au^gel
used it in the salutation to the virgin Marie: Aue gratia plena, that is, all
hail greatly in gods favor. But the scholastical divines with other do use
Gratia in that place for abounda^ce of virtues, by the which the virgin Marie
did deserve the favor of god. Whereupon, they inverted great honors to be
given unto the virgin Marie. They did excogitate to be song and said in her
worship, Rosaries, Anthemes, Salve regina, Aue maris stella, and the nombring
of bedes called our Ladies Psalter, inverted by one Petrus a french man, a
lowsy and hypocritical heremite. But how aptly and well these things were
applied to the virgin Marie, the godly) thanks be given to God) does now most
evidently see.

Pax.
Pax, first signifies the prosperous success and felicity of all things.
This word, Pax, has a strayghter signification in the Latin tongue, the^ the
word, Scholom, has among the Hebrews.

Joseph asked his brethren: Est ne patri meo Pax? as though he would say: Is
my father in good case, does he want any thing?

Pax in this place of Peter signifies tranquillity and quietness of conscience.
And this is the difference between grace and peace.

Grace is in God, by the which he does favor us, and by the which he does
remit sin through Christ without all merit. Peace in us, that we being
safe and sure of remission of sins through Christ, may be quiet in conscience.

The third Prelection of the second Tome.
BEnedictus Deus et pater domini nostri Jesus Christi, 1. Benedictus
qui secundum misericordiam suam magnam regenerauit nos in spe^ viuam per
resurrectionem Jesus Christi ex mortuis. Blessed be God, 2. Dominus.
eue^ the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his aboundaunt
mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead.

I will divide this lesson into three members.

The first part shall be the explication and openyng of the text.

The second shall be the declaration and confirmation of Christ's divinity.

The third shall be a strong probation of Christ's manhood, with aunswers to the
objections of those heretics, which do deny^ Christ's humanity.

Concerning the first: after that Peter has absolved and made an end of the
Epigraphe and inscription of this Epistle, now he goes to that part, which is
called Exordium, that is, the entrance of his matter, in the which entry he
does insinuate or covertly creep into the minds of his hearers by a certain
gratulation, or thankesgeuing. The tenor and meaning of these words is this:

Blessed, praised, and thanked be God, which by his mercy through Christ has
redeemed us from death, and has given us life everlasting. He does prosecute
every member, and almost every word copiously and largely: partly, to commend
and set forth the great benefits of God, and partly, to make away both plain
and profitable to that which follows.

First of all (says he) God is to be praised, blessed, and thanked, for the
Sacrifice of praise and thanks geuyng is an amiable and acceptable service
unto God. Which Sacrifice who soever does not use to offer unto God, he is not
worthy of the name of a Christian.

Afterward, he declares who is that God, that must be so praised and thanked:
verily, that is to say, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. By the which
words he does show and set forth the divinity of Christ, and the substance
of the person.

Now for to be god is none other thing, then to be beneficial, gentle, and
bou^teous, good and helping, and finally to be the preserver, keeper and
defender of al persons.

For as much then as god did open, show, exhibit, and give this great
benificence and liberality to the world, even then specially, when he sent his
only begotten son into the world: It is not without cause that he is called
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the which, does show himself specially
god in Christ.

For, as god in time past called him self the god of Abraham, and would with
that note and title be discerned and known from all fained and false gods:
Even so after he had manifested and made him self known in his son Christ,
he would be none otherwise known but by the same Christ.

3. dole.
Therefore, they which do conceive in their mind the only, naked, and bare
majesty of god without Christ, have in the place of god an Idol, as the
Jews, the Turks, 4. Mahomet.
and the professors of Machometes religion have. For he that will know god, and
have god as a true god, let him ever inueste, adorn, and deck god with this
title: God the father of Christ. For as often as our mind does seek god, and
look upon god, except Christ be also conceived, it will be a vain, a confused,
and a desperate conception and contemplation. For without Christ, the goodness
and liberality of god can never be tasted nor perceived of us.

5. Spes viua,
It follows in the text: In spem viuam. Here Peter shows the cause why god
should be blessed and praised. Which god (says Peter) according to his
abounda^t mercy, begat us again unto a lively hope, that is to say, therefore is
god to be praised and thanked, because being neither provoked nor allured by
any merits or deserts of ours, being moved only by his mere and natural
goodness has revoked and called us back again from eternal death, unto the
hope of eternal life. And this is the sum and the scope of the whole gospel.
And I beseech you mark here, what an apt and meet Epitheton Peter puts to
this word, Mercy, he calls it an abundant, a great, and a rich mercy.

Psalm. 103.
The Prophet David says in his Psalms: Miserator et misericors dominus,
longanimis, et multum misericors, non imperpetuum irascetur: The Lord is full
of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness, he will not
always chide, neither keep his anger for ever.

Truly, here is a great faith, and a great trust which we ought to have,
when we be persuaded, that God is ours, that is, that god will be meek,
pityfull, gentle, and slow to take vengeance, which comes to pass by none
other means, but that god is a father, no enemy, nor tyrant.

Now, if he be a father, then is he most loving unto his children. For how can
any indignation, disdain, or any reue^ging affection continue long in the
fathers mind toward his children?

In the time of the law, when all things were terrible and fearful, then did
the wrath of God seem to have none end. But when the son of god came, then
would god the father have all goodness, all clemency, all gentleness to be in
him, and to come with him.

Regen uit nos in spem viuam: He begat us again to a lively hope. This phrase
of speaking has a greater energie, then if he should have said, he has
restored life again unto us. For this word regeneratyng and begettyng again
does admonish and put us in mind of our infirmity and misery. Adam begat
us, but that was unto death. For by nature we be the children of wrath and
indignation. Therefore, they had need to be regenerate and borne again, which
would be the children and heirs of god. And this begettyng again does god the
father work in them which believe in Christ.

Per resurrectionem Jesus Christi ex mortuis. It follows, by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead. Here Peter shows the manner and the way how
we be renewed and borne again unto the hope of immortal life. Truly even by
this (says Peter) that god raised his son again from death. The
resurrection of Christ does comprehend the whole mystery of Christ. For by
Christ his resurrection it is declared to the whole world, that sin is
cleansed and put away. For, except the Lord had cleansed and put away sin,
death, which is the reward and price of sin, had prevailed against us. But
the Lord dyed and is risen again. Therefore he has put away both death and
sin: not that they be not, but that they cannot hurt the faithful, which
learn and believe by the lyuelye resurrection of Christ, that the life
eternal is prepared for them.

To make the matter more plain, no man can believe in God, without a certain
mean, and middle. Therefore, when we would appear before god, or call upon
him, we have need of some other, which may solicit our cause and reconcile
us to God. Now, there is none other mean and middle, but only Jesus Christ.

Therefore, the faith of the Turks, and the Jews, is no true faith. And where
they believe and confess, that God is the maker of heaven and earth: even so
does the devil believe, but it does nothing avail him. No more does their faith
profit them, because they presume to come into the sight of God without
Christ, which is the true and only mediator, as Paul says to the
Romans: Cap. 1.
Acceslum habemus ad Deum in fide, non per nosmetipsos, sed per Christum: We
have access unto god in faith, not by our selves, but by Christ.

Wherefore, when we go to god, we must bring Christ with us, we must come by
him, and satisfye god by him, and to do all things with god by him and in his
name. And this is it that Peter here says: Per resurrectionem Jesus Christi:
That is, because Christ is risen again, is ascended into heaven, and sits
at the right hand of the father. For, he ascended for this cause, for to send
and to give us his holy spirit, by the which we being borne again, might be
bold to come to god, and say: O father, behold, I am come before thee, and
do pray unto thee, not that I have any confidence and trust in my prayer, but
because my Lord Christ does make intercession for me: he is mine advocate, he
is mine attorney, he has suffered death for me, and has received upon him for
my cause both sin, death, and hell: he is risen again, and has vanquyshed
all mine enemies: he has purchased for me the hope of eternal life.
Therefore, when I come to thee, O God, I must needs bring Christ with me, or
else I come unworthily, or else I come in vain. Away, therefore, you
Papists, away with your intercession unto Saints, with your works of
supererogation, 6. Purgarory
with your pipyng Purgatory, and such other like trashe. I tell you, that
neither remission of sins, nor the favor of God, nor eternal life and
salvation can be obtained by none other means, but by Christ: and that (I say)
by Christ only.

Thus I have plainly opened unto you the text of Saint Peter before
rehearsed. Now will I descend to the second part, that is, to the entreaty
of Christ's divinity.

Pars secunda.
The universal Scripture does call God a father, and that a father eternal.
None is father of him self, but the father of a son or some child. And
because the father is eternal, it does necessarily follow, that he have a
son eternal, equal and consubstantiall unto him in all things.

For the confirmation of this, Paul brings in two testimonies, the one out of
the second Psalm, where it is written, I will declare the decree, yt is, the
Lord has said unto me, thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee,
Hodie, this day, 7. Hodie.
yt is, from the beginning, or eternally (as Auste^, and Theophilactus do
expound it.)

The second testimony is out of the second book of Samuel: Ego ero illi
pater, et ille erit mihi filius: I will be his father, and he shall be my son.
Which words Paul does apply to Christ the son of God.

Micheas the Prophet has for this matter a goodly testimony: Et tu Bethleem
Ephrata paruula quidem es in millibus Judah, cap. 7.
ex te prodibit mihi dominatur in Israele et exitus eius a seculo a diebus
aeternitatis: And thou Bethleem Ephrata art little to be among the thousands of
Judah: yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that shall be the ruler in
Israel, whose going forth has been from the beginning, and from everlasting.

Whereupon, Christ him self does say: Amen, dico vobis, John. 8,
antequa^ Abraham fieret ego sum: Verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I
am. He does not say. I was or I shall be, 8. Egosum.
but I am* alluding to the ineffable name of the Lord, Jehovah.

There is a greek word (...), which signifies to be of the same essence. Of
this word there was great altrecation among them of the old time.

Eusebius does compe^diously show, how this word was used of the Nicene
Council: where it was defined, that Christ was (...), cum patre, that is, of
one substance with the father. Which thing has an express signification,
that the son of god has no participation nor similitude with the creatures
that were made, but is likened only to the father which begat him, nor is of
any other essence or substance, but of the fathers.

Cap. 13.
Zacharias bringing in god speaking, does say: Excitare O gladie super pastorem
meum, et super virum coaequalem mihi: percute pastorem, et dispergentur oues
gregis: Arise O sword upon my shephearde, and upon the man that is my fellow,
says the Lord of hosts, smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.

Behold, he calls the shepherd that is smitten, his fellow, And who was that
smitten shepherd, Cap. 10.
it is written and declared in the gospel of John.

Obiectio.
Saint Hierome, which was expert in the Hebrew tongue, did translate and read
Virum cohaerentem mihi, and not Coaequalem mihi. Therefore, this text makes
nothing for his divinity.

Responsio.
As Saint Hierome does not deny the Hebrew word, Amith, to signify coequall
or fellow: so be puts in the steed thereof an other word of the same
equipollencie and efficacy. For he says in his commentaries: Vir cohaerens
deo quis est nisi qui ait: ego in patre, et pater in me est: A man cleauyng
together with God, who is it, but he that says: I am in the father, and the
father is in me.

Cap. 5.
Again, in the gospel of John it is written: Propterea quaereba^t Iudaei Iesum
interficere, quia no solu^ soluisset sabathu^, sed et patre^ suu^ dicebat Deu^,
aequale^ se facie^s deo: Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill Jesus, not
only because he had broken the sabbath, but said also that god was his father,
and made himself equal with god. Neither the equality can consiste in any
other thing, but in substance.

The Jews do understand that which the Arrians will not see and perceive:
that is, that the Lord by a singular manner did call god his proper and natural
father: of whom naturally he was begotten, his natural and consubstantiall
son.

Cap. 8.
Christ says in John also: Ego ex patre processi et veni: I proceeded from my
father, and came. He does not say only I came, but I proceeded, that is, I
proceeded such an one as the father is in substance, certes true god of true
god.

Again, he says: Ego et pater vnu^ sumus: I and the father am one, that is,
one thing, John. 10.
not one in concord and consent, but in identitie and substance.

9. Vnu^ sumus. Cap. 2.
Furthermore, al things that were made, were made by him, that is, by Christ.
Therefore, he is no creature, but true god creating all things.

Saint Paul to the Philippians does say, that the son was in the shape of
god: but to be in the shape of god is none other thing, but to be equal and
consubstantiall unto god in all things. For the Apostle adds these words:
Non rapinam arbitratus est, se aequalem esse Deo: he thought it not robbery to
be equal unto god.

Now, that thing which is gotten by robberye, pertayneth to an other, and is
possessed by injury.

S. Ambrose says: Quum hanc vnitatem substantiae in patrae et filio no^ solu^
prophetica et euangelica authoritate cognoscas: quomodo dicis, in scripturis
diuinis homousion non inueniri? Lib. 5. de fide cont. Arrian.
quasi aliud sit homousion, quam quod dicit: ego de Deo patre exiui, et ego et
pater vnum sumus: For as much as thou do know this unity of substance in
the father and in the son, not only by the prophets, but also by the gospel:
how say thou, that homousion is not found in the holy scriptures? as though
homousion does differ from that which he says: I came out of the father, and I
and the father am one.

Saint Austen confirms the same. Also Christ says to his Apostles: Lib. 14.
cont. Maxim.
number and vos vultis abire? respondit omnium nomine Petrus, domine, ad quem
ibimus? verba vitae aeternae habes, and nos credimus, and cognouimus, quod tu
es Christus filius Dei viui: Will ye also go away? then Simon Peter answered
him, master, to whom shall we go? Thou haste the words of eternal life: and we
believe and know, that thou art Christ, the son of the living god.

Obiectio.
It is true in deed (says the Arrian) that Christ is the son of God by
adoption, and imputatio^ and because he has received a more plentiful grace
the^ al other of God. But he is not the natural son and the consubstantial
son of the father.

Responsio.
In the gospel of Mark the high priest said to Christ: Cap. 14.
tu es Christus ille filius benedicti? art thou that son of the blessed god?
Likewise he says in Matthew: I adjure thee by the living god, that thou tell us,
whether thou be Christ, the son of the living god: Jesus answered ego sum: I
am. For you shall see the son of man sitting upon the right hand of the power
of god, and coming in the clouds of the heavens.

This confession of the Lord, as most blasphemouse and worthy death they
brought before Pilate, crieng: we have a law, and after our law he ought to
dye, because he made himself the son of God.

Furthermore, Christ says in John: Cap. 10.
I have showed many good works unto you from my father: for which of those
works do you stone me? The Jews answered him saying: for the good work we
stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and that thou being a man make thy self
God.

Again, Christ says to his disciples: ne turbetur cor vestrum, creditis in
Deum, John. 14.
et in me credit etc. Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in god, 10.
Many dwelling places
believe also in me. In my fathers house are many dwelling places: if it were
not so, I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you, and though I
go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my self,
that where I am, there may you be also. And a title after he says: I am the
way and the truth, and the life. etc.

Here he commands us to believe in him as in the true God. Also he says:
Pater venit hora, glorifica filium tuum, vt filius tuus glorificet te etc.
Father, John^ 7,
the hour is come, glorify thy son, that thy son also may glorify thee,
as thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life
to all them that thou haste given him. And this is life eternal, that they
know thee to be the only very living god, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ. I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work that thou
gave me to do. And now glorify me, thou father, with thine own self, with
the glory which I had with thee before the world was. By these words Christ
does prove him self to be the true God.

Finally, saint Paul in the epistle to the Romans has a strong testimony
for the divinity of Christ. His words be these: Of whom, concerning the
flesh, Cap. 9.
Christ came, which is god over all, blessed for ever, Amen.

The like saying is in the epistle of saint John, the words be these: we are
in him that is true, that is in his son Jesus Christ. 1. Ep. cap. 2.
This same is very god and eternal life.

Well, I will conclude this part with a golden and godly similitude written by
the learned father and godly bishop Cyrillus, who writes after this manner:
filius in patre and ex patre est, non profluens for as, sed aut quasi a sole
splendour, aut quasi ab igne insita sibi caliditas. In his enim exemplis vnum ab
vno produci, and ambo consempiterna sic esse conspicimus, vt aliud absque alio
nec esse possit nec naturae suae rationem retinere: quomodo enim erit sol
splendore priuatus, vel quomodo erit splendour, nisi sol sit a quo defluat?
Ignis vero quomodo erit calore carens? vel calor vnde prodeat, nisi ex igne,
aut ab alio forsan non procul a substantiali qualitate ignis disiecto etc. that
is to say: The son is in the father, and of the father, not flowing out of
an other, but either as it were the brightness coming from the sun, or else
as it were the natural heat coming from the fire. For in these examples, we
see the one to be so produced and brought forth of the other, and so to be
perpetually annexed together, that neither one can be without the other,
neither retain nor hold his proper nature. For, how shall the sun be without
brightness, or how shall there be brightness, unless there be a sun from
which it may come? Or from whence can heat come, but from fire, or from some
other thing not far distante from the substantial quality of fire? Therefore
like as the natural qualities are together which their subjects from whom
they come, and do always show from whence they come: so in the only
begotten son of God we must understand, that not only he is with the father,
but also he is believed to be in the father, not strange from the nature nor
inferior to the father by nature, but is with him, and of him after the manner
of an unspeakable generation.

Thus I have brought you sufficient testimonies for the proof of Christ's
divinity: and now will I proceed to the third part, which shall be to establishe
with strong arguments and reasons that Christ was a very true and natural man,
sin only excepted.

In the first book of Moses God said unto the serpente: I will put enmitye
between thee and the woman, Genes. 3. 11. He shall.
and between thy seed and her seed. He shall break thine head, and thou
shalt bruise his heel etc. Who knows not the head of the serpent to be the
kingdom, the might, and the power of the devil? And all the scripture does
testify, that Christ (who was called the seed of the woman) has vanquished
and overcome this mighty tirannie of the said serpent. And Christ is properly
called semen, for the verity of the human nature. But he is called the seed
of a woman, not of man, by the reason he was conceived of the holy Ghost,
without the seed of man.

The like promise was renewed and inculked unto Abraham, In semine tuo
benedicentur omnes gentes orbis: Genes. 22
In thy seed shall be blessed all the nations of the world. Saint Paul to the
Galathians does say: This seed of Abraham in the which we obtain blessedness,
is Jesus Christ.

The same Apostle in the epistle to the Hebrews does write, that Christ took
not upon him the nature of Angels, Cap. 2.
but he took the seed of Abraham. By naming the Angels, he excludes all
spiritual substaunces. By the seed of Abraham, he understands the very
substance of man's flesh.

The scripture does deduce the line and progeny of Christ out of the loins of
Abraham unto Jacob, and out of him into Judah, and so again unto David, unto
whom the promis of the son of God was again renewed. Nathan said unto David:
Thus the Lord says: when thy days be fulfilled, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers, 12. Nathan.
and I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy body,
and will establish his kingdom: he shall build an house for my name, and I
will establishe the throne of his kingdom for ever.

Obiectio,
This is spoken of Solomon, who builded the great and sumptuouse temple of
Jerusalem, and not meant of Christ.

Responsio.
Solomon was born while David lived, and his kingdom soon failed. But the
Prophet David speaks here of a son which should be borne unto David (...)
^s death: for he says: when thou shall sleep with thy fathers, I will raise
(...) s^ede, after thee, which shall go forth out of thy womb, as it is
written in the psalm: de fructu ventiis tui ponam super sedem tuam: Out of the
fruit of thy womb I will set out upon thy seat. Now, the Virgin Mary was of
the progeny of David, of the which virgin Christ was borne, of whom the
Aungel spoke unto the virgin, saying: and dabit illi dominus Deus sedem patris
ipsius, Luke 5.
etc. And the Lord God shall give him the seat of David his father, and he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be
none end.

Saint Paul says: filium Dei factum ex muliere: Gal. 4.
that the son of God was made of a woman, concerning the human nature.

John the Evangelist writes, verbum caro factum est, and habitauit in nobis:
Cap. 1.
the word was made flesh, and dwelled among us: not that the word was
turned into flesh, but that the word took flesh upon him, and that God
became man. 13. Factum est In polymor. suo dial. 1 1, Ioh, ca. 4.


The Ortodoxe and christian fathers do expound this word to signify,
assumsit: as Theodoretus and other.

The same John says: Every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ to have come
in the flesh, is of god: and every spirit which does not confess Christ to
have come in the flesh, is not of God. Whereupon we may freely pronounce
Valentinus, Appelles, Manicheus to be of the devil, and their opinions to be
most detestable heresy.

Again, saint Paul in the epistle to the Romans says: quorum sunt patres
ex quibus est Christus secundum carnem: Of whom are the fathers, and of whom,
concerning the flesh, Christ came.

Tertullian, to prove that Christ had a very true human nature, writes
after this manner: nihil ex aliqua materia desumitur, quin eius indicia and
vestigia nonnulla conseruet, etc. Nothing is taken or made of any matter, but
it keeps some tokens and appearance thereof. Because the bodi of the first man
was made of earth, therefore it did retain the kind of the two elements.
for, the flesh represents the earth, and the blood represents the water.
And many things do make demonstration, that we, concerning our bodies, be
earthlye.

In the earth are clottes and cloddes, in our bodies are muscles and fleshie
knottes.

In the yearthe are rocks and hard stones: in our bodies are bones.

In the earth are floddes and riueres: in our bodies are veins which water
all the members with blood In the earth are dispersed the roots of plants
and trees: in our bodies are synewes.

In the earth are smaleflatte stones: in our bodies are hornie nails.

In the bowels of the earth are certain metals: in the holownes of our bones
are marrowe or marie.

In the earth we see moss and herbs to grow: in our bodies do grow here is,
as the beard and the bushe.

Now, when all these particulers had place in the body of Christ, the
Anabaptists, without all cause or reason, go about to affirm, that Christ
brought his body from heaven with him, and that he passed through the womb
of the virgin Marie, as water does thorough a pipe.

But let us now see their reasons and objections, wherewith they go about to
establishe their heretical doctrine.

Obiectio. 1.
First, say they, if the body of Christ should not be celestial and heavenly,
but taken of the womb of the virgin: how then does Paul say, Christ to dwell
in our hearts. For his material body can not enter into our hearts. And so
should we have but half Christ to dwell in us.

Responsio.
Paul does evidently and plainly declare how Christ dwells in our hearts:
for, he adds per fidem, by faith. Now, faith it self does apprehend not
part of Christ, but whole Christ, as in the sacrament of the Eucharist, and in
the word of God, which sets forth unto us our salvation.

And that this is spirituallie to be understand and judged, it appears by the
conference of many other places in the scriptures.

It is written in the Epistle to the Romans: If Christ dwell in you, god which
raised him from death, Cap. 8.
will quicken and make a live your bodies, propter spiritis eius qui habitat in
vobis: through his spirit, which dwells in you. Here may you manifestly
see, that Christ dwells in us by his spirit, not by his real and carnal
body.

Obiectio. 2.
No creature is to be worshipped, if Christ took his body of a virgin, there is
no doubt, but it was created. Wherefore, it ought not to be worshipped: but
Christ ought to be worshiypod. Ergo, he took not his body of the virgin Mary.

Responsio.
We must take heed, that we divide not the natures of Christ with the heretic
Nestorius. The unity of the person is to be vewed and considered, whole Christ
is worshipped of us, that is, that same divine parson, which, whersoeuer it be,
or how so ever it be worshipped, has always the humanity joined with it,
which can not be separate from the divine nature. Now, if the reason and tenor
of adoration be explored and tried, the same is to be referred not to the
humanity, but to the divinity. Which two natures are always in Christ
inseparable.

Obiectio. 3.
It is written in Matthew: That which was borne in her, is of the holy ghost.
Mark here and note, Cap. 1.
how Matthew does say: Christ was born in Marie, and not of Marie. Therefore, he
took no matter of her.

Responsio.
This place of Matthew does most chiefly confute them. For here is attributed
unto Christ, that he was borne in the virgin. Now, to be borne, is not to pass
thorough a pipe or a conduit, but truly to take matter and substance of a
body, of that whereof it is said to be borne.

And where they urge this preposition, in, as where it is said, natus est in
ea, he was borne in her: This phrase is but only once used in all the
scriptures. When on the other side, in infinite places it may be showed, that
Christ was borne ex semine David, of the seed of David. But these heretics
are so far past shame (as Tertullian writes) that where so ever they find
this preposition, ex, they put it out, and place in the steed thereof this
preposition, in, that they might the better establishe their detestable
doctrine.

Obiectio. 4.
It is written in S. John, that Christ said: vos de terra estis, ego de
superius: You are of the earth, I am from above. Therefore, Christ coming from
above took no body in the earth.

Responsio.
Christ is from above, concerning his divine nature. Furthermore, he is said to
be from above, because al his actions and doings were ruled and governed, not
with earthly affections, but with the heavenly and divine spirit. But in the
Jews (whom he reproved) it was otherwise. For they were mere and naked
natural men, and were lead with carnal and earthly affections and lusts.

Obiectio. 5.
A certain woman in Luke cried out and said: blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the paps which gave thee suck. But Christ answered: yea rather
blessed be they which hear the word of God, and do keep it. By this it
appears, that Christ denied himself to be borne of the virgins womb.

Responsio.
Christ in these words did not reiecte nor refuse the kindred of his mother,
but did show which was the better degree of felicity, as though he had said:
the womb which bare me, is not blessed for the bare birthes sake, but for
faiths sake. And so are all they which hear the word of god, and keep it. So
that in these words of Christ there appears no negation, but rather a
comparison of the degrees of blessedness.

Obiectio. 6.
The Angels in the old Testament took unto them man's flesh, and put upon
them our bodies, who, notwithstanding, were not borne of women. Wherefore than
may we not say and affirm the same of Christ, that he did put upon him the
shape of man, and yet took it not of the virgin Marie.

Responsio.
The likeness of the Angels appearing in the shape of man must not be compared
with the incarnation of the Lord. For they took not unto them bodies, that they
should be crucified, that they should dye, and redeem mankind, but that they
should execute, and do the messages committed unto them. But Christ would
become very man, yt he might redeem mankind, which thing could not have been
brought to pass, if he had brought his body from heaven, seeing that the
celestial and terrestrial nature do differ plusquam genere.

Obiectio. 7.
Hilarious wrote in his book of the Trinity, that the virgin Marie added
nothing of her own substance unto the flesh and body of Christ, beside the
ministry of conceyuing, of bearyng, and of delivering.

Responsio.
This sentence of Hilarie avails them nothing. For he does most evidently
testify the body of Christ to be a creature: but he says, that Marie added
nothing of her own substance, beside those three ministeries, of conceiuyng,
bearyng, and bringinge forth. For the fourth ministry had been to have had
copulation with man, and to have admitted his sede, which she did not.

Quaestio.
But what manner of flesh was the flesh of Christ? had it a soul, or no
soul? Arrius taught that the son of god took only flesh without soul, and
the word was instead of the soul.

Apollinarius did attribut a soul unto Christ, but took away that part which
is called men's, denieng it to be a reasonable soul. 14. Men's. Cap. 20.
But the holy scripture gives unto Christ a soul, and likewise unto the same
soul mentem a mind.

The Lord says in the gospel of Matthew: the son of man came to give his
soul a redemption for many. And Christ himself said: tristis est anima mea
vsque ad mortem: my soul is heavy, even to death.

Again in John be says: my soul is now troubled. Now, if this soul of Christ
had been destitute of that part, which is called men's: how could he be sad,
understand, desire and remember?

Christ says in s. Luke, the son of man came not to destroy the souls of
men, but to save them. Now man was lost both in body and in soul: Therefore,
cap. 9.
that he might be saved both in body and in soul, Christ our savior took
upon him a very true humain body, and a reasonable soul.

To conclude for both the natures of Christ, the holy fathers fighting against
heretics, which denied, either the humain nature or the divine nature of
Christ, or else the conjunction of both natures in one person, took their
arguments of the natural manner of the Euchariste.

If Christ had come unto us only in the divine nature, and had no human
flesh, but fantastical, what communion and fellowship had been between us and
Christ? Saint Paul interpreting these words: Ego and pueri, quos dedit mihi
Deus, behold, here am I and the children, which god has given me, says thus:
For as much then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part with them.

If they take away the flesh and blood of Christ, then they do berieue us also
of the spiritual meat, which we apprehend and take by faith. And so they will
utterly destroy the sacrament of the Lords table. On the other side, if they
take away the divine nature from Christ, than he should be only a mere natural
man. And so his flesh and blood should have nothing prevailed to our
instauration and redemption. For, although the whole matter of heavenly life to
be given unto us, was executed by the flesh of Christ: yet it did depend only
of the divine nature. Nor it had been any great matter to have had any communion
or fellowship with the flesh of a bare and mere man. For, we have that
naturally with all men, but if does nothing profit. Therefore, the holy
communion requires the partakyng of such a flesh, which could give life,
which could not be had, if the divine nature should have been withdrawn from
Christ.

15: Symbol of Athanasius
We will therefore conclude this lesson with the scriptures, and with the symbol
of Athanasius. which both do affirm, that Christ is god begotten of the
substance of the father before all worlds, and that he is man borne of the
substance of his mother in the world, perfect god, and perfect man,
subsisting and being of human flesh, and of a reasonable soul, Which shall
come again in the same flesh, but yet glorified, to judge the quick and the
dead. To whom, with the father, and the holy ghost be all honor and glory.
Amen.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea praelectionis tertiae. Tomi. 2.
Benedictus. 1.
BEnedicere in the hebrew tongue is called Barak and it signifies sometimes to
make blessed, luckie, cap. 12.
prosperous and fortunate. As in Genesis: faciam te in ge^tem magnam, and
benedicam te. that is: I will make thee a great nation, and will be bless thee,
which is as much to say, as, I will make thee happy and fortunate. Cap. 28.
Also it is written in Genesis. Det quoque tibi benedictionem Abrahae. Let him
give thee also the blessinge of Abraham, that is, let him make thee luckie and
safe.

Secondly benedicere, betokens to make plentiful, to encreace and augment
the power of procreation of children, Cap. 9.
as in Genesis. Benedixit deus Noe and filios eius, and dixit ad eos crescite
and multiplicamini, that is. God blessed Noe and his children, and said unto
them: Grow ye, and multiply, he blessed them, that is, he made them fruitful.

Thirdlye benedicere, signifies to magnify, celebrate, and make holy, as in
Genesis: benedixit diei septimo, He blessed the seventh day, cap. 2.
that is, he did magnify it and set it forth with singular laud and praise.

Fourthly, it signifies sometime to do good, as in Genesis, Vt benedica^
benedicentibus te. I will do good to them that do good unto thee. Cap. 12.


Fiftely, it betokens to pray and wish well and good luck to them that
depart or go away, as in the Act of the apostles. Vt nec plura locutus
benedixit eis, that is. And speakinge no more, he blessed them, that is, Cap. 1.
he bid them farewell, and so ascended to heaven.

Sixthly, it betokens to salute, as in Genesis. Benedixit Jacob Pharaoni.
Jacob blessed Pharao, that is: Cap. 47.
He saluted him and wished him well to do.

Seventhly, it signifies to give and yield the victory, Cap. 32.
as in Genesis Nondimittam te nisi benedixeris mihi. that is. I will not let
thee go except thou knowledge me to be thy ouercommer, and confess thy self
to be ouercomme. The Latin men do say: Herbam dare, manus porrigere, palmam
proferre, and such like phrases, to signify, to give place.

Eyghtly, it betokens to praise, and to give thanckes, as in the psalms.
Benedic anima mea domino, that is. My soul praise the Lord. And again:
Benedicite omnia opera domini domino. O all ye worckes of the Lord, praise the
Lord. And in this signification saint Peter uses in this place, Benedictus
dominus deus.

Finally, benedicere does signify to curse and blaspheme. For blasphemies were
so odious to the fathers of the old time, that they were afearde to name and
term the^ with their own proper word, and therefore did express them
oftentimes by a contrary word, as Job did use, saying. Ne benedixerint filii
mei deo. Least my children blaspheme god. Cap. 1. Cap. 15.


Benedictio, is taken sometime in the holy scriptures for alms, as in Paul to
the Romans, where he does say after this manner. Scio quod cum venero ad vos,
in plenitudine benedictionis euangelii Christi venturus sum. I know that when
I shall come to you, I shall come in the plentifulnes of the gospel of Christ,
that is in the aboundaunte liberality of your alms, given to the maintenance
and setting forth of Christ's gospel and his preachers.

Benedictio, sometimes is used for sweet, pleasant and flattering speech,
through the which the minds of the simple are seduced and brought from the
way of truth, as in the Romans. Cap. 16.
S. Paul does exhort us to note and take heed of them which deceive the hearts
of the innocents through sweet words and fair speaking. Christ in the gospel
of Matthew used this word benedico, and also in the gospel of Mark. Which
word the papists both ignorau^tly and folishly have abused. For they say
benedicere in that place betokens to bless with the sign of the cross, and
to make gestures with the hand, crossynge to and fro. But if they would
confer this word (...) which Mathewe and Mark do use, with the word that
saint Luke does use, they should soon perceive what benedicere means.
Saint Luke does use this word (...), id est, gratias agens, which
betokens to give thancks, to singe praises to God, and to wish well, and no
other thing is meant by this word (...) which Mathewe and Mark do use.
Again when he gave the cup, he used this word (...), which is an
interpretation and declaration, that it signifies one thing in both places.

Likewise saint Paul does use this word benedicere, in his first epistle to
the Corinthians, his words be these. Poculum benedictionis cui benedicimus,
nomine commemoratio sanguinis Christi est? Many do understand by this word
benedictio, consecratio: which if it be rightly understand, we do not repel
nor put from the sacrament, because that those signs and symboles which
before were vulgar and commune to eat and drink, are now translated by the
word and institution of Christ to a sacramental nature, that they might be
holy signs of the body and blood of Christ: which before, were not.
Consecration is not to be taken in that sense as though it were a certain
magical excantation which does transubstantiate and change the natures of
things. But benedictio is the decree of Christ, by the which those symboles
are appointed to a holy and mystical use.

Obiectio.
Why then the meat and drink which is set upon our commune table to be
received at dinners and suppers, are as good as the sacramental meat and
drink, for they also are sanctified by prayers, the word of God, and (as the
common term is) by saying of grace, as it is written in the Epistle sent to
Timothy.

Responsio.
The signification of both is not like. For in our common meals we desire by
the word of God and prayer, that we may lawfully use the creature of God,
that if any part of the first malediction be left in it, which was inflicted
upon the earth, and the fruits thereof may nothing hurt us. But the
sacramental symboles appointed by the word and institution of God, are made
signs and mysteries of our salvation.

Chrysostom understands by benediction, thanks geuynge. Quoniam (inquit,
quando calicem in manus accipimus, deo benedicimus, and illi gratias agimus.
Because (says he) when we take the cup into our hands, we praise God and
render thanks unto him. And by this he judges the argument of the Apostle to
be more firm and sure, as though it were said, you gave thanks to God, that
you are cleansed from sin, and delivered from the deuell. How therefore now do
you return to communicate at the tables of deuels? To be short, when in
receiving of the Lords supper, we do give thanks and record what goodness god
has given and promised us by Christ, that is the true consecration as they call
it, and not rehearse certain prescribed words with exercising and blessing
the sacramental signs.

To make an end of this word benedicere, I will show also how saint Paul
does use it in the Epistle to the Hebrews. His words be these. cap. 7.
Nemo negat qui in id quod minus est, ab eo quod maius est benedictionem
accipiat, that is: No man does deny, but that which is lesser, does take
benediction of that which is greater. In this place saint Paul speaks of
Melchisedech and Abraham, and shows that Abraham as lesser, took blessyng of
Melchisedech as the greater. We must not understand nor think, concerning
this benediction, that Melchisedech being a holy and wise man did use crossyng
and blessing with saying of certain words upon the head of Abraham, but some
other matter far from that kind of blessing is meant by the Apostle. For this
benediction was a solemn precation wherewith he that was endued with some
public and notable honor did commend private men unto god. This benediction
which Paul does make mention, is the symbol of some great power. As Isaacke
blessed his son Jacob. And as Jacob himself blessed his nephews Ephraim and
Manasses. This benediction was not mutual, that the son likewise should give
the same benediction to the father. But the authority of the greater is
required to give this benediction, which may well appear out of that place of
the book of Numeri, Cap. 6.
where it is written, that afterward it was commanded to the priest to
bless the people. A promise was added forthwith that they should be blessed of
god whom the priest blessed. And it is rather to be called and judged the
benediction of god, then of man. For as the priest does supply the room of
Christ in offering sacrifices: So he was in blessinge the people no other thing
but the minister, messenger and delegate of the high God. Cap. 4.
And that which Luke rehearsed is to be taken in the same sense, where it is said
that Christ liftinge up his hands did bless the Apostles. This manner of
liftyng up the hands was borrowed of the priests of the old law, that
Christ might show himself to be the same person, by whom God the father does
bless us.

Obiectio.
Where you say that the lesser ever takes blessinge of the greater, it
seems not to be true. Cap. 1.
For it is written in Luke how Simeon being a mere natural man, did bless
Christ being God and man. Ergo the lesser may give blessyng to the greater.

Responsio.
If thou will restrain this word benedictio, only to Marie and Joseph, the
matter is answered very soon. But Luke does comprehend in his words Christ
also. And in deed it may be demanded by what authority and law, Simeon did
usurp to himself the office of geuynge blessyng to Christ. But it may again
be probably answered that Simeon bring a private man and none of the common
sort, did bless Christ, and not as one which was a public person* for he
was no priest as diverse learned men do write, and as the verity does also
declare. Benedicere therefore in this place does signify to pray for the
happy and luckie success of the kingdom of Christ, to wish health, good
fortune, and glory unto Christ. Where upon it does appear how shamefullie
they be deceived which do imagine that the benediction of Simeon was such a
kind of benediction, as the popish bishops were wont to give, with shakinge
of three fingars over the peoples heads. But the benediction of Simeon is
nothing else, but to wish and desire good success unto Christ in all his
doings.

Dominus. 2.
THE son, the second person is called Dominus, Lord, for two causes.
First for the mystery of our redemption, for Christ is the Lord of all the
elect, whom he challenged and delivered from the power and dominion of Satan,
sin, and death, and made them unto him a proper and pecuculiar people.

Secondly, he is called Dominus, Lord for his divine power and nature, by the
which all things are subject unto the son of God. Paul writing to the
Corinthians does say. Licet multi sunt domini, nobis tamen vnus est dominus
Jesus Christus, per quem omnia and nos per illum, that is: Although there be
many Lords, yet unto us there is but one Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
al things are, and we are also by him. It little avails the Arrians to boast
that Paul does not call Christ God, but lord, as though the divinity were to
be attributed only to the father. But if Christ be only the one Lord (as
saint Paul calls him) he shall also be God, unless he will exclude the
father from dominion and bearyng rule. For as Christ is only one Lord, and
yet does not depose the father, from bearyng rule with him, So the father is
only one God, and does not separate the son from the divine nature. And as
Chrysostom has noted, this distinction is not always observed in the
scriptures, for sometime the father is called Dominus Lord, as in the psalm.
Domine dominus noster. psalm. 18. Ierem. ca. 23. et. 33, Romans 9.
Likewise the son is called Deus, as in Jeremy, and in the Romans, and in
many other places besides.

Vnus Dominus, one Lord: by this phrase ye fables of ye Jews which babble and
prate that there should he two Messiah, one of the tribe of Judah, an other of
the tribe of Ephraim, imagining that the one shall be a base and abiecte
person, and a man afflicted. The other to come with power and great glory.
But the christian faith does preach and affirm that there is but one, and
the same Christ, and one only person. Notwithstanding there be two kinds of
his coming. The first is, humble and lowly The last shall be with majesty and
glory.

Idolum. 3.
TErtullian does write that this word Idolum is deduced (...), id est forma
species. Vvherof comes this diminutiue (...) as you would say a form or
shape to express God, that some honor and worship might be given unto it,
which is called Idolatria. But when in very deed god can not be expressed by
form or image, but by the lyinge imagination of man, it must needs be granted
which saint Paul writes to the Corinthians: Idolum nihil est in mundo, An
idol is nothing in the world.

Because I have made mention of this place, of Paul, I will examine the words
and mind of Paul thoroughly, what he meant by these words, Idolum nihil est
in mundo. Chrysostom writes that Paul was wraped in a narrow strait on both
the sides, for of one side he would restrain the Corinthians that they should
not eat of the meats offered to idols. On the other side he seemed to grant
that idolles had no divine power, either to sanctify meats offered to them, or
else to pollute them. Which seem two contraries. For if those meats be
forbidden to be eaten which are offered to idolles, it seems that they should
take some uncleanness of the idols, which by their own nature they have not:
therefore it was great impiety for men, either to touch them, or to taste
them. Again if nothing came unto them by reason they were offered, then was it
indifferent, either to use them, or not to use them.

To this, answer may thus be made. Among the Corinthians there were two
sorts of men. The one were dull, ignorant and blunt. The other were of a
quick, sharp, and pregnant wit. The duller sort thought that there was some
thing in the Idols which had in it some excellent or divine power. The wiser
sort thought and reasoned that Idols were nothing else but stones and wood,
having nothing in them either to make good or bad, meats offered unto them,
and therefore took them as Adiaphora, things indifferent. Now Paul is compassed
about with these two kinds of men.

First he granted that which they affirmed, which was that an idol is nothing
in the world. Which is not to be taken or understand as touching the
matter. For no man doubts but that stones, wood, Iuerye, silver, gold and
brass be somewhat in the world. But the words of Paul must be understand
concerning the artificial imagination. And then idols are to be set among
those things which do signify. And the nature of those things which are
conferred together is such, that if you take away one, you must take away the
other also. As when the son does cease, then the father also cease to be a
father. And these be relatiua. And that an idol pertains to the nature of
relatiues: Tertullian declares in his book De Idolatria.

These words In mundo, in the world, are well added. For in the minds and
toughtes of foolish men an idol may be somewhat: But in the number of true and
substantial things which were created of God, an idol is nothing. When
heretics profess and worship God, not as he is himself, but as it pleases
their fantasy, then they make an idol to them selves. And as the other
material idols be gross and externe: so these idols of the mind be
spiritual and interne.

Origin makes a difference between Idolum and similitudinem. His words be
these. In. 20. Exodi hom. 8.
Aliud est ergo facere idolum, aliud similitudinem. Et si quidem dominus nos ad
ea quae dicenda sunt illuminare dignetur, ego sic arbitror accipiendum quod
(verbi causa) si quis in quolibet metallo, auri, vel argenti, vel ligni, vel
lapidis saciat speciem quadrupedis alicuius, vel serpentis, vel auis, and
statuat illam adorandam, non idolum, sed similitudinem fecit: vel etiam si
picturam ad hoc ipsum statuat nihilominus similitudinem fecisse dicendus est.
Idolum vero facit ille qui secundum apostolum dicentem, quia idolum nihil est,
facit quod non est. Quid est autem quod non est? Species quam non vidit oculus,
sed ipse sibi animus fingit, etc. that is. It is one thing to make an idol and
an other thing to make a similitude. As for example: if any do make the form
and shape of a fourefooted beast, or of a serpente, or of a bird in the metal
of gold or silver, or wood or stone, and does set it up to be worshipped, he
does not make an idol, but a similitude. Or else if he set up a picture for the
same purpose, he makes also a similitude.

He makes an idol which makes that which is not according to the Apostles
saying, An Idol is nothing. What is that which is not? some form and shape
which the eye never saw, but the mind does feign and imagine it. For
example: if any will shape to the parts of man a Dog or a Rams head, or
would feign in one man's body to be two faces, or would put the hinder part of
an horse or of a fish to the upper part of man's body: He I say that imagines
and makes these or such like things, he makes not a similitude, but an
idol. For he makes that which is not, nor is like to it self in any part.
And therefore the Apostle knowing these things, does say: Idolum nihil est in
mundo. For there is no shape taken or made of things that be extant. But there
is only that which an idle and curious mind has invented. That the true God
cannot nor ought to be expressed or fashioned with shapes and similitudes, it
is evidently commanded and declared in Deuteronomio, and for that cause there
was no image of no sex or any other thing seen in the mount Horeb.

Obiectio.
The Arcke of covenant and the Cherubin were in the old Testament, not only
suffered, but also commanded.

Responsio.
The Arcke was no image nor shape whereby God might be represe^ted, but it was
rather a place in the which God promised him self to be present to hear the
prayers of the people, and to give them aunswers, when he was consulted.
Neither did men imagine or make by their own will and fantasy either the
Arcke or Cherubin, but God commanded them to be made.

Who was the first inuentor of images the writers do not agree Saint Hierome
in the Epistle in the which he makes his preface, in the Epistle sent to Tite
does say, that Crete^ses sowed the first seeds of Idolatry, in the which he
seems to allude to the fable of Jupiter.

I shall think it no labor ill bestowed to speak somewhat, for what cause
Idolatry was brought in Saint Paul does show it to the Romans, saying: When
they knew God, they did not glorify God nor tender thanckes unto him, but
were foolish in their own reasons and imaginations, for they worshipped not
one God, whose invisible majesty they might know by the visible creatures of
God, but did feign and frame unto him many things by their own counsels and
inventions.

Question.
How can this be true that an idol is nothing in the world, when we read in
Histories that images has both showed things to come, and also has wrought
merueilous wonders in afflicting with extreme pains their contemners, and in
doing much good to those which worshipped them?

Responsio.
Concerning the images them selves, they be nothing but wood, stone or
metal, and can neither show things to come, nor yet of them selves can do
neither good nor ill, which the Prophet Esaias does testify, saying. Nu^ciate
quae ventura sunt, Cap. 41.
and dicemus vos deos esse. Show what things are to come, and we will say ye
are gods, also do either good or il, if you can. Also he scorneth and mocketh
the artificer, Cap. 45.
that he makes an idol or image of one part of the block, and of the other
part makes a fire wherewith he may seath his meat and warm him self.
Therefore when any wonders are done of Idols, they are to be ascribed unto
devils, which do lurcke and lie in the images, and be present in them, Vt
(...), and they draw unto them selves those honors and Sacrifices which are
offered. And there is no doubt but that devils in some natural things may
divine and foreshew some things, although not all: notwithstanding they cannot
certainly and infallibly tell things to come, for God is able to alter the^ at
his pleasure.

Ezechias, as much as concerns natural causes, ought to have died, when the
Prophet Isaias did show unto him present death: yet the end of his life was
prolo^ged by the will of God. Therf^re the devils to keep their estimation* do
give perplexe and doubtful aunswers, least the euente of those things which
they show, might confute and confound them. As this old verse does testify.

Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse.

Which was a doubtful answer, whether the Romans should over come
Aeacida, or he the Romans. The like is recorded in Herodotus of Craesus, and
sometime in deed they show truly things to com, but for ye most part they lie
and deceive. Sometime also they punish most grievously certain persons, as
Liuius writes of Titus Lauinus. S. Austen in his book De ciuitate Dei, says
that it is no marvel that men which be strange and far from Christ, be
oftentimes tormented of the devil, for that they be through sin his
boundslaues. As the children of God are led with the spirit of God, so the
wicked and malignant spirits have great power over the children of
incredulity and unbelief, as the Epistle to the Ephesia^s does witness. The
devils have power to afflicte them whom God has made subject for their sins
unto his tyranny, but if any goodness or benefit be collated to Idolators, it
comes without question from God, who is the author of all good things. Some
perchance will greatly marvel why God will an Idolatour to prosper any way.
To which it may be answered, that it is not for their false religion, but that
God will declare his goodness and patience, as he suffers daily the sun to
rise upon the just and unjust: whereby we be taught to be friendly and well doing
to them which be not our friends.

Obiectio.
By this means God seems to give an occasion of error and idolatry.

Responsio.
God does te^pt and prove us, as it is in Deuteronomie, whether we will give
ear and credit unto a false Prophet when we see him to have good success in
things, and when he in deceiving the people in persuading false worshipping of
god, does show things to come and work wonders and signs

To end Nihil est Idolum in mundo, this is spoken by the figure Metonimia,
because the thing which is signified is not extant.

Idolum, is called in the Hebrew tongue Alil, which some will have to signify a
thing vain and unprofitable, other will have it to signify foolishnes. And
some of the Rabines do say that it is co^pounded of, Al, which in Hebrew
signifies, Non, and of, El, which signifies Deus, quasi non deus, not God,
but a thing having the shadow of God, and yet has in it no power to help or
to do any thing. You may call it in ye Latin tou^g, Inops, poor, nedie,
lacking help, and not able to help. Of Idolatria, is more spoken before.

Mahometus. 4.
MAhomete had to his father one Abdalla, by stock and auncestry a Persian or
Arabian borne, and had to his mother Emma a Jew and was borne in Iesrab, on a
monday being the twelf day of the month Rabe, about the year of our Lord. 597.
or 621 his father died a little before his birth.

His genealogy is reuolued with monstrous and blasphemous fables unto the time
of Seth and Adam. Libro de genesis Mahometi et in Chron. Sarac.
He was borne without any dolor or pain felt by his mother. And when he was
circumcised, he was merry and laughing. But whither this is to be believed, judge
you. At the very hour and time of his death the idols fell down by them
selves. And Lucifer was taken of Angels and drowned in the deep sea Alcazum,
from whence after forty days, being escaped, calling together a counsel of
devils, he complained of the destruction of his kingdom, beside many other
frivolous, fabulous, and lying vain wonders, which are fained to have happened
about the time of his birth.

Mahumetes education.
Of his nursing and education, there are also many fables, trifles and
blasphemies rehearsed, As how the winds, birds and clouds did strive for his
education, and that god committed him to Halima, to be brought up. And how that
an Ass enclining her self down said of Mahomete. Hic est sigillum
Prophetarum* this is the seal of the Prophets. Also, how three men drew out
his bowels, and cleansed the devils portion out of his heart. And that a
Southsayer would have killed him as an enemy and destroyer of Idols: Cap. 1.
but he escaped out of his nurses hand, and was found by chance under a tree
by the river Tuhene.

Being a boy of eight years old, he was brought up of his graund father Abdaal
Mutalib.

The writers say, that in his youth he kept the Camels of a rich merchant of
Arabia, and always when it was fair, hot, and clear weather, a black
cloud was seen over his head.

In Alcorano Azoara. 17.
Mahomet could neither read nor write, as he him self testifies, being utterly
unskillful and unlearned in his youth.

He had a great iolte head, a face mixed with white and read, a long beard,
Simoneta. lib 4. cap. 36.
and he was swift and of very nimble feet. He had a quick, subtle, and crafty
wit, and learned all manner of sects.

Sergius the Nestorian heretic coming to Mecha, instructed him worshipping
Idols with his error, Vincentius lib. 23. cap. 51
and delivered unto him certain rules out of the old and new Testament.

He married one Eadiga a rich widow, whom he allured to love him by art
Magic.

Paulus diaconus lib. 18. rerum Romanorum. Azoara. 58.
When Mahomet was sick of the falling sickness, he persuaded his wife to believe
that he had communication with ye Archangell Gabriel, and that when he saw him,
the force and strength of his body failed him. He called him self that grain,
which is said in the Gospel to bear plentiful fruit.

Mahometes functions.
First he was a keeper of Camels, afterward when he had married a rich widow,
he became a merchant, and at the length a Prophet, and by the help and means
of Sergius the Moncke, he was a sectarie. He feigned that he received the law
of God of Gabriell the Archangell in the forty year of his age.

At the last, (when he was made a captain in the wars) within xviij. month
after he fained him self to have learned his mysteries in Jerusalem, being
translated from thence and taken up into heaven, of Gabriel the Archangell, and
after he had descended from heaven, took to his fellows Eubogaram, Ali and
Zaid. And when he came to Athaif, he openly taught that he was a Prophet, and
this he did by the space of ten years running up and down from place to place.
And at length having gotten a band of men, he compelled by menacinges those
men to consent unto him which he could not by fantastical and subtle reasons
bring to the form of religion and laws that he had prescribed.

He had two heavenly counsailours, Michaell and Gabriel, and two earthly
counsailours Eubocara and Aomarus.

In the proclayming of his laws a dove made by art did fly unto him, and
^^tting upon his shoulders did gather corn out of his care.

VVherby certain mad men foolishly thought that the holy ghost gave laws unto
him.

Doubtful matters were referred to his determination.

He was sent to be a punisher of ye Gentiles, yt they might worship one God.
Azoara. 9. Ibidem. 38.56


Some things he commanded to be done, and some things to be undone. He
ordained some meats that were good and sauorie to be lawful to be eaten, and
other some to be unlawful. He does explane Alcoran, and extolleth it above all
other laws. He expounds the contrarieties therein, and makes plain the
right way

He said also he was enjoined to worship only the Lord of the City Haram, and
to believe in him which ruled all things, and to read Alcoran plainly, and by it
to give correction.

He affirmed also him self to be an arbitrer and judge of dissension in
religion, and did arrogate unto himself the authority to dispense and to
dissolve wedlock.

Furthermore, Vincentius Lib. 23.
he declared that he did follow the law of Abraham by the commandment of God,
and said that he was a Prophet sent of God to give salvation, and that he might
temper and mitigate laws which was to rigorous and severe for the Jews and
Christians, by giving forth more gentle and easy precepts.

In the kingdom of the Sarazens he did constitute four chief rulers which
were called Ammirei, Sigibertus et Paulus diaconus. lib. 18.
and he him self was called Ammiras or Proto Simbolus.

His wars are described in the Chronicles of the Sarazens.

Mahometes works which he wrote.
Mahomete being a subtle and crafty man, that he might alienate and turn the
weaklinges from the Christian faith, following certain heretics in composing
and making laws, Simoneta lib. 4. cap. 34.
and taking many things out of the sacred Bible, made the book called Alcoran.

Biblander does say, that in making the book Alcoran, In apologia.
he used the help and labor of two runnagate heretics, Sergius and John of
Antioch, and of two Jews that were Apostataes. And that he might get more
authority unto his book Alcoran, he fained it to be given and sent him from
heaven: for he swore that he being taken up into heaven, learned his mysteries
there.

It is written that he would have nor do nothing of his own will, but only
that which was commanded of God: and being taken up into the highest of the
orizon, came unto God him self, which taught and instructed him effectually,
but yet he being two arrows shot distant from God.

Mahometes doctrine.
Mahomets opinions are a confused Chaos, gathered out of the vayn doctrines of
Ethnicks, heretics and Jews.

Petrus Cluniacensis. Vincentius. 23. In Colloquio cum Iudeis.
First, he denies the Trinity with Sabellicus, and takes away the divinity
of Christ with Nestorius, with the Manichies he does deny ye death of Christ,
albeit he denies not his going again into heaven.

He named him self Messiah, whom the Jews look for to come, yet at this day.

He makes Gabriell one appearing in the shape of man, standing upright, never
slepyng, nor eating, neither drincking, to be a teacher and reueler of his
monstrous doctrines. He left to every sect power freely to follow their own
doctrine, and said unto the unfaithful: I truly will not follow your law,
neither you my law, therefore let your laws remain to you, and my laws to me.

He affirms also, that his people could not obtain the government of a
princely rule, unless they departed from the Christian faith, and kept their
own ordinances and laws. God forbids him to call him self any other
thing then a man, and that he should testify, that there is but one God. He
promises remission of sins, and good things to them that follow him, and
curses all them which do dissent from him, and menaceth unto them the pains
of hell fire.

The story of the book of Numbers contained in the 13. and 14. chapters he
does peruersly reply against and repel. He counts the history of Abel, the
history of Noe, and the history of Joseph to be but fables. He judges
likewise the like of Moses. He said, that he suffered afflictions for the
truths sake, and for inuocating upon the only one God.

Mahometes Prophecies.
Mahomete prophesied that twelve of the nation of Chorasc should bear rule
after him, and that after them there should rise dissension, and that the
dignity and observation of his law should endure so long as twenty of Chorasc
should remain alive, and that his successors should wear vile and base
apparel until thirty years were expired, and afterward they should wear
sumptuous and gorgious apparel.

He prophesied also that Alcoran should perish and be destroyed after a
thousand years were expired.

Mahometes strifes and conflictes.
Mahomete impugned the Cbristian religion first with his false doctrine, for he
utterly denied Jesus Christ to be the son of God, and condemned them that
believed in him.

Secondly, by false cauillations and slanders, for he fayneth the unfaithful
(whom he thought to be the Christians) to affirm that the Angels which be
about God are women, and to worship the virgin Marie for a goddess.

Thirdly, he did contend against his own profession, for that he was constitute
of God to be a teacher, and not a violent enforcer, as he says himself.

Furthermore, he used manifest violence, fayning himself to do it by the
commandment of God.

Finally, he did strive against his own country men the Arabians, for some of
them said unto him: Bring us an other Alcoran, or else do thou alter and
change this. Unto whom he answered, that he would not. Some of them called him
a devilish man, and an enchaunter, whom he does confute by threatening of the
pains of hell fire. He published an edict in the which he did forbid under
pain of death that no man should dispute, doubt or contend of his laws, and
also commanded all me^ to be contented with the authority of the dictatour.

He contended also against the Gentiles and their idols, and against them that
denied the resurrection of the dead.

Mahometes vices and wickedness.
Like as Mahomet was an instrument of the devil, so also he bare the devils
marks, that is, notes of lying, murder and filthiness. He did not swear by ye
name of the true God, but by the winds, clouds, Prophets and Angels, by the
evening star, and by the Mount Sinai, and by the going down of the sun.

Vincentius described at length his theftes and cruelty. He was given so much
to filthy lust, that he said it was given him of God to do more in carnal
copulation, then forty men, which is a foul thing to be spoken. He had forty
wives* He fained also that God gave him a singular power and license to
exercise his fleshly lusts.

The Jews at the first ran unto him by heaps, supposing him to be Messiah,
but when they saw him eat of Camels flesh, they knew yt he was not Messiah.

Mahometes death.
At the length by the just punishment of God he fell into a pleurisy, or else
into the falling sickness as some write, whereof he was wont oftentimes to be
sick, and in his sickness he lost his wits, his belly swelled, In Chronog.
and his little finger was bowed backward, and died fourtene days after he
was sick, when he was. 63. years old, or fourtye, as Valentinus, and
Munsterus notes, and in the year of our Lord. 632. as Sigibertus writes,
and after he had reigned over the Sarazens ten years. He commanded that no
man should bury him, because he said he should be taken up into heaven the
third day. Which when they that looked for, saw came not to pass, his
friends cast him out naked, but some do write that he was buried in his
clothes. His carcass is put in an iron coffin, and kept in the town Mecha,
where it is woorshipped of all the East part.

Other testimonies of Mahomet.
Mahomet him self writes, that many men judged and reported of him saying
thus: Do ye not follow that diuelishe and mad man, who uses inchauntments. He
did eat as other men does, and went abroad, wherefore he has not an Angel to
his keeper, which geteth him treasures, or makes him gardens, the fruit and
herbs whereof he might eat.

Again it is said of him: This man is an enchaunter and a liar, making and
bringing up all lies of him self, and purposes so to dissuade us from the
sect of our Elders.

And in an other place Mahomet says thus: The unfaithful hearing our
precepts, do say that they are art Magic, and that I feigned the^. But he,
that he might deceive the unware men, feigned that Christ prophesied that
Mahomet should come, and bring a most excellent law.

Rabalachbar learned in the scriptures, said that Mahomet should be borne, and
also he approved all the history of him, by the astrological testimony.

This shall be sufficient for the birth, life, and death of Mahomet. Now a word
or two of his ryddles and hard sayings, which properly may be called Enigmata.

Aenigmata Mahometi.
Question. 1.
WHat son is stronger then the father? Iron. What is stronger then Iron?
Fire. What is stronger then fire? Water. What is stronger than water? Vvinde.

Question. 2.
What earth is that, which the sun once saw, and never shall see again,
unto the worlds end?

Responsio.
When Moses divided the red sea, the bottom of the sea was made bare, which
the sun then saw, but after the water was closed again together, the sun
never saw it, nor shall see it again.

Question. 3.
What house is that, which having twelve gates, by the which twelve portions
went out with twelve generations?

Responsio.
That rock which Moses smote with his rod, and opened twelve fountains to the
twelve tribes of Israel.

Question. 4.
To what piece of the earth spoke God?

Responsio.
God commanded the mount Sinay to lift Moses up to heaven.

Question. 5.
What was the first wood without life, and afterward having spirit and
life.

Responsio.
Moses rod, which was now a rod, and now a Serpent.

Question. 6.
What woman came only of a man and father without a woman or mother. And what
man was borne only of a woman and mother without father?

Responsio.
First, Eve was made of Adam without the company of a woman, and Christ was
borne of the virgin Marie, without the company of a man.

Quaestio. 7.
What earthly things be these which were made and brought forth without the
coniunxtion of any male.

Responsio.
Adam, Abraham's Ram that was in the bushe behind him, and Christ.

Question. 8.
What grave was moved with him that was buried in it?

Responsio.
The whale with the prophet Jonas in his belly.

Question. 9.
What were those two whose graves are unknown?

Responsio.
Abitabil and Moses. For Abitabill when he felt death coming, commanded that
after his death, a Camel bearing his body, should be driven to go thither,
whither soever fortune would lead him, and that they should follow the Camel,
until he lay down of his own will. And in the place where the Camel lay down,
there was found a monument or grave, which Noe had prepared to Abitabil. And
when he was buried there, that place was utterly lost, and could never be found
again.

Moses when he wandered in the wilderness, found by chance a grave open and
void, meet for his quantity, both for breadth and length. Vvhereat he
marueilynge, the Angel of death came to kill him. Whom when Moses knew, he
asked him, saying: Wherefore came thou? the Angel answered, I am sent for
thy soul. Unto whom Moses said: By what means canste thou take it away?
for thou canste not take it out of my mouth, with which mouth I have spoken to
the Lord, nor out of my ears, wherewith I have heard the Lord, neither
through my eyes, wherewith I have seen the face of the Lord, neither out of
my hands, wherewith I have received the gift of God. Nor by my feet, because
I went up to the mount Sinai. The Angel hearing this, departed, and
changing his shape brought out of Paradise a certain fruit: which when the
Angel offered to Moses, Moses received it, and put to his nose, and then the
Aungel took him by the nostrels, and so wroung out his soul: which being
done, his body remaining in the sepulcher, was never found after.

Quaestio. 10.
What fire does eat and drink, and after it is quenched, it is never
kindled again unto the day of judgment?

Responsio.
The fire in man's body is sustained by meat, drink and life. And when the
soul departs from it, it is extinguished, and shall not be kindled again
before the soul return to it.

Question. 11.
What is ever little, and what is ever great?

Responsio.
Little stones, and great ^illes.

Question. 12.
What humor and moistnes is that which comes neither from heaven nor from
earth.

Responsio.
The sweat of man and beasts when they labor.

Question. 13.
How was the first ship made?

Responsio.
Noe began the first ship, and Gabriell gave the keys, and Noe with his
children entered in, and he coming from Arabia, went about seven times the
City Mecha, and saylyng from thence, came to Jerusalem, and compassed that
likewise seven times about, and so came into a mountain of Iudaea, and there
the waters being decreased, the ship stayed.

Question. 14.
How can thou measure all the world?

Responsio.
With one natural days journey, for the sun goes in one day through the
whole world from the East to the weast, and from the weast to the East.

These were the questions and aunswers which Mahomete had with the Jews.

Purgatory. 6.
THere is fained to be a certain middle place after this life between hell and
heaven, which they call Purgatory. In the which place they that be there are
counted to participate somewhat of both the extremes, for in that respect that
they are so confirmed with hope, that felicity at length shall be given unto
them: they suffer quietly the pains that be inflicted upon them, and so are
counted in the number of the Saints: but in that respect that they are
punished and tormented with grievous pains, they have their lot in hell.

It is said also that the pains of Purgatory shall not only have a certain
end, but that they may be also eased, relieved and redeemed, with the worckes
and suffragies of the living.

Our adversaries do persuade with many reasons and authorities that there is
such a place. Which reasons and authorities I will allege and bring in, and
make answer to the same orderly.

The first reason and proof.
They do allege out of the old Testamente the history of the Machabees:
where it is read that Judas believed it to be a wholesome and an holy thing, to
pray for the dead, that they might be loosed from their sins.

Responsio.
This place cannot oppugn the verity, because these books be not in the
Canon. Yet they say, although the Hebrews do not accept them as Canonical, yet
our Church has received them: we grant that your Church has received them,
but (as S. Cyprian does testify) that they may be read in the Church, In
expositione symboli.
but not that our faith or any article thereof may be confirmed thereby. In the
which place Saint Ciprian does rehearse all the books Canonical, and adds
these words. Hi sunt ex quibus patres voluerunt dogmata nostrae fidei
consistere: these be the books, out of the which our fathers would have the
doctrines of our faith to consiste.

And Saint Hierome, when he alleges the books of the Machabees, is wont to
add, Si quis velit credere and recipere. If any man will believe and receive
them.

Saint Augustine also says: Receptos, sed non vt pares, Contra. secu^dam
epistola^ gaude.
legi Proph^tis and Psalmis. I have read them being received, but not equal to
the Prophets and Psalms. Which books, notwithstanding, he says are not
unprofitable, so that they be soberly read and heard, that is, that we do judge
and discern in what points they do agree with the Canonical Scriptures, and
in what points they do not agree.

Eusebius.
Melito also Bishop of Sardinia does not rehearce the books of Machabees to be
in the number of the Canonical Scriptures.

Epiphanius also leaves them out.

To this purpose makes also the history of one Razias in the same book, who
killed him self, that he might not fall into his enemies hands. In which
book both the man and his fact is commended and praised. Which example the
heretics called Circumcelliones (who were in Saint Augustines time) did
wickedly abuse in laying violent hands on them selves. Whereupon Saint
Augustine labored much against the Donatistes to defend that book: but how
much he prevailed, let other men judge.

To conclude, it is written at the end of these books: Si recte scripsi, est
quod volui, sin exiliter and tenuiter, est quod potui. If I have well written,
it is that I would, but if I have written slenderlye and sleightlye, it is
that I could. Which words do not seem to be spoken by the instinct of the
holy ghost, as the author of the said books.

The.2 reason and proof.
Cap. 9.
They allege Zachary the Prophet where it is written: Emisi vinctos tuos elacu.
I have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.

Responsio.
Saint Hierome by this lake, in the which was no water, plainly understands
hell, where is no mercy, which when it was prepared for us, we were redeemed
and delivered from it by the merit of the blood of Christ. This place is also
expounded of many, of the receptacle of the souls of the fathers before Christ
ascended into heaven, from whence they were delivered and carried up into
heaven, by the benefit and merit of Christ. But Saint Hierome affirms that
the rich glutton was tormented in the same lake. VVherby it appears, that
their judgments and expositions of Purgatory are wavering, and not firm.

The.3. reason and proof.
They prove Purgatory by this saying of Ecclesiastes: De carcere atque catenis
interdum quis progredietur ad regnum? Out of the prison, who will come forth to
reign?

Responsio.
This saying of Ecclesiastes makes nothing to their purpose, for as much as it
is entreated there only of the chaungeable course of things.

Gregory bishop of Pontus, otherwise called Laodicenus, (as saint Hierome
writes) says: Vt rex stultus atque senex e regno facile potest derici, sic
vicissim iuuenis, quamuis pauper, modo sit sapiens, ex humili loco ad regnum
prouehi potest. Like as a king that is foolish and old may be easilye deposed
from his kingdom, so on the other side a young man, though he be poor, so that
he be wise, may be promoted out of a base and low place, unto a kingdom.

Origin and Victorinus do apply this place to an allegory, in expounding the
old King to be cast down, to signify the deuel, which is called prince of the
world, and by the young man they understood Christ: which when he came freshly
unto the father, he received all power, when before he was vexed in the world
as in a prison.

The.4. reason and proof.
It is written in the psalm of David: transiuimus per ignem and aqua^, nosque
in refrigerium eduxisti. We went into fire and into water, but thou broughtest
us out into a welthie place.

Responsio.
Saint Augustine expounds this verse of the tentatio^s of this world: So that
adversities are signified by fire, and prosperities are signified by water.
Under the which tentations when the godly do not lie and are overcome, they are
brought to the refreshments of heaven.

The.5. reason.
In the new Testament there is mentioned one kind of sin, which is not
forgeuen neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Therefore there
remains some sins to be cleansed and purged in an other life.

Responsio.
This place does not infer nor urge, that there be some sins which are
remitted and purged in an other life.

Among the Logicians two negative propositions do not conclude an affirmative.
Wherefore not to be forgeuen in this world, and not to be forgeuen in an other
world, does not affirm the pardonyng of sins after this life. Christ
therefore spoke these words by an exaggeration, whereby the greuousnes of this
sin might be made more open and known. Also saint Mark do write the self
same thing, saying simply, it shall never be forgeuen, and makes no mention
neither of this world, nor of any other, but does expound Mathewes meaning.

The.6. reason.
They object out of Matthew this saying: least the iaylour cast them into
prison. Verily I say unto thee: thou shalt not come forth, until thou haste
paid the uttermost farthing.

Responsio.
Saint Augustine plainly understands hell, and he will have the word donec, to
be taken in the same signification in which it is said: he knew her not until
she had brought forth her first begotten son.

Saint Hierome expounded this place of concord to be observed and kept among
the fatthfull, so long as they are alive, which he proves by the sayings that
go before, and by the sayings that do follow

Before it was said. If thou offer thy gift at the Alter, and there do
remember that thy brother has ought against thee, leave thy gift there etc.
And now it follows love your ennemies.

He makes mention also of an allegorical interpretation, by the which some do
understand by the adversary, the spirit it self: which exposition seems
to be very absurd, that the holy spirit should deliver us to the judge. He
omitteth not also to rehearse, that some do understand by the adversary the
deuell, as you may r^ade in Ambrose.

Tertullian also rehearses the same in his book de anima, although he affirm
the same place to be understand more simply of concord and agreement.
Therefore when no certainty can be gathered of such allegories, this reason
and proof is very infirm and weak.

The.7. reason and proof.
The rich man mentioned in Luke seems to prove a purgatory, for that he
desired Lazarus to be sent to his brethren, to warn them that they should not
come there, which seems to have come of charity, but in hell, there is no
caritie. Ergo he was not in hell, but in purgatory.

Responsio.
This place of Luke is counted of many to be a parable. Of which judgment
Chrysostom is. And a parable proves nothing. But let it be a true history,
how will they by that defend him to be in purgatory, forasmuch as between the
bosom of Abraham, and the place of punishment there was said to be a great
Chaos? So that from thence none could come unto Abraham. And it is merueill
that the rich man, being so greatly tormented, did not require anniuersaries
and suffrages of the living. And when Abraham did affirm that the could
receive no help neither of him nor of Lazarus, what boldenes has the priest
to say that he by his mass and prayers can release the souls of the dead
from the pains of purgatory. The wise virgins did not communicate their oil
unto the foolish virgins. Likewise Lazarus could not profit the rich glutton.

It were much better to expound and weigh the words of Abraham, when he said
and made answer. Mosen habent and prophetas, they have Moses and the Prophets.
By which words it is showed that the holy scriptures are sufficient to
salvation, and that men need not to be sent to fathers or to human
traditions, or apparitions of the dead.

The.8. reason and proof.
They pretend also the authority of the Apocalips, where it is read that no
impure or unclean person shall be admitted into the holy city.

Responsio.
Concerning the holy city (which is the feloship of the blessed) we grant
that no impure thing may be transmitted unto it. For they that die in the name
and faith of Christ, are cleansed with his blood. Over and beside repentance
and dissolution of the flesh does cause them to remember and confess their
impuritie. Wherefore they ought not to be counted unclean, which be partakers
of eternal life.

The.9. reason and proof.
Paul writes that all knees both of things in heaven, and things of the
earth, and things under the earth ought to bow them selves unto god.

Responsio.
These words are not to be understand of the worshipping of God, for this
worship stands not in this, that the knee should be bowed, but does specially
require the spiritual affectes and motions of the mind. Paul there speaks of
the great authority and power, which is committed and given to Christ, by the
which power every creature of heaven, earth, and hell, is made subject unto him:
yea the deuel himself, with all the wicked and damned spirits, will they, nil
they, are delivered under his feet. And the words which go before do show
this sufficientlye, for it is said: God gave him a name that is above all
names, that al knees would bow in that name. Which words if ye will apply
unto the divine worship, as though they which worship God be in purgatory,
than must you grant also, that the deuel and all the damned spirits do
worship Christ.

The.10. reason and proof.
It is alleged out of the Apocalips, that every creature in heaven, in earth,
and under the earth, and in the Sea, sing praises unto God.

Responsio.
All things do praise God as it is convenient to their nature: for they
exhibit matter and occasion of divine praises, as hills, mountains, trees,
woods, dragons, and such other like do truly and properlye praise God for
their creations sake.

The.11. reason and proof.
It is written in Paul that fire shall try every man's work, and if any man's
worck that he has built upon, abide, he shall receive wages. If any man's work
burn, he shall lose. But he shall be safe him self nevertheless, yet as it were by
the fire. Here may you see that the fire of purgatory shall cleanse all men's
doings.

Responsio.
No man shall escape this fire whether he build well or ill. All are to be
proved by this fire, that the doctrine which is builte be proved and examined
whether it does agree with the foundation, or no. Otherwise god is said to be
like unto a burning fire. For god will purge the sons of Leui, and will
purify them as silver and gold. The doctrines that be sound, shall abide, nor
the fire that tries them, shall hurt them, no more then the furnace does hurt
silver or gold.

Augustine in diverse places of his writings makes mention of this sentence,
and always consenting unto himself does bring the self same exposition of
these words, but he affirms this saying to be in the no^bre of one of those
hard sayings, which Peter speak in his epistle.

Furthermore he warns that we interpret this fire to be of that kind which
may be common, as well to the good buylders, as to the ill. At the last he
says, we must beware that we set not in this predicame^t those that be
baptized which have lived ill, and that we faigne not their heinous sins, as
murder and whordom (by the which men are excluded from the kingdom of heaven)
to be wood, straw and chaf, because to such kind of men, being guilty of
such grievous crimes, hell fire is due: which fire can not be common to the
good builders also, except you will thruste them also into hell fire. Here is
also mention made only of them, which markyng and observing the foundation, do
build. Among whom they are not to be nombred which are burdened with
desperate vices. Saint Austine goes further and says, that the foundation is
Christ, which the Apostle himself does interpret. He adds also faith,
because Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, and he makes them to be the
good builders, which obey the law of God. He affirms them to build hay and
stuble, which retain the pleasures of the world, which pleasures are not
expressly forbidden, and do so retain them, that they give them selves more
unto them, then equity does require. They which build well (says he) possess
the goods of this world, as riches, honor, wife, family, and yet they be as
though they possess them not, and do use them, as though they would not use
them. The ill builders are affected with these things more then behooves, yet
they give not themselves so loselye unto these their desires, that they will
prefer these goods, before Christ, unto whom as unto the foundation they do
lean, but rather set Christ before them. For if they come either to confession
of their says, or to martyrdom, they will rather lose those goods, than to
depart from Christ. Notwithstanding because they did embrace them with to
vehement affect and love in losing them, they feel the fire. For they be very
sorrowful, and take it grievously that these things are taken from them, but yet
they be saved, because they keep the foundation of the true faith safe and
unhurt, that is (says he) haie, wood, and chaf to be kindled with fire and
perish, because their desires and pleasures does moleste them, as the flame of
fire would do, and so those pleasures and affections do vanishe away. And this
happens to many (says he) while they live here. For it chances many times,
that the holy martirs and saints be beriued of the goods of this world for the
name of Christ. He proves fire to signify tribulations, as it is taken in the
psalm. Psalm. 65.
And for that cause be willed fire and water to be had in the exorcisme of
baptism, that we may be admonished that by these two we shall be tried. He
brings in also this sentence of Ecclesiasticus: Vas figuli probat fornax, at
animos iustorum tentatio tribulationis: the furnace proves the potters
vessel, but tentation of tribulation, tries the minds of the righteous.

To this interpretation of Augustine, Gregory does consent, yet he does wrest
it unto purgatory. But it does most evidently appear, that Paul by the good
and bad buildings, does signify doctrine, either sound or else corrupt, whose
end is described, that if they be good, they shall have reward, but if they be
ill, they shall perish and vanish away. For every plant which my father has
not planted (says Christ) shall be pulled up by the roots, but the word of God
remains for ever.

He which has not builded well, may be saved, but yet by fire, because he shall
see his doctrine confuted and condemned, and shall know that he has labored in
vain, and be like unto one which goes through the fire, whose garments are
burned, yet he himself escapes. Some do expound this clause (so as it were by
fire) because men are hardly brought from their opinions. For they do embrace
and allow to much their own inventions. But the exposition is more simple and
plain, if you will say that these men, when god shall examine them, shall feel
shame, sadness, and unquiet consciences. And to this interpretation does Ambrose
condescend, he must needs be ashamed which sees himself to have defended a
falsity for a troth: in this examination and judgment of God the error of
doctrine is opened, and forthwith follows dolor and great heaviness of
repsta^ce. Chrisostom thought yt this fire pertains to hell, but because he
sees this saying to be against him (but he shall be saved as it were by fire)
he expounded to be saved, to signify no other thing, then to endure and
co^tinu, not to be extinct, not to be turned into ashes, or to be brought to
nothing, that this evil builder should endure quo ad substantiam, concerning
his substance, but he shall not be reserved (as he says) but only to
punishment, that he burn in this fire for ever. He did know that this
interpretation was somewhat far fetched, and therefore he went about to
temper it, and shows that Paul sometimes adourneth with fair words those
things, which otherwise are dishonest and to be disproued, and sometimes terms
with dishonest words things that be commendable and allowable: In the later
Epistle to the Corinthes Paul says, that we do captiuate all our thoughts
whereby this word captiuat, he calls it to be a persuasion, by the which men
do willyngly submit them selves to the faith of Christ. Also when he speaks
of the mortification of the flesh and members, which are upon the earth, he
commends by this term (mortification) a very approved and perfect thing, And
likewise when he says to the Romans. Non regnet peccatum in vestro mortale
corpore: Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies: he does beautify with
this word (kingdom) tyranny, by the which we are oppressed with sin: so by
this word (saving) he calls it and means eternal continuance in the fire
of hell. But this wrestinge and writhing of Chrysostom to defend his
interpretation, can not consist as a thing true. For when all things here are
taken allegoricallie, what needs he to fly the signification of a true fire,
unless he means the fire of hell to be also allegorical, which the received
doctrine of the church will neither admit nor suffer?

Furthermore when it is said, the fire shall prove every man's work, it
behooves to constitute such a fire, which as well the good builders as ill,
shall sustain and feel, as saint Augustine very aptly does write.

I think Saint Augustine neither mente nor would, good and holy men to be
tormented with the fire of hell. Notwitstandynge the Greek scholies do receive
this sentence and interpretation of Chrysostom.

Erasmus in his annotations does count it a vain and foolish thing by this
place to prove purgatory. If the fire of purgatory be in this place
constitute and proved, then must this fire be common as well to the Apostles and
to other saints, as to other, although they have builded a church with most
approved and sincere doctrine. And by this place to defend purgatory, is no
more but that our adversaries do cast doung in their own eyes. For they say
that some pardons are given and granted of the pope to absolve man when he
dies, ab omni tam poena, quam culpa, as well from all pain, as from all fault:
so that his soul shall fly straight way into heaven. If it be so, how shall
this man be proved with the fire of purgatory, if this fire be common to all?

Scotus does say that the action and motion of charity may be found so
absolute and perfect, and of so great feruencie, that it may put away all
pains How then can this fire of purgatory which they will prove by this
place, be common to all? unless perchance they will place this fire in the
air, and faigne that all saints when they fly to heaven, do pass through
this fire: as one Altuinus did affirm.

But it is to be marked that the opinion of them which will have a purgatory,
is not one, but diverse and sondrie. For some would have it to be a most
certain doctrine, and one of the articles of our faith, other do but suspicate
or opinate that there is such a place.

Concerning the first, sure doctrine, and the articles of our faith, ought to
be proved with most evident testimonies of the scriptures. Their judgment is
not to be received which would make men to be the authors of things to be
believed. For contumely should be done to the holy ghost, if it should be
thought that he had given unto us those writings in the which should not be
perfectly contained whatsoever is necessary to salvation.

The Epistle written to Timothy does sufficiently convince them, where it is
written that the scriptures given by the inspiration of God is profitable to
teach, to confute, to correct, and to instruct, that the man of God may be
perfect, and absolut to all good works: Wherefore if they will bring any good
work, or any thing necessary to be believed, which can not be confirmed by the
holy scriptures, it is to be answered, that which they bring, is neither good,
nor profitable. And where they boast that the Apostles taught not al things,
nor that the primative church received not all things necessary to salvation,
it is not to be granted.

Tertullian has a godly saying much repugnant to this opinion. De persecuti
one hereticorum.
For he writes. Foelix ecclesia cui totam doctrinam apostoli cum sanguine
profuderunt. Happy is the church unto whom the Apostles with their blood
poured and gave all necessary doctrine.

Christ also said* what things I have heard of my father, those things have I
made known unto you.

Obiectio.
The Apostles in deed, showed and taught all things, but they wrote not all
things

Responsio.
If they wrote not al things, yet they had a respect that al things which they
delivered might be manifestly proved, either out of their own writings, or else
out of the books of holy scriptures. For otherwise there should crepe into the
church a rablement and heap of superstitions, which would seem to be defended
under the pretense of the traditions of the Apostles.

But to our purpose again. Concerning purgatory, great doubt has risen
thereof in the church, for the greek church in the Florentin council did long
resist and stand against it.

Augustine spoke of purgatory diverse and sondrie ways. For in his
Enchiridion he says, not to be incredible, that such a place may be after
this life: but (says he) it may be inquired whether there be such a place or
no. And it may be found, it may be hidden. Which words also he has ad
dulcitium. Quaestio. 1.
Likewise in his book de fide and operibus, he writes: Sieve igitur in hac
vita tantum homines patiuntur, sieve etiam post hanc vitam talia quidem iudicia
subsequentur non abhorret (quantum arbitror) a ratione: Cap. 16
that is. Whether men do suffer these things in this life only, or else such
judgments do follow after this life, it does not abhor (as far as I know)
from reason.

You may see that saint Austin uses here a disjunctive proposition, to the
verity whereof one part is sufficient. Who, I pray you, would speak so
doubtfullye of an article of the faith, as to say, whether Christ had a true
flesh, or a fantastical flesh? or whether the divine nature were in Christ,
or human nature only? etc. Those things which pertain to the faith, ought
necessarilye to be defined, and ought to be most certain.

The same Augustine when he spoke of the fire of purgatory, said after this
manner. Lib. de ciuita te dei 21. c. 26.
Non hoc redarguo quia forsitan verum est: I do not improve this, because
peradventure it is true. But in those things which are necessary to be believed
to salvation, it is not lauful to use such phrase, either of writing or of
speaking.

Obiectio.
Although saint Augustine seems to be doubtful in these places alleged, yet
in other places he does most certainly affirm it.

Responsio.
Those places where he seems to affirm it, are to be interpreted by these
other four places. In the which he makes it to be ambiguous and doubtful,
whether there be such a place or no. Therefore it must be granted that saint
Augustine was persuaded rather with opinion, then with certain science and
knowledge, because the nature of opinion is to assente to one part, with a
fear and doubt of the other part.

But it is to be tought that this makes greatly against this comment and gloss
of purgatory, that the holy scriptures make no mention of such a place,
neither in the old Testament, nor in the new.

Abraham boughte for the burial of his wife a field, the grave is described,
the price is expressed, and all things are there so diligently rehearsed, that
nothing seems to be omitted. Where notwitstandynge, there is no mention made
either of purgatory, either of the soul to be delivered from pain, either of
any sacrifices or prayers.

In the book of Leuiticus, and in other books where the law is described,
as well for the whole state of man and sacrifices and oblations for every kind
of sin, yet there is no mention made for the dead to be delivered from pain.

The prophets which where the best interpreters of the law, when they
commend in every place all offices of piety and charity, yet they set not
forth in all their sermons any thing that concerns such a place.

Paul also when occasion was offered him in writynge to the Thessalonians (for
he entreated how they should mourn and lamente for the dead in funeralles, and
he lifts up and comfort them that he admonished only by the hope of the
resurrection:) might at the least have admonished in that place to have prayed
for our dear friends, least they should lie long in the pains of purgatory.

He brings no such thing, but after the doctrine of the resurrection, he
says. Itaque inuicem consolemini verbis istis: Therefore comfort your selves
one an other with these words.

Dionisius called Areopagita, when of a set purpose, he moved a question, why
the Minister of the church, does pray for him that is dead, makes no mention
of purgatory, but greatly trauaileth to render other causes and reasons. If he
had believed a purgatory, he might easily have answered the question.

Saint Ciprian in the end of his book does write Quum hinc excelsum fuerit,
neque locus poenitentiae, neque satisfactionis erit effectus: When we depart
from hence, there shall be neither place of repentance, nor effect of
satisfaction.

Our adversaries were wont to pretend for this opinion, mercy, because they
would not think them to be condemned which died in the confession of
Christ, when notwithstanding, they were yet holden with some spot of sin.

But that mercy is foolish which moves us to ordeine and constitute those
things which we know not, whither they set forth the glory of God or no, and
which also can not be proved by the holy scriptures. Furthermore we are bound
to love God, with all our strength, and all our souls, and to begin nothing
which we know not to be allowed of him, and to pertain to his glory.

Thus you perceive that purgatory is no necessary doctrine to be believed.
Again, the suspicion and opinion thereof does lean upon infirm and weak
reasons, and does hurt piety, rather then promote it.

Certain places of holy scripture which do impugn purgatory.
Christ said: he that hears my words, and believes in him that sent me,
shall not enter into judgment, but have life everlasting, Joan. 5
and shall pass from death to life.

In the Apocalips it is written. Blessed be they which die in the Lord, Cap. 14.
for forthwith they shall rest from their labors. But to be broiled in fire,
is not to rest from labor.

Luke 23.
Christ said to the thief: This day thou shalt be with me in paradise.
Which place is against them which hold, that those spots which remain in
man, although he lived never so well and virtuously, must be purged. What will
they say then to the thief, which behaved himself wickedlye to the end, and
yet was immediatlye after his death received into paradise?

Cap. 11.
It is written in Ecclesiastes: If the clouds be full, they will pour forth
rain upon the earth. And if the tree do fall toward the South or toward the
North, in the place that the tree falls, there it shall be. Solomon uses here
two allegories, the one taken out of the clouds, and the other of the trees, by
the which he admonishes us to do that goodness, which we will do, while we
have opportunity and time, for when we are departed from hence, there is no
place neither of merit, nor repentance. There be also many other places in
the scriptures which make against this matter.

One place I had almost forgotten, which the adversaries of late have alleged
for the defense of purgatory.

Obiectio.
It is written (say they) in the epistle to Timothy that saint Paul
prayed, that the Lord would grant Onesiphorus, which often refreshed him, that
he might find mercy with the Lord at that day. Now when Onesiphorus was dead,
and yet Paul prayed for him, therefore it is lawful for us to pray for the
dead, which were in vain, unless there were a purgatory.

Responsio.
If they look well on their own writers they shall find that Onesiphorus was
alive, as in Lyranus, whose words be these: The Lord send him mercy in that
day, die scilicet mortis suae, vel in die generalis iudicii, in the day of his
death, or in the day of the general judgment.

Dionisius Carthusianus also does say that he was alive. Over and beside
Oecumenius expounding the fourth chapter of the same Epistle, does say, that
Onesiphorus was at Rome: In the which chapter Paul saluteth the family of
Onesiphorus which was at Ephesus, but Onesiphorus himself was at Rome. And so
writes Chrysostom. Therefore this place makes nothing for purgatory.

I am not ignorant that the most part of the fathers are bent in their
writings to grant a purgatory. But we must understand that the fathers were
men, and did sometime err as me^. For they did not alwais build gold, silver
and precious stones upon the foundation, which is Christ.

As for antiquity and custom it ought not to prescribe and to be prejudicial
unto verity and truth: for in the very time of Paul errors began in the
church. For some even than thought that baptism ought to be received for the
dead. But Ciprian does admonish, that that custom with reason and truth, is
the mother of error.

Obiectio.
The church has used always to pray for the dead, even from the time of the
apostles.

Responsio.
It can not be denied but that the church has so done. But this their doing or
saying has none authority out of the holy scriptures. Men be moved and as it
were impelled with a certain natural love toward their frindes that be dead,
to wish them well to do, and to break out sometime into prayers for them.
But heed is to be taken that this affection be not dissonant unto faith.

Other causes beside the opinion of purgatory may be assigned and alleged
why prayers were made in the church for the dead.

They would not have the name and memory of their friends departed, to perish
and to be extinguished, but took great care that it might long continue among
the faithful.

Furthermore those prayers pertained to geuinge of thanks unto God, who has
called them that are departed unto himself out of this miserable world.
Whereupon saint Ambrose in his funeral orations, which he had at the death of
Theodosius and Valentinianus the Emperors, does rejoice that they had alredie
obtained eternal felicity, and that they reigned with Christ: yet
notwithstanding he prayed that God would give unto them that rest, which they
desired, which two things seem to be repugnaunt, unless you will expound
prayers for thanks geuyng.

Furthermore, some of the fathers went so far, that they thought prayers
somewhat to profit them that were in hell, not in shortning their plains, for
they be eternal, but to diminish and ease them at the least for the time of
the prayers.

Chrysostom, Augustine, and Hierome seem to be of that mind.

Again some might seem to pray for the dead, not for the end to deliver them
from purgatory, but that Christ might the sooner come to judge the quick and
the dead, that the faithful which died in the Lord, might the sooner have the
fruition of felicity, both of the body and the soul.

Furthermore, other did pray for the dead which were not in purgatory, (for
they believed it not) but in paradise, De monogamia.
as it appears in Tertullian, who writes yt the church was wont to pray for
the martirs, for whom (as saint Austine says) if any man do pray, he does
them injury.

Those prayers therefore were nothing else but thanks giving. For they rendered
thanks unto God for the great gifts and benefits granted to them of god, by
the which they did most gloriously triumph over their ennemies, they did also
stir and comfort other to be their followers. They did set forth their noble
acts, declaryng that they were gone into their country.

Lib. 3. epist. 3
Therefore in the primative church they prayed for the dead, but yet for the
martirs (as Ciprian testifies.) Even as we do give thanckes unto god for all
those that die godly in the Lord.

Ecclesiast.
Erasmus says that in times past the people assembled together upon certain
days to singe. (...), that is geuyng of thanckes. And the Prophet preacher or
bishop did extol with godly words the divine goodness toward his creatures:
they did set forth the praise of the godly martirs, which glorified Christ with
their death, the people song hymns, psalms and spiritual songs unto the
Lord.

Now a word or two concerning the doctors judgment.

Epist. 54
Saint Augustine in this Epistle ad Macedonium says: Morum corrigendorum nullus
alius quam in hac vita locus: nam post hanc vitam quisque id habebit quod in
hac sibimet conquisierit that is. There is none other place to have correction
for manners, then in this life: for every one shall receive that after this
life, which he has gotten to himself in this life.

De verb. apo sermo. 19.
Again in an other place he says. Duae habitationes sunt, vna in igne aeterno,
altera in regno aeterno. There be two habitations or mansions, the one in
eternal fire, and the other in the eternal kingdom of heaven. Furthermore in
his hypognostichon against the Pelagians, he writes. Lib. 5.
Primum fides cathoilcorum diuina authoritate regnum credit esse caelorum, vnde
non baptizatus excipitur: secundum gehennam vbi omnis apostata vel a Christi
fide alienus supplicia reperitur. Tertium penitus ignoramus, nec esse in
scripturis sanctis reperimus.

The catholic faith believes by the authority of gods word, first, that
there is a kingdom of heaven, from the which he that is not christened, is
exempted. Second, that there is hell where every Apostata or unfaithful does
receive punishment. The third place we utterly know not, neither we find it in
the holy scriptures.

Saint Hierome does say, that when we be in this present world, we may help
one another, whether it be by good prayers, or by good counsel. But when we
shall come before the judgment seat of Christ, neither Job nor Daniel can pray
for any man. For every one shall bear his own burden.

Chrysostom says: Omnia hic dissolve vt citra molestiam illud viduas
tribunal. etc. That is: Bring all things to pass here, that with out all
molestation or grefe thou may see that judgment seat. While we be here, we
have manifest and noble hopes, but when we are departed thither, it lies not
in us after, either to repent, or to wipe and wash away any thing that we have
committed.

I could bring the authorities of many other fathers, but to him that will be
resolved without obstinacy, these be sufficient. And thus much for Purgatory.

Hodie. 7.
HOdie is called in the Greek tongue (...), or attice (...), in the Hebrew it is
called Haiom, which is compounded of iom, with the demonstration He before it.

Hodie in the scriptures is taken diverse and sundry ways First, for the
certain and present time, as in the prophet Esaias: Non ieiunatis hodie, vt in
sublimi exaudiatur vox vestra You shall not fast as you do to day, to make
your voice to be heard above.

Secondly, Hodie does not signify this present day or to morrow, but perpetuity
of time, or from the beginning of the world, as in the epistle to the Hebrews,
Paul does use it saying: Jesus Christus heri, Cap. 13.
et hodie idem est etiam in secula. Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, the same
also is for ever. Notwithstanding this sentence of Paul is of diverse, diversely
expounded.

Some do write that Paul brings in here an argument to confirm faith and
trust in God, in them to whom he wrote.

One might object and say: Paul thou do well admonish us. God did above
measure favor the Apostles and apostolic men, as his chief darlings and
friends, but he will not embrace me, with the like favor and grace. To the
which objection Paul gives an apt and mete answer, saying: Jesus Christ
yesterday and to day, and the same for ever. As though he should have said.
Jesus Christ, which was yesterday, that is in time past, that same is to day,
and shall continue for ever. He has that same benignity and gentleness which he
had then. His hands are not abbreuiated nor shortened. He which sustained and
nourished with meat and drink Elias, and the people of Israel, by the space
of forty years, the same will also nourish and feed you: doubtless if his
benignity and gentleness should cease, he should also cease to be God. Other do
refer this sentence to Paul, to this end, that we should know that same
manner of salvation to have been before Christ was incarnate, and the same
which is after the incarnation of Christ to be all one. Other do refer it to
the doctrine of Christ, and that this word shall remain for ever. Which
expositions, although they be godly: yet in my judgment the first exposition
is the very natural sense of the place.

And note here one thing, that the Apostle does not entreat of the divine
essence of Christ, but of the knowledge of him, which floorished always among
the godly, and is the perpetual foundation of the church.

Therefore this sentence must be referred, not to the essence, but to the
quality (if we may so say.)

Nor Paul disputes here whither Christ were eternal with the father, but what
manner of knowledge and benignitye was among men of him, and from him.

Thirdly, Hodie, is properly used to be spoken of that time, which is after the
coming of Christ, as Paul uses it to the Hebrews saying: Hodie, si vocem
eius audieritis, To day if ye hear his voice.

Lib. 2. cap. 2
Hesichius in Leuiticum, does use Hodie, for eternity and perpetuity, alleging
these words of the second psalm: Ego hodie genui te. This day I begat thee,
that is, ab eterno, from ever and eternallye. For with God heri, and cras have
no place. There is always with him a continual and perpetual Hodie, as
Theophilactus writes upon the epistle to the Hebrews.

Notwithstanding some learned men which be of great judgment write upon these
words ( Filius meus es tu, ego hodie genui te: thou art my son, this day have
I begot thee) after this manner. There be, say they, diverse kinds of sons,
some are children by nature, some by adoption, some of regeneration, some of
alteration, by ye which the pristinate state and condition is changed into a
new state. As touching Christ our Savior, the true Christians be not ignorant
by what kind of these sons he is the son of God. Our faith does believe him
to be the natural, the only begotten and consubstantial son of the father.

Concerning this present place of scripture, let us see how this agrees unto
Christ, that the father did not simply say I begat thee, but this day I begat
thee. This phrase does not agree unto children of adoption, of age, or of love,
but only of the sons of generation, that is, that be begotten.

Now this generation is three fold.

1. Natural. 2. Spiritual. 3. Condicional.
The natural generation is, by the which God the father begat the word, and
his natural and consubstantial son, and by the which one man begets an
other.

The spiritual generation is, by the which the minds of men are so
regenerate, that of wicked they be made godly. Of the which generation Paul
speaks in the Epistle to the Corinthians, saying: In Christo Jesus per
euangelium vos genui. I have begot you in Jesus Christ by the Gospel. Again,
filioli quos iterum parturio. My little children, with whom again I travel with
child.

Conditional generation is, by the which man is changed into an other state
and condition, diverse and discrepant from his former state, as if one of a
private man be made a king, one from an obscure and base calling is made noble
and honorable, of mortal, is made immortal.

Now these words, Hodie genui te, this day I begat thee, does not agree to
Christ, according to the first generation. Yet not so, but that he is the
natural son of God, nor that this generation being eternal, can be made
temporal, or subject to any time, except ye will refer it to that day, in the
which ye word being incarnate, was born of the virgin Mary.

Neither the generation which is called spiritual, may agree unto Christ, for
when he is and was most pure in mind, he had none impiety nor vnpurenes, from
the which he might be regenerate unto godlynes. But the third generation, that
is the condicional, may be applied and referred to Christ. For what other thing
was ye imutation and chaung of the state and condition of Christ, when he was
by the holy ghost dedicated, consecrated, and declared from heaven to be the
son of God, at the flood Jordan, when he was baptized: But a certain
regeneration, that is, he was seen to be another manner of man, the^ he was
before? In so much that the inhabitauntes of the city did say: Vnde huic haec
omnia, and quae sapientia haec quae data est illi? etc. From whence has he
these things? what wisdom is this that is given unto him, that even such
great works are done by his hands? Is not this the carpenter Mary's son?
The brother of James and Ioses, and of Judah and Simon?

Or else these words. Ego hodie genui te. This day have I begot thee, may he
referred to Christ, when being raised from death he puttyng of the infirmity
and mortalitye of our flesh was translated and exalted above all, unto the
heavenly glory, and to the right hand of the Father. This is the censure and
judgment of certain learned divines.

Hodie is taken also for every time, or daily time, as we ask in the Lords
prayer, panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie, Give us this day our daily
bread.

Hodie signifies sometime the whole time of our life, as Basilius Magnus
writes in a certain Epistle, In epistola ad Chilonem de vita solit.
where he brings in this saying of the Apostle: Inuicem adhortamini, et in id
ipsum aedificate vsquequo hodie dicitur. Exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day.

This shall be sufficient for this word Hodie.

Many places or Mansions. 10.
Cap. 14
IN John Christ says to his disciples: let not your hearts be troubled, ye
believe in God, believe also in me. In my fathers house are many dwelling places.
If it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. The
occasion why Christ spoke these words, was for that Christ told them before
that he would depart from them. Vvherof the disciples conceived heaviness and
sorrow. Wherefore Christ with these words did comfort them again, saying that
he would not depart from the^, as always to be separate and divided from them,
but that unto them also there was a place in the kingdom of heaven. And
therefore he said: In domo patris mei multae mansiones sunt, in my fathers house
ar many dwelling places or mansions.

This place of scripture has been peruerslye drawn into an other sense, as
though Christ by these words should teach, that there were distinct degrees of
honor and glory in the kingdom of heaven. But Christ did not say, there be
diverse and sundry mansions, but many ma^sions, which be sufficient unto many.
As though he should say: there is not only a place there for me, but also for all
my disciples. There is no cause therefore, that ye should mourn and lament for
my corporal departure, for the kingdom of my father was prepared unto you from
the beginning of the world, and you were elect and chosen before the foundations
of the world were laid. Therefore there is nothing that ca^ annoy or hurt you,
whither it be sin, the world, death, hell, or Satan. For no man can take the
elect from the hand of my father.

Question.
If the election were done, and mansions prepared before the beginning of the
world, what need have we then of Christ? Or wherefore came he into the world?

Responsio.
The election was done before the world was made, but yet in Christ, and by
Christ. For there is none adopted of God unto his son, but by Jesus Christ. So
many mansions were prepared from the beginning of the world, but by Christ our
mediator and intercessor.

Therefore Christ came into the world to reveal and declare these ma^sions
before prepared, yt he might open ye gate of election and prepare us by his
spirit to receive these ma^sions. For what had it auailed to be elect, and in
ye mean time not to have known or entered into ye gate of election?

Obiectio.
Math. 20
How ca^ it be said, yt there be many mansions, when yt very few be elect?

Responsio
They be called many mansions in comparison to Christ, so yt the meaning is
this: Heaven is not prepared to me only, nor I alone am elect of the father
from the beginning, but many other by me are elect of the father, unto whom the
kingdom of heaven, through faith which they have in me, is opened. I verily am
the true and only son of God, and alone naturally elected of the father, and
to whom heaven naturally is prepared. But there be many other whom the father
has chosen in me, and which by me shall possess the heavenly kingdom
prepared from the beginning. Therefore (says Christ to his disciples) if it
were not so, I would have told you, As though he should have said, if heavenly
glory should receive me only, I would have told you, but the matter is
otherwise, for I go before to prepare you a place, for there be places as well
for you, as for me.

I do not a little marueil, that the most part of the later writers, which were
in the corrupt time, did not only allege his place out of John, to prove the
diversities of glories and joys in heaven, but also other places, whereof I will
touch three or four: Not that I entende to prove or give forth, yt there is
utterly an equality in heaven, or else a disparity and vnequality* But that as
far as the scriptures do give, none of both opinions can be proved in the
scriptures, by the judgment of learned men. Both the sentences are probable,
but yet not to be proved by the scriptures.

Now shall we go to the places which they allege, for the diuersitye of
degrees in glory.

The first reason.
First say they, every man shall receive according to his works, and every
one shall receive his reward, according to his labor.

Responsio.
I understand this sentence to be spoken generally concerning glory, Cap. 2.
and damnation which interpretation I have out of the epistle to the Romans.
And Christ in the last sentence of judgment does so expound, that every man
shall receive his reward, when he calls the^ on the right hand to salvation,
and casts out them on the left hand unto damnation. He whose labor shall be
found godly and just, shall be saved, and he who shall be found to have labored
ill, shall perish.

The second reason.
It is written in Daniel, that they which teach other and be wise, Cap. 11
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever.

Responsio.
This place makes little for the purpose: for it happens often times in the
holy scriptures, that those things which be spoken in the first place, are
repeated again in the second place. The difference which seems to be in this
sentence, is of the firmament, and of the stars. But when they which teach, and
they which do instruct to righteousness, be utterly all one, and are contained
in one degree, diverse rewards are not due unto them, forasmuch as they labor
both in one thing. Wherefore it appears that the same thing, which was spoken
first, is affirmed after, but yet more plainly.

Question.
Why does Daniel make mention of those which do teach, more then of other?

Responsio.
Because they are more to be confirmed and comforted, for that they be more
subject unto persecutions, then other are. Therefore they have need of
consolation. Yet it follows not out of this, but that the rewards are due
unto other faithful also. For Christ does evidently say: Iusti fulgebunt sicut
sol in regno Dei, the righteous shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of God.

Saint Hierome expounding this place, when he had simply entreated this
sentence, did say, that many do ask, whither the unlearned being holy, and the
learned being also holy, shall have one and the same glory. And he says, that
by the translation of Theodosion, we may answer that the one shall be as the
firmament, and the other as the stars. But other divines do say, that both
the parts of this sentence be one thing.

The third reason.
If there be diversity of pains, there must needs be also diversity of joys
per argumentum a contrariis. And that pains for sin are not one and equal,
Christ does prove, when he said, that it should be easier for Tire and Sidon,
then to Corozaim and Bethsaida, likewise unto Sodom, then unto Capernaum.

Responsio.
An argument a contrariis, although it run like a probable reason, yet the
same reason is not always necessary For this kind of argumentation does
sometimes deceive. As for example: A man may kill him self, therefore a man may
make him self a live again. This is no good argument.

Many other instances might be brought, but to avoid tediousnes they shall be
omitted. It cannot be denied, but that in punishments and pains there is
diuersitye: yet it seems not, that the same likewise should be in joys,
because by our ill works we deserve pain, but by our good works we do not
deserve felicity. Therefore this reason a contrariis, is far diverse.

The fourth reason.
We shall be like unto angels, but the angels have diverse degrees and orders
among them selves: Ergo we all shall have diverse degrees and orders amongst
our selves.

Responsio.
The scripture does grant that the Angels have now diverse orders and
gouernmentes, because God does use their ministerye to conserve the world and
the church. But in the end all these principalities and powers shall be
abolished: nor we do know after the day of judgment, whether there shall be
any more diverse orders and degrees among angels concerning felicity.

Furthermore, they which grant diverse orders in angels, do grant that they do
differ between them selves, specie, or as they say, proximo genere, which
cannot be granted of holy saints, or of our spirits. Wherefore the
similitude between us and the angels, does not in all points agree. For then
al angels should be taken to be of one kind, and of one order. But of the
orders of Angels I have spoken of largelye before in the Miscellane Angelus.

The fifth reason.
The sede, which is sown in the ground, does bring forth fruit, some thirty
fold, some threscore fold, some an hundred fold.

Responsio.
This parable does pertain unto the state of this present life, because the
word of God does not bring forth fruit, nor take place in the godly hearers,
like and after one manner.

The.6. reason.
In the parable of the talents, which the servants did render unto their
Lord, some more, some fewer, may be proved, that the diversity of the gain is
recompensed with diverse rewards.

Responsio.
This parable does nothing prove this purpose. For he which uses well the gifts
of God, is made worthy to be placed over many, and graces and gifts are
increased unto him, and is made daily more participante of the spiritual
dowries of Gods spirit.

The.7. reason.
It is written in the Apocalips, that some do follow the Lamb, whether soever
he goes, which is not granted unto other.

Responsio.
This place with other of the same book is obscure and dark, because the
book is said to be sealed, and is understand of very few.

And it appears not unto us, whether this allegacion does appertain unto
this present life, or to the life to come. We grant, that they which be of a
more pure life, may enter and pearce to the understanding of Christ's
mysteries. And on the other side, may be taught, that whersoeuer Christ is,
there his faithful Ministers shall be. Wherefore it is promised not only to
some, but also to all which serve Christ, that they may follow the Lamb.

The.8. reason.
He that shall do and teach men so, shall be called great in the kingdom of
God.

Responsio.
The kingdom of God in this place betokens the church militant, where they
are to be had in great price and estimation which do teach well, and do those
things which they teach. Therefore this place makes nothing for the diversity
of glories.

The.9. reason.
It is written in the latter epistle to the Corinthians: Qui parce seminat,
parce metet. etc. He that sows sparely, shall reap sparely, he that sows
in blessing, shall reap in blessing.

Responsio.
This place pertains to spiritual fruits, to be received in this life. For
they which be liberal in giving alms do abou^d with spiritual goods, and God
sometime does give unto them riches more plentifully, that they might more
largelye show their pitye and mercy unto them that have need thereof.

Obiectio.
As one star differs from an other in glory, so shall the resurrection of
the dead be: Ergo there is a difference and diuersitye of gloryes in heaven.

Responsio.
This comparison of Paul does not infer nor prove that there should be
diversity of glories, as the words following do import, where it is said: the
body is sown in corruption, it shall rise again in incorruption, it is sown
in ignominy, it shall rise again in glory: where it appears that this
diversity is to be taken only between the body that is buried, and the body
that shall rise again. Paul does not conclude here any thing of the
difference of clarified bodies them selves, but between the bodies that are
laid in the earth, and the bodies that shall rise again. And this is a general
comparison, and not a particular. Therefore Paul meant nothing less in this
place, then diversities of degrees in glory, but only puts the
differences between the bodies, that we have now, and the bodies that we shall
have then.

The.10. reason.
All the fathers and doctors, which ever wrote, be of this mind, that
diversity and diverse degrees of glory is given to the saints in heaven.

Responsio.
As touching the fathers, it cannot be denied, but that they do confess and
grant differences of joys. But here only is called in to question, whether
this assertion may be proved by the testimony of the holy scriptures?

Furthermore, they do not always speak one thing. For saint Hierome in his
epistles, where he commended the wydow, and seemed to compare her unto the
virgin, says, that he will not gladly grant these diversities between the holy
saints, when not withstanding he himself is a stout defender of these
differences.

The 11. reason.
If you will not grant diversity of joys, many will not be so earnest and
painful to go forward, and to grow to virtue, but will wax slothful and
sluggish.

Responsio.
They which be not moved through faith of Gods word, and through hope of
eternal felicity to do well, will not be easily moved for the consideration of
these diversities. For if they should do otherwise, they are rather to be
counted hirelings, then the sons of God.

To end, these authorities, proofs and aunswers, are not here alleged utterly
to deny the differences of rewards. Here is only said that this opinion cannot
be concluded out of holy scriptures. It may be notwithstanding, that when the
saints do record and remember, that God has wrought by them many noble
works, do perchance conceive in them selves more delectation and joy, then
the other, which cannot repeat such works done by them. But that distinction
of the scholemen which they feign of certain crowns, atque de praemio
substantiali et accidentali, is most frivolous and foolish.

He shall, 11.
IT is written in Genesis how God spoke to the Serpent after this manner:
Inimicitias ponam inter te, et inter mulierem, et inter semen tuum et inter
semen eius. Ipsum conteret tibi caput. I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed. He shall break thy head. etc. In
this sentence the pronoune Ipsum is of diverse diversely used. For some do read
ipsum, other ipse, and other ipsa. The Hebrews do read ipsum, referring it to
semen.

Septuaginta do translate (...) ipse, and then it is referred unto Christ.

The commune translation does read ipsa, whereupon certain scolastical divines
refer it and expound it of the virgin Mary, who by mediatio^ of her son,
overcame Satan. And so writes Lyranus. Other refer it unto the church. But
here ye may see and learn what great ignorance and negligence was in the popish
Church, and in the Doctors and writers being of the same church.

The femine gender is put of them instead of the masculine or neuter They
would never consult the Hebrew or Greek books. They would never confer the
latin translations one with an other. And therefore by common error, this
corrupt reding was received, that is to put ipsa for ipsu^.

But it may be that they were deceived by the likeness of the two hebrew
letters, Vau and Iod, which be very like, saving that Vau is draw en a little
longer downward. Therefore where the Hebrew has Hu, which be tokeneth ipse, or
else ipsum, they did read Hi, which signifies ipsa. And by that means they
might be deceived.

But the truth is that ye must read ipse, or ipsum. If you read ipse, it has
relation unto this Greek word (...), which is of one signification with the
word (...). If you read ipsum, it must be referred to this word (...). In the
words of Moses there is no ambiguity, but concerning the sense and meaning of
the words, the interpreters of the holy scriptures do not agree. For many do
take semen, the sede, without question or dout for Christ, as though it should
be said, some man shall be borne of the sede of a woman, which shall wound the
serpents head.

Their sentence and judgment might easily be allowed, but that they do wrest
this word semen to violently. For who will grant a nowne collectiue to be
spoken of one only man?

Also, as the perpetuity of discord and debate is noted between the Serpents
sede, and the womans sede, so by continual course of ages victory is promised
to the children of men.

Generally therefore some divines do interpret semen, of the posterity of Eve.
But when experience teaches that all the sons of Adam become not the
victours and ouercommers of the devil, it is necessary that they come and flee
unto one head, that they may so find, unto whom the victory does pertain. So
Paul does deduce us from the seed of Abraham unto Christ. Gal. 3.


The sense therefore is, that mankind which Satan endeavored to oppres should
have the upper hand. But that manner to overcome and to have the upper hand, is
to be marked, which is described in the scriptures. Satan at his pleasure has
led the children of men captive in all ages, and does continue the same woeful
triumph unto this day, and therefore is called the prince of the world. Joan 12.
But because a stronger came from heaven, which should subdue him, by that
means it came to pass, that the whole church of God should valiantly resist
him, as Paul says to the Romans Dominus breui conteret Sathanam sub pedibus
vestris. Gap. 6.
The Lord shortly shall beat down Satan under your feet. By the which
words he does signify that the virtue and power of beating down Satan, is
dispersed and poured upon all the faithful, and that is the common benediction
and blessing of the whole church.

But here note one thing, that this is only begone in this world, and not
finished, because the Lord does not crown none but his approved champions and
soldiers.

Furthermore, the image and manner of these things which are done from the
beginning of the world, unto the end of the same, is to be observed and marked.

The sede of Satan are all the wicked, as well men as spirits. The sede of the
woman is Christ, with the whole body of his elect. And as enmities are between
the Serpent and mankind, so are they likewise between the sede of Satan and
Christ, with his elect. For the generation of the wicked does always fight
against the elect of God to destroy the good. But the elect shall at length
escape stronger, through their head Christ. Who by his death has abolished
and vanquished him which had empire and rule of death.

Caietanus also does refer these words Ipsum semen conteret caput tuum, unto
the elect of God, because every elect does tread upon the head of the
Serpent, that is, upon the office and propertye of the the devil, provoking
unto sin.

The end of the Miscellanes of the third Prelection, of the second Tome.
The fourth Prelection of the second Tome.
IN our last lesson I declared unto you the mind of S. Peter upon these
words: Benedictus deus pater domini nostri Jesus Christi, etc. Blessed be God,
even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, according to his aboundaunt
mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead. Now, I entend, by Gods grace, to go forward with more of
the text.

It follows in Peter: Inheriditatem incorruptibilem et incontaminatam, et
immarcessibilem, conseruatam in caelis in vobis, etc. That is. To an
inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you, which are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto
salvation, which is prepared to be showed in the last time.

The Apostle does prosecute here all things with very due and Rhetorical
order. This hope of life (says he) is happened unto us by the resurrection of
Christ. His death is made our life, and he with his resurrection, has raised
us from the eternal death, to which we were subject.

Cap. 6
Saint Paul writes to the Romans. Si insiti facti sumus illi per
similitudine^ mortus eius, nimirum et resurrectionis participes erimus: for if
we graffed with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall we be to the
similitude of his resurrection. And in an other place. If you be dead, your
life is hidden with Christ in God.

In hereditatem, to an inheritance: As though he should say, in that Christ
rose again, he restored and recovered unto us that immortal inheritance which
we had spent and lost by our first parents in paradyse. Christ therefore
taking the shape of a servant does reconcile us to the father, and did again
make us coheires with him.

1. Inheritance
This inheritance is Incontaminata, undefiled, that is: It neither has, nor
can have any such filthiness as the earthly inheritaunces have, which make the
soul unclean by their abuses, that the soul may not be seen at the day of
judgment adourned and decked with that wedding garment.

This heavenly inheritance is pure, and makes us to be glorious, this
inheritance fades not away, it feels no decrease. It can not be taken away
of thieves, it can not be consumed of fire, it can not be troubled with any
storm.

But let us ask Peter here a question, where is this inheritance? where is (I
say) this wholesome inheritance kept and preserved for us? 2. Heaven.
In caelis, in heaven, (says Peter) as though he should say: your names are
written in heaven, you are received into the number of the elect: It follows.

Erga vos, for you. This feast, this banquet, this inheritance in heaven is
prepared for you which believe in Christ: for us, I say, which have been and ar
poor, this inheritance is prepared, that we might be made rich.

Saint Austen has for this a goodly saying: Subiecit se, vt exaltaret te
inclinauit se, vt susciperet te, exinaniuit se in maiestate, vt impleret te
diuinitate: descendit vsque ad te, vt tu ascenderes vsque ad eum. He did humble
him self, that he might exalte thee: He inclined himself, that he might take
up thee: He beriued himself of his majesty, that he might replenishe thee with
his divinity: He descended even to thee, that thou should ascend even to
him. It follows.

3. Virtue. 4. Hell.
Qui virtute dei custodimini per fidem ad salutem: Which are kept by the power
of God through faith unto salvation. That is, we are kept by his word. For of
our selves we be weak sheep, in whom there lies neither wisdom nor power to
defend our selves from the Wolf. But how are we kept? Through faith (says
Peter) least the gates of hell should prevail against us in the time of
adversity.

Question.
What does it profit salvation and inheritance to be laid up in store for us
in heaven, when that we are toste up and down in this world, as it were in a
troublesome sea? What does it help, to constitute our salvation in a safe and
quiet port, when we are in danger of a thousand shipwrackes?

Responsio.
Peter does here prevent such objections, when he teaches us to be kept here
in this world by faith in the middle of dangers, and so to approach unto death,
that, notwithstanding, we may be safe under the custody of faith. But because
faith oftentimes waxes faint in this infirmity of our flesh, we may be
always doubtful, 5. To morrow
what shall chance unto us to morrow, except God did here succor and
comfort us.

The opinion of the papists is most diabolical, which doubts of final
perseueraunce, because we be uncertain whether we shall be in the same grace
and favor to morrow, as we be now.

But Peter does not leave us so doubtful: for he affyrmeth us to be kept of
the power of God, that no doubt by the conscience of our proper infirmity
should trouble us. Although we be infirm and weak, yet our salvation is not
unstable, because it is holden up by the power of God. Therefore as we are
defended by faith: so faith her self has her stabilitie in the power of God,
whereby we may be safe, not only for the time present, but also for the time to
come.

Saint Paul writes, saying: Persuasus sum, quod neque mors, neque vita, Cap.
8.
neque angeli. etc. I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, 6. Height nor depth. Cap. 1.
nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Again, to the Philippians: Hoc ipsum persuasus, quod qui cepit in vobis opus
bonum, per faciet vsque in diem Jesus Christi. I am persuaded of this same
thing, that he that has begone this good work in you, will perform it
until the day of Jesus Christ.

It follows, ad salutem quae in hoc parata est etc. Unto salvation which is
prepared to be showed in the last time. Which is as much to say as this: Now
your rewards are hidden. And oftentimes they which seem to be in best case,
are in the worste, and they which seem to be in the worste case, are in the
best.

In this world there is a time to exercise and practice godliness. To the
rewards to the said exercise du, either is a time prescribed, which it behooves
us not to preuente and to crave before time. Let it suffice us, that eternal
felicity is laid up in store and in safety for us, which neither man nor
deuel can take from us, so that faith fail us not, by the which neglecting of
worldly things we do wholly depend of heavenly things. This doctrine does
greatly make to nourishe and sustain our hope. For the inheritance, to which
we are appointed, is gotten and prepared from the beginning of the world, which
as yet lies hidden, shut up, and sealed. But within short time it shall be
opened and revealed, that it may be plainly seen and felt. Therefore, while we
be in this world, no truce, no tranquillity or peace is to be hoped, but when
we shall finishe this warfare like life, then that incorruptible crown laid
up in heaven shall be set upon them which do overcome by faith.

But when shall this be? when Peter? when I say shall it be given? 7. Golden
hills.
Thou show many gay and noble things, thou promisest golden hills: but
nothing we see, nothing we feel.

Peter answers: In tempore supremo: in the last time, that is, at the last
day of Judgment. Because the instauratio^ of all things is not to be looked
for before. But in that time this crown, this inheritance, these rewards
shall be revealed and made open. And then shall we sustain no labor, no
affliction, no passions, but shall have eternal rest, whereof Christ gave a
taste unto his disciples in the mount Thabor. When Peter flowing with joy
said unto Christ: Domine, bonum est hic nos esse. O lord, it is good for us to
tarry still here.

It follows: In quo exultatis nunc ad breue tempus afflicti in variis
experime^tis si opus sit: Wherein ye rejoice, 8. Te^tations.
though now for a season (if need require) ye are in heaviness through manifold
temtations.

Now, Peter builds upon the foundation, which he has laid, a noble edifice
of patience, saying: in quo exultatis: in which you rejoice, that is, be glad,
exalte, and rejoice in the hope of this salvation laid up in heaven. He does
not here only praise them, but also exhort, and comfort them. For he teaches
what fruict shall come unto us by the hope of this salvation laid up in heaven,
that is, spiritual joy, by the which the bitterness of all euels and
adversities is not only mitigated, but also all sadness and heaviness is
vanquished and extinct. Therefore, if thou be a christian and do expecte this
inheritance? thou must depend all and whollye on this hope: so that thou
contemn whatsoever things be in this world, and openly profess and
confess all the wisdom, and all the holiness of this world to be utterly
nothing. Therefore none other thing is to be looked for here but to be condemned
and persecuted of the world. But yet (as Peter says) ad breue tempus for a
short time, as though he had said, you which now do weep, the world rejoicing,
shall be in short time filled with great joy: you which now suffer adversity and
afflictions remember, that they shall not continue long.

Notio.
Here seems to be some repugnancie and contradiction while he says, that the
faithful which rejoice with gladness, are also afflicted, sad and heavy, for
these two be contrary affectes. But the faithful themselves do know better by
experimente, that these two contrary affectes do consiste together in them,
than can be expressed with words. For the faithful are not stocks and
blocks, nor have not so put of humayn sense and feling, but that they be
touched with dolor and sorrow, but that they fear perils and dangers, but that
they feel what a grievous thing poverty is, and how sharp and hard persecutions
be, yea and furthermore do apprehend what tears, 9 Pestilence.
what sickness, what cares, what coldes, what sterility and barennesse, what
pestilence, what hunger do chance in the whole life of man, and that
adversity (which is thought to have this day an end) begins again to
morrow. So that in this life be it never so long, there seems little life or
comfort. Of these euels the faithful perceive and feel heaviness, but yet this
heaviness is so mitigat by faith, that the faithful notwithstanding cease not to
rejoice: so that sorrow does not hinder their joy, but rather give place unto
it. On the other side, although joy do overcome sadness, yet it does not
utterly abolish it, because it does not beriue us of our humayne nature.

It follows, Si opus sit: If need require. This saying of Peter is full of
comfort, if the matter so require, if it do tend to our salvation, god will
shortly fynish these afflictions and tentations. 10. Above that
For as Paul says, fidelis deus, qui non sinit nos tentari supra id quod
possumus: God is faithful, which does not suffer us to be tempted above that we
be able to bear. And God does not afflicte and trouble us, but for the best:
Si opus sit: If need require. Peter puts here the condition, for the cause,
for he shows that it is not without cause, that God does so exercise and try
his. For if he should afflicte us for no cause, it would be very grievous to
bear and to suffer. Peter therefore does take here an argument of consolation
out of the counsel and decree of God: Not that the reason and cause may always
appear unto us, 11. If God will so.
but that we should be resolved and fully persuaded, that it ought so to be,
because it pleases God. And therefore Peter does say: Si opus sit, If need
require. Which in other words he does after in the.3. chapter repeat, saying,
Si ita velit deus, if God will so. Which place does make much against them,
which lay crosses and burdens upon them selves, 12. Having no need.
having no need, that is, not looking for the sentence and will of God. There
be many which endeavor, as it were with certain violence, to run and to
burste into heaven by their works and chosen crosses: as Basilius Magnus and
Gregorius Nazianzenus did, 13. Fastings.
who both gave them selves to such fastinges, watchings and lying on the
ground, thinking thereby to enter into heaven, that they could not execute their
pastoral function and office. But God does condemn such works. For these
proper works, which we do choose unto us of our own mind and choice, are
nothing worth in the sight of god. We ought to expecte and look what god will
put and lay upon us, 14 Crosses on our selves.
that we walk and follow as he does lead us.

Therefore, we need not to seek and to lay crosses upon our selves, but as Peter
says, Si opus sit, that is, if the matter so require, which is: If god do
appointe unto thee that thou suffer, the^ pacie^tly receive the cross, and
comfort thy self with the hope and expectation of that inheritance which is
not temporal but eternal.

Obiectio.
Does not Paul say: Si nos ipsos iudicaremeus, non diiudicaremura domino. 1.
Cor. 11.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord.

Responsio.
Paul does not in this place speak of the cross and outward afflictions, but
of repentance, and of the right and due proof of our selves, before we do
eat of the bread, and drink of the cup of the Lords table. The godly and
faithful do preuente the iudgmente of god by repentance. And there is none
other judgment, by the which we may obtain absolution and remission before
god, than frankly and freelye to accuse our selves, in the acknowledginge of
our sins.

It follows: Quo ex ploracio fidei vestrae, multo pretiosior auro quod perit
etc. that the trial of your faith, being much more precious than gold that
p^risheth (though it be tried with fire) might be found unto your praise and
honor and glory, at the appering of Jesus Christ. 15. Homaeosis
Peter does here bring in pulchram (...) an apt similitude between gold and
fire, and the cross and affliction.

The cross and diverse affl^ctions do bring to pass, that sincere and pure
faith may be known, 16. Faith.
from a counterfeit and feigned faith. And for that cause God does so tempte
us, that our faith may be proved and made manifest to the world, and that by
our example other may be invited and allured unto faith also.

He brings in an argument a minoriad maius. For if gold, 17 Gold.
which is a corruptible metal, is so much esteemed of us, that we will have it
tried by fire, that the worth and price thereof may be better known of us: What
meruell is it, if God require the same proof and trial in our faith,
considering that the excellency of our faith is so greatly regarded of God?

That which fire is unto gold, the same affliction is unto the faithful. 18.
Fire.
Gold is not lost and perished by fire, but proved and purged. So the
faithful are not lost and destroyed by afflictions, but are tried, and (as ye
would say) broiled, that they may be sincere and pure in the faith.

Faith is compared unto gold, but faith is much more noble then gold. For as
gold is the most precious metal in things mortal: so faith does most excel
in things spiritual.

Gold is temporal, faith is eternal: gold is tried two manner of ways. First
when it is purged by fire from the dross.

Secondly when the goodness thereof is tried by judgment. Both these manners of
prouinge do most aptly agree unto faith. For first when many dregs of
incredulity do remain in us, while they be (as you would say) sodden in the
furnace of God, by diverse afflictions, then the drosses of our faith are
purged, that it might be pure and clean before God.

Secondly experimente and judgment is taken of us, whether it be a fained or a
sincere faith.

When we come unto faith by the word and hearing of the gospel, we are
justified and begin to be purged, but as long as we be in this flesh, we can
not escape throughlye clean. Therefore, God does throw us into the midst of
the fire, that is, into afflictions, ignominy, shame, and other incommodities,
by the which we be daily more and more purged and tried, until death do come.

This purgation and mortification we can not obtain be any of our own works.
For how can an outward work purify and make clean the inward heart? 19.
Book of wisdom.


Peter does allude, here to diverse places of the scriptures: as the saying of
the book of wisdom: tanquam aurum in furnace probauit electos dominus: God
tries the elect, as gold is tried in the fire.

Again, in the psalms it is written: thou O God have proved us, thou haste
tried us, Psalm. 65
as silver is tried. Thou have brought us into the snare, and laid a strait
chain upon our loins. Thou have caused men to ride over our heads. We went
into fire and water, but thou broughtest us out into a welthie place.

Chrysostom that golden doctor, has for this matter of affliction, a golden
saying. Talis est natura fidei, quanto magis vetatur: tanto magis accenditur.
Virtus fidei in periculis secura est, in securitate periclitatur. Quid enim
alium sic laxat vigorem fidei, sicut tranquillitas longa? Such is the nature
of faith, that the more it is forbidden, the more it is kindled and set
forward. The power of faith is secure and safe, in the middle of perils and
danger, and in security it is in peril and danger. For what other thing
does so loose the force of faith, as long security and tranquillity?

It follows, In laudem gloriam and honorem in reuelationem Jesus Christi: Unto
your praise and honor and glory at the appearyng of Jesus Christ.

Peter exhorts them to perseueraunce, and does make an argument ab vtili: As
cunning husbandmen are wont to foreshew the corn and the rhyme, to gather the
corn unto them that do sow it: so Peter in this place does not only show
the fruict and reward, which they shall receive (which live godly in Christ) but
also the time of gathering and receiuyng the same fruict and reward. Not in
this time (says he) nor in this world, but when the son of God shall appear
in his majesty. Then the patience of the godly afflicted, shall be to their
praise, then it shall be to their honor, when the wicked fall into fire, they
shall enter into everlasting life.

It follows: Quem quum non videritis, diligitis etc. Whom ye have not seen,
and yet love, in whom now, though ye see him not, yet do you believe and
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.

Peter speaks these words of the energie, 20. Flesh.
force, and strength of faith, to declare and set forth the certainty and
assurance of the same. And does make as it were a certain Antithesis between
the flesh and faith.

The flesh requires experime^ts, and does lean to earthly and visible
things: But faith does stick and cleave in things heavenly and invisible.

Cap. 11.
Paul says to the Hebrews: Faith is the ground of things which are hoped for,
and the evidence of things which are not seen, that is, faith is occupied about
those things which do not appear. And those things be not earthlye, but
heavenly, not visible, but invisible, as the common saying is, vbi ratio habet
experimentum, fides non habet meritum. Where reason has experimente, their
faith has no merit.

Saint Ambrose also writes: Aufer argumenta, vbi fides quaeritur in ipsis
gymnasijs suis iamdudum dialectica taceat, piscatoribus creditur non
dialecticis. Wh^re there is any questions of faith, there take away arguments
and reasons. Yea where faith is, let Logic keep silence in her own schools,
credit is given to fishers, not to Logicians.

Saint Austin says: Noli intelligere vt credas, sed creed vt intelligas.
Understand not that thou may believe, but believe that thou may
understand.

Christ said to Thomas: because thou haste seen me Thomas, thou do believe,
blessed are those which have not seen, and yet do believe. So Peter here does
say: when you have not seen Christ with these corporal eyes conversant in this
world, yet notwithstanding you do love him: Therefore you are blessed.

But there is no love without the knowledge of the thing loved. But you know by
faith, for faith has her eye, faith has her ear, yet spiritual, not carnal.
By this means Christ is seen in the mystical supper, which if it should be
furnished only with common bread and profane wine, now it should not be a
mystical supper, nor worthy to be called the supper of the Lord. Now those
things which faith does comprehend, it does truly comprehend. Therefore* when in
the supper we behold and see the Lord by the eyes of faith, the Lord is truly
present in the supper. I say truly, I say he is truly present as the nature
of faith requires, and where other say he is present carnally, it is against
the nature of faith. Faith believes Christ to have been incarnate, to have dyed
in the flesh, to have risen again, to have ascended into heaven, and to sit at
the right hand of the father, and from thence to come to judge the quick and
the dead. Therefore concerning these things to be done in the world the
faithful do not see, do not touch, do not eat Christ carnally, but
spiritually. And this faith does work in the hearts of the faithful, the love
as well of God as of our neighbor. Therefore Peter says here: Que^ quum non
videatis, diligitis. Whom when you have not seen, yet you love.

Paul says to the Galathian: In Christo Jesus neque circumcisio neque
praeputium quicquam valet, sed fides per dilectionem. Cap. 5.
Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision do any thing avail, but faith by love.

Saint John weighing and vewing the love of the neighbor and of God, writes:
Si quis dicit, diligo deum, et fratrem suum odit, mendax est. If any man say, I
love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar: for he that loves not his
brother whom he sees, how can he love God whom he sees not? It follows.

Credentes tamen exultatis gaudio ineffabili et glorificato: yet do you believe
and rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. Here does Peter add the
fruit of trust and faith in Christ and seems to speak after this manner: You
do feel peace and joy in your hearts with most sweet tranquillity of
conscience more pleasantly, then I can express with words. This joy is an
unspeakable joy, not vulgar, not common, but a glorified joy, that is, it
agrees for the most part with that eternal joy which is to come.

The joys of the world are disturbed by misfortunes and afflictions, and are
frail and fall away, but the joy of faith is not only not disturbed by
misfortunes, and by the cross of persecution, but is made perfect more and
more. And when the storms of adversities do wax raging and fierce, then is
faith most clear.

All the godly being sensed with the strength of faith and patience, do
contain all the whole world and the tyranny thereof.

Let us hear what Paul says: Who shall separate us from the love of God?
Romans 8
Shall tribulation, or anguishe, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword? As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day
long. We are counted as sheep of the slaughter. Nevertheless in all these
things we are more then conquerours, through him that loved us. For I am
persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Dioclesian the Emperor a most sharp and cruel persecutour of the
christians, when he knew that one Peter one of his Chamberleines had embraced
the faith of Christ, minding to pull him again from that faith, commanded him
to be beaten with plummettes of lead, and with sharp iron nails, when Peter,
notwithstand these torments, did stand stoutly and courageously: with a
pleasant and merry countenance: he commanded his body to be rubbed with
salt and vinegar, and him to be brought out naked, and to be racked and
stretched forth upon an iron grate, and with a soft fire to be burned, that
his torments might increase more and more.

But what countenance he had in the beginning of his torments, the same he
kept in the end. It follows.

Reportantes finem fidei vestrae, salutem animaru^ vestrarum, receiving the end
of your faith even the salvation of your souls. That is, 21. End of our faith.
by faith love and joy in Christ Jesus, you shall obtain that eternal glory,
which is your salvation: you must enter into the glory of God by many
tribulations. Therefore faith only is not certain, but the reward answering
to the same is also most certain

Saint Paul says: I am appointed a preacher of the gospel, and an Apostle,
and a teacher of the Gentiles, 2. Tim. 1.
for the which cause I also suffer these things, I am not ashamed, for I know
whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him against that day.

Also in an other place he says. Bonum certamen certaui etc. I have fought a
good fight, 2. Tim. 4
and have finished my course: I have kept the faith. For hensforth is laid up
for me the crown of righteousness which the Lord the righteous judge shall
give me in that day. This life and whatsoever pertains to this body, are
great impediments that our soul can not apply it self to the contemplation
and cogitation of the spiritual life to come.

The Apostle Peter does set forth here with most earnest study and care this
spiritual life, this glory and felicity to be had in remembrance at all
times, and does teach that we need to pass and care for nothing. So that we
may bear away the end of our faith which is the salvation of our souls. It
follows.

De qua salute ex quisierunt and scrutati sunt prophetae etc. Of the which
salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched, which prophesied of the
grace that should come unto you, searchynge when or what time the spirit which
testified before of Christ which was in them, should declare the sufferings
that should come unto Christ, and the glory that should follow unto whom it was
revealed, that not unto them selves, but unto us they should minister the
things which are now showed unto you by them which have preached unto you the
gospel by the holy ghost sent down from heaven, the which things the Angels
desire to behold.

Peter in these words does confute and refell these which judged the
Prophets and their writings to be given only to the people of the old
Testament, 22. People of t e old testament.
and to pertain nothing unto them, whose objection Peter here does dissolve,
as though he should say.

The mysteries of our salvation, were revealed unto the Prophets for that end
that they should be known and made open, not only to the prophets them
selves, and to them which were of their time, but also they wroughte for our
felicity and salvation, that we might be learned and instructed of them as of
schol-maisters and teachers.

Cap. 15.
Saint Paul to the Romans says: Quaecunque scripta sunt, in nostram doctrina^
scripta sunt etc. Whatsoever things ar written before time, are written for our
lerning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have
hope. And Paul himself pleading his cause before Agrippa says: 23. Agrippa.
I teach nothing but that which the Prophets and Moses taught before. And the
same things which were written and done after the prophets, of the Apostles,
came of one and the self same spirit.

All those things says Peter which were before showed of the prophets, are
now declared by me and my other fellow Apostles to be fulfilled in Christ. And
this declaration was done by none other author, 24. Penthecost
then by the holy ghost coming from heaven in the day of Penthecost.

De qua salute exquisierunt and scrutati sunt prophetae: of the which salvation
the Apostles have inquired and searched.

He absolueth in these words two things. For he entreats of the verity
and certainty of our faith, 25. Fear.
that the afflicted should not fear that they suffered for an ill cause or an
il doctrine. But he teaches by prophecies and examples of Christ, that there
is no entry into blessedness, but by adversities and affliction.

And that which Peter says here. (The Prophets have required and searched) it
pertains not so much unto their writings and doctrine, as to their private
and earnest desire wherewith they burned to see christ (as Christ writes in
Luke) multi reges and prophetae volueru^t videre quae vos videtis, Cap. 10.
and non videru^t. Many kings and prophets would have seen those things. etc.

Quaestio
Peter say the fathers to have sought it, as though they had not obtained
that thing which at this time is offered and given unto us.

Responsio.
Salvation is taken here for manyfestation which was given at the time of his
coming, when he which was promised before, was then verily and corporally
exhibit and given, when the prophets had but a little taste of the grace
wroughte by Christ, not concerning the substance thereof, but touching the
manner of revelation, they did not without cause enquire, search, and with
wishes desired Christ presently to be given them.

When Simeon after he had seen Christ with a quiet and peaceable mind, did
prepare him self unto death, he shows that before that, he was unquiet and
careful. It follows.

Scrutantes ad quem aut ad cuiusmodi temporis articulum etc. searchinge when or
at what time, he does now note the manner of their inquisition, for the
difference of the law and the gospel was as it were a certain veil put
between, that they could not look so nerely upon those things which were set
out to our eyes. Nor it was mete the full light to shine as it were in the
midde day, when Christ being the son of righteousness was yet absent. And
when they daily desired redemption to hasten that they might see it: yet that
their desire did not make them impatient, but they did patiently susteyn how
long it pleased god to defer the same.

Peter does not say, that the prophets did search by their own sense and
labor what time the kingdom of Christ should come, but did apply all
their study and endeuoures to the revelation of the spirit. 26. Sobriety of
inquiring.
And by this example they teach a certain sobritie of inquiringe and
learning. For they went no further then the spirit did lead them. And
verily there should be none end nor mean of the curiosity of man, unless
the spirit of god should rule and stay our wits, to desire to learn none
other way than of the same spirit. It follows: Qui in illiserat spiritus.
The spirit which was in them. By these words he does signify that the
prophets were endued and beautified with the spirit of intelligence, not
after a common manner, but larglie and abou^dantly. And this is a great praise
of their doctrine, that it was the testimony of the holy ghost.

Well, to draw to an end, because time calls away, I will go to the
clause and sense of this present text, which is this. In quam desiderant
angeli prospicere: or as some read in quae desiderant prospicere: whom or
which things the angels desire to behold. In the greek it is (...). i. in
quae, that is those things which were showed before of the prophets, and
afterward preached by the apostles.

The text might easily be depraved to put (...), for (...). Nor Peter here
does mean of the spirit of ye prophets (which the angels desire to behold) but
does set forth the majesty of the gospel which the angels do reverence and
honor.

Beda does interpret it of Christ glorified, and says also that it may be
taken and understand of the holy ghost, sent down upon the earth.

Irenaeus expounds this place of the promises of the prophets which Christ
coming into this world did accomplish and fulfill. Lib, 4. ca. 67


In quae angeli desiderant prospicere, the which things the angels desire to
behold. Here is a marvelous great praise of the gospel, which conteyneth the
treasure of wisdom, as yet concealed and hidden from the angels: as though
Peter should say, it is no marvel if the prophets desired to see things
done by the unspeakable counsel of God, saying that the angels had so ardent a
desire to see the perfection and accomplishment of the same.

Obiectio.
It is neither mete nor reason that those things should be open and known
unto us which are conceled from the angels, who do always see the face of god,
and are ministers in the church to be governed, and administratours of al good
things done in the church.

Responsio.
Such things be opened unto us as it were in the glass and speculation of
the word, not that our knowledge is counted higher or greater then the
knowledge of the angels. 27. Glory be to god. Luke 1. Ephe. 5.
Peter only understands in these words those things to be promised unto
us, the accomplishment and performance whereof the angels desire to see. And
therefore when these things began to be don, the angels not without great joy
did singe, gloria in excelsis deo, glory be to god on high.

Furthermore saint Paul says, that when the Gentiles were called, the
marvelous wisdom of god began to be known to the angles, for this was a merye
and pleasant spectacle and sight unto them, that Christ did gather the whole
world, so many years lost and alienate from the hope of life, unto his
body, that is, the church.

But how much more will they meruell at the higheste and chiefest presidente
of gods justice, goodness, and wisdom, when the kingdom of Christ shall be
accomplished? The citezens of the which kingdom, god the lord and ruler of
angels make us, through the force of the death of his son Jesus Christ, to
whom with the holy ghost be al honor and glory now and for ever. Amen.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea praelectionis quartae secondi Tomi,
Inheritance. 1.
IT may be demanded, whether this inheritance shall be given to the soul
immediately after our death: or whether it shall be deferred unto the last day,
and whether the souls in the mean times do sleep, and then this inheritance
be given both to body and soul, when they be joined together, and not before.

Responsio.
1. ep. cap. 13.
Paul writes to the Corinthians: Tunc videbimus eum facie ad faciem: then we
shall se him face to face, all the divines do say, that this aduerbe, tunc, being
an aduerbe of time, does signify furthwt after death, that the soul being
losed from the body, shall have furthwt the fruition of the gloriouse sight of
God.

But Ireneus would in no wise grant that to be true, before the day of
Resurrection, and does say, that it is the doctrine of heretics to persuade
them selves, that they shall ascend into heaven, and to be inhau^ced to the
sight of the father before the general resurrection of the dead. He would have
us, and says that we ought, to suffer those things which christ himself did
put in experience: who was not suddenly and straight way raised from death, nor
did ascend immediately unto his father, but after his resurrection said unto
Marie: noli me tangere, quia non dum asce^di ad patrem meum: touch me not, for
I have not yet ascended to my father: Nor it is mete (says Ireneus) that the
disciple should be above the master. Therefore, as Christ did not straight way
after his death ascend into heaven: so ought we to expecte and look for the
resurrection of the dead, before we ascend into heaven.

Confutatio.
This collation between Christ and us is not generallye true. For we grant,
that we ought to conform our selves unto Christ. But in every part the
collatio^ is not to be admitted. For Christ did many things, which it is not
necessary for to do.

It was three days or Christ did rise, because he would declare the verity of
his death. And he ascended not before 40 days, that his resurrection might
appear more certain: in the which time he did eat and drink with his
disciples, and did offer himself to be touched of them for the co^firmatio^ of
their faith. But when it behooves us not so to do, nor any necessity does so
exact of us, there is no impediment, but that our souls may ascend into
heaven, immediately after their separation from the body.

It is true, that the dtsciple ought not to be above the master: but shall we
therefore gather, that what soever Christ suffered, we ought to suffer the same?
He was called Beelzebub: does it follow therefore that we should be so called? He
was offered upon ye cross, and did hang between ij. theefes, is it therefore
requisite that we should do the like? No, it follows not.

Obiectio.
It is written in the Apocalips, that the souls of them which were slain for
Christ's sake do cry: how long, O Lord, will it be, Cap. 6
ere thou do revenge the blood of them that dwell upon the earth? Here you may
see, that the souls of the saints be not in heaven, but do lie under the
altar, and seem to lie a sleep.

Responsio.
They are said here to cry and to have a marvelous earnest request and
desire, but to cry, and so ferue^tly to pray, is not to lie a sleep. White
robes were given unto them, that is, they have received part of their
felicity, which is the joy of the soul. And it was said unto them, that they
should rest for a little season, until their fellow servants and their brethern
that should be killed even as they were, were fulfilled. And the^, that is,
after the day of the general resurrection, they shall have the absolute and
consummate glory, both of body and soul.

Obiectio. Cap. 11

Saint Paul in the epistle to the Hebrews (when he had nombred the fathers of
he old Testament, which were noble and valiant in faith) says, that they have
not received the promise, God prouidyng a better thing for us, that they
without us, should not be made perfect.

Responsio.
We grant in deed, that they have not received the perfection and
consummation of the promise, or of this inheritance. For they look for the
resurrection which we shall have altogether.

Other expound this place after this sort: They had not such clear light of
Christ as we: for they looked for that which we have. Therefore, it were shame
for us, if at least we have not as great constancy as they had.

Reasons out of the scripture to prove that the souls sleep not.

Christ a little before his death said to the thief: This day thou shalt be
with me in Paradise. These words, this day, do evidently declare, that his
felicity should not be proroged unto the last day.

Paul writes to the Philippians, that he wished to be loosed out of this
world, and to be with Christ: for he doubted not that to be profitable for
him. This his desire should not have been sound and good, if his soul should
sleep.

The history of the rich man and Lazarus, does prove that the soul after
this life does in no wise sleep, but to be either in joy or in pain. And where
the adversaries do say, it to be a parable, and therefore to make nothing
against them: I answer, that many of the fathers do say it not to be a
parable, but an history, as Gregory and Hierome. And Tertullian goes so
far, that he judges the rich man to be Herod, Eleazar, John Baptiste.
Chrysostom, and Augustine do affirm it to be a parable.

Solomon says: duste shall return unto earth, from whence it came, and the
soul shall return unto God which made him. If it return again unto God,
Eccle. histor. Lib. 4.
it sleeps not

Policarpus which flourished in the Apostles time, when he went to be burned for
the confession of the faith of Christ, declared that he should that day be
present before God in soul.

Christ said that it was written, that he should be the God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob: and further added, that he is the God of the living, not of the
dead. And if they do live, they must needs do somewhat, that is, they must know
God, and love him.

Nor the scripture does allow their sentence, when it says, them that be dead
to sleep.

This phrase is applied unto the body, which after death is said to sleep,
because it shall rise again. And by this phrase the old writers affirmed
churchyards to be the places appointed for burials, as though you would say,
places to sleep in. And therefore they be called (...).

Heaven. 2.
Heaven is called in the Hebrew, Schamaim: which is a word co^pound of, Scham,
and maim. And it has his appellation of his waterie substance. For, maim
betokens waters. It has ye form of the duall nombre, for the two waters,
that is, those waters which are above the firmament, which be called, aquae
superiores, and the waters which be under the firmament, which be called aquae
inferiores.

And note here, that both the greek word, (...), and the latin word, coelum,
are put in the plural number in the Lords prayer, because that this Hebrew
word Schamaim has no singular number. And therefore the greek and latin
translation is put plurallye. Where the Hebrew says Schebaschamaim, the greek
has, (...), the latin has: qui es in caelis.

Heaven in greek is called, (...), quasi (...), as saint Ambrose writes in
his Examero^. And it does come ab (...), which betokens to se: because heaven
is clear to be seen, and not thick, as the water and the earth is. Philo in
his book de mundo, does deduce it of this word (...), which betokens a
limite, a mark, a bound: because that heaven is the uttermost bound of all
the superior bodies.

Heaven is called in latin, coelum, which comes of the verb caelare, which
betokens to cover: because heaven covers all the inferior things. Other (as
saint Ambrose) would have it called caelum, a coelare, to grave: because the
stars seem to be engraued in it. Varro does call it caelum quasi (...). i.
cauum, hollow.

The philosophers do say, that there be x. heavens: whereof seven have the
names of the planets, as of: Saturnus. Jupiter. Mars. Sol. Venus. Mercurius.
Luna.


The eight heaven is called caelum sy dereum, sieve stellatu^, the ninth they
called caelum aqueum, vel crystallynu^: not of coldness, but of clearness:
because by that the stars did clearly appear and shine. The tenthe they
called primum mobile. But the eleventh heaven, which is the place of the
blessed spirits, the heathen Philosophers knew not.

This heaven the divines do call caelum empy reum, not of heat, but of
brightness: because it does excel all the other heavens in brightness and
shinynge.

Because I have made mention here of certain heavens, I thought it expedient
to give a little note her of that place of saint Paul, where he says, that he
was taken up into the third heaven, which of diverse is diuersely taken.

The scholasticall divines do say, that heaven is taken three manner of ways.

First, it signifies those things that be under the soul, secondly, those
things that be in the soul, thirdly, those things that be above the soul.

Under the soul are all bodies and corporal things, as S. Austen writes. So
we may take and make to be three heavens, Videlicet.

Aereum. Sydereum. Empyreum.

Unto the which last the Apostle was said to be rapt and taken, not to be or
remain there, for the^ he should have known whether he had been there in the
body, or out of the body.

Damascen says, that the Apostle was taken above the eight Sphere, that he
might clearly see those things which are above the whole corporal nature. If
you take heaven for those things which be in the soul, the^ heaven betokens
some hie matter or knowledge, which surmounteth and excedeth the natural
knowledge of man.

They say also, that there is triplex visio, that is, three manner of visions.
First a corporal vision, by the which we see and know spiritual bodies.
Secondly, a vision imaginary, by the which we see and know the similitudes
and likenesses of bodies. Thirdly, an intellectual vis^on, by the which we
know the natures of things in them selves. If these visions be after the
natural manner (that is to say, if I see any s^nsible thing, if I see by
imagination any thing that was seen before, if I understand any thing by
fantasy) all these visions can not be called caelum. But then any of these
visions is called Caelum heaven, when it is above the natural faculty and
power of man's knowledge. As for example: If thou see any thing with thy
corporal eyes above the faculty of nature, Daniel 5.
so art thou rapte and taken unto the first heaven, as Balthazar was rapte
and taken, when he saw the hand of a man writynge upon a wall. But if thou be
lift up and taken by imagination or spirit, to know or see any thing
supernaturally, then art thou rapte and taken unto the second heaven: Act. 10.
as Peter was rapte and taken when he saw the sheet sent down from heaven.

But if any man do see things intelligible, and the natures of them not by any
sense or fantasy, then he should be taken up unto the third heaven.

And here is to be noted, that to be taken up to the first heaven, is to be
alienate from the corporal senses. Whereupon when none can be fully and wholly
abstract and drawn from the corporal senses, it can not be said, that any man
is taken up simpliciter, unto the third heaven, but secundum quid: For as much
as it chau^ceth, that a man sometime is so intent and bent unto one sense, that
he is utterly abstract and taken from the act and use of the other senses.

To be rapt and taken unto the second heaven, is when any is alienate and taken
from his sense, to see and behold things by imagination. And such visions are
wont to be done in extacises and traunses: as Peter was in a trance, when he
saw the linen cloth come down from heaven.

But Paul was rapte and taken unto the third heaven, because he was so
alienate from his senses, and so inhaunced above all corporal things and
visions, that he saw things intelligible, simplye, purelye, and plainly, even
after that manner as the angels, and the souls separate from the body, do see:
yea and (that which is more) did see God by essence, In Genesis 12.
as Saint Austen does expressly write.

Nor it is probable, that Moses the minister of the old testament unto the
Jews, should see God: and that Paul the Minister of the new testament unto
the Gentiles, should be void of the same gift.

These words with many other divisions and distinctions writes Thomas
Aquinas. In 2. Cor. 12.


Caietanus did call that third heaven the highest place of all: because in the
scripture there is mention made of three heavens. The lowest is coelu^ aereum
where the fowls of the air are. In the midst is coelum sydereu^, of the
which mention is made in the beginning of Genesis, Et posuit eas in firmamento
coeli and he has set them in the firmament of the heaven. The third and the
highest is, where be all the waters that are above the heaven, whereof the
scripture makes much mention, which we do call coelum aqueum, and the
Philosophers call it primum mobile. But Empyreum caelum, which the latter
writers do speak of, is not mentioned in any place of the scripture.

Saint Augustine disputes, whether by this third heaven we must understand
Paradise.

Lyranus affirms this third heaven to be the same that Paradise is, whom some
of the later writers do follow. But the taking up of Paul is to be understood
two manner of ways, that is: he was rapt unto the third heaven, that he might
see the glory of God, and the glory of Christ reigning in heaven. And he was
taken unto Paradise, that is, unto the seat and place of the blessed spirits,
Patriarchs, and prophets, to the end that he might not only see whether he
himself should come after death, but also that he might hear the mysteries
of God, whereby he might return the better instructed and prepared to his
Apostleship. Other divines do say, that numerus ternarius, the number of three
is put of Paul, (...), for the highest and most perfect sight.

Caelum, in the scripture is taken many ways. First it is taken for that
firmament wherein the stars are set.

Psalm. 149.
as in the psalms: which covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain
for the earth.

Psalm. 103.


Cap* 4.


Ca^lienarrant gloriam Dei. The heavens declare the glory of God.

Virtue. 3.
THis word, virtus, virtue, is of doubtful signification: for there be two
words in Greek of diverse significations, which are translated in Latin into
this word virtus.

The one of the Greek words is (...), which does signify virtue, as it is
opposite and contrary to vice.

The other word is, (...), which signifies also virtutem, but as it is
opposite and contrary unto infirmitye and weakness. And so (...), in Greek, and
virtus in Latin does betoken power, might and strength.

psalm. 45.
Virtus sometime is used and put for strength and power, as Deus adiutorium
nostrum, and virtus nostra. God is our help, and our strength.

Also it is taken for majesty, authority, and power. It is also put and used
for justice, 1. Cor. 4.
innocence, and faith, as Non in sermon est regnum dei, sed in virtute: The
kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.

Sometime it is taken for the host and furniture of heaven, as the stars and
light, Psalm. 148
as in the psalm: Laudate eum omnes virtutes eius, praise him all his army.
Finally, the holy ghost is called virtus dei, the power of God, because it
makes perfect, and finisheth all things. As Christ is the word of God, by
which althings are made.

Hell. 4.
Hell is called in Greek (...), which is called of the Latins Pluto, Orcus,
Tartarus, Infernus. The Greek word is written with an aspiration, although it
be compounded ab a priuatiua particula, and (...), id est videre, to see, as
though you would say, a deep place under the earth, dark, and without light.
It is called in the Hebrew Scheol, and it is written with Vau holem, although
sometime it is red without Vau. It signifies (as some men do say) a pit, a
grave, death it self, the state of the dead, hell, and the place of the damned
spirits. And it is so called with the Hebrews, because all heavy things do go
and tend downward, It cannot be satisfied, as in the proverbs in this verse:
Tria sunt, quae non satura^tur et quartum quod nunquam dicit, sufficit:
infernus, et os vuluae, et terra quae non satiatur aqua, ignis vero nunquam
dicit. There be three things that will not be satisfied, yeo four that say not,
it is enough: the grave, and the baren womb, the earth that cannot be
satisfied with water, and the fire that says not, it is enough. And so this
word Scheol, seems to come of this radical Schaal, which signifies (when it
is referred to the person) to demand, to consult: but if it be referred to any
thing or matter, then it signifies to ask, and to crave. And in that
signification Scheol comes of Schaal. It is taken for a grave in the book of
the kings, where it is said of David against Ioab unto Solomon: Non sinas
descendere camtiom eius pacifice ad sepulchrum: Let thou not his hoare head go
down to the grave in peace.

It is also used for the place where damned spirits are, as in the Psalms: Si
ascendero in coelum tu ecce ibi es: si descendero ad infernum, ecce ades: If I
ascend into heaven, thou art there: if I descend into hell, thou art there also.

Scheol is taken sometime for the horrible dismay of the mind, and for the
feeling of the wrath of God, and for the taste (as it were) of the infernal
pains for sin. Such agonies the holy saints did often feel in them selves
in this life: in so much that they thought them selves to be rejected of God,
and to be destitute of al grace and help. Such kind of agony Christ felt upon
the cross, when he cried: O God my God, why have thou left me?

Hell in this signification is very frequent in the scriptures, as in Samuel:
Dominus mortificat, and viuificat, deducit ad infernum, et reducit. The Lord
does mortify and make a live again, brings down to hell, and brings up
again.

Also in the psalms. Circumcinxerunt mefunes mortis, et angustiae inferni
apprehenderunt me. The snares of death have compassed me, and the grefes of hell
caught me, when I found trouble and sorrow. Diverse do diversely expound this
verse of the psalm: Quoniam non relinques animam meam in inferno. For thou
shall not leave my soul in hell. Some do take infernus, in this place, for the
grave: some for the state of the dead, some for horrible sorrow in mind, some
for hell it self. So that this proverb may be verified: Quot capita, tot
sensus, how many heads, so many wits.

But because I have made mention of this matter, I will recite the judgments of
the old fathers, as well of the Latinists, as of the Grecians, how they take
this clause: Non relinques animam mea^ in inferno: thou shall not leave my
soul in hell, and afterward I will declare the minds of the later writers.
And when I have done, I will submit my self to the judgment of the catholic
and Apostolic church, which I would wyshe all Christians to do.

Patres ecclesiae occidentalis.
First I will begin with the doctors of the west church. And I will first place
S. Auste^, because he, among al other doctors in divinity bears ye hell

But it shall be necessary to allege those scriptures, upon which they do
ground their sayings. The scriptures be namely these following.

Psalm. 16. Non derelinques animam meam in inferno, nec dabis sanctum tuum
videre corruptionem: Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thine holy one to see corruption.

Psalm. 88. Cruisti animam meam ex inferno inferiore: Thou have taken my soul
out of the lowest hell.

Zach. 9. Tu quoque in sanguine testamenti eduxisti vinctos tuos de lacu, in
quo non erat aqua: Thou also in the blood of the testament have brought out thy
prisoners out of the lake, where was no water.

1. Pet. 3. Christus mortificatus carne, sed viuificatus spiritu, inquo etiam
abiit, et spiritibus, qui erant in carcere, praedicauit: Christ was put to
death concerning the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit, by the which also
he went and preached to the spirits yt were in prison.

Now to the fathers. Augustinus.

Si ergo secundum homine^ quem verbum deus suscepit putas dictum esse, (hodie
mecum eris in paradiso) non ex hiis verbis in caelo existima^dus est esse
paradisus, neque enim ipso in coelo futurus erat homo jesus Christus, sed in
inferno secundum animam, in sepulchro autem secundu^ carnem. Quod vero illa
anima in infernum descenderit, apostolica doctrina predicat. Quandoquidem
beatus Petrus ad hanc rem testimonium de psalmis adhibet, vbi de ipso Christo
praedictum esse monstrat. Quoniam non relinques animam meam in inferno, nec
dabis sanctum tuum videre corruptionem. Illud de anima dictum, hoc de corpore.

That is to say: If thou think these words (thou shall be with me this day in
Paradise) to be spoken concerning the manhood (which the word being God, took)
not by these words, Paradise is compted to be in heaven: For the man Jesus
Christ was not in heaven it self, but in hell, as touching the soul, and in
the grave as touching the body. And truly that the soul descended into hell,
the Apostolic doctrine does declare. For blessed Peter for this matter
brings testimony out of ye psalms, where he shows this to be prophesied of
Christ: For thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see
corruption. That was spoken of the soul, this of the body. And he says a
little after thus: Restat igitur vt si secundum hominem dictum sit (hodie mecum
eris in paradiso) in inferno intelligitur esse paradisus, vbi erat eo die
futurus, secundum humanam animam Christus. That is to say: It remains
therefore that these words (thou shall be with me this day in paradise)
concerning the man, that paradise may be understand to be in hell, where Christ
should be that day, concerning the humane soul.

Idem Augustinus rursum scribit.
Dominum carne mortificatum venisse in infernum satis constat, Neque enim
contra dici potest vel prophetiae quae dixit (quonia^ non relinques animam meam
in inferno) quod ne aliter quispiam sapere auderet in actibus apostolorum idem
Petrus exponit, vel eiusdem Petri verbis, quibus eum asseret soluisse inferni
dolores, in quibus impossible erat eum teneri. Quis ergo nisi infidelis
negauerit fuisse apud inferos Christum?

That is: It appears sufficiently, that the Lord being mortified in the
flesh, came down into hell: for the prophecy cannot be gainsayd, which has
said (for thou shall not leave my soul in hell) which thing least any man
should be bold to savor or understand otherwise, the same Peter does expound,
even with those words of Peter, by the which he affirms him to have loosed
the sorrows of hell, in the which it was impossible for him to be holden. Who
therefore unless an infidel, will deny Christ to have been in hell?

If ye will ask, whom Christ set out from thence, Saint Austine does give you a
resolute answer, saying: De illo quidem primo homine patre generis humaniquod
eum ibidem solueret, ecclesia fere tota conse^tit, quod eam non inaniter
credidisse, credendum est. Vndecumque hoc traditum sit etiam si Canonicarum
scripturarum hinc expressa non proferatur autoritas. That is to say: Of that
first man, being the father of al mankind that Christ loosed him there, the
whole church almost does consent, which thing the church not vainly to have
credited, is to be believed. From whencesoeuer this was delivered, yea although
there be no express authority of the canonical scriptures brought forth for the
same. And with Adam he numbreth Abel, Seh, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with
other.

Idem Augustinus rursum scribit.
Aliam opinionem dicam! fortassis enim est apud inferos aliqua pars inferior,
quo traduntur impii, qui plurimum peccauerunt. Et paulo post: Nondum enim
dominus venerat ad infernum, vt erueret inde omnium sanctorum praecedentium
animas, et tamen Abraham in requie ibi erat, et dives non possit, leuatis
oculis, nisi ille esset superius, ille infernus.

That is to say: I will show you an other opinion: For perchance there is in
hell a lower part, wherein are thrust down the wicked which have grievously
sinned. And a little after: For the Lord came not yet into hell, to take from
them the souls of all the saints that went before Christ. And yet Abraham was
there in rest, and the rich man could not lift up his eyes to see, unless Lazarus
were above, and the other beneath.

Cassiodorus.
Cassiodorus also consents to Augustine, saying: Infernum vero habere
inferiorem partem, euangelii locus ille de Diuite and Lazaro testatur. Apparet
vtrunque apud inferos fuisse, vt se videre valuissent, and Diuitem ex inferiore
loco ad superiora oculos eleuasse. Sed licet vterque apud inferos esse
viderentur, pro meritorum tamen discretione, superior locus sanctis, inferior
peccatoribus deputatur. That is to say:

That place in the gospel of the rich man and Lazarus does testifye, that hell
has a nether part. And it appears that they both were in hell, that they
might see each other, and the rich man to have lift up his eyes from the nether
part, to the higher. And although they were counted to be both in hell, yet for
the difference of their works, the higher part was deputed to the saints, and
the lower part to the sinful and wicked.

Ambrosius.
Quis potuit ascendere in coelum? quia ideo passus est, vt expoliatis inferis
virtute patris deuicta morte resurgens, quum animabus ereptis in coelum
ascenderet. Omnis enim quicunque viso saluatore apud inferos sperauit de illo
salutem liberatus est. that is to say.

Who could ascend into heaven? because he suffered therefore, that hell being
spoiled by the power of the father, and death vanquished, he rising again,
should ascend into heaven with the souls taken out. For whosoever, the savior
being seen in hell, hoped of him salvation, was delivered.

Hieronimus.
Nunquid apertae sunt tibi portae? et hostia tenebrosa vidisti? In passio ne
domini, et in morte domini quae dicuntur luce sunt clariera, qui claustra
inferorum aperuit, et sanctorum inde animas liberauit that is to say

Were the gates open unto thee? or did thou see the darcke doors? These
things which be spoken, are clearelye verified in the passion and death of our
Lord, which opened the cloisters of hell, and delivered the souls of holy men
from thence. For Hierom says inde, from thence, that is to say, from hell.

Gregorius Magnus.
Gregory writes after this manner: Ante aduentum mediatoris dei and hominis,
omnis homo (quantumuis mundae probataeque vitae fuerit) ad inferna claustra
descendit. Every man, before the coming of Christ (although he were of never
so clean and approved life) descended to the cloisters of hell.

Again in an other place he says: Si sustinuero, infernus domus mea est, et
in tenebris straui lectum meum: spiritus etenim sancti, et sustinere aduersa
poterant, et tamen e corporibus educti, adhuc ab inferni locis liberari non
poterant, quia nec dum venerat, qui illuc sine culpa descenderet, vt eos qui
ibi tenebantur ex culpa liberaret. Though I hope, yet hell shall be mine house,
and I shall make my bed in the dark. For the holy spirits both could sustain
adversity, and yet could not be delivered from the place of hell, because that
he was not yet come that should desce^d thither without gilt, that he might
deliver from gilt them which were holden there.

And in the same place a little after he says: Et quia in ipsis quoque in
ferni locis iustorum animae sine tormento tenebantur, vt et pro originali culpa
illuc descenderent, et tamen ex propriis actibus supplicium no^ haberent (quasi
in tenebris lectulum strauisse) est, in inferno sibi requie^ praeparasse
Because the souls of righteous men are holden in the very places of hell without
torment or pain, yt they should yet go thither for ye original gilt, and yet
sustain no punishment for their acts and deeds (to make their bed as it were
in darkness) is, to prepare them a rest in hell.

Cyprianus.
Ciprianus in the end of his treaty in symbolum, writes thus: Si ergo
intellexerimus quid partus virginis, quid verbi in carne natiuitas, quid
sacramentu^ crucis, quid vtilitas diuini ad inferna descensus, quid
resurrectionis gloria, and animarum de infernis reuocata captiuitas. etc. That
is to say: If we shall understand, what the delivery of the virgin, what the
nativity of the son in the flesh, what the mystery of the cross, what the
profit of the divine descense into hell, what the glory of the resurrection, and
the captivity of the souls being revoked again from hell. Sermo de asce^tione
etc.

Again, Ciprian says: Semel Christus descendit ad inferos, vlterius non
descendet, non vltra videbunt deum in tenebris sigillati Once Christ went down
into hell, any more he shall not descend, any more they shall not see God, which
are sealed and shut up in darkness.

Vigilius.
Vigilius writes after this manner: Lib. 2. Cont. Eutichem.
Co^stat dominu^ nostru^ Jesus Christu^ sexta feria crucifixu^, et ipsa die ad
infernu^ desse^disse, ipsa die in sepulchro iacuisse ipsa dielatroni dixisse,
hodie mecu^ eris in paradiso caro igit ipsa die no^ fuit in paradiso, sed
examinis iacuit in sepulchro. Anima per illud triduum in inferno, non in
sepulchro. That is to say; It is euidente, that the Lord Jesus Christ, being
crucified on the friday, the same day descended into hell, the same day he lay
in the sepulcher, the same day he said to the thief: this day thou shall be
with me in Paradise. The^ his flesh was not the same day in Paradise, neither
in hell, but lay dead in ye sepulcher: but his soul those whole three days was
in hell, not in the grave.

Here might be alleged other Doctors also of the Latin Church, which consent
unto the fathers before mentioned, as Primasius, Sedulius, Leo, and other. But
these shall be sufficient for the West Church. Now you shall hear the opinion
and judgment of the Grecian fathers of the East church.

Authors Graeci. Chrisostomus.
Considerandum est, quod Abraham apud inferos erat, In. 16. Luke
nec dum Christus resurrexerat, qui illum ad paradisum duceret. Antequam
Christus moreretur nemo in paradisum conscendit. It is to be considered, that
Abraham was in hell, neither yet was Christ risen which should bring him unto
Paradise. Before Christ died, no man went up into Paradise.

Also in an other place he says: Nullam animam ante Christum arbitror
asce^disse in coelum, ex quo peccauit Adam, et clausi sunt ei coeli, sed omnes
in inferno detenti sunt, propter quos etiam descendit ad inferos. I judge no
soul before Christ to have ascended into heaven, since Adam transgressed, and
the heavens were shut unto him, but all were holden in hell, for the which also
Christ descended into hell.

Eusebius.
Eusebius Emissenus writes thus: Sciendum est, quod illa hora qua saluator
noster inclinato capita emisit spiritum, Lib de resurrectione.
corpore in cruce derelic to, anima simul cum diuinitate ad inferna spolianda
descendit. It is to be known, that in that hour in which our savior bowing
down his head, gave up the spirit, his body being left on the cross, his soul
with the divinity descended to spoil hell.

Damascenus.
Descendit in infernum anima deificata, vt quemadmodu^ is qui in terra
iustitiae ortus est sol, sic et eis qui sub terra in tenebris et vmbra mortis
sedebant, lux fulgeret. Et vt quemadmodum in terra euangelizauerit pacem,
captiuis remissionem, caecis visum, et iis qui crediderunt factus est causa
salutis aeternae, incredulis autem infidelitatis improperium et redar gutio:
sic et iis qui in inferno, vt ipsi omne genu flectatur coelestium terrestrium,
ac infernorum, Atque hoc pacto a seculo co^peditos soluens ru^sus ex mortuis
rediit nobis, viam parans ad resurrectione^: That is: He went down into hell in
his soul deified, that as to those which were in earth he sprung the sun of
righteousness: so also unto those which under the earth sat in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, he might be a shining light. And that as on earth he had
preached peace, remission to the captives, sight to the blind, and to those
which did believe, he was made the cause of eternal salvation, but to the
unbelieving, an imbraiding and reprofe of infidelity: So also to those which
were in hell, that every knee should bow unto him, both of things in heaven, in
earth, and in hell. And by this means, loosing them yt were bound from the
beginning of the world, he returned again from the dead, preparing us a way to
rise again.

A general council.
Christus deus et homo, non autem duo filii, sed idem vna persona in vtraque
natura perferens passionem et mortem pro salute nostra, Council. Tole tanum.
non in virtute diuinitatis, sed in infirmitate humanitatis descendit ad
inferos, vt sanctos, qui ibi tenebantur, erueret, et deuicto mortis imperio
resurrexit.

That is to say: Christ God and man, but not two sons, and two Gods, but
being both in one person, in both the natures suffering his passion and death
for our salvation, not in ye power of diuinitye, but in ye infirmity of
humanity, descended into hell, yt he might deliver from thence the saints that
were holden there, and when he had overcome death, rose again.

The judgments of the later Divines, concerning this article: Descendit ad
inferna. Erasmus.
Erasmus in his Cathechisme does write of this article after this manner

This is the article which Ciprian said not to be had in the Roman Symbol,
no neither yet to be added in the East churches. Yea and moreover, although the
symbol of the Synod holden at Nice, or of the Synod holden at
Constantinople, is none other thing then a declaration of this Symbol: yet is
not there neither so much as any one thing that is correspondent to this article.

Also the very inconcinnitye or unhandsome joining or hanging together of the
speech and oration, is an evident proof, that there is a percell thrust in
among the other articles, by some other man.

These words, sepultus est, that is, he was buried, do belong to the body,
which laid a sleep by death, does rise again, that is, does as it were waken
from sleep. But these words, descendit ad inferos, that is, went down to hell:
they do refer unto the soul, which neither was buried, neither did rise
again, but being departed and sundried for a time, shortly after returned
again into the dead body.

Whether Thomas Aquinas did add this article, I am in doubt. There is a
certain suspision that it should be added of some other man, or at the least
by this argument, for that it is not in the mete place. For when he does make
the third article of the resurrection, he makes the fourth article of the
going down into hell, except peradventure he meant this, that Christ, after he
was risen again from death to life, went down in body and soul to hell.

And an other little work which goes abroad, bearing the title of Thomas
Aquinas upon the Symbol, does interpret and declare the contrary thereof, and
uses also a contrary order. For there the going down to hell, goes before the
resurrection. How be it, this said Opuscle (although it be a learned and an
holy work) yet it seems not to be the work of Thomas Aquinas.

Erasmus says also, that those scriptures and reasons, which are alleged to
confirm this article, cannot constrain him which desires to thwart and to
find cauilations, to believe that the soul of Christ went down by it self
personally to hell. For the scriptures (says he) does often times call death
and the grave by this name Inferos, which same word is sometimes englished hell.
As for example in the book of Genesis: Morietur and deducent famuli tui canos
eius cum dolor ad inferos, that is to say: he shall die, and thy servants
shall bring his hoare hears with sorrow to his grave. He calls here the aged
body of Jacob, hoare hears. And by this word inferos, he meant the sepulcher or
grave. And this thing does Saint Ciprian in few words in a manner show, when
after he had said before, that this particle is not had neither in the west
churches, nor in the East churches, he adds afterward these words. Vis
tamen verbi videtur esse in eo quod sepultus dicitur That is: how be it there
seems to be the same strength of the word, in that yt he is said to have been
buried. As who should say, yt descendere ad inferna, to descend into hell, were
nothing else, but to be buried in the grave, which our Lord speaking of his own
burial, called to be in the heart of the earth. Haec Erasmus.

But yet the same Ciprian in other places seems to make a distinction between
these two clauses Sepultus est, et descendit ad inferna: for upon the Symbol
he writes: sed et quod in infernum descendit, euide^ter pro nunciatur in
psalmis. etc but that he also descended into hell, it is evidently pronounced in
the psalms. And so bringing in testimonies of the psalms, he alleges saint
Peter and other authorities out of the Psalms, writing on this wise: Vnde et
Petrus dixit, quia Christus mortificatus carne viuificatus autem spiritu, in
ipso ait. Et eis qui in carcere inclusi erant in diebus Noe in quo etiam quid
operis egerit in inferno declaratur. Sed et ipse dominus per prophae^am dicit,
tanquam de futuro: quia non relinques animam meam in inferno, nec dabis sanctum
tuum videre corruptionem: that is to say: Whereof Peter also said, that
Christ mortified in the flesh, was quickened in the spirit, and to them that
were in prison in ye days of Noe he preached. In ye which also is declared what
work^s he did in hell. But the Lord also by the prophet says as of the time to
come: Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy
one to see corruption: which again he shows prophetically to be fulfilled
when he says: Lord thou have brought my soul out of hell, thou have saved me
from those that go down to the pit.

Before these words saint Ciprian does speak of the burial of Christ saying:
sepultus quoque pethibetur, et lapis magnus positus ad ostium monumenti: He is
also said to be buried, and there was a great stone laid at the door of the
tomb: which article when he had confirmed with many scriptures, then infers
these words: Sed et quod ad infernum descendit. etc.

Now the Grammarians say, that this conjunction sed, is not vox exegetica,
but discretiua, and his property is always to bring in an other matter
distinct from the matter going before.

Also in the end of his treaty in symbolum he writes: Si ergo intellexerimus
quid partus virginis, quid verbum in carne natiuitatis, quid sacramentum
crucis, quid vtilitas diuini ad inferna descensus quid resurrectionis gloria.
etc. that is: If we shall understand what the delivery of the virgin, what the
nativity of the son in the flesh, what the misterye of the cross, what the
profit of the divine descence of Christ into hell, what the glory of the
resurrection. etc

Furthermore, Ciprian writes in his sermon De ascensione. Semel Christus
descendit ad inferos, vlterius non descendet, non vltra videbunt deum in
tenebris sigillati. Once Christ went down into hell, any more he shall not
descend, any more they shall not see God, which are sealed and shut up in
darcknes.

Now confer Cripian with Ciprian, and so he may be the better understood.

Master Calvin does count it (...), to expound this article: sepultus est, by
the other words which follow, descendit ad inferna, saying that they do
interpret plain and manifest words by a more obscure and dark phrase.

But now to Erasmus again, whose words be these. If the universal church
has now received this article, it is not lawful for thee not to believe it. It
is sufficient for thee to profess, that Christ did so descend (ad inferos) as
the scripture and the church does think and mean. But yet as it is a point of
christian wisdom, not to believe very lightly that thing for certain and
undoubted, which is not expressed in the holy scriptures: Even so is it a point
of christian mekenes, not to refuse proudly and frowardly that thing which the
religious contemplacion of God and godly men has taught, either to the solace
and comfort, or else to the erudition of them that do believe, of which sort are
those things also. That the holy ghost took one of the most purest drops of
blood out of the Virgin Mary's heart, and laid it down into her matrice: and
that hereof was suddenly made the perfect body of a man, so small as is a little
spider, which is but even now cropen out of the egg, but yet with all the
members full finished and perfect in all powers and qualities, as it is now in
heaven. Likewise where they do teach, that Christ by reason of the complexion
of his humane body (which they will to have been in him most subtle, and so
therefore of most quick and sharp feeling) did suffer more grievous and bitter
pains than any man may possibly suffer, the pain of them only excepted
which are perpetually damned in hell.

These things and such other like unto these, let them be so heard, as
devout and holy contemplacions of men, concerning Christ, but not as articles
of the faith. Many such manner of things have certain m^n imagined also
about this particle, telling what persons Christ brought out from hell,
and whom he did leave there still, and what things, and with what words
he did speak to every one of the circles.

But this is sufficient for us, that he was once in flesh borne a very man,
that he did verily suffer passion, that he has verily died, and been buried,
and that he has verily revived again, the very same soul returned again
into the natural body. Haec Erasmus.

Psalm. 16.
Stephanus in his annotations upon the psalm, declaring this verse: Non
derelinques animam meam in inferno, does interpret it, non relinques corpus
meum in sepulchro.

And Beza upon the second of the Acts, does translate that verse after this
manner: Non relinques cadauer meum in sepulchro, which translation and
interpretation seems to some very strange, and much stretched. Yet it cannot
be denied, but that the word Nepesch, has many significations. This verse in
the Hebrew has these words: Kilo taazab nepeschi lescheol.

This word Nepesch, De opificio Dei.
has many significatio^s. First it signifies wind, breath or blowing,
whereupon Lactantius does write, that some called the soul fire, some wind,
whereof this word anima, or animus took the name, because (...) in Greek is
called ventus.

Cap. 1.
And in that signification this word Nepesch is used in Genesis: Sed and omni
bestiae terrae, et omni volatili caelorum, et omni motabili super terram, in
quo est anhelitus viuens etc. To every beast of the earth, to every foul of
the heaven, and to every thing that moves upon the earth, which has life in
it self. etc.

Likewise it is used in Job: Habitus eius prunas accendit. His breath makes
the coals to burn. This word breath, here is called in Hebrew Nepesch.

Seccondly, Nepesch, signifies ye soul which is the chiefest, and
principallest part of man. And so it is used in many places of the Scriptures.
As in Genesis, Genesis 27.35. 1. Samuel. 1 25 Job 9.24 Psalm. 13.119.
in Samuel, in Job, and in the Psalms: as in this place: viuat anima mea et
laudabit te. Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee. Soul here is called
in Hebrew, Nepesch.

Thirdly, Nepesch, betokens that power of the soul which we call
appetitinam, seu concupiscibilem, that is, it is taken for the appetite, for
affection, will, mind, and desire. As in Exodus: Ne opprimas peregrinu^, vos
enim nostis animam peregrini. Cap. 23.
Thou shall not oppress a stranger, for you know the heart of a stranger.
Heart here is taken for the sorrow of the heart.

And the word in Hebrew is, Cap. 23.
Nepesch, Likewise in Genesis. Si est cum anima vestra vt sepetiam mortuum
meum. If it be in your mind or pleasure that I should bury my dead. And so
Nepesch is used in many other places of the scriptures.

Fourthly nepesch signifies blood and life, because life consists in blood,
which is, vehiculum, that is as you would say, the wagon or chariot of the
spirits.

And so it is used in Genesis, and in Deuteronomie, where it is said: ne
comedas sanguinem, quia sanguis est ipsa anima: Cap. 9. Cap. 12.
thou shalt not eat the blood, for the blood is the life, and thou must not
eat the life with the flesh. In the which place nepesch is put both for life
and blood.

Fifthly, nepesch, signifies the body, which is the other part of man: and so
it is used in the psalms. As, Infernum venit anima eius. His body was laid
in yrons. The body here is called in Hebrew nepesch Likewise in an other psalm:
misit maciem in animam eorum. He sent lennesse into their soul. Here is the
soul taken for the body, which is called in hebrew, nepesch, And in this
signification Stephanus might seem to use this word, nepesch: and to have
taken anima pro corpus, when he translateth non relinques animam meam in
sepulchro, for non relinques animam meam in inferno.

Sixthly, nepesch is put in some places of the scriptures, per (...), for a dead
carcass or a body without a soul, as in Leuiticus: Cap. 19.
Et incisionem super anima non ponetis in carne vestra You shall not cut your
flesh for the dead. Nepesch betokens here the dead bodies. Also in the
same book, non contaminabit se sacerdos super animam populi sui. Let not the
priest defile him self by the dead, that is, by touching the corpse. Here
this word anima, is put for the dead body, and is called in Hebrew, nepesch.
And the old translation has: ne contaminetur sacerdos in mortibus ciuium
suorum. Let not the priest be defiled in the death of any of his. And Castalio
translateth in funeribus eorum, in their funeralles. Nepesch is likewise so
used in the book of nombres. And upon these and such like places, Cap. 5.6.^
Beza might seem to have grounded his interpretation, when he translated: non
relinques cadauer meu^ in sepulchro, for, non relinques anima^ mea^ in inferno.
But there be great learned men which do very much mistike this translation, and
they call it a corruption of the very letter of the holy scripture.

They write also, that it is pity, that an article of our faith, constantly
and uniformly taught in the church of Christ, should now be drawn into
question, and to be made a wavering opinion: seeing that all the fathers both of
the East, and the West church with one consent and agreement has allowed this
article. And master Calvin himself confesses also, that to be true. For he
says: Id certe extra controuersiam est, ex communi piorum omnino sensu, fuisse
desumptam particulam, quando nemo est patrum qui non in suis scriptis descensum
Christi ad inferos no^ commemorat. That is to say: It is without all
controversy and doubt, that this particle (descendit ad inferna) was taken of
the common judgment and consent of the godly, for as much as there is none of
the fathers, but does make mention and rehersall in their writings of the
descense of Christ into hell. Yet master Calvin himself is of an other
judgment: For he counts the descence of Christ into hell, to be done upon
the cross, where he felt the severity of gods vengeance, and did wrestell
with hell, and with the horror of death, and was smitten of God for our sins,
as a most wicked offender, and to be as one forsaken of God, and therefore
cried, O god my God, why haste thou thus left me.

And that Christ after this manner descended into hell, it is no meruel, when
that he suffered that death which is inflicted upon the wicked: And truly there
can be no more terribler hell, then one to feel him self forsaken and
alienate from God, and not to be heard when he calls, as though God had
conspired to his destruction. And therefore we see Christ to be cast down,
that he was compelled, anguish enforcing him, to cry, O God my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Haec Caluinus.

Other writers, both of great learning, and deep judgment, do expound this
article in another sense, who judges the descense of Christ into hell to be
nothing else, but the virtue of the death of Christ to have come even unto the
dead, and to have proffited them, that is, that all the Patriarchs and
faithful men before the coming of christ, be preserved from eternal death,
through the death of Christ.

Or else by this word, Inferos, or inferna, there may be understand not the
place of punishment appointed unto the wicked, but all the faithful departed,
as by this word, superos, we do understand all them that remain alive.
Therefore we may say, that the soul of Christ went down to hell, that is,
that it was brought into the bosom of Abraham, where all the faithfall
departed were gathered together. Wherefore, when Christ said to the thief
crucified with him, this day shalt thou be with me in paradise: he promised
him participation of life, and company of the blessed spirits. But it
pertains rather to a curious and busy head, then to a godly and quiet mind,
curiously to enquire, and dispute of this matter. Haec Bullingerus.

In expositio. Symboli.
The same Bullinger wrting upon the epistle of Peter, where he entreats there
of the prison in which the spirits were, does say: Vbi nam locorum hic fuerit
carcer, ignotum est. In what place this prison was, it is unknown. Bullinger
here does constitute a place which he calls with Peter a prison. And where
that same place is, he knows not. Moreover he says, in that place there was
no filthe, no darcknes, no pain* but a place of refreshing. And the place is
therefore called a prison, because the souls of the blessed were there retained.

Also he writes, that this saying of Zachary: Tu quoque in sanguine
testamenti tui dimisisti vinctos tuos ex puteo, in quo non est aqua, may
apparteine to this purpose.

Calvin also writing upon the same Epistle does say: a question may be moved,
why Peter does place in a prison the souls of the godly, 1 Epist. 3. pet
after they were departed from their bodies. And truly this greek word (...),
in my judgment, does signify rather an high tower, wherein watch is kept, or
the very act of keeping watch. But if it shall please any man to keep the name
of a prison, it shall not ill agree. For when they were living, the law was
to them (as Paul witnesses) a straight custody or prison, in which they were
deteyned. So after their death, it behooved them to be bound with the careful
desire of Christ, because the spirit of liberty was not yet exhibit unto
them. Therefore, the carefulnes of lookyng for Christ, was to them a prison.

Lebanrisch writes after this manner: Saint Peter alleges this saying of the
prophet David: Non derelinques animam meam in inferno, nec sines sanctum tuum
videre corruptionem, that is: Thou shalt not leave my soul in hell, neither
shalt thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. After that he had
declared, that this could not be spoken of David himself (for that his grave
remained yet among them, and his body suffered corruption) he adds: forasmuch
as David was a Prophet, and did know that God swore unto him, that Christ
should come of the fruict of his loins, touching the flesh, he speak
evidently of the resurrection of Christ, because his soul should not be left
in hell, nor his flesh saw corruption. You see how saint Peter applies this
sentence of the Prophet to set forth Christ's resurrection. And in steed of
this word sanctu^ eius, saint Peter has carnem eius, which is to be marked.
Is not resurrection contrary unto death? And what other thing is death, then
the separation of the body from the soul? And what other thing then can
resurrection be, but a renewing and knitting together again of the body and
the soul? Saint Peter therefore applyieng this sentence to the resurrection of
Christ, does (as it were) point with his fingers the places from whence these
two parts severed, must be brought again: namely the soul from hell, for hell
could not hold it: and the body from the grave, that it should not corrupt.
Haec Rabbi Lebanrisch.

Thus I have declared at large the opinions and judgments as well of the old
fathers, as of the later writers, concerning this article of the faith:
Descendit ad inferna, he descended into hell. So that every man (as Paul
says) may abound in his own judgment. One thing I would wish that
neither this article, nor any other contained in the symbol, commonly called
Symbolum Apostolorum, should be lightlye shaken of, but to be believed as they
stand there. As for my part, I am fullye resolved, that this article is true:
He descended into hell.

To morrow. 5.
THis word is called in latin, cras, in greek, (...), in Hebrew, Machar. And
it signifies not only the next day following, but also the time to come: as
Jacob used it in Genesis, saying: Testificabitur de me iustitia mea die
crastina: My righteousness shall answer for me hereafter. Cap. 30.


Also in Deuteronomie: Quum interrogarit te filius tuus cras: when thy son
shall ask thee in time to come. Cap. 6. Cap. 13.
It is also used for a short time to come: as in Luke, where Christ says:
oportet me hodie and cras, and sequenti die ambulare: I must walk to day, and
to morrow, and the next day following, that is, a little while.

Crastinus, the adjective is sometime used for daily and continual. For whereas
the Grecians do read (...): panem nostru^ quotidianum, saint Hierome says,
that he found in the gospel (which is called, Euangelium hebraeorum) machar
crastinum. As if it should be said, da nobis panem hodiernum and crastinum.

Saint Austen seems to show the like in one of his sermons. For as the
earthly fathers do provide for their children bread and meat, Sermo. 28.
for the morrow and the time to come, wherewith their bodies might be
sustained: so provide thou, O father, which art the heavenly father, and the
father of spirits, for us thy children, the heavenly bread of the mind.

Symachus did translate (...). 1. eximium, and egregium, excellent, great,
singular.

Some expound this greek word, (...), super substantialem, vel
superessentialem.

To our purpose again. As this word, hodie, does signify the time present:
so cras signifies time to come. And by this word, to morrow, is signified any
procrastination or delay, whether it be good or ill. And the scolastical
divines do divide Cras into five kinds. id est.

1. Cras deliberatiuum. 2. Cras procrastinatiuum. 3. Cras mortificatiuum. 4.
Cras damnificatiuum. 5. Cras beatificatiuum.
By the first Cras, is understand good aduisement, discretion, deliberation,
which one takes before he does any thing. For prudent, grave and wise men will
not do things headlong and in have, but will work advisedly, according to the
proverb, festina lent: make haste slowlye.

By the second Cras, is understand negligence, remissenes, and slownesse of
doing of things. And those persons which be subject to this slacknesse, may
be compared to the Crow, which cries always cras, cras. They differ to do
any thing, until the power or faculty of doing be taken from them. They will
not honor and pray unto God, they will not help their neighbor, they will
not hope for godly things.

It is written in the proverbs: Ne dicas amico tuo, vade and reuertere, cras
dabo tibi, quum statim possis dare: Say not unto thy neighbor, Cap. 3.
go and come again, and to morrow will I give thee, if thou now have it.

Also in an other place of the same book it is written: Ne glorieris in
crastinum, ignorans quid superuentura pariat dies: Cap. 27.
Boaste not thy self to morrow: for thou know not what a day may bring
forth.

Also in Ecclesiasticus it is written: Non tardes conuerti ad Dominu^, and ne
differas de die in diem. Subito enim veniet ira illius, Cap. 5.
and in tempore vindictae disperdet te: Make no long tariyng to turn unto the
Lord, and put not of from day to day: for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord
break forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall
perish in time of vengeance.

By the third Cras, is understand the day of death, unto which all men be
subject. It is written in Ecclesiasticus: Rex est hodie, Cap. 10.
and cras morietur: He that is to day a King, to morrow is dead. This Cras,
takes away all corporal pleasures, all temporal riches, all pompes, and
honors.

By the fourth Cras, are understand the pains of hell, to the which the wicked
and impenitent sinners shall be subject. They have two days, hodie and cras, to
day and to morrow. To day they have prosperity, to morrow they shall have
calamity.

Hodie habent gaudere: cras habebunt dolere.
Hodie rident: crastino strident.
Hodie saltent: crastino nutant.
Hodie sunt pleni: cras erunt egeni.
Hodie sunt primi: cras erunt infimi.
Hodie sunt equites: cras erunt pedites.
Hodie sunt in gloria: cras erunt in miseria.
Hodie abundant auro: cras erunt in demonum thesauro.
To day they be glad: to morrow they shall be sad.
To day they laugh: to morrow they shall weep.
To day they leappe: to morrow they shall quake.
To day they be full: to morrow they shall be empty.
To day they be first: to morrow they shall be last.
To day they be horsemen: to morrow footmen.
To day in glory: to morrow in misery.
To day abounding with gold: to morrow in the devils treasure house shall lie
full cold.

Of this Cras that may be spoken, which is written of Luke: Cap. 12.
foenum quod hodie in agro est, cras in clibanum mittitur. The grass which to
day is in the field, to morrow is cast into the oven.

By the fifte Cras is understand consolation, and eternal life, which the
godly shall possess and enjoy. For they have also two days, hodie and cras:
In this present life they sustain misery, but in the life to come they shall
receive glory. This hodie and cras received poor Lazarus which lay in
Abraham's bosom. Haec ex scholasticis.

Heighte nor depth. 6.
Cap. 8.
HEighte in this place of saint Paul to the Romans, signifies any strange
miracle or wonder not seen before, which comes from heaven: And depthe
signifies any thing that comes from the deepest and lowest parts of the
earth.

Heighte sometime may be taken for the excellency and profoundnes of man's wit
and reason, 2. Cor. 10.
in philosophy. For saint Paul said to the Corinthes: Arma militiae nostrae
non sunt car nalia, sed potentia Deo ad demolitionem munitionum, quibus
consilia demolimur, and omnem altitudinem, quae se extollit aduersus
cognitionem Dei: The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
god, to cast down holds, to cast down the imaginatio^s, and every high thing
that is exalted against the knowledge of god. And according to this saying of
Paul, we may understand by depth, the humility of the mind, and the hurt of
the body, after the rules and doctrine of men, which in words have an
appearaunce of wisdom, as the same Apostle writes to the Colossians.

Cap. 2.
Haymo writing upon this place brings in a strange interpretation. For by
height he understands Astrology, and by depth, Necroma^cie, by which two,
many men were turned from the faith. He would have S Paul's meaning to be
this: Although all the Astronomers (which do affirm them selves to be cunning
in the constellation and course of the planets) do come against us: yea
although they (which by Necromancie do raise up spirits out of hell, as the
woman that had a familiar spirit raised up Samuels spirit) do come against
us, yet they shall be never able to separate us from the love of Christ.

Golden hiles. 7.
THere is a proverb in greek: (...): Aureos montes polliceri: To promise
golden hills. Which proverb is spoken of them that do promise unmeasurable
things, and do make men to hope very much for them. It is deduced and taken of
the arrogancy of the Persians, which for their mines of gold, did boast of
golden hills.

Plautus says: Neque ille sibi mereat Persarum montes, qui esse aurei
perhibentur: Neither let him think to deserve the hills of the Persians,
which are said to be golden hills.

The like proverb is mentioned of Porphirion, who thinks the same proverb
to be taken out of one of Aesops fables. The proverb is recited by Horace:
Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus: In art po
The hills do swell and travel, but out comes the folish mouse. It may be
spoken against gloriouse men, against boasters and braggers, which with great
promises and by majesty of countenance and authority of gay apparel, move men
to expect much at their hands, and when it comes to the purpose, they bring
and show forth nothing but toys and trifles.

The original of the proverb is this: When, at a certain time, rude and
foolish men did see the ground swell and move in a hill, they ran on heaps
on every side to behold so horrible a sight, looking that the earth should
bring forth some strange and great wonder, that is, that the hill should bring
forth other Titans that should renew wars with the Gods. At the length, after
they had looked a long time what would come forth, a Mouse crept out of the
ground, at the which sight they all did greatly laughe.

Temptation. 8.
Obiectio.
How does Peter here say truly, that we are tempted of God? when James
says: Deus neminem tentat: God tempts no man. In which words there
appears great difference between these two Apostles.

Responsio.
Peter here understands two kynds of temptation, the temptation of God, and
the temptation of our flesh. God tempts us with crosses, false prophets,
with famine, with war, with fire, with water, with diseases, with afflictions
and persecutions, and with a thousand kinds of adversities, that he may try
our faith, whether we will persevere in the confessing of Jesus Christ.

Many men do swerve and go back in the time of temptation, as soon as any
grieuouse affliction does arise. But the godly at no time do better prove and
try their weakness and wits, than in the time of temptation and affliction.

Also we are tempted, that the sincerity of our minds may be made manifest to
other men. So did god tempte Abraham, Genesis 22.
when he commanded him to offer his son Isaac for a sacrifice.

God said to Moses: Behold, I will cause bread to rain from heaven for you,
and the people shall go out, Exodus 16
and gather that that is sufficient for every day, that I may prove them
whether they will walk in my laws or no.

Again, in Deuteronomie: if there arise among you a prophet or a dreamer of
dreams, (and give thee a sign or wonder, and the sign or the wonder which
he has told thee, come to pass) saying: let us go after other gods which
thou have not known, and let us serve them: thou shall not hearken unto the
words of that prophet, or unto that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God
proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your god, with all your heart,
and with all your soul.

James. 1.
Saint James says: Take it to be great joy, my brethern, when you do fall
into diverse temptations, knowing this, that the trial of your faith brings
patience.

Ibid.
Again he says: Happy is the man that does suffer temptation. For when he is
tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
them that love him.

The second kind of temptation is, the temptation of the flesh, and the malice
and evil affection which by nature is graffed in us. The senses and thoughts
of man's heart, are prone and ready to ill from their youth.

Gal. 5
Saint Paul says: Caro concupiscit aduersus spiritum. Nihil est in carne
nostra bonum. The flesh lusts against the spirit. There is no goodness in
our flesh

This temptation and lust of the flesh, which Satan by meruailouse
suggestions does set on fire, tempts us to infidelity, to blaspheme the name
of god, to contempne the gospel, and to hate our neighbors, and to all manner
of wickedness and sin. Of this temptation speaks saint James, saying: God
is not a tempter of the wicked, for he tempts no man They are tempted which
be lead away and intised by lust and concupiscence, that is: God is not the
author of ill, he tempts not to wickedness, that ye may lay the fault on
him. Your sinful flesh, and wicked concupiscence entiseth you to ill. Accuse
your selves, not God. God in deed tempts you, but not to commit sin, but
that you should be tried. But the lust of the flesh tempts and deriueth you
to commit sin:

Here you see Peter and James not to dissente, but to agree in sense and
meaning.

Pestilence. 9.
THis question is much tossed and moved among men, what is to be judged and
thought of them, which in the time of plague and pestilence do fly and depart
from their usual dwellings.

Many do justify and hold well with their departing and going away: Other do
condemn and disalowe it. And they which do fly, do so defend their own going
away, that they reprove them of rashness which do not fly, and do judge them
as tempters of God.

On the other side, they which do not fly, do so judge of them that do fly,
yea and do give out such ill report of them, that they do scarce count them
worthy to be called Christians.

Somewhat to speak of both these parties, I shall think it very expedient and
necessary, to show you what Musculus mind is in this matter.

First (says he) they that do fly, let them acknowledge and deplore the
infirmity of their faith, let them not stoutly defend it. For what pretense
soever they make, it is most certain, that they neither judge well of them
selves, neither yet of god, which does smite and plague men.

They think, that this rod of pestilence is like to (...), a nightlye
conflicte, in which there is no certain direction of the stroke or blow that is
given. They think (I say) that this plague of pestilence is brought by some
chance, and that it does smite them which be present, and that it can not
touch the^, which have withdrawn them selves from the infected place. But we
know, that is most certainly affirmed of Christ, that all the hears of our
head are no^bred to our heavenly father.

They say, that they which do abide still, do so tempt God, as they do, which
when the house is on fire, and like to be burned, yet do remain still in the
house, and put them selves in danger of death.

But these men do not observe and mark, that many which do not fly, yet are
not taken nor infected with the pestilence. And on the other side, that many
also which do fly, yet they do not escape, but are infected. Exodus 9.
Leuiticus. 26 Deuter. 28. 1. Paral. 21. Ezechiel. 6 14. et. 33.
Vvhereupon it evidently appears that the plague of pestilence is inflicted
by the moderation of God. And that the pestilence is the plague and scourge of
god, it may be proved in many places of the scriptures.

What Christian will so think or judge of God, that he does either rashly or
without science or nombre so smit, that whosoever dies of the pestilence, does
therefore die, because he fled not from the place infected. And that man by
chaungyng of places might escape the hands of God. But the scriptures do other
wise instruct us.

In Ezechiel they be marcked and signed, whom god spared and favored. Again
in an other place it is granted unto Noe, Job, and Daniel, that if they were
present when the pestilence rages, for their righteousness they should save
their own lives or souls. Therefore, they which fly the pestilence, do seem to
me to do as vnhapie children do, who when their father is angry, having a rod
in his hand minding to beat the^, do fly out of the house, and by that means
do the more exasperate the fathers mood and anger. And yet notwithstanding
they not escape the rod by this their fliyng away, but do by it purchase to
them selves more anger and sharper stripes.

But they seem rather to fly well, which with humble submission of mind, with
the acknowledging of their sins, and by true repentance do pacify and
mittigat the wrath of God so smiting them.

Over and beside, they offend against christian charity, which do relinquish
and forsake their brothers and neighbors in such troubles and afflictions. The
christians in times paste were wont to imparte their help and pity, even
unto the heathen and gentiles, in such plages and diseases. They therefore
which do labor with such infirmity of faith and charity, what marvel is it
that they do fly from the horror of death?

Now as touching them which do not fly, let them first consider wherefore,
and for what cause they do not fly, whither it be for lack of certain
necessary charges whereby they may the better fly, or for any other cause. It
is one thing, not to fly either by temeritie, or by contempt of the wrath of
God, or for want of money or costage (for so the Turcks and infideles do.) And
it is another thing, for one being armed with faith and charity, to humble
himself in the sight of god, and to desire God to appease his wrath, and so to
tarry with his brethren and neighbors, miserably a afflicted, and to mourn
with them that mourn.

Also let them take heed that they judge not ill of them which do fly, nor
rail on them, nor curse them, but by the affection of brotherly love, be sorry
for their infirmity, and commit their flight unto gods clemency: for
except they do so, they may be counted a great deal worse than they which do
fly. Haec Musculus in Psalm.

But by master Musculus leave and patience I do judge that god does allow
every man to use such remedies as physic does appointe. For the wise man
says in his book Ecclesiasticus. Honor the Physician with that honor that
is due unto him, because of necessity, for the Lord has created him, for of
the most high comes healing. And a little after he says: The Lord has
created medicines of the earth, and he that is wise, will not abhor it.

Now the physician says that the best remedy to avoid the pestilence, is to
fly the air. For to speak naturally, all pestilence, as Galene writes,
comes of the putrefaction and corruption of the air. And the inspiration of
that air is the cause why beasts and men are so infected and taken with the
pestilence: which air we can not avoid, unless we fly to some other place
where the air is not so infected. Yet here is to be considered, that they
which have office, and can not well by reason of their office fly, as
pastors, preachers, and certain magistrates, either politic or oeconomicall,
ought to tarry still in their usual abode, and to provide other remedies
prescribed by physic to conserve them in health.

Therefore to hold, that all without exception ought not to fly the pestilente
air, I can not be induced to grant, nor to consent.

Above that you be hable to bear. 10.
Paul writes to the Corinthians saying. There has no tentation taken you,
but such as apperteineth to man. And God is faithful, which will not suffer
you to be tempted above that you be able, but will even geeue the issue with
the tentation, that you may be able to bear it.

There be some which read this sentence in the Optatiue mood, as though
Paul should have said: I would to God, that no other temptation may take you,
but the temptation of man. And they make a distinction between this and that
temptation, wherewith God is tempted. But other (as Chrysostom) do read it in
the Indicative mode, saying: that it is a consolation given of Paul unto the
Corinthians, least they hearing so horrible examples of ye wrath of God, being
co^fused with fear, should be utterly dismayed. For it is the continual manner
of the Apostle, after sharp rebukyngs, straight way to mittigate and appease
them. Therefore Paul does here give unto them hope of pardon, and does say,
that they fell into such temptation as appertaineh to man. His meaning is this:
There is no cause why you should be dismayed. It is not my mind to bring unto
you any matter of desperation. There is none other thing chanced unto you,
then that which happens unto men.

Saint Paul wrote to the Philippians, Cap. 2.
saying and cum timore ac tremore operenum salutem vestram: Make an end of
your own salvation with fear and trembling.

This saying might be thought to be very heavy and heard. But saint Paul
adds immediately these words. God works in you both the will and the deed,
even of his good pleasure. So Paul adds here in this place to the
Corinthians: God is faithful etc. In the which words he does show how they may
resist temptation. He bids the^ to have respect unto the Lord, because
every temptation, being never so small, would straight way oppress us, and we
should utterly perish if we would trust and lean only to our own power and
strength. Therefore, we must arm our selves with faith to resist the sondrie
assaults of Satan. For this is the victory which overcomes the world, even
our faith.

Paul calls the Lord faithful, not only because he is true in his
promises, but also because he is a sure keeper and defender of his, under whose
tuition we be safe. For God does never forsake nor leave his destitute.

Therefore says Paul to the Corinthians, forasmuch as he received you into his
tuition, you need not to fear, so that you wholly depend on him. For God will
faithfully perform those things which he has promised. They can want nothing
which strive for his honor. He gives them power and strength. He measures
temptations, and shows away to come out of them.

Under the name of temptation, he comprehends generally al things which do
moleste and trouble us.

Obiectio.
Cap. 1.
Paul writes in the second epistle to the Corinthians, saying: we are pressed
out of measure passing strength. Ergo, this saying of Paul here- and an other
saying there, can not be both true, for they be two co^traries.

Responsio.
The saying of Paul in the.2. epistle to the Corinthians, is to be understand
of the usual strength of man.

For Paul did also at the last vanquishe and overcome that temptation.

Mark furthermore, that the cross of temptation is laid of God upon the
shoulders of the faithful, but it is not perpetual, least they should fall from
grace, and in temptation despair of salvation.

Therefore, God does cause the temptation to cease, that we should not be
tempted above that we are able to bear.

If God will so. 11.
Saint James in his epistle rebukes them, which say, go to now, to day or to
morrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and bye and
sell, and get gain, and yet you can not tell what shall be to morrow. For what is
your life? It is eue^ a vapor that continues for a little time, and afterward
vanishes away.

Therefore, ye ought to say: if the Lord will, and if we live, we will do this
or that. etc.

It is a most foolish thing for man to promise to him self any great thing,
when he his uncertain what shall chance the next day, as I have lately
declared before in the Miscellane (To mororow.)

Here saint James does elegantly by a similitude of vapor, show, that the
counsels and devises of man are but vain, fadinge and vanishinge away.

Vapor is an airy coagulation coming of heat and of moistnes, having in it
but a little substance and is sone disolued, unto such a vapor S. James
compared our life, and that very aptly. For, (as the proverb says) homo bulla
est: man is but a booble of water.

And Sophocles says: homo spiritus est, et vmbra tantum: Man is but only
breath and shadow.

Pindarus says, that the life of man is nothing else, but vmbrae somnium, the
dream of a shadow. And there is nothing more vain then a shadow, for it seems
to be, and yet is nothing.

Therefore (says James) ye ought in your sayings and doings to have both in
mind and in mouth: if God will, and if we live. And yet it may chance sometime,
that the godly and faithful (who does know that all their doings are directed
by the will of God) do sometime say, that they will do this or that, without any
such exception.

It is very godly, when we promis any thing in time to come, to use these
manners of speaking: if it please the Lord, or if the Lord will suffer. Yet we
must make no religion of it, as though it were an heinous thing to omit such
phrases. For we read in the scriptures, that the holy men of God did speak of
things to come mithout condition, when notwithstanding they had in memory, yt
they could do nothing but by ye permission of God.

Saint James here does touch them, which having little respect to the providence
of God, do make subject unto them selves the whole course of the year, when
they have not so much as one moment in their power. They promis to them selves
lucre and gain, which is far from them, when they be not sure to hold that,
which is before their feet.

Having no need. 12.
There is a great question, et adhuc sub iudice lis est, whither the children
may marry or contract them selves without ye consent of the Parents.

To this question, I will in this Miscellane make a resolute answer. And first I
will put down mine assertion, and after prove the same with sufficient
testimonies.

Assertio.
It is of necessity, and not only of honesty, that the children ought not to
marry without the consent of their Parents.

This doctrine is proved and ratified by the holy scriptures, by the minds of
holy fathers, by the consent of general councels, by the old Canons, and by the
civil laws.

Scriptures.
When Isaac came to man's state, Abraham sent his servant unto his kindred to
find out there a wife for his son. Note here, the Father sent, and the son
sought not.

Isaac sent Jacob into Mesopotamia to his uncle to get him a wife there. His
father sent him.

After this, a law was given of God unto Moses, that children should honor
their Parents. This honor does not consist only in putting of the cap, and
making curtesy, but in the relieuing and sustaining them if need be, and in
showing obedience and duty unto them in all things lawful and honest, Cap. 22
whereupon there is a peculiar law made in Exodus.

If a man entise a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall endow
her, and take her to his wife. If her father refuse to give her to him, he shall
pay the dowry. Note here that this law says: Si pater voluerit.

Cap. 30.
In the book of Numbers it is written: if a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, and
bind her self by a bond, being in the fathers house in the time of her youth,
and the father hear her vow, wherewith she has bound her self, and the
father hold his peace: the vow shall stand. If the father disalow the vow, then
the same shall be of no value. Note, if the Father disallow.

Now I ask what a vow is? It is a promise made to God, but Matrimony is a
promise made to man. Now by an argument a maiori, if God does permit and
refer a vow made to him, to the judgment of the father: much more will he
permit and refer matrimony unto his judgment, for as much as it is but a
promise made between man.

In the book of Judges it is recorded, how that Sampson said to his father and
mother: Cap. 14.
I saw a woman in Tinnath, now therefore give me her to wife.

In Genesis it is written, how that Sychem said to his father Hamor: Get me the
maid Dina, of her father Jacob to wife.

By this place it appears that the consent of Parents is requisite in
marriage, seeing the very infidels did also observe it as a thing necessary.

It is written that Thamar said to her brother Amnon: Si me petieris a patre
meo, me tibi non negabit. Note here: Si me petieris a patre meo.

Paul to the Ephesians says: Filii obedite parentibus in omnibus. He
excepteth nothing, but says, in all things, specially those things which be
not against Gods word.

In his epistle to the Corinthians he does manifestly and plainly show that it
lies in the Parents power to set their daughters to husbands.

This thing is proved, not only by the law of god, but also by the light of
nature, as certain comedies do teach and declare.

In Euripides the daughter says: Pater meus habet solicitudinem, and curam mei
connubi.

Veteres patres.
Tertullianus ad vxorem says: Ne in terris quidem filiae rite ac iure
contrahere possunt matrimonium sine consensu parentum. Lib. 2.
That is: Not upon the earth truly daughters can well and rightly contract
Matrimony, without the consent of their parents.

Chrysostom writing upon Timothy, does exhort the Parents to join their
children in Matrimony, by the reason of their slippery age. Q 1. hom. 9.
He does not exhort the children to choose them selves wives where they will.
His words be these. Mature illos matrimonio iungamus, vt munda atque integra
illorum corpora sponsae admoneantur. Let us (says he) (meaning the parents)
couple our children in marriage in due time, that their bodies may be joined
pure and whole unto a wife.

Saint Austine being desired to make a marriage between a young man and a maiden,
answers: Facerem (inquit) sed matter pueri non adest, Epist. 1.3.3.
and tuscis ad nuptias contrahendas eius voluntatem esse necessariam. I would
(says he) but the mother of the man is not present. And you know that the
consent and will of her is requisite to contract marriage.

Saint Ambrose does so much allow the saying of Euripides before rehearsed,
that he puts it into his book of the Patriarchs.

Quorundam patrum decreta et Cannones.
Euariscus says. Matrimonia tunc sunt legittima, quando sponsae petuntur a
parentibus, et traduntur public, aliter vero presumpta, non coniugia, sed
adulteria, contubernia and fornicationes. That is to say: Matrimonies are then
lawful, when the wives are asked of their parents, and are delivered openly,
otherwise they are not marriages, but adulteries, unlawful companies and
fornications.

Nicholaus says. Ibidem capit Nostrates.
Ea firma sunt matrimonia quae iunguntur consensu contrahensium, et eorum in
quorum sunt potestate.

Those be firm and true marriages which are coupled by the consent of them that
do contracte themselves, and with the consent of those persons, under whose
authority they are.

Leo the first says. Ibidem cap. qualis.
Tunc intelligendum est matrimonium cum puella a parentibus traditur sponso.
Then that is to be demed lawful matrimony, when the maiden is given of her
parents to a husband.

Again, it is written in the decrees: Mulier que nupsit arbitrio patris est
extra culpam si quis postea illi matrimonio detrahat. The woman that has
married by the arbiterment of her father, is without blame, yea although any
hereafter do deprave or say against that matrimony.

Generalia concilia.
The fourth general council of Toletum: 32. quest. 1. ca hoc sanctum
Hoc sanctum confirmat concilium vt viduae quibus placuerit teneant castitatem:
quod si priusquam profiteantur nubere elegerint, illis nubant quos propria
voluntate voluerint habere maritos. Similis conditio de virginibus habeatur,
nec extra voluntatem parentum, vel suam cogantur maritos accipere, that is:
This holy council does confirm and ratify that widows which will, may live
chastely: but if before they profess chastity, they will choose to marry: let
them marry them who^ by their own will they desire to have to their husbands.
Let the like condition be had of maidens, neither let them be constrained to
marry without the consent of their parents, nor against their own wills.

Reges ciuiles.
Titulo de Nuptiis.
Iustinianus in his institutions, will in no wise Matrimony to consist without
the assent of the parents.

In. ff. de statu. hom. Paulu.
Again: si filius vxorem duxerit invitis parentibus, filius qui nascitur ex
illis nuptiis, non erit legittimus, if the son marry a wife against his
fathers will, the child that shall be borne in that marriage, shall not be
lawful.

Again it is written: Filia patris voluntate nubit, ea postea conqueritur de
marito, et ab eo diuertit, deinde in gratiam redit, et invito patre iterum
eidem nubit. Respondetur illud non esse legittimu^ matrimoniu^. That is: The
daughter with the good will of her father does marry, she afterward does
complain of her husband, and departs from him: afterward she is again
reconciled to him, and marries him again against her fathers will. It is
answered, that yt matrimony is not lawful.

Fu. L. Si suriosus.
Finally, it is written. Filii si forte parents furiosos habent et mente
captos, quoniam illorum consensu vti non possunt in contrahendo matrimonio,
curatorum suorum consensum adhibebunt. If peradventure children have to their
parents mad men, and out of their minds, because they cannot have their
consentes, they ought to have the consent of their governors.

Therefore, for as much as the law of God, the law of nature, the law politic,
Fathers, old Canons and Councels, do grant the consentes of parents to be
necessarily required, why should not we grant and judge the same? Besides
this, the example of Christ should move us, who was given of his father a
husband unto the church, and did always say that he did not his own will, but
the will of his father, who sent him.

Answers given unto certain arguments and reasons of the contrary part.
First they say, that in contract of Matrimony, there ought to be a great
liberty, and no servile restraint, otherwise there will fall out inconvenience.

Responsio.
I do ask what liberty they do mean, whether of the flesh, or of the spirit?
Truly the chiefest liberty of the spirit, is when we obey the commandments of
God, who if he will have us to be obedient unto our parents in other things, why
not also I pray you in Matrimony?

If they pretend and crave so much liberty for the contract of matrimony, why
have they forbidden so many degrees to marry? Yea the Bishops of Rome have
forbidden even unto the seventh degree of kindred.

And if they will have so much liberty, why have they forbidden and restrained
matrimony, from the Ministers of the church?

Furthermore, if there ought to be so great liberty in marriage as they pretend,
why did God forbid matrimony unto a contrary religion?

The second objection.
The sons and children for fear of the displeasure of their parents may say
that matrimony does please them, which their fathers does appoint, and yet in
deed does not please them, and so are constrained to marry against their wills,
and to hate one another.

Responsio.
The children are not constrained so to say, but may freely answer and say,
that wife, or that husband does not please me. I will none of this matrimony.
And doubtless also without the consent of the child, matrimony is to be
contracted by no manner of means, as it is red in the law: In ff. de ritu
nuptiarum. l. non cogitur.
Filius non potest addigi vt vxorem ducat. A son cannot be compelled to
marry a wife.

When Abraham's servant came into Mesopotamia, and had found a wife for his
masters son, when the parents of the maid would have the servant to tarry
longer, and he would not, they called the Damsel and asked whither she would
go with him, or no.

When the fathers deal with their children tirantlike, and would constrain
them to marry wives, which they cannot brook nor bear withal, then the matter
is to be brought before the Magistrate, whose office it is to hear the cause,
and to deliver the same from injury: than if the son do marry by the
authority of the Magistrate, yea although it be against the parents will, it
cannot be said that he marries utterly without the consent of his father, for
a Magistrate est pater patriae, is the father of the country.

The scholemen do not rightly say that the sons have power over their own
bodies, they ought not in deed to be compelled against their will to marry: but
that they may marry without the consent of their parents, it cannot be granted.

By the civil law the power of the father is so great, that he may sell him,
if he fall into extreme necessity. Cap. 21
The same is permitted also by the law of God, as in the book of Exodus, yet
with certain cautions and circumstances.

Upon this I conclude, that they argue not well, which say that that matrimony
is a certain kind of bondage, which the son cannot enter into, without
consent of the father.

The third objection.
The consent of the parents in matrimony, is required in deed ad honestatem,
sed non ad necessitatem, and so certain divines hold.

Responsio.
This is a frivolous and vain reason. For what necessity can be greater then
that which the law and commandment of God does bring and require. Children
are commanded to honor father and mother. Saint Paul also does prescribe
them to obey their parents in all things.

Again to the Philippians he says furthermore: brethren, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things
are of good report, think on those things, do them.

By these words it appears, that those things which be honest, are not to be
separated from the commandment of God, and so I make this argument. The
consent of the parents is required, quoad honestatem, honesty is comprised
within the commandments of God. Every part of Gods commandment is require
of necessitye.

The fourth reason.
The consent of Parents is to be required, but yet if the Parents will not
consent, then the matrimony of the children is good and lawful enough.

Responsio.
This is nothing else but to deride and mock the parents. For what contumely is
this, the son so to require the consent of the father, and yet whither the
father will or will not, he will remain still in his purpose, to put the same
in execution? It were much better not to ask at al, then so to desire it.

The fifth reason.
What shall we say of our forefathers, and of many other which now lives and
has married without the consent of the parents? Shall we call them adulterers,
and shall we take their children pro illegittimus?

Responsio.
When before the light of the gospel such marriages were had, such persons
could not utterly be excused from sin (for it was not lawful for them to be
ignorant of Gods law). Notwitstanding, because they were married, the
Magistrate than permitting them, they are to be taken for firm and ratified
matrimony.

Replicatio,
But here wanted the consent of the parents: Ergo. etc.

Responsio.
The consent of the parents was had there, and not had there. For the Magistrate
made the civil laws subject and under the Canons, which they ought not to
have done, and to this all men almost does agree. Then for as much as the
magistrate has authority over the people, if the Magistrate does consent to
any thing, that in a manner does the public and common consent of the people
grant. As for example, when in a great assembly the Magistrate and all the
people meet to pay a great sum of money, although some one private man of
the people does dissent, and does not take it in good part: yet because the
Magistrate does consent, the same private man is counted also to consent. So
the Father would not have his sons marriage to be firm, without his consent:
yet because he does put his will to the judgment of the Magistrate, he seems
in a manner to consent.

Therefore, the Matrimonies which hitherto have been made, before the knowledge
of the light of the Gospel, are to be taken and had as firm: but if the
Magistrate does now revoke back that error, marriages to be made hereafter,
ought to have the consent of the Parents (iure diuino) ergo ex necessitate.

Always this provided and excepted, that in the cause of religion, fathers are
not to be heard, because that in that case, God is to be heard before all,
for he is the father of all.

Conclusio.
The Canonistes do judge those marriages to be lawful, which are done without
the consent of Parents, as it is written in their decrees, when the gloss does
say, that when the woman comes to adulte age, she is released from the power
and authority of her father, both quoad iuramentum, and matrimonium.

And this sentence do the Scholemen also follow. They dispute that the son
has power over his own body, and that he is not bound to his Parents, but may
at his own arbitrament and choice, marry.

The master of the sentence, himself does write, quod consensus patentum
facit ad decoum nuptiarum, non ad necessitatem. That is to say: that the
consent of the parents does make the marriage comely, but is not of necessity.
But how aptly and truly this is spoken, it is answered before.

And mark (I pray you) how finely he does interpreate the words of Euariscus
before recited: As when Euariscus does say, that marriages contracted without
the consent of Parents be not true marriages, but scortations and adulteries:
that is (says he) not for that they be so in deed, but because the parties do
agree between themselves, as adulterers and fornicatours do.

Euariscus says. Sunt adulteria, they be adulteries, Lumbardus says: hoc est,
videntur esse, that is, they seem to be: What exposions be these, I pray you?
Iustitia est virtus, videtur sic esse virtus. Furta et homicidia sunt peccata,
ergo videntur sic esse, et quod non sic, sunt re vera. O profundam theologicam,
imo inanem potius sophisticationem.

To end, I am not, nor cannot be of that judgment nor mind, that the
Canonistes and scholemen be of, in this point, but do plainlye asserte and
hold, that the consent of the Parents to the childrens marriage is to be
granted (ex necessitate, and not ex honestate solum,) and as yet can not
otherwise be resolved, unless I hear better reasons than hitherto I have
either heard or read.

Ieiunium. Fasting. 13.
IEiunium is called in Hebrew Zom, in Greek (...). Ieiuniu^ takes ye name of
intestinum, a bowel or gut, called ieiunu^, because it does not contain and
hold that which it receives, but forthwith lets it go down into ye lower
parts, yt by the example of it, we should not burden our selves with to much
meat.

Ieiunium a fast, is a discipline, and chastising of the body, taken willingly
for the time present, by the which we are made humble before God, and do
beriue the body of nourishment, that it may obey the spirit.

There are two necessities which make us to fast, that is, a public
necessity, and a private.

Joel. 2. Jonas. 3.
Public necessity is when some calamity either presses, or is ready to come
upon the church of God. The examples whereof do appear in the Prophets.

This kind of fast was used in the time of the Apostles, as is read in the
Acts. And this fast to the old fathers seems nothing or very little to have
differed from public mourning, whereof there are many examples in the
scriptures.

Private necessity is, when any man does fast, feeling him self to be vexed of
his own lust or concupiscence, from which he takes away the cause, that it may
the less inflame and burn.

In the Gospel the Lord said, that the sons of the bride do fast, when the
Bride is taken away from them, that is, in a hard time of necessity.

Matrimony signifies the bond with which we are joined to Christ in faith and
spirit. In this perfect bond the godly eats and drinks with thanks giving,
and with that yt is sufficient. The godly is glad, and rejoices in these
external gifts of God. But when he perceives the Bride to be ready to depart,
or that he is almost gone out of his heart, that is to say, when he feels the
spirit to be overcome with insolency of the flesh, and perceives his faith
to be cold, then he prays and fasteth, that either he may retain and keep
the Bride, or else stay him when he is about to depart.

The whole life of Christians must be a fast, as Christ exhorts us saying.
Videte ne grauentur corda vestra crapula vel ebrietate. Take heed least your
hearts be laden with surfets, or with dronkennes.

In old time (when discipline was of force) the people gave themselves wholly
sometimes to punish the flesh and to prayers. And this discipline was
institute, and ordained, either when calamity was at hand (which thing
oftentimes happened in the primative church when grievous persecutions were in all places put in ure) or else when some great and worthy thing was to be done in
the church, which had need to implore and pray for the assistaunce of the holy
ghost. As when Ministers and Pastors of the church were ordered. The example
whereof we read in the Acts of the Apostles, when Paul and Barnabas were
called to the ministry.

In the old law once in the year there was a fast ordained to pourge sins.

The Lord would (when Moses ascended into the mount Sinai, and gave laws) that
the people should come before him, washing their garments, and abstaining from
their wives for the space of three days. And when they fasted, they did set
apart all other business, and attended to fasting and prayer. Whereupon the day
of fasting was made a solemn holy day among the Jews.

I do evidently find both in the old testament, and in the new, that fasting
was commanded. But on what days we oght to fast, or not to fast, I do find
commanded neither of God, nor of the Apostles. Epist. 86.


Saint Austine says: Pariter duo ieiunia ieiunauerunt, id enim est cor poris
et animae. etc. That is: they fasted two fastes together, to wit, of the body,
and of the soul, that is to say, refraining from wrath, from fury,
slaundring, blasphemy, and brawling, because these are the deadly meats of the
soul, which do feed and procure it to do ill, and do bring it to everlasting
death.

Again, the meats of the body and soul be these: gluttony, sluggishnes,
fornication, dronkennes, and security. These be the meats of the body and
soul, which do feed the body, and kill the soul. De salutar. do cume^tis.
c. 48.


The same S. Austine says in an other place: Nihil prodest tota die lo^gum
duxisse ieiunium, si postea sua vitate ciborum vel nimietate anima obruatur,
etc. That is. It does nothing avail to fast all the day, if afterward the
soul be overwhelmed with delicate meats. The mind being filled, forthwith is
sluggishe, and the earth of our body being watered, will bring forth filthy
lust: therefore let the meat be temperate, and let the belly be never to full.

Origin writes thus. Ieiunio sic adhibenda temperies, vt corpus vestru^ nec
saturitas excitet, nec inedia immoderata debilitet. Fasting must so be
temperated, that neither fulness may excite and stir the body, neither
immoderate hunger may weaken the body. Ecclesi histo.


Eusebius says. Quale est illud ieiunium, quod non vesceris carnibus, et de
ore tuo omni esca sordidius egreditur? etc. That is. What manner of fast is
that, that thou eatest not flesh, and that which is more filthye than all
meats, goes out of thy mouth? What fast is that that the belly is
sancttified with fastings, Conc. 2.
and the tongue is polluted with lies?

The Council Barcarense, does anathematise him which abstaineth from eating of
flesh, unless there be a cause of abstinencie.

Apollonius disputing against Montanus the heretic, says: Hic est qui docuit
nuptias solui, et qui ieiuniorum leges primus imposuit. This is he which taught
that Matrimony is to be dissolved, and which first made the laws of fasting.
Euse hist. lib 5. Cap. 18.


We read also in Eusebius this saying: Non solum de die paschae agitur
controuersia, sed de ipsa specie ieiuniorum. etc. that is. There is a great
controversy not only of Easter day, but also of the kind and manner of
fastings: for some do think, that the fast ought to be observed one ly one
day, some two days, some more, some also forty days, counting the nights
with the days: which diversity of observations, did not first begin in our
time, but long before us. And they ( I think) began it first, which not
sincerely observing that which was taught at the beginning, did otherwise,
either by negligence, or by ignorance determine and appoynte them.

Notwithstanding al these, though they did vary in observations, yet they were
and be at peace with us. Neither did the dissension of fasting break the
unity and agreement of faith. These be the words of Ireneus gathered out of the
ecclesiastical histories. Tripart hist. lib 9. cap. 58.


Socrates declares, that this diversity of fastings was in the church in the
reign of Theodosius Anno. 1453.

But they had not like abstinence from meats, for some did altogether
abstain from meats that had life: Some did eat only fish: some with
fishes did eat also fowls, saying with Moses, that souls do get their
living in the water, and have their substance out of it some also did abstain
from roots and from eggs some did eat only dry bread some did fast until
nine of the clock, making no difference of meats: with innumerable kinds of
observations and custom. And because there is found no aunciente and old
history of this matter, I think that the Apostles left it free for every man
to do good works, not for fear, Esdras 18. Judith 4. Hester. 4.
nor for necessity. Haec Socrates.

Fasting goes before prayer, as it appears in Esdras, Judith, and Hester.

Saint Hierome says: In epist. ad Galath. ca. 4.
Ieiunia et congregationes inter dies propter eos a viris prudentibus
constituuntur. etc. That is: Fasting and prayer on certain days is appointed
of wise men, for them which serve the world more than God: neither they can,
yea they will not assemble and pray together in the church all their life time.
Neither they will offer their sacrifice of prayer unto God before their worldly
business. For how many are there, which at the least will observe and keep these
few days that are appointed for fasting and prayer? In prolog. in Math.


The same Hierome says, that fasting was ordained with prayer, when saint John
wrote his gospel.

Again, saint Hierome says: Lib. 2. cont. Iouinianum.
Nos vnam quadragesimam secundum traditionem apostolorum toto anno, tempore
nobis congruo ieiunamus etc. We do fast one Lent (after the traditions of the
Apostles) all the year, at a time expedient and meet for us. But the
Montanistes do make three Lents in the year, as though there had suffered
three Saviors.

Chrysostom says: Medicina est ieiunium, sed medicina, Tomo. 4. Homil. 8. de
ieiunio.
lieet millies vtilis sit, tamen per imperitiam vtentis invtilis fit saepe.
etc. That is: Fasting is a medicine, but the medicine (although it be much
profitable) yet by the ignorance of him that fasteth, it is often times made
unprofitable. We must know well both the time in which it is nedeful to fast,
and also the quantity of the medicine, the temperature of the body, the nature
of the country, the time of the year, and convenient food must be well known.
Fasting did not deliver the Ninevites from peril, the changing and amendment
of life did appease the wrath of God.

This I have spoken, not that we should contemn fasting, but that we should
honor it. For the honor of fasting is not abstinence from meats, but the
flieng from sin. Therefore, he that defines fasting to be only an abstinence
from meats, does greatly contemn fasting.

Chrysostom says: Ibidem.
Si quotidie huc conuenimus totam quadragesimam, ieiunemus, and non mutemus
vitam, in melius maioris damnationis occasio fieret. If we daily assemble
hither, if we fast all the Lent, and do not amend our lives, it will cause us
to have the greater dampnation. Mar. 5.


Our Savior Christ says: Hoc genus demoniorum in nullo potest exire, nisi in
oratione et ieiunio. This kind of devils can not go out of a man, but by
prayer and fasting. In epist. ad fannarium.


Saint Austine says. Alia vero quae per loca terrarum regionesque variantur.
And other things that do varry and differ in Countries (as this that some do
fast on the Saboth day, and some not, some do communicate and be partakers of
the body and blood of Christ every day, and some on certain days, and
such other like) may be observed at liberty. For that which does not repugne
the faith and good customs, may be used indifferently, and may be observed for
the society of them among whom we live.

My mother following me to Millaine, found a church that fasted not on the
Saboth day, and began to doubt what she might do. Then I asked counsel of
this matter of Saint Ambrose, then Bishop of Millaine: who answered, when I
come to Rome, I do fast on the Saboth, when I am at Millaine, I do not fast.
So also thou, to what Church soever thou shall happen to come, keep their use
and custom, if thou will offend no man, neither any man will offend thee.
When I told this to my mother, she gladly embraced it.

Epist. ad fannar.
Again, saint Austine says: Si volumus deo placida exhibere ieiunia, sumus in
oratione continui, in iudiciis iusti. etc. That is: if we will please God with
fasting, let us pray continually, let us judge uprightly, let us be faithful
in friendship, let us suffer injuries patiently, in contentions let us be
moderate, let us avoid filthy talk. Let us be stout against iniquitye, in
banquets temperate, in charity simple and pure, ware among them that be
subtle, sorowing among them that be sad, resisting them that be stubborn,
in supersticions spare, silent among evil speakers, among the humble coequal.

De spiritu et anima.
The same Augustine says: Sic debes ieiunare, vt non palpites, vt vix respirare
possis. etc. So thou ought to fast, that thou may not pant, that thou
may scarce take breath, and that thou may either be carried or drawn with
the hands of thy fellows: but that the concupiscence of the body being
broken, thou do not bestow less time in reading in the Psalms, nor in
watchinges, then thou wast wont to do.

Ad Demetriadem.
Saint Hierome also says: Non sanat oculum quod calcaneo adhibetur, ieiunio
passiones corporis, oratione pestes sanandae sunt mentis: the medicine that is
put to the heel, does not heal the eye, that lust of the body is to be healed
with fasting, the disease of the mind with prayer.

Super marcu^ Sermo. 38.
Again he says in an other place: Tantum tibi ieiuniorum impone modum, quantum
far potest. etc. That is: Measure thy fastinges so much as thou can suffer.
Let them be pure, simple, and chaste, let them be moderate, and not
supersticious.

What does it proffit, not to eat oil, and to seek certain troublesome and
difficull meats, as dry figs, pepper, nuttes and such like? And while we
do seek for delicate meats, we are drawn back from the kingdom of heaven.

Furthermore, I do hear that some men against nature do not drink water,
nor eat bread, but do suppe thin delicate broathes, not in a cup, but in
a bole curiously made. Are we not ashamed of such foolishnes? nor does it yrcke
us of such superstitions? In epistola ad Galath.


Bernardus says: If only thy mouth have sinned in gluttony, let it only
fast, and it is enoughe. But if the other members have sinned, why do not they
also fast? Therefore, let thine eye fast both from curiouse sightes, and from
all wantonness, that it being well humbled, may be corrected with penance,
which walked at liberty in sin. Let the ear fast which ytched wickedly at
fables and tales, and idle words, nothing perteinyng to salvation. Let the
tongue fast from backbytinge, murmuryng from unprofitable and naughty words.
Let the hands fast from all works, that are not commanded to be done.

But let the soul much more fast from vice, and from her own will and lust.
For without this fast all other are reproved of the Lord. As it is written:
Quia in diebus ieiuniorum vestrorum, voluntates vestrae inueniuntur. For
because in the days of your fastings, your own wills are found.

Furthermore, saint Hierome says: Dies obseruatis, and menses, De doctrina
christiana. di.
and tempora, and annos, dicat aliquis etc. Some man may say, you do observe
days, months, times and years, we also do incur the like fault observing
the fourth day after the Saboth, the fridaye and the Sunday, the fast also of
Lent, the feast of Easter, whitsondaye, and the feasts of holy martirs in
sondrie countries diversely ordained and instituted. To the which a man may
plainly answer, that the days of the Iewishe observations are not the same
that ours be: for we do not celebrate the passover of unleavened bread, but
of the resurrections of the cross.

Neither we do nombre seven weeks in Pentecoste, after the custom of the
Jews, but we do observe the coming of the holy ghost. And least a disordered
congregation of the people, should diminish the faith in Christ, therefore some
days are appointed, that we should assemble and come all together. Not, that
that day (in which we meet together) should be the more solemn, but that, on
what day so ever we must come together, we may ye more rejoice by beholding
one an other. But they which do answer this question more pithilie, do affirm
that all days are alike, and that Christ not only is crucified on the
fridaye, and rises again on the Sunday, but the day of resurrection is
always, and that they do always eat the flesh of Christ. 41. cant. quisquis.


Saint Austine also says: Quisquis rebus praeterenutibus restrictius vtitur,
quam se habent mores eorum cum quibus viuit, aut intemperans, aut
superstitiosus est. etc. that is. Whosoever does observe transitory things,
more straightly then is used amongs them with whom he lives, he is either
intemperate, or superstitious.

And whosoever does so observe them that he do excede the bounds, that good
men (with whom he lives) do observe, either he signifies some thing, or else
he is an euel man. For in all such things the use and custom is not in fault,
but the unlawful appetite and lust. Therefore that which is convenient, and
agreeable to the time, place, and person, is diligently to be observed: least
we reprehende and rashly count any thing to be sin. For it may be, that a
wise man may use precious and delicate meat without any gredie desire, and an
unwise man may burn upon vile and course meat with the filthy flame of
gluttony. etc.

I read an old verse in which is contained the use and abuse of fasting, this
is the verse.

Abstinet aeger, egens, cupidus, gula, Simia, virtus. The sick man fasteth
because he has no appetite to eat, or by the reason of some medicine received.

The poor man fasteth, because he has not for to eat.

The covetous man fasteth, to spare meat and drink.

The gluttonous man fasteth, that he may after eat the more gredily.

The ape, that is, the hipocrite, fasteth, to seek the praise of man.

The godlyy man fasteth to mortify his flesh, and to mourn for his sins.

Fasting may be unlawful in five cases.
First, when that thing which is necessary for the sustention of life, is
denied to man.

Secondly, when that thing which is necessary (concerning office and society)
is withdrawn, as from the preacher and other that be in office.

Thirdly, when any person is hindered or let from the works of charity.

Fourthly, when any person through a voluntary vow of fasting does macerat
and consume his body, which vow ought not to be kept, but changed.

Fiftely, when by reason of the fasting day, men do eat and drink
excessiuely without measure, or when in the fasting day, more exquisite meats,
are more sought and had, then on other days.

Look more for fasting in the Miscellane. Choice of meats.

Crosses on our selves. 14.
Saint Austin in his retractions makes mention of the Donatists, who
threatened to destroy themselves with fire, rather the^ they would return to
the church. From the which wicked opinion one Dulcitius did disuade them:
saying, that if they thought them selves just and good men, they should rather
fly, according to Christ's commandment: than wickedly to burn them selves
in the fire. Epist. 50


Also in his epistle ad Bonifacium, he reherceth three kinds of death,
wherewith the Donatistes willingly desired to be killed, or rather killed them
selves. First, some of them would desire those which were worshippers and
kepers of Idols, to destroy them: Other would offer them selves to the armed
men, lying by the high way side, to be slain of them. Other of them thought
it a sport to throw them selves down hedlonge from high places into the water
and into the fire. These three kinds of death (says Austine) the deuell
taught them, who suggested Christ to cast himself down hedlong from the
pinnacle of the temple.

So in like manner in these days the Anabaptists with certain other, desire to
have crosses laid upon them without just cause, or before God does lay them
upon their shoulders. Where they both tempte God, and break the commandment
of Christ, who says to his disciples: If they persecute you in one city, fly
to an other. For Christ would not have us to cast our selves rashely and
without urgent cause into the hands of the raging enemies, or to the peril of
death. Nor a christian ought to be imbraided or rebuked for flying of
persecution, so that he fly as he ought to do: and also when he ought to do,
as Helias by flying did escape the fury of Iesabel. David by flying did escape
the raging cruelty of Saul. Paul by flying did aduoide the persecuting hands
of the ruler of the city of Damascus. He was let down over the wall by the
disciples, and so escaped.

Notwithstanding the same Paul, when the faith ought manfully to be desended,
did stand to his tackle, and offered his neck to the block, and would not fly
nor depart. When the disciples most earnestly desired him that he would not
go to Jerusalem, least he should suffer those things which Agabus had
prophesied: he would in no wise consent, but said: what do you thus weping and
troubling my hearts? I do desire and wish, not only to be bound in bonds,
but also to suffer death at Jerusalem, for the name of my Lord Jesus Christ.

Quaestio cum obiectione. Cap. 10.

May we then sometime fly, and sometime not fly? Saint John in his gospel
says, that a good shepherde gives his life for his sheep. But an hireling,
and he which is not the shepherd, neither the sheep ar his own, sees the
wolf coming, and he leaves the sheep and flies, and the wolf catches
them, and scatters the sheep. Now if the shephearde ought to put his life in
ieopardie for his sheep: Ergo he ought not to fly, for all that do fly, ar no
shepherds but hirelings.

Responsio
If the pastor of a church be so necessary to the christian public weal,
and for his sheep to be fed that his presence must needs be had, than he
ought not to fly, but ought with danger of life to govern, keep and deliver
his sheep committed to his charge, from the peril of spiritual death. For
when and where there is none to supply his room, and so by fliyng does bring
his sheep into danger of destruction, he ought with a bold mind to abide and
to sustein persecution, even unto death (if need be.) For it is a noble thing
to suffer death for the commodity of a public weal.

On the other part. If the Prelate or pastor be sought of the fierce
persecutours, and threatened to be put to death, if there be in that place other
learned, wise, and godly ministers, which can as well provide for the
instruction and saving of the sheep, as he can, then he may lawfully fly.

And the reason is this: He sought not to lose his life and body, and to put
himself forth to the peril of death, when his flock may otherwise be kept
sound and safe, and do suffer none or very little hurt by his flyinge.

And it may happen that a greater commodity may follow if he fly for a time
from them, then if he had remained with them.

Saint Austine upon these words of Christ: cum vos persecuti fueritis in vna
ciuitate, fugite in alia^, writes after this manner: Quis aute^ credit ita haec
dominum fieri voluisse vt necessario ministerio, sine quo viuere nequeunt
deserantur greges, quos suo sauguine comparauit? etc. Who may believe that the
Lord would have it so, that the flock whcih Christ has purchased and gotten
with his own blood, should be forsaken and made destitute of the necessary
ministry without the which they can not live? When the Apostle Paul fled,
the church was not left void of the necessary ministry, but that thing
which ought to be done, was accomplished by other faithful brethren, which
remained there. For the Apostle did fly, the other disciples willinge and
egginge him forward, that he should preserve and keep himself to the use and
proffit of the church. Therefore let the servants of Christ, the ministers of
his words and sacraments, do that which he has commanded and permitted, let
the^ fly at all times from city to city, when any of the^ specially and
personally is sought of the persecutours, so that the church be not left
desolate of other which are not so persecuted, and which may give food to
their fellow servant, whom they know not to be able otherwise to live. But
when the peril and persecution is general, perteinyng to the whole nombre of
bishops and the clergy, then let not the^ which lack other, be left and
forsaken of them when they lack and want. Therefore either let them go all to
places where they may be defended, or they which must needs tarie^, let them
not be left and forsaken of them, by whom their ecclesiastical necessity
ought to be supplied: so that they may altogether either live, or else
altogether suffer, that which the father of the house will have them to suffer.
And so forth you may read more of this matter in all the said epistle written
to Honoratus.

To this judgment of saint Austine Lyranus does consent and agree,
expoundinge that place of John whee it is said, that a good shepherd does put
his life for his sheep, his words be these.

Nomine lupi venientis super oues, aliquando intelligitur diabolus per
tentationes fideles infestans: aliquando hereticus per falsam doctrinam
corrumpens: aliquando tyrannus violentia armoru^ persequens. etc. that is: By
the name of the wolf coming upon the sheep, sometime the deuell is understand,
molesting the godly christians by tentations, and sometime by the name of the
wolf is understand an heretic, corrupting the sheep by false doctrine, and
sometime a tyraunte persecutinge by violent arms and strength, is understand
by the name of a wolf.

In the first and second significations, it is to fly, because such wolfes
ought not to be resisted by the pastor corporallye, but rather spirituallye by
devout prayer, by holy preaching, and sound doctrine.

In the third signification of the name of a wolf, a distinction is to be
made. For the persecution is either personal, or else general. If it be
personal, so that it be against the pastor only, and not against the flock
committed unto him, than he may lawfully fly: But if the persecution be common
both against the shepherd and also the floke, yet a distinction is to be made.
For either there is but only one pastor, or else there be many pastors and
preachers. If there be but one only, than he ought not to fly and forsake his
flock, for otherwise he should be an hirelyng, and not a shepherd. If there
be many pastors, of whom the church has need, than some ought to remain, and
other may fly, that the flock remainyng behind, may be sufficienly governed
and fed. And if they contend who shall tarry, and who shall flee, they may,
calling for grace of the holy ghost, decide the matter by lots.

Athanasius has made a long and goodly apology concerning flying from
persecution, in the which among all other things he writes thus. Age iam quid
sacrae scripturae de istiusmodi reloqua^tur inspiciamus, etc. Go to now, let
us se what the scriptures do speak of this thing, and so shall it appear that
they fight with the holy scriptures, and that they slander the virtues and
godly dealings of the saints and of the holy men. For if they despise the^
which had and conveyed them selves away, and if they do slander them which
fly and avoid persecutours, when they sought them unto death, what will they
do I pray you, when they see Jacob flying from his brother Esau? and Moses for
fear of Pharao to depart to the Madianites? Or what will these bablers and
ianglers answer unto David flying out of his own house, when Saul sent
soldiers to kill him? and when he hid himself in a den and changed his
countenance, to escape from Abimelech and his assaults?

Again, what will these praters say, when they see that great prophet Elias
called a God, and raising the dead, to hide him self for fear of Achab, and
to fly the menaces of Iesabell: At what time also the children of the
prophets being sought unto death, did keep them selves close in dens with
Abdias. Peradventure they have read nothing of these things, as over old, or
do not remember what things are written in the gospel. But what do they not
know that the disciples for fear of the Jews did seek secret and close
places? Do they not know, that Paul was let over the wall in a basket at
Damascus, when the Gentiles sought him to deliver him to the Rular?

And a little after he says, in the consummation of the world when that word
of the father came which spoke to Moses, before he made and gave again a
commandment of flying, saying: when they persecute you in one city, fly to
an other.

He says also, when ye shall se the abomination, of desolation which was
spoken of before in Daniel standing in ye holy place, he that redeth let him
understand. Then let them which be in Iewrie, flee unto the hills, and he
that is in the house top, let him not come down to take any thing out of his
house, and he which is in the feildes, let him not return home to fetch his
garments.

When the holy men of God knew this, they framed their life to this rule,
for that which God has enjoined, is to be done. And there fore the word it
self which was made man for us, would (when he was sought to be persecuted)
fly and avoid the assaults of the persecutour. For it becomed him to show
him self to bear our flesh, and to be made man, not only in hungryng,
thyrstyng, and suffering, but also in the reason and means of flying. For
as soon as he was borne, and also when he was a child, Joseph was commanded of
the Angel to take the child, and his mother to fly away, for Herod sought
his life. And after, when Herod was dead, fearing Archelaus, departed into
Nazareth.

Furthermore when by healyng the withered hand, he showed him self to be God,
and the Jews seeking counsel to kill him, he being not ignorant of their
assaults, departed from these places.

Also after he had raised Lazarus from death, from that hour they took
counsel to kill him. Wherefore Jesus did not walk openly among the Jews,
but went into a place nere to the wilderness.

Furthermore when he said: Antequam Abraham fieret, ego sum. Before Abraham
was, I am. The Jews taking up stones to cast at him, he hid him self, and
went out of the temple, passing through the midst of them.

Jesus also hearing the martyrdom of John the Baptist, whom when his disciples
had buried, he went into a ship and departed into the deserte. Therefore as
the Lord did, so he taught. Now I fear least these men not stayinge their
lust and pleasure of imbraidyng within the compass of man's checkes, but being
carried further with their madness, will obiecte also unto their Lord God
timiditie and fearfulnes. But who can abide and suffer them so raging and
running into such madness? It is better that they be said and counted to be
ignorant of the gospel etc, where he entreats of this matter at large.

Saint Austine makes mention of this Athanasius, Epist 1280.
and says that he did well to fly, when Constantius the emperor did desire
to apprehende specially him, yet he left not the Catholic congregation
(which was at Alexandria) destitute of other ministers.

Thus have I showed at large when a pastor ought to fly, and when he ought
not to fly.

Homaeosis. 15.
HOmaeosis is called in Latin similitudo, and it is thus defined: Homaeosis est
minus notae rei per similitudinem eius quae magis nota est, demonstratio: that
is. Homaeosis is a demonstration of a thing less known, by the similitude of
that thing, which which is more known. As in the psalms. Ecce sicut oculus
seruorum in manibus dominorum suorum: sicut oculi ancillae in manibus dominae
suae: Ita oculi nostri ad dominum deum nostrum, donec miscreatur nostri.

Behold, like as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their master,
and as the eyes of a maiden, unto the hand of her maistres: so our eyes wait
upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us.

This figure does bring unto the oration great light and dignity, and it is
very proffitable to prove.

Example.
As they do most grievously offend which do infecte with poison a common well
where all men do draw: so they deserve worse of a common weal, which do
corrupt the mind of a prince with pernitiouse counsels.

An other example
As in dangerous saylynge the stern is not committed to him which excels
in riches and nobility, but to him which is expert in the cunning of
navigations: So it behooves not to deliver unto him a princely government
(which is richer and more honorable than other) but to him which does excel
other in wisdom, policy and fidelity.

The holy scriptures are full every where of this figure. Among the doctors
of the church none uses this figure more often and largely, then John
Chrysostom.

This figure may be varied five manner of ways. For there is, Similitudo.
Iucunda. Grandis. Acris. Mediocris. Humilis.


An example of the first.
As when the Vveste wind blows with her pleasant blastes, the foulenes and
sadness of winter is put away, and the whole face of nature waxes new and
young, again the trees are beautified with boughs, and the grene grass is
distinguished with the sight of diverse flowers, and the sun it self, and
the whole show of heaven does delight the eyes with a pleasant aspect: so
as soon as the grace of the holy spirit does blow upon the mind of man,
forthwith does the deformity and foulnes of the former life pass away. And
in the steed of vices, the whole life shines with virtues of comelines. So
that, that man may be counted to be borne again, and luckely to wax young.

Example of the second.
As God, when he lacks nothing, yet by his own nature is glad to do good to
all men: so they which call God father, ought frelye to deserve well of all
men, as much as in them lies.

Example of the third.
Do thou wax pale, and art thou afraid of the hissing and biting of a
viper, and do run to the physician?

How much more is filthy sin to be abhorred and feared, which has worser
poison then all vipers: and how much sooner ought medicine to be sought?

Example of the forth.
As they which by the counsel of Hesiodus do often add small things to small,
and so at last do become rich: So he which grows in virtue more and more, at
last becomes perfect.

Example of the fifte.
As beggars if they have any good thing do conceile it, and do only show
their rags and their sores, whereby they may stir the compassion of the
beholders: so it behooves us not to boaste our good deeds before God, but to
profess and confess our euilles, if we will provoke his mercy toward us.

There be three kinds or spices of this scheme Homaeosis, as Mancinellus
declares in his Distichon: Fertur homaeosis quoties fit similitudo.
Sunt species, Icon and parabola and paradigma.


Icon is an oration shewinge the similitude of bodies or of natures, or else it
is a comparison of persons between themselves, or of those things which are
incident unto persons.

In Virgil the like is used, where it is said: Aene. 1.
Os humerosque deo similis, like unto God both in countenance and in body.

The poet here compares Aeneas to the image of God.

The like is in the scriptures: Vidimus gloriam eius, John. 1.
gloriam quasi vnigeniti a patre. We saw the glory thereof, as the glory of
the only begotten son of the father.

Note here one thing by the way yt this word (...) in greek, which is in latin
tanquam, veluti, quasi, is not a note of improprietie in this place, but
signifies rather a true and whole approbation. As Paul uses it, when he
says: tanquam fiui lucis ambulate: Walk as the children of light. So the
evangelist saint John understands here that glory to be seen in Christ,
which agrees to the son of God, and which should be a certain testimony
of his divinity.

Saint Gregory writes. Quod in sacro eloquio, sicut and quasi aliquando non
pro similitudine ponitur, sed pro veritate: In the holy scripture these two
particles sicut and quasi, so^time ar put not for a similitude but for a
verity and confirmation.

Parabola.
Parabola, which Cicero calls collationem, Quest 6. ad Algarian.
is called parabola (as saint Hierome says) quod alteri (...). id est
assimilatur: because it is likened to an other thing.

Parabola est (vtinquit Beda) rerum genere dissimilium comparatio: Math. 13
A parable is (as says Beda) a comparison of things differing, genere, As in
Matthew. Simile est regnum caelorum grano sinapis. The kingdom of heaven is
like unto a grain of mustarde sede.

Again in the psalms. Erit sicut arbor plantata etc. He shall be as a tree
planted by the waters side.

John. 3.
Likewise in John: As Moses exalted the serpent in the wilderness, so must the
son of man be exalted. There be many other examples of this scheme in the
scriptures.

Paradigma.
Paradigma is called in latin exemplum. It is a showing of an example,
exhorting or deterring.

Fabius defines it after this manner: Paradigma est rei gestae vtilis ad
persuadendum, id quod intenderis commemoratio. It is a declaration of a thing
done or as done, proffitable to persuade that which thou intendest.

Example of paradigma, exhortinge.
Cap 5
An example of a paradigma, exhorting, is written in James when he exhorts to
prayer by the example of Elias.

Cap. 6.
The like is in Matthew, where Christ exhorts us from carefulnes, by the
example of the fowls of the air, which do neither sow, nor reap, nor
gather into the barn, yet the heavenly father does feed them.

Example of paradigma deterring.
Cap. 17.
An example of paradigma deterring, is written in Luke: memores estote vxoris
Loath. Remember Lottes wife, by which example he would not have us to look
back unto filthiness.

There is none other difference between similitudo and paradigma, but that
examples are taken out of things done, as this: As a horse if he be occupied
is made tamer and milder to suffer great labors: So the body of man (if it be
used by degrees unto great things) it is able to bear and sustain, that
which an other dare not touch.

Examples are taken out of persons either true or fabulouse, out of brute
beasts and things without life. As the Elephantes do not use carnal
copulation, but in most secret places, and if any man do come in the mean
time, they kill him. How much more ought shamefastnes to be had in the
congresse of man and wife, although it he lawful?

Also as the Dolphins do not suffer the young ones to wander unaccompanied, how
much more behooves it man to appoint unto his tender children a governor and
scholemaister?

Again, as every tree does nourishe that which it brings forth, so it
becomes natural mothers to nourishe their children with their own milk.

Thus much I thought good to speak of this figure homaeosis.

Faith. 16.
ALthough I have spoken of faith sufficiently before, yet I will somewhat now
touch yt faith which is called fides iustificans, not meaning in this place to
make the whole discourse how only faith does justify (for that shall be
differred until I answer to the four bills which were cast against me by
the ennemies of God, and laid in the preaching place where I stood), but I
will only show here a necessary note or two of faith.

Prima nota.
This word fides, does so take her name as well among the Grecians as among the
Hebrews, that her constancy and firmitie may easily appear by the etymology
of the word.

It is called in Hebrew Amnah of the word Aman which signifies firmum esse,
to be firm and sure.

The Grecians called fide^ (...), quod est persuasum esse, that is, to be
persuaded. If you will require the original of the word, it seems to be
derived ab (...), for that which is persuaded and believed, it stands as most
true.

It is called in Latin fides, quasi fiat quod dicitur, that that which is
said may be done. Of this, much is entreated before.

But the true definition of that faith which is fides iustificans, is this.

Fidei definitio.
Fides est firmus atque constans animi assensus, verbis dei, spiritu sancto
affatu ad credentium salutem. that is: Faith is a sure and constant assent of
mind, inspired with the holy ghost, to the salvation of them which believe.

In this definition no kind of the causes does want.

Causa materialis is the word of God. Causa formalis. is the act of consent.
Causa efficiens. is the holy ghost. Causa finalis. is our salvation.
And the assent of faith is therefore called firm and constante, that it may be
diverse from opinion. For when we do embrace one part of the question
proposed, if either fear or suspicion for the verity of the other part do
arise, then we are said to have opinionem. which must be far set from faith.

Also that this faith should depend of the holy Ghost, there be three
necessary causes.

First, because the words of God to the which we do give faith by assent
should not be extant, except they were revealed of the holy ghost.

Secondly by the aid and help of the holy ghost our minds are lightened, that
we may understand those things which are proposed in the holy scriptures,
for otherwise the natural man perceyueth not those things which be of God.

Thirdly, that this light wherewith we be made mete to understand, may have
followinge it, the promptnes of our will and affections, so to bridle the
wisdom of the flesh and other affairs of our life, that they hinder nor let
the sure assent unto faith.

Secunda nota.
You must understand that faith (as it is our action) does not justify, for so
it is always weak and imperfecte, nor we can in that sort surely and safely
lean unto it. But the hedde and spring of our justification comes of
Christ, of the promises and mercy of God, which are objected and offered unto
faith, who is the first power and faculty which brings those things into
our mind.

Therefore when we say that we be justified by faith, it is no more to say, but
that justification is obtained and had by Christ, and the promises of God,
which are received and apprehended by faith.

An example or similitude.
He that has a weak and not a perfect sight in his eyes, yet if he see a
fair sign and goodlye color, is said perfectly to see it, not by the benefit
of his dim sight, but because the fair sight and goodly color is an object
to the sight, and is by that perceived and seen.

The order of our justification.








Conclusio.
By this it appears that faith is not the thing which does justify us, but
rather that thing by the which we perceive and apprehend righteousness and
justification.

Gold. 17.
GOld is called in Latin Aurum, Lib. 6. de lingua latina.
whereof is derived (as Varro says) this word Aurora, which signifies the
earlye morning, which is before the rising of the sun. It is so called,
because the air then has the color of gold, by reason of the sun ready to
rise.

And this is the difference between mane, and aurora, that mane, is after the
sun rising, when the day is clear. For the old writers (as Nonius says) did
call it manum clarum, clear. Lib. 1. Saturnalium.
Macrobius does think that it is called mane, a manibus, because the beginning
of the light does then appear from the lower parts.

Varro does derive it of this verb Manando because yt the day with the Sun
does flow from the East. Whereupon they which be borne in the morning are
called Manii, sieve Lucis.

Aurora, (as I said) is before the Sun rising.

Aurum, is called in Greek (...), vel (...). It is called in Hebrew Zaab, and
it takes that name of his color. For Tzachab betokens Yellowe, or the like
color.

Aurum has in the Scripture six significations.

First, it is taken for oil. As in the Prophet Zachary: Cap. 4.
What be these two Olive branches which through the two golden pipes, empty
them selves into Gold.

Secondly, it is taken for wine, as in the Prophet Jeremy: Cap. 51.
Babell has been as a golden cup in the Lords hand, that made all the earth
dronken. The golden cup is taken here for wine.

Thirdly Aurum is taken for wisdom in the Apocalips: Cap. 3
where it is said: Suadeo tibi emerea me aurum ignitum. I counsel thee that
thou bie of me gold that is tried by fire, that thou may be made rich. By
gold is signified here metaphorically, wisdom and faith.

Fourthly, 1. Epist. 3.
Aurum signifies pure and sincere doctrine (as saint Ambrose expounds it
upon the epistle to the Corinthians) or it may be taken for the good works of
the godly, as saint Hierome takes it.

Fifthly, aurum does signify a good man and a godly, and one elect of God. As it
is used in the epistle to Timothy, where saint Paul says: 2. epist. 2.
In a great house are vessels, not only of gold and silver, but also of wood
and of earth, some for honor, and some for dishonor. By gold here are
signified the elect and perfect men of God.

Sixthly, gold signifies bright and clear air, as in Job, Cap. 3.7.
where it is said: Ab aquilone aurum veniet. Gold shall come out of the North. By
gold here is signified serenity and fair weather.

Fire. 18.
FIre is called in Latin, ignis, and is derived of this preposition in, which
is a private particle of this verb gignenpo, which betokens to get, bcause
nothing is gendred in the fire. It is called in Greek (...), and in Hebrew it
is called aesch, by reason of Nun taken away persyncopen. And it is so called
because it denoureth al things with out any recovery or mercy. And therefore
this verb Akal, which betokens to consume, is attributed unto it.

Ignis in the scripture has five significations.

Cap. 9.
First, it betokens persecution and correction, as in the Evangelist Mark,
where it is written. Omnis igne salietur, every man shall be salted with fire,
and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt. In the which words he teaches,
that it is better to be sacrificed unto God by salt and fire, that is, to be
purged and sanctified, then to be sent into hell fire.

Cap. 10.
Secondly, it signifies the wrath and plage of God, as Paul uses it in the
epistle to the Hebrews, where he calls judgment the vehemency of fire, which
shall devour the adversaries and the wicked.

Cap. 3.
Thirdly, fire signifies the love of God, as in Matthew. He shall baptize you
with fire and spirit, that is, he shall inflame your hearts with the love of
him.

Fourthly, fire signifies the word of God, which stirs up in some the
burning of salvation, Cap. 12.
and in other some the burning of eternal damnation. As in Luke: Ignem veni
missurus in terram. I came to send fire into the earth, that is the Gospel,
which is a burning fire, which does purge al pure things, and consume al impure
things, as the leuitie and filthiness of the flesh.

Theophilactus says: By fire preaching is understand. For the word is fire,
which consumes al material and imperfect thoughts, and abolisheth images, of
what matter soever they be.

Fifthly, fire is taken for all calamity, as in Amos. Mittam ignem in domum
Asael. I will send fire into the house of Asael.

Book of Wisdom. 19.
THe book of wisdom called commonly Liber sapientiae, is not in the Canon
of the Hebrews.

The Jews in deed read this book, but very seldom, supposing it to be the
book of one Philo a Jew, but a Greek borne. For the title it self (as saint
Hierome says) does savor rather of the Greek eloquence, then of any other
tongue.

Certain suppose that this Philo is not he that lived under the reign of
Nero, Lib. de viris Illustribus.
and wrote diverse works in the praise of christian religion (as Hierome does
testify) but to be another Philo, of a more ancient time, very cunning in the
Greek tongue: which lived. 160. years before the birth of Christ, in the time
of Onias the high priest.

And because the ecclesiastical fathers do judge these two books, that is, the
books of wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus prophetical: they are believed therefore
not to be made of Philo, which was after Christ, but of other that were before
Christ. Lib. de ciuitate. 17. ca. 20
Of the which book saint Austine speaks after this manner: Alii duo libri,
quorum vnus sapientia, alter vero ecclesiasticus, dicitur propter eloquii
nonnullam similitudinem, vt Salomonis dicantur obtinuit consuetudo: non autem
non esse ipsius non dubirant doctores. etc. That is: The other two books, of
the which one is called wisdom, the other Ecclesiasticus, custom obtained
that they were called the books of Solomon, for some similitude of eloquence
of his phrase: but the doctors do not doubt that they be not his, yet the
west church has of long time received them into authority: in the one, Cap. 1.
that is the book of wisdom, the passion of Christ is most evidently
prophesied. In Ecclesiastico, that faith of the Gentiles is foreshewed after
this manner. Miserere nostri dominator deus omnium, et immitte timore^ super
omnes gentes. O God the ruler of all things, have mercy upon us, and send
fear upon all the Gentiles. In catalogo sacrae script. Lib. 1.


Dreido in his dissolution of the fifth difficulty, writes, that the book of
wisdom is entitled of the ancient Fathers, the book of Solomon, not that it
was written of Solomon the carnal son of David, but that it contains the
sentences of Christ the true Solomon, vttred of him which was Salomo^ him self
figuring Christ, or else bering his person. For it is used often in the
scriptures, that that which speaks, does speak in the person of an other. So
many sentences of this book, Cap. 7.8.9.
which the author speaks of him self literally understand, agrees only
to Solomon, who being made king, wished above all goods in the world, that he
might obtain wisdom, with the which there came unto him all other goods: unto
whom God also said, that he should build him a temple in his holy hill.
Whereupon Solomon knew in spirit that Christ was the wisdom of God the
father. Therefore, although this book is now (as saint Hierome says) any where
found in the Hebrew tongue, but does rather savor of the Greek eloquence: yet
it does not follow that Solomon did not make or give forth the sentences and
doctrines of this book. For as much as Solomon (as the scripture testifies)
wrate. 3000 parables, and 5000. verses, and entreated of beasts, fowls,
creeping things, and fishes, and disputed of herbs and trees, even from the
ysope unto the Cedar tree. It is manifest that he made and spoke certain
sentences, gathered of diverse other, and perchance of them which came from
far countries to hear his wisdom.

The proverbs of Solomon, made of Solomon, were not written and couched of him
into one book, but those things which were dispersed abrod, were afterward
brought into one book in the time of Ezechias, and were gathered together of
the Ministers of Ezechias, Cap. 25.
king of Judah, as it appears in the book of Proverbs. So it might chance
that the sentences of this book of wisdom, being originally the sayings of
Solomon, were gathered together and wrote into one Greek book by some
author, full of the spirit of God.

Furthermore, consider this, that Hierome does not affirm this book to be the
book of Philo, but does say, that the Jews do affirm it to be the book of
Philo.

Ciprian, Ambrose, and other fathers do often allege, saying: In sapientia
Salomonis dicitur. It is said in the wisdom of Solomon, which is none other
thing to say, than in the book of wisdom.

Retract. 2. Cap. 4.
Vvher saint Austine in his book de doctrina christiana, does consta^tly
affirm that Jesus the son of Syrach wrote book of wisdom, he does in his
retractations, revoke that saying. Haec Dreido.

Flesh. 20.
FLesh is called in latin Caro, and it is properly said of dead beasts, and
therefore it is called Caro, quasi anima carens, as lacking life or soul (as
Donatus writes.) And it is not only spoken of four footed beasts and
fowls, Lib 16. Cap. 38. Lib. 9. Cap. 17. 1. Cor. 15
but also of fishes and fruit, who are said to have carnem in se as Plinius
writes, who attributes both unto fishes and to trees car^em, flesh. And so
saint Paul in the Epistle to the Corinthians, does use it saying. No^ omnis
caro, eadem caro, sed alia quidem caro hominum alia vero pecorum, alia vero
piscium, alia vero volucrum All flesh is not one and the same flesh, but there
is one flesh of men, an other flesh of beasts, an other of fish, and an other
of birds.

Saint Hierome does make a difference inter carnem et pulpam, that is of him
called Caro, which is knit together with blood, veins, synews and bones. And
that is called pulpa, which we eat, and that is only fleshly, because it is
eaten and gnawen of us.

Some would have this word caro, to be derived of ye Greek word (...).

Caro is called in greek (...), or (...) in hebrewe bashar. It has in the
scriptures many significations.

First, it is the fleshly carnosity which is sustained with bones, both in man
and beast. As in Genesis. Et clausit carnem loco eius, and closed the flesh in
the stead thereof.

Again in the same place: Hoc os de ossibus meis, et caro de carne mea this is
the bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.

Secondly Caro signifies the whole man, as in Deuteronomy. Quae vnquam fuit
caro quae audiuit vocem dei viui loquentis de medio ignis, sicut nos, et vixit?
What flesh was there ever that heard the voice of the living God speaking out
of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived? Cap. 7.


Thirdly, it betokens all manner of beasts, as in Genesis: Venerunt ergo ad
Noah in arcam bina ex omni carne, in qua erat spiritus vitae. They came to Noah
in the Arc two and two of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life.

Fourthly, it is taken in the good sense, Cap. 11.
and is contrary unto obstinacy and hardness of the heart, as it is used in
Ezechiel: Auferam cor lapi deum de carne eorum, et dabo eis cor carneum. I will
take away the stonye heart out of their bodies, and will give them an heart of
flesh, that is, a soft, gentle, and mollified heart, ready to receive the word
of God.

Fifthly, it is taken in the ill sense, and so it is taken most often, and then
it signifies every thing that lacks the spirit of God, as in Genesis. Ed
dixit Iehoua: non iudicabit spiritus meus in homine, quia caro est. My spirit
shall not always strive with man, because he is but flesh.

And likewise in the Epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15
sapientia carnis mors est, and in infinite other places of the scriptures.

Caro betokens not only sensuality, but what so ever is without the compass
of the grace and spirit of Christ.

End of our faith. 21.
HOw does Peter say there that faith has an end, 1. Epist. 14.
when Paul writes to the Corinthians, yt these three things do always
remain, faith, hope, and charity: but the greatest of these is charity?

Responsio.
Paul in that place had entreated of the gifts of the holy ghost which were to
be abolished, neither could always endure: and he sets forth those things
that be more durable, faith, hope, and charity, and of these three he makes
charity the chiefest, because it continues not only here, but also has a
place in heaven.

Certain do think that Paul speaks only of the continuance in this life,
as though he would say: The gifts of the holy ghost shall not always endure.
For when the faith of the Gospel shall be enlarged and set forth, they shall
cease and give place, because they were given for the promulgacion of faith.
But charity in the Church is always necessary. Therefore faith, hope, and
charity do abide, because christian religion cannot be safe without them.

Obiectio.
Against this sentence does saint Paul repugne, who seems to respect the
life to come, saying: Nunc videns per speculum in aenigmare, tunc facie ad
faciem. etc. Now seeing by a glass in a dark speech, the^ face to face. Now
we know partly, then I shall know as I am known.

Also Erasmus says: Si spectemus charitatem prout nunc. etc. If we respect
charity, as saint Paul in that place takes it, it is to be doubted how it may
endure in heaven, for that we shall not be able to deserve well of our
neighbors. For all men shall be happy, neither any shall have need of our help.

Responsio.
This is not a stronger argument. For who will deny the blessed spirits to
have charity? And if there want occasion to help our neighbors, yet the
affection and faculty of doing is accepted, if either occasion or faculty
shall be offered. Therefore we must not doubt that charity shall endure in heaven.
And this is the mind and censure of all the chiefest fathers.

Obiectio.
Ireneus says, that faith shall abide in heaven, and brings this reason:
because there we shall better know and learn, and more thoroughly pearce unto
divine things, then we can do in this life. How then does Peter say that faith
has her end?

Responsio.
Ireneus either by great and urgent business in planting and governing the
church, or else by diverse persecutions, and manifold incommodities, could not
diligently discuss the scriptures, and therefore he might easily err.

Phocius (as the Greek scholies do report) was of the same sentence, who says
that faith shall endure in heaven. For then we shall be most delighted with the
contemplacion of God. He affirms the same also of hope, because there is
(says he) a sure possession: for that which we hoped for, will be present unto
us, and they which hoped, shall not be defrauded of the things hoped for.

And among the scholemen Durandus was of this censure.

But their assertions are against the sayings of Paul, which attribute
imperfection to faith, that is, to the notice and knowledge of God, which we
have in this world, because it is had by a glass in a dark speech, neither
it is in the whole, but in part. And per antithesin, he says, that we shall
know in our country, as we be known, and see face to face.

Furthermore, the definition of faith is against them. For in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, faith is said to be an evidence of things which are not seen, but
then althings shall appear and be made open. Therefore faith than and there can
have no place.

And in the epistle to the Romans we read, that the hope which is seen, is
not hope, for else how does a man hope for that he sees?

But let us see what Paul will have to be understand by these words Maxima ex
hiis charitas, the greatest of these is charity.

Every man's faith and hope profits himself, charity is extended to other.

Faith and hope are in the time of imperfection, Charity shall abide in the
state of perfection, that is, it shall be perpetual, when faith and hope shall
have their end.

If we discuss and search out all the effects of faith, faith shall be the
worthier and superior to charity: for charity is the effect of faith. The
effect without doubt is inferior to the cause.

Saint John says, that faith is the victory which overcomes the world: which
cannot be said of charity.

By faith we are borne again, and made the sons of God, and do obtain the
eternal faith, and by faith Christ dwells in us. And so faith in many things
is superior to charity. And chariti is called the greatest, not in all
respects, but in that it shall be perpetual, and because now it is the greatest
mean and way to preserve the church.

I marvel here that the Papists do stand in they own conceits, in mistaking
these words of Paul. If faith (say they) does justify: the^ much more charity
does justify, because charity is called greater.

See I pray you what an argument this is: Charity is greater the^ faith. Ergo
charity does justify.

The like argument is this: The king is more noble and greater than a plough
man and a shoemaker. Therefore the king can plow the ground or so a shoo
better, then either of them.

Again, a man is more noble and better then an horse. Therefore he will run
swifter then an horse, and will carry a greater burden.

The angels are more excellent than the Sun and Moon. Therefore they will give
more light to the earth.

If the power and strength of justifying did depend of the woorthines and
merit of faith, it were another matter.

But faith justifies not, because it is more worthy, but because it does
apprend righteousness, freely offered and given in the Gospel.

People of the old testament. 22.
WHat difference is between the old testament and the new, I showed largely
before. Here I note only one thing, which is temeritie, ignorance, and
blasphemy of certain fantastical heads, which hold yt the prophets do write
only to the people of ye old testament, and that their doctrine did pertain
only to their time, and would seclude al ye fathers yt lived under ye law from
the hope of eternal salvation. And here is also a note to be gathered against
the^ which utterly reject ye old testament, as a book nothing necessari to ye
christians which live under ye gospel. But as I have said before, there is no
difference between the old testament and the new, but only in circumstaunce,
and nothing in substance. And therefore the one is as well to be allowed and
received, as the other.

Pentecoste. 24.
PEntecoste is a Greek word, and betokens in latin fifty, and when it is
read in the scriptures, this word (...), id est, dies, is to be understand, as
you would say, the fifty day: because that feast was kept among the Jews, in
remembrance that the law was given them in the mount Sinai, the fifty day
after their departure out of Egypt. It is called, Festum hebdomadum, et nouarum
frugum, the feast of weeks, and of new corn. For they numbered from the first
day of the Pasche, seven weeks, which contained fifty days, and they did
celebrate the fifty day, in the memory of the law given from heaven.

Because I have made mention of Pentecoste, a feast of the Jews: I will give a
note of all the feasts of the Jews, and of the feasts which are kept in our
days, and wherefore they are constitute and ordained.

God in the old testament did institute many and diverse feasts, that he might
admonish the people of the benefits done unto them, that he might instruct the
ignorant, and that he might keep them all in the true woorshipping of God.
But all their feasts were not solemnised a like. They did sacrifice daily at
morning and Evening. The seventh day of every week was kept holy. Every month
had a proper feast: Also every year there were three solemn holy days
observed and kept. They did offer sacrifice daily at morning and evening, in
remembrance of continual worshipping of God. The godly prayed, they called to
remembrance the promise of the seed, unto which they looked by faith in all
their sacrifices. In steed hereof the church has substitute morning and
evening prayer.

Also the seventh day of the week, the memorial of the creation of the world,
was celebrate by offering sacrifices, and by thanks giving. Instead whereof the
church has ordained the first day of the week in remembrance of the second
creation, that is, of regeneration which is done by the resurrection of ye
Lord, that was solemnised on the first day of the weke, and therefore yt day was
called of ye apostles, dies dominicus, ye sondai.

In the begi^ning of every month, one day was kept holy, in remembrance of the
conseruatio^. For when they saw ye Moon keep her ordinary course and shining,
God would yt for the whole benefit of governance, thanks should be given to
God, and therefore he did institute that feast.

Although this feast does not bind the christians yet we ought to be no less
thankful unto God, then the godly Jews were.

Every year, three solemn feasts were observed, Pascha, Pentecoste,
Scenopegia.

Pascha, the passover, was ordained of the remembrance of the deliverance of
the Jews from the bondage of the Egiptians.

Pentecoste, was observed in remembrance of the law, given in the mount Sinai.

Scenopegia was celebrate in remembrance of the habitation of the people of
Israel in the desert, forty years in tabernacles, that by this ceremony, they
might call to remembrance all the benefit of their deliverance. Instead of
these three Iudaical feasts, the church has ordained Easter in remembrance
of the resurrection of the Lord, which delivered us from the bondage of the
devil.

Pentecoste was ordained in remembrance of the confirmation of the Gospel, by
the visible sending of the holy ghost, and by the miraculous gifts of the
tounges.

The nativity of Christ in remembrance that Christ was given and sent of God
the father unto us.

Now a word or two of other of our feasts.

Although it be idolatry to invoke and pray unto saints (as the Papists do
in their holy days) yet I think it very profitable to retain and keep some
of the feasts, and that for many causes.

First, it is profitable to know the histories of the church, for out of them
we may take doctrine, confirmation, and consolation.

Secondly, it is a sweet thing to have in mind the benefit of God bestowed
upon his church, whereof singular fruit comes to the godly.

Thirdly, yt thanks may be given to god for his benefits done to ye church

Fourthly, that by weighing the diverse and sundry adversities of saints, we may
bodly strengthen our selves to suffer the adversity that is present, and also
that is to come, which thing we must needs take upon us.

Fifthly, that saints may be unto us examples of repentance and godly life, of
true worshipping, of confession of our faith, of constancy, of patience and of
other virtues, yt we may frame our lives after their godly examples.

Sixthly, that with godly affection we may desire the company and fellowship of
the saints.

These and other mo are weighty causes why we do retain and keep some feasts
of saints in the church. Would God that many did not abuse the feasts of
Saints and Martirs unto voluptuousnes and madness, as the papists do in
nightly daunecs, in garlands of love, in swilling and bolling and other vices
not pleasing God, his angels, and saints, but they do serve Satan, to the
contempt of God, his Angels and Saints. Thus much of the feasts of Saints.

Fear. 25.
Fear is called in Latin Timor, or metus, in Greek (...), in hebrew Girah,
and it signifies reverence, veneration, religion. As in the psalm: Psalm. 2.
Colite Iehouam in timore, worship the Lord in fear.

Question.
John. 4.
How can we serve the Lord in fear, when it is written in John: Timor non est
in charitate, fear is not in love?

Responsio.
The old and ancient fathers affirm, that there is two kinds of fear, that
is Timor filialis, and Timorseruilis.

Filial fear.
Timor filialis, is the true fear and worshipping of God: as when we do
worship, love and fear God, for none other cause, then that he is our God and
father.

And as the son does reverence and fear his father, not because he is
corrected of him, but because he loves him, and takes him for his father. And
this fear of God comes and rises of love and faith, not of fleshly hate or
fear, and it is none other thing then very faith.

Psalm. 28.
It is written in the proverbs: Beatus est qui semper pauidus. Blessed is he
that is always fearful. And this filial fear is the knowledge of God, according
to that saying also in ye proverbs: Initium sapientiae timor domini. But of
this fear speaks the prophet David saying. Beati omnes qui timent dominum,
blessed be al they which fear the Lord. Again, in an other place. Psalm. 33.
Timete dominum omnes sancti eius, quoniam nihil deest timemtbus eum. Fear the
Lord all his saints, for they lack nothing which fear the Lord.

And as the virgin Mary did sing in her song. Et misericordia eius a progeny
in progeniem timentibus eum. And his mercy is from one generation to another,
to them which fear him.

Of the servile fear.
The other fear is called timor seruilis, which is hipocritical, carnal,
fained, and this fear (as s John says) is not in love: but perfect charity
does cast forth all fear. For this fear has in it a torment, and comes of
the fear of pains and punishment. As the servant do fear their masters,
not of any love, but for fear of stripes. Vvhereupon rose that proverb:
Oderunt, quem metuetunt, whom they fear, them they hate. A saying much used of
Cicero, and is counted of Seneca a voice to be detested.

They carnally and seruilely do fear God, which do serve him without faith and
charity, which do fear God as a terrible judge. Such fear was in the Jews at
the mount Sinai, Exodus 1^
when they heard thundringes and lightnings, when they said to Moses: speak
thou unto us, and we will hear. Let not the Lord speak to us, least we dye.

In fine, the faithful and godly do honor and fear God as a father. The
hipocrites and unfaithful do fear him as a judge and a tyrant.

The godly fear for the love of virtue, the ungodly for fear of punishment.
And that full well saw the Heathen Poet Horace, when he said: Oderunt peccare
boni, virtutis amore.
Oderunt peccare mali, formidine penae.
The good from offense, virtues love does detain:
The evil to offend, fear of pain does restrain.


Sobriety of inquiring. 26. Cap. 12.

Saint Paul writing to the Romans does give a doctrine touching this matter
writing thus: I say to every one that is, among you that no man presume to
understand above that which is mete to understand, but that he understand
according to sobriety.

Saint Hierome writing against Iouinian, when he went about to defend most
sharply virginity, and continencye, that he might abuse this place of Paul to
his purpose, condemned the received translation of the latin books, and
thought that we should not read, sapere ad sobrietatem, but sapere ad
pudicitiam, to be sober not to modesty and wisdom, but to chastity. It may be
granted in deed that this word (...), does signify sometime chastity. But in
this place that sense does not agree. For Paul generally here speaks of
arrogantiae, and of (...) by the which every man endeuoreth to prefer him
self before another.

Origene does take it in a much better sense, and understands per (...),
temperauncie, not that by the which we moderat our pleasure in meat and drink
and other carnal lusts, but that by the which we keep a measure in all
things, both in our affections and doings. So that Paul seems to teach none
other thing here, then that no man should take more upon him, that his degree
and calling will suffer.

And doubtless they which yield to much to their own arrogancye, and have an
estimation of them selves, more then is convenient and mete, are made destitute
of their wisdom, and run into a certain kind of madness, as certain
Emperors and Monarchs did, which would have them selves to be worshipped for
Gods: of which number he was which feared not to say, Et quis est deus, vt
possit vos liberare de manu mea? that is to say: and who is that God, which can
deliver you out of my hand?

In this number also may they be counted, which trusting to their doctrine and
learning, go about to search the inscrutable secrets of God. King Agrippa did
imbraide Paul saying: Multae literae te ad insaniam adegerunt. Much learning
has made thee mad. Chrysostom writes, that if any man, either for great
learning or wisdom, or for any gift of the holy ghost, do run into dotage
and wax mad: that fault (says he) lacks mercy. For he that is borne a fool
(says he) has his excuse, and al men do pity his condition. But he that
waxes mad, because he seems to him self to be excellently learned, or
through any special gift of the holy ghost, is puffed up with pride: he hurts
him self, and abuses intemperantly wholesome things.

A man shall perceive many, which rejecting the knowledge of things necessary,
aspire vainly to know other things.

Did not the Emperor Adrianus make him self a laughing stock, when among the
weighty affairs of the common wealth, he enquired of the Grammarians who was
Euanders Nourse, and who was the great graundfathers graundfather of Priamus,
and occupied him self with such trifles and toys?

Was not Thales the Philosopher derided and mocked of his own maiden, when
beholding and viewing most attentively the stars, fell into the ditche before
his feet? And such things do often chance in curiosity, that when we desire
to know those things which pertains nothing unto us, we are most shamefully
ignorant of other things which are most profitable and necessary.

Seneca complained and lamented, that a great part of our life perishes, when
we do nothing, a greater part when we do ill, the greatest part of all is lost
when we be occupied about things unprofitable, and specially when they be
above our capacity.

Socrates has a worthy saying, which is driven into a proverb: Quae supra nos,
nihil ad nos. Things which be above us, do pertain nothing to us. By the which
he deterreth us from curious searching of heavenly things, and the secrets of
nature, and of the mysteries of divinity.

Plutarchus says: Homo curiosus vtilior est hostibus, quam sibi. A curious man
is more profitable to his enemies, tha^ to him self. Again he says: Omni fide
caret homo curiosus, quamobrem famulis et hospitibus citius credimus epistolas
at sigilla, quam amicis ac familiaribus curiosis. A curious man lacks
credit, therefore we commit our letters and seals rather to our servant and
hosts, then to our familiar friends being curious.

Saint Bernard says: Multi student plus alta, quam apta proferre. Many desire
to utter rather high things, than meet things.

Prosper has a very notable saying. Quae deus occulta esse voluit, non sunt
scrutanda, quae autem manifesta fecit, non sunt negligenda, ne etenim in illis
illicite curiosi, and in hus damnabiliter inueniamur ingrati. That is to say:
those things which God would have to be hidden, are not to be seached, and
those things which he has made manifest, are not to be neglected, least in
the one we be found to be unlawfully curiouse, and in the other damnablie
unthankful.

Socrates being demanded of a certain person what was done in hell, made
answer, that he never went thither, nor communed with any that returned from
thence: by the which answer he derided the curiosity of of the asker. Sermo.
23.


Euclides (as Maximus does report) being demanded of one, what the gods did,
and with what things they were best delighted: as for other things (says he) I
know not, but of this I am most sure, that they do hate all curiouse persons.

Vespasianus the Emperor, being admonished of one of the Consulles whose name
was Florus, that he should rather say, plaustra quam plostra, the next day
saluted him, calling him not by the name of Florus, but flaurus, merilye
alluding to his curiousnes.

Saint Austine has a golden saying. Compescat se humana temeritas, and id quod
non est, non quaerat: ne illud quod est, non inueniat Let the temeritie of man
stay it self, and let it not search that which is not, least it find not
that which is.

To conclude with the holy scriptures, Jesus the son of Syrach says: Seek
not out the things that are to hard for thee, neither search the things
rashly that are to mighty for thee. But what God has commanded thee, think
upon that with reverence, and be not curiouse in many of his worckes: for it is
not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the things that are secret: be
not curiouse in superfluous things, for many things are showed unto thee
above the capacity of men. The meddling with such has begiled many, and an
evil opinion has deceived their judgment. Thou can not see without eyes:
profess not the knowledge therefore that thou have not.

Glory be to God. 27.
THese be the words of Angels, whereby they signify that no man can glorify
God truly, without the knowledge of Christ. Man was created for this end,
that he should give glory to God his maker. But by the fall of our first
parents it came to pass, that man neither did know God aright, neither gave
glory unto him.

If you will ask, what is to give glory unto god? To give glory unto any man,
is nothing else then to attribut true virtue unto him. As when a king or prince
does rule justly, wisely, puisauntly and mercifully, his subjects do attribut
glory unto him, that is, they do allow his doings, and with a singular
benevolence do report well of him. Likewise glory is given to God when his
virtues, wisdom, righteousness, power, mercy, etc are truly knowledged and
understood.

The wisdom of god is known in this, that he does repair man which he had made
to his own glory, that he might recover again the image which he had lost
through sin, by the merits of his derelye beloved son Jesus Christ, and to
give the glory of wisdom unto god.

The righteousness of God is known by this, that he would not receive mankind
again into his favor, without recompense of the wrong don. For, when it was
nedeful, either that man should perish and die for ever through sin, or else, yt
some, which came of the seed of man, should appease almighty god by suffering
punishment for all mankind: God gave his only begotten son, which took upon
him the nature of man, in the which he satisfied the justice of god. Wherefore,
ye praise and glory of righteousness is worthily to be attributed unto god our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ.

The puissaunce and power of god is known in this, that he overcame the
serpent and his seed by Christ, and utterly abolished the kingdom of ye devil,
as touching al the^ which have apprehended Jesus Christ by faith. And therefore
the glory and power of strength is to be given to God.

The mercy of god appears in this, that mankind being destroyed and
oppressed with the tirannie of the deuel, and with great adversities and
calamities, as with death, hell, and da^natio^, is taken again into the favor of
God by his son, and for his son. This mercy of god excels all other
worckes of god, which mercy the holy Angels and elect people of God do and
shall set forth, yea the deuels also, will they, nill they, shall acknowledge it.
And so the glory of mercy is to be given to God.

The verity of god is opened and declared in this, yt god being mindful of
his former couenau^ts, does perform that which he promised. For when our first
parents did fall into sin, God promised the seed of the woman, which should
break the serpents head, which promise he performed in giving his son. And
so the glory of truth is to be given to god.

Therefore for these great virtues, glory is to be given unto God: and chiefly
of the^ which do feel his benefits. This glory is tha^ given unto god: First,
when we do acknowledge the great benefit of god. Secondly, when we do
apprehende the son of god by faith. Thirdly, when we do laud and praise god
with our mind, words, and godly conversation and confession of the faith.
Fourthly, when we do inuit and stir many other to the knowledge of God.

The fyft Prelection of the second Come.
LEet us go onwarde in Gods name with the text which follows in this manner.

Propter quod succincti lumbos mentis vestrae, sobrij perfect sperate in eam
quae offertur vobis gratiam in reuelationem Jesus Christi. That is to say.

Wherefore gyrde up the Loins of your mind, 1. Loins.
be sober and trust perfectly on the grace that is brought unto you by the
revelation of Jesus Christ, etc.

For as much as the promises of God are made unto us, so that we need not to
pass or care for any afflictions after ye example of christ, who entered into
his glory by the cross and afflictions: Peter by an elegant manner of speaking
does egg us forth, and exhort us that we persiste firm, and constant, as well
in the purity of life, as in christian religion.

In the first word he does open how we ought to be enta^gled from a lascivious
and carnal life, that all the impediments of truth being set a part, nothing
should hurt or hinder our course and running unto Christ.

He says here, girde up the loins of your mind, by the which he does
signify understanding and will, which he would have most ready to embrace
the truth, and to be beautified with charity, and this is a very apt
metaphor. Cap. 12.


Christ does say in Luke: Sint lumbi vestri praecincti, et lucernae ardentes in
manibus vestris. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning in
your hands, that is: Be always instructed and ready, looking as good
servants for your Lord and master. Cap. 5. Lib. 4. cont. Marcionem.


S. Paul to the Ephesians does say. State succincti lumbos vestros in veritate.

Tertullian says. We ought to gird up our loins, that is, to be vnwrapped
from the impedimentes of a wanton and entangled life. Also we ought to have
burning lights, that is, our minds kindled with faith, and shining with the
works of verity, and so to look and wait for our Lord Jesus Christ.

Therefore gyrd up the Loins of your mind. The loins in many places of the
Scripture do signify pleasure and lust corporal. But Peter speaks here of
spiritual loins. When the scripture speaks of the body, calling the^
loins, then is meant the natural generation of man, as we read in Genesis,
Cap. 49.
that Christ should be borne of the loins of Judah. And so corporally to gird
up the loins is nothing else, but chastity, as in the Prophet Esaie: Esaias. 11.
Et erit iusticia singulum lumborum eius, et fides cinctorium renum eius. That
is to say: And justice shall be the girdle of his loins, and faythfulnes the
girdle of his raynes. That is, only by faith is restinguished and restrained
filthy pleasure.

But the spiritual girding, whereof Saint Peter speaks here, 2. Virgin
untouched.
has it self after this manner: As a virgin not touched of man, is chaste and
whole of body, so the mind through faith is inuiolate and unspotted. But
as soon as the mind does degenerate from faith, unto false doctrine, than is it
corrupted and polluted. Therefore the scriptures do call infidelity and
idolatry, adultery and fornication. Peter therefore does here exhort them to
gird up the loins of their mind, which is as much to say as this: you have
heard now ye Gospel, and you are come unto faith, see now that you persist
manfully in it, neither suffer your selves to be corrupted with false doctrine,
running hither and thither to the works of your own device and invention. It
follows.

Be sober, and trust perfectly on the grace that is brought unto you. 3.
Sobriety.
Sobriety here is the work and fruit of a lively faith. Peter means here by
this sobriety, not only that virtue which does measure and bridle glottonie
and gurmandyse, but also that virtue which does shake of singgyshnes and
sloth, and makes us to be given unto prayer. 4. Idleness.
For what shall it profit to overcome glottonie, if we suffer faith to wax
faint and cold by slothful idleness?

Although a man be justified, yet he feels for the most part always the
flesh rising and rebelling against the spirit. Which flesh is tamed by this
sobernes, and is (as it were) a bridle unto the flesh. They do err therefore
much, which persuading them selves to have done their duties, boast and brag
them selves to have faith, and yet give them selves to pleasures and lusts.

Peter does here improve such, and says that they ought to be sober, and
denies their faith to be a lively faith, and does commend such a faith which
shows her self forth by good works and godly conversation.

Note here, that as great watchinges does consume the gross humors of the
body, and does make a gross man slenderer and leaner: So a christian watch,
that is, a lively faith, does sees away and consume unchaste affections. It
takes away the surfeit of man's wisdom, it takes away fear, inconstancy and
impacience, it contemns the joys and pleasures of the world, and does
wholye bequeath it self unto God.

Although Peter would have us to be sober either in mind or in body: yet he
means not, nor commands that a man should destroy his body, or make it
more weak then it ought to be, either with fastings or watchings, wherewith
many have made them selves unprofitable members, both to a common wealth, and
to the ecclesiastical ministerye.

5. Bernard
In this foolish error was S. Bernarde of a long time, although he were
otherwise a learned and godly man. For he did afflicte his body with great
abstinence, that he got him such a loathsome savor by it, that he could not
live together in the company of other men. But at length he was delivered from
this error, and commanded his brethren, that they should not overmuch wear
away and consume their body by such straight kind of life. It follows.

Perfect sperate in eam graciam quae vobis offertur, that is: Trust perfectly
on the grace that is brought unto you. Such is a true christian faith, that it
wholly and utterly with a most perfect trust does lean unto the word of God,
and attempteth to do boldly those things, what soever ought or behooves to be
done. And therefore Peter says: Then are the loins of your mind girded up,
then is your faith whole and sound, when committing your selves surely and
safely unto the word of God, you dare do al things, not weighing nor regarding
what thing soever of yours is brought into peril and danger: Whether it be
your goods, your worldly name, yea or your whole life. In those words S. Peter
does describe very aptly a sincere and not a feigned faith: For that faith
which is not lively, is to be counted rather a dream, than a faith. But a
lively and perfect faith, does cause man to depend wholye on the word, and
not to pass or care what fortune soever God does cast on his shoulders, yea
and to run through thick and thin, and to sustain both sharp and sower
for the Lords sake and his word. As when death is offered, it behooves a
faithful man to commit himself boldlye unto Christ, to offer his neck unto
the axe, his body to the fire and boldly to resist the adversaries power. Such
a faith and trust does S. Peter here require of all christians, which faith
does not stand in cogitation and words only, but in virtue and power.

Now (says Peter after) trust on the grace that is brought unto you. That is
to say: You have not deserved this great grace, but it is freely offered unto
you. For the Gospel which does show and set forth this grace unto us, was not
excogitate and invented of us, but the holy ghost sent it from heaven unto us.

But what I pray you is offered unto us? Forsooth even this: that he which
believes in Christ, and does steadfastly cleave unto his word, now has and
possesses all the goods of the Lord, with the Lord. So that he is made Lord
and master of sin, death, devil, and hell, and is assured of eternal life.

This so great treasure is offered unto us even at our doors. It is put into
our bosom without all our endeavor, merit, or deserte. It comes (I say)
unlooked for, we thinking of no such thing. Therefore thapostle Peter exhorts
us, that we boldly and surely look for this trust and grace, because God which
does offer it, cannot lie.

This word offered or brought, has a merueilous energie and great liberality
in it, as though Peter should say, you need not to take great labors and
pains, you need not to run on pilgrimage, you need not to go from country
to country to seek this grace. It offreth it self unto you, although you be
at home, although you be in the field, or where soever you shall be. This only
remains that you do receive it, when it is offered. These be the true riches
of God, that franckly, frelie, and willinglye he gives his mercy and grace to
them which seek it not: Esaias. 52.
(As it is written in Esaias:) Palam factus sum non quaerentibus me. I was made
open and known to them which sought me not.

Again in an other place. Quia quibus non est narratum de eo, viderunt et qui
non audierunt, contemplati. That which has not been told them, shall they
see, and that which has not been heard, shall they understand. How great
therefore is our ingratitude. if we do neglecte and contemn this grace so
gently, and louinglye showed and offered unto us? Which if we do contemn, the
great wrath and displeasure of God is to be looked for. Saint Paul in the
Epistle to the Hebrews says. Quomodo effugiemus, si tantam neglexirimus
salutem? How shall we escape, if we neglecte so great a salvation? It follows.

In reuelatione Jesus Christi: by the revelation of Jesus Christ. That is, God
the father offreth his grace unto none, but by Christ. Wherefore let no mortal
man presume to come into the presence and sight of God, without this Mediator
Christ. He will here none except he bring as an advocate his dear beloved
son Christ, whom only he does respect and regard, 6. Baptism.
and for whose sake all persons and all things do please God the father, as his
voice declared in the time of the Baptism of Christ, which sounded and said:
Hic est filius meus dilectus, in quo mihi been co^placui. This is my beloved
son, in whom I am well pleased.

Christ came for this end, that taking our flesh and blood, he might join him
self with us to obtain grace with the father for us. By this faith in Christ
all the Prophets and Patriarchs were saved. For it behooved al men to believe
that promise which was made to Abraham: In semine tuo benedicentur omnes
gentes, In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. Therefore the faith of the
Jews, and of the Turks, and of them that trust in their own works, and hope
by them to obtain, heaven is a vain faith, or rather no faith. For every
religion which has not Christ for a captain and guide, is profane, wicked,
and naughty. But if it have Christ, it is perfect, and absolute.

I remember two old verses tending much to this matter, which be very sensible
and worthy to be noted.

Hoc est ne scire, sine Christo plurima scire,
Christum si been scis, satis est, si caetera nescis.
To know much without Christ, is nothing expedient,
But well to know Christ, is only sufficient.
In reuelatione Jesus Christi: That is, by the revelation of Jesus Christ. By
the Gospel declared unto us, what christ is, that is to say, that he is our
Savior, that it is he which takes away our sins, that it is he which
delivers us from all evils, that it is he which does reconcile us to the
father, and makes us just and righteous without our own worckes. He which
knows not Christ after this manner, is much deceived, and clean out of the
way. For although thou know Christ to be the son of God, 7. Rihgt hand.
to have died, to have risen again, and now to sit on the right hand of the
father: thou do not yet know Christ, nor this knowledge shall any thing
proffitte thee. But it is necessary that thou know and believe him to have done
all these things for thee, to help, succor, and comfort thee.

Christ ought not so to be preached, that he lives and reigns only to him
self, but that he is ours. For otherwise what should it have proffited him to
descend into the earth, and to have shed his blood? Therefore he was sent into
the world, not for his own cause, but that the world might be saved by him,
and that he might become wholly ours.

In reuelatione Jesus Christi: by the revelation of Jesus Christ. That is, with
a most sted fast hope apprehende and receive you this grace offered. For Christ
is not showed unto us obscurely and darckly, as he was showed in old time to
the prophets, 8. Goliath.
and by the Prophets. For they do set forth Christ to be a savior always, as
it were in mysteries. For they signified him sometimes by Isaac to be slain of
his father. Sometime by David who slew great Goliath: sometime by Solomon and
his peasable kingdom, with such and other like places was Christ understood
of the faithful in time past. But unto us, he is openly and plainlye declared
without al figures, types, and mysteries.

Summa summarum. This is the mind of Peter: You need not to take any great
journey to come unto the grace of God. For God has prevented your journey in
bringing and offringe this grace unto you. But because the fruition thereof is
not yet had, until Christ appear from heaven (in whom is hidden the
salvation of the godly) in the mean time we must hope, and that perfectly
hope, for otherwise this grace of Christ is offered to us in vain, unless we
sustain and abide patiently, until the coming of Christ. It follows.

Quasi filii obedientiae. As obedient children: It is ordained by nature, that
the children represent and follow their fathers. You are made (says Peter)
the children of Christ by a liuelye faith, which was made obedient unto his
father even unto death, follow you therefore your father. And forasmuch as it is
appointed be nature, that we should obey our parents, it is necessary that we
become obedient children.

To obey, does signify in the scriptures to believe. And he is an obedient son
which does hear the gospel and word of God, and by faith embraces it.

In Titum.
Therefore if it be not the word of God, hear it not, but rather spurn at it
with thy feet, and regard it not. For (as saint Hierome says) Sine
authoritate scripturas, garrulitas non habet fidem: without the authority of
scriptures, all pratyng and talkyng ought to have no credit.

Li. de virg. 4
Saint Ambrose also writes. Si Christus non docuit quod docemus, etiam nos id
detestabile iudicamus. If christ has not taught that which wedo teach, we
judge it detestable. 9. Adoption.


Quasi filii obedientiae, as obedient children. Peter does first signify that
we are called of the Lord by the gospel into the right title and honor of
adoption. Secondly he shows that we be adopted on this condition, that God
might have us as children obedient unto him. For although obedience does not
make us children (for that is the free gift of God) yet obedience does
discern and distinguishe us from strangers. And how far this obedience
does extend and stretche it self, Peter does teach, when he forbids the
children of God to fashion and frame them selves to the desires of this world,
but does exhort that they should conform them selves rather unto God. The sum
and scope of the whole law and of all things which god does require of us,
does pertayne to this end: that the image of God may shine in us, least we
become children which do degenerat from the father. But because all the senses
and whole disposition of our flesh, are repugnaunt unto God, and the whole
nature and condition of our mind, is enemy unto him, therefore Peter begins
our obedience from the renouncyng and forsakyng of the world and the lusts
thereof, and that we do put of the image of old Adam with his lusts. Therefore
Peter says as follows.

Non configurati prioribus ignorantiae vestrae desideriis: 10. Ignorance.
Not fashionynge your selves unto the former lusts of your ignorance. Peter
here does exhort us unto purity of life, by an agrument taken of hurt, and
peril like to ensue. Do ye not fashion your selves (says he) to your old
concupiscences and lusts, and to the corrupt manners of the old man, by the
which death and perpetual prisonment hangs over you. You have put on a new
life, and none other then heavenly, before the which obtained, you gave your
selves to gluttony, 11. Ambition.
desires of the flesh, ambition, pride, hatred, envy, and to such other
things which are not lawful to be named. These were the works of darckenes
and ignorance. You knew not Christ, therefore light and true knowledge was far
from you. You were ignorant of those things which were given and shall be given
hereafter through Christ. You lived before as blind, Proverb. 14.
not knowing which way to hold or keep. It is the propretie of sin to
deceive fools. But now calling to remembrance what dangers you have
escaped, be not you deceived nor lead from the right way, no not in one point.

To the mind of Peter, Cap. 12.
here that pertains which saint Paul writes to the Romans: Obsecro vos
frates per misericordiam dei etc. I beseech you therefore brethren, by the
mercies of God, that you give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable seruyng of God. And fashion not
your selves like unto this world, but be you changed by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable and
perfect.

Non configurati etc. Not fashionyng your selves unto the former lusts of your
ignorance. Here you see that Peter does impute all things unto ignorance, as
the chiefest spring of all euels. For where the faith and knowledge of Christ
is absente, there can be none other thing, but error and blindness, that it can
not be known what is right, what is wrong, what is true, what is false, what
is good, what is badde, so that men through ignorance do fall hedlonge into
diverse kinds of vices. After what manner it was with us of late days in the
time of superstition, when Christ and his glory was darckened, and his word
abolished. For then had we error for truth, ignorance for knowledge,
blindenes for light. Then was there reasoninge and debatynge through the whole
world, how men might attain eternal felicity. Of this sprange up so many
sects, as Friars, some being black, some white, some Franciscanes, some
Augustines, some obseruantes, and of Monckes, Nuns, 12. Heremites and
anchorites.
Chanons, and Heremites, of Anchorites and Anchorizes. So that al things were
divided, every man almost seeking and framing to him self away how to come to
heaven. But Peter says here: you have played the fools long enough. Now
throw foolishnes away. For you are made wise and have attained true knowledge.

Ignorantiae vestrae: of your ignorance. Peter calls the time of ignorance,
before they were called to the faith of Christ, whereby we learn that
incredulity is the fountain of all mischief: 13. Privation.
Where the knowledge of God does not florishe, there are darcknes, error,
vanity, privation both of light and of life

Quaestio.
Forasmuch as Peter speaks to the Jews, which were always conuersaunt

Qui ergo hunc inuocatis patrem. etc. And if you call him father, which without
respect of person judges according to every man's work, pass the time of
your dwellinge here in fear. By faith you are made the sons of god, and he
is your father, you have obtained an incorruptible enheritaunce, whereof
mention is made before. Now therefore there remains none other thing, than
(the veil being put away) that thing may be made manifest, which now is
hidden, but we must look for it until we may see and understand it. Therefore
for as much as you are come to this point, that you may invoke and call upon
god the father by faith, because notwithstanding he is a righteous judge, and
rewards every man according to their worcks: 17. Respect of person.
Let no man persuade himself for that he is called a christian, or the son
of God, that god will spare him, if he live without fear, and thincketh it
sufficient to be called by that name. The world judges by respect of
person, and not al men a like, for it is partial to friends, rich men,
learned, wise, and men of authority and power, But god regards none of
these, he judges al men a like, be the person never so great. Like as in Egypt
he slew the kings son, as well as the son of any poor shepherd. And
therefore the apostle Peter admonishes us to look for such judgment, and to
stand in fear, and that we should not boaste nor brag of our faith,
because we are called christians, neither that we should presume therefore that
god will spare us more than other. For that thing in times past deceived the
Jews also, who bragged them selves to be the sons of Abraham, and the people
of god. The scripture makes no difference by the flesh, but by the spirit. It
is certain that god did promise Christ to be borne of the seed of Abraham,
and that of Abraham should rise a holy people. But it follows not therefore,
that all men are the sons of god which do come of Abraham. God also promised
the Gentiles to be saved, but he said not, that he would save all the
Gentiles.

Quaestio.
Forasmoch as you do say that god does save us by faith only, without
respect of worcks, how then does Peter here say that god does judge without
respect of person, according to every man's work?

Responsio.
That which we have taught of faith, that it only justifies us before god,
is undoubtedly true: for the scripture approves the same more manifestly,
then that it can be denied or disproued. Now where Peter says here, that God
judges according to every man's work, it is true also. But this is
certainly to be believed, that where faith is not, there can no good worcks be
had.

Again, there faith is not to be found, where no good worcks are: therefore
faith and good worcks concur, and can not be the one without the other, as in
which two the su^me of christian life is comprehended. For as thou have lived,
so shall thou be rewarded and judged of god. And therefore although god judges
according to every man's work, yet notwithstanding this is true, that good
works are but the fruits of faith, by the which is proved where faith and
infidilitie is. 18. Lie and lier,
God therefore will judge thee by thy worckes, and will prove and try thee
whether thou have faith or no. Like as a man shall not know a liar better than
by his own words: Notwithstanding it appears that not by these words
only he is made a liar, but he was a liar before he made any lie, because a
lie must come out of the heart, into the mouth. Wherefore you must so take
this saiynge of Peter, that you understand good worckes to be the fruits of
faith, and that god according to these fruits (which we must needs
exercise) does judge us, that it may manifestlye appear, whether faith or
infidilitie do dwell in our hearts.

God will not judge thee according to this that thou art called a christian,
that thou art baptized, but he will ask thee thus: If thou be a christian,
where be the fruits by the which thou may prove thy christian faith?

And therefore saint Peter says: In as much as you have such a father that
judges without respect of person, pass the time of your dwelling here in
fear, that is, fear this father, not for fear of punishment or reuengement,
as the devils do, but for fear least he cast you of, and withdraw his hand
from you, like as a good son fears least in any thing he offend or
displease his father.

Such a fear god does require of us, that we may abhor and deteste sin,
and that we may diligently benefitte and do good to our neighbors, while
we live in this world.

A christian which has a right faith, has all the good benefittes of God,
and is the son of God, but his time in this world is nothing else but a
pilgrimage. For his spirit is alredie in heaven by faith, by the which spirit
he is governor of all things. But god suffers him to live yet in the flesh,
and to have bodilye conversation in the world, that he may help other, and
that he may bring them with him to be heaven.

Therefore we must behave our selves in this world, none otherwise then they do
which iourneying into far countries, do take their inn and ease, for they
are satisfied if they have meat and lodgyng for one night of the host,
neither do they claim or chalendge to them selves his substance or goods.

Likewise every man must use worldly goods as though they were not his own, and
must take so much of them, as is sufficient for the sustentation of our
body, helping our neighbors with the overplus.

Therefore the life of man is as it were but a restyng place, we must take our
journey thither where our father is, that is, into heaven. Wherefore we must
lay away all slothful, wanton and careless living, and pass the time of our
dwelling here (as saint Peter says) in the fear of god. It follows.

Scientes quod non corruptibilibus auro, etc. Knowing that ye were not redeemed
with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation
received by the traditions of the fathers. Peter does persevere to exhort us to
holy life and christian religion, taking his argument of the inestimable price
of our redemption, as if he should say: Continue you in faith, and in loving
one an other, consideringe that you are redeemed with such a price, as far
passes man's reason. You that first were inhabitants and citizens of this
world, under the thraldom and yoke of Satan, are now made the citizens of
heaven, 19. Tradicion.
and household servants of god, and you are delivered, not only from Satan,
but also from the vain conversation of your fathers traditions. He calls
their fathers traditions vain and fond, because they which were gentiles,
were instruct and brought up in Idolatry, and they which were Jews, had
learned many superstitions. By the which they did violate and break many
ways the commandments of God, wherefore Christ reproved them in Matthew
saying: Quare and vos transgredimini mandatum dei propter traditionem vestram?
Why do you also break the commandment of God by your traditions?

Saint Paul says, that he persecuted the church of God, when not
withstandyng he thought him self to be a great follower of the traditions of
the fathers. All traditions are vain and foolish whatsoever they be, which do
repugne the doctrine of Christ. For where Christ wants, there is mere vanity.

Or else saint Peter by the vain traditions of the fathers, does mean
conversation of life, according to Moises law, which was vain and weak to the
atteyninge of eternal life. The worckes of the law did not justify of them
selves, they were but shadows and figures, and could not remitte sin. From
these lawishe worckes the Jews were delivered, being no more bound to Moses
law, which Christ our savior has so fulfilled, that it need not any more to
be sought. For what can it demand or ask of us, when we are nothing bound
to it, but it is in all points fulfilled by Christ? It follows.

Sed pretioso sanguine Christi, quasi agni immaculati and incontamninati. But
with the precious blood of christ, 20. Lamb.
as of a lamb undefiled and without spotte. Peter here does declare with a
large amplification the price of our redemption, and does by this provoke us to
stand in ye fear of god, and to expend and weigh how much this our
redemption did cost him. Before this, says Peter, ye were citizens of the
world, living under the imperie and rule of the deuel: but god now has
delivered you from that wicked conversation, and has brought you into another
place, that now ye might be citizens in heaven, and strangers in earth. But
consider you how much god has bestowed for you, and how great a treasure it
is, by the which ye are redeemed and brought to this point, that ye are become
the sons of god. But what is that great and precious treasure wherewith ye are
redeemed? Not corruptible things as gold and silver, but the precious blood
of the son of god. This treasure is so noble and excellent, and of so
imcomparable a price, that no sense or reason is able to comprehend and
conceive it.

Yea, it is so precious, that one drop of this innocent blood had been
sufficient for the sins of the whole world. But it pleased the eternal
father to pour his grace so largely upon us, 21. All his blood.
and with so great a price to purchase our salvation, that he would his son
Jesus Christ to shed all his blood, and to give also that whole treasure unto
us.

Peter therefore requires that we shake not of this so great a grace, and to
weighe it lightly and slenderly, but rather so to esteem it, that we may be
moved and egged forward to fear. In the which fear we living, may not
again deserve to be deprived of this noble treasure. It follows.

Quasi agni immaculati and incontaminati: as of a lamb undefiled and without
spotte, that is: Christ willingly was brought unto the slaughter without
murmuring, and without cryinge, for our reparation and redemption. To this
place alludeth saint John the Baptiste saying. Cap. 53. 22. Takes away sins
Ecce agnus dei, ecce qui tollit peccata mundi. Behold the lamb of God,
behold the lamb which takes away the sins of the world. Likewise the
Prophet Esaie says: He is brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep
before his sherer is dumme, so he opens not his mouth.

Also Jeremy speaks in the person of Christ: I was like a lamb or bullock
that was brought unto the slaughter. Cap. 11.


This Christ was an immaculate lamb, that is, he was conceived by the holy
ghost, borne of the virgin Marie, he was a lamb without spotte. And therefore
he only and none other could be a pure and holy sacrifice for sins, for
which he has fully satisfied, and sustained the pain thereof, as it is in the
prophet Esaie. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Cap. 53.


Question.
From what thing are we redeemed by this so preciouse a treasure?

Responsio.
Peter says, a vana vestra conuersatione: from your vain conversation,
received by the traditions of the fathers. In the which words Peter does
thoroughly overthrow that thing which we are wont to lean unto, thincking
that whatsoever we do, ought to be allowed, for that they were done of old
time, and because our elders and fathers (among whom there were many, both
wise and good) did observe and keep the like things.

But Peter here does say, whatsoever things your fathers did, either ordain
or used to do, were al ill: yea insomuch that those things which you learned of
them, concerning the worshipping of God, were so ill, that it behooved,
notwithstanding the son of God to bestow his blood, that men might be
delivered from the same wickedness. Whatsoever therefore is not washed and
cleansed by this blood, it is all infecte, corrupt and cursed. Whereby it
follows that how much the more any does aspire to righteousness without
Christ, so much the more is he removed from true righteousness: and is the more
depely drowned into the bottom of blindness and curse, and does make him self
guilty of the blood of Christ. Those gross sins are truly of little weight,
if they be compared with this sin, which teaches that we may obtain
righteousness by works, and after the decree of reason does frame and ordeine a
worshipping of God. For by this means is ye most innocent blood of Christ
dishonored and blasphemed.

The Gentiles did much more grievously sin in worshipping the Sun and Moon
(which they counted to be the true worshipping of God,) than in committing
other sins which they doubted not to be heinous.

Wherefore the righteousness of man without Christ is nothing but blasphemy, and
the most heinous sin that man can commit. Therefore he that desires the
grace of God by any other thing than by the blood of Christ, let him never come
into the sight of god. For he does nothing else but more and more, through his
own righteousness, offend the majesty of God. And by this may be gathered that
men do most detestable err, and the farther depart from Christ, which without
Christ will lean and trust to the authority of the fathers, or to old
custom.

Obiectio.
Paul boasts him self to have worshipped God with a pure conscience, even
from his elders, 2. Tim. 1
and writing to Timothy does commend him that he did follow the faith of his
Graundmother Lois, and his mother Euniche. And Christ also says of the Jews,
that they know what God they ought to worship. And therefore it may seem
absurd here that Peter did affirm, that the Jews of his time learned nothing
of the traditions of the fathers, but mere vanity.

Responsio.
Where Christ did say that the manner and knowledge of the worshipping of God
was known to the Jews, he had more respect to the law and commandment of
God, than to the common people of the Jews, because the temple was erected at
Jerusalem, and god worshipped there, not by the arbitrament of man, but by the
prescripte of the law. Therefore Christ does say that the Jews did not err in
observing that law.

Concerning the progenitors, that is, the graundmother and mother of Timothy
and such like (of whom Saint Paul speaks) there is no doubt, but God had
some remnaunt in that people, in whom true piety did always remain. But the
most part of the whole body of the people was merueilouslye corrupt, and fell
into al kinds of error, as into superstitions, hypocrisy, trust in their own
works, ill opinions, and other gross vices.

Therefore where Peter condemns the institution and traditions of ye fathers,
he does separate them from Christ, which only and alone is the soul, life,
and truth of the law. Whereupon we may conclude, that the papists do most
folishlye err, which think that the bare name of the fathers and their
traditions, are sufficient for them to defend al superstitions, and that by
this trust they might reject whatsoever was brought out of the word of God. It
follows.

Praecogniti quidemante mundi constitutionem: Which was ordained before the
foundation of the world, but was declared in the last times for your sakes.
Peter here does stir his hearers to the love of Christ, and to receive their
salvation with great honor, by an argument brought ab antiquitate, as though
he should say: Think not, nor persuade your selves, that those things which
I have spoken of the price of your redemption, that is, of the immaculate Lamb
Jesus Christ, and of the effusion of his blood, to be new things, or to be
invented by the art and wisdom of man: but they were ordained before the
foundation of the world, and came from the counsel of the eternal father.

God says, Peter did from everlasting, foreordeine his son to be sacrificed
for the expiation of our sins, Cap. 1.
as Paul says to the Ephesians: Elegit nos deus in Christo ante mundi
constitutionem. God has chosen us in Christ before ye foundation of the world,
that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.

Likewise John in his revelation calls this Lamb, ab origin mundi occisu^.
Slain from the beginning of the world, that is, he was before ordained from
the beginning to be a sacrifice for our sins, by the which sacrifice all ye
elect should be cleansed from the beginning of the world. If therefore this
salvation was foreknowen and before ordained, according to the good will and
pleasure of God, that we should be holy: it chances not unto us by any of our
own merits, but by the mere and pure grace of God, unto whom we owe all
things, both our selves and all ours. It follows.

Manifestati autem nouissimis temporibus propter vos: But was declared in the
last times for your sakes. The Apostle here answers to the objection of
them which perchance might have said thus: Forasmuch as Christ was foreknowen
from everlasting to be the sacrifice and expiation of our sins, 23. So long
ere he came.
why was it so long ere he came into the world? Peter answers, because it
so pleased him, he came in the last time. And so Paul answers, saying: Vbi
venit plenitudo temporis, deus dedit filium suum factum ex muliere. When the
fulness of the time came, god gave his son borne of a woman, made subject to
the law, that he might redeem those which are under the law, from the curse of
the law.

Question.
Why does Peter call that time in which he was, the last time? Seeing that a
great time is expired and gone from the time of Peter hitherto.

Responsio.
Peter calls it the last time in two respects. First, that it is the last
time from the ascension of the Lord, that shall continue unto the last day.
And this time the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ him self did call the last
hour. Secondlye, it is called the last time in respect of visions and
prophecyes, which were to be fulfilled of Christ. It is called (I say) the
last time, not that straight way from the ascension of Christ the last day
should come: but because after this preaching of the Gospel, which than was,
and now is, none other preaching is to come, nor to be looked for, nor that the
matter of Gods grace might be more revealed and made more manifest, tha^ it is
now revealed and showed since the ascension of Christ. Before this, one
revelation ever followed another. Whereupon the Lord said in Exodus: 24.
Adonai.
Nomen meum Adonai non reuelaui eis. I did not reveal my name Adonai unto
them. For although the Patriarchs knew God: yet they had not so manifest a
preaching and knowledge of God, as was afterward given by Moses and the
Prophets. But now there cannot be a more noble and manifest preaching of the
Gospel, than is had in the world since the ascension of Christ. And in that
respect Peter does call this time the last time, because there can never be a
more clerer preaching of the Gospel, than now is: It follows.

Propter vos qui per eum creditis. For your sakes which by his means do
believe in God. For your sakes (says Peter) is the Gospel preached. God the
father and Christ his son had no need thereof, but it was done for our
salvation, that is: that we should believe in him, not by our own strength, but
by Christ which makes intercession for us to the father. Therefore we must
learn and believe that Christ was made manifest and known unto us for none
other end and purpose, tha^ that by him we should be saved, and that in him we
should behold the truth, goodness, and righteousness of God, and that in
embracing the same, we should have a full mind and trust to him, and in him.
It follows.

Qui suscitauit eum a mortuis. etc. Which raised him from the dead, and gave
him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God. The whole, holy, and
blessed Trinity has raised Christ as man from death. For the outward works
of the Trinity ar indivisible. For what things so ever ye father does, ye same
both the son and the holy ghost does. And so likewise on the otherside
whatsoever ye son and the holy ghost do, the same does ye father. Christ rose
as a man glorified, yt is, the divinity rose not, but Jesus Christ touching his
humanity, was raised from death, by ye glory of ye father. For the son him self
as God, did raise him self concerning his humanity, for he said in John:
Soluite templum hoc, et in tribus diebus excitabo illud. Destroy you this
temple, and in three days I shall raise it up. He spoke this of the temple of
his body. God (I say) did raise Christ's body from the dead, and gave to him
glory, because he rose immortal. 25. Given to me to judge.
He gave unto his body perpetual glorification and power to judge, as it is
said in the Gospel of Matthew: Data est mihi omnis potestas, et in caelo et in
terra. All power is given to me, both in heaven and in earth. God the father
gave unto him, not only the glory of his body, but also the glory of his
name, as it is written by Paul: Dedit illi nomen quod est super omne nomen, vt
in nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur, coelestium, terrestrium, et infernoru^. 26.
Knee should bow.
He gave unto him a name which is above al names, that in the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, of things in earth, and of
things under the earth. Also God gave, that in calling on his name, maruailes,
wonders and miracles should be done.

He gave unto him (I say) this glory, that our faith and hope should be in
God, and not in mere man, that is, that we should believe and trust in God,
because Christ both God and man is he, whom God gave forth as a propitiatour
for sin by faith in his blood, to the declaration of righteousness in this
time. It follows.

Vt fidem et spem vestram in deum habeatis. That you may believe and trust in
God. Peter here does say, that Christ was raised from death, that faith and
hope might have a firm and sure stay, whereunto they might lean. And here is
that comment and gloss refelled of the universal and confused faith in God. For
although that Christ had never risen again, God notwithstanding does remain
in heaven. But Peter denies that we cannot believe in him, unless Christ had
risen again.

It is evident therefore, that faith ought to behold and consider another thing,
then the bare majesty of God. For it is the property of faith, Phil. 3 Cap. 4.
to flee and pearce in to heaven, that he might there find the father. And how
can he do that, except he have Christ his guide and leader? For (as Paul
says) per ipsum habemus adeun di fiduciam, by him we have sure hope and trust
to go to the father. 27. Our high priest.
Again to the Hebrews he says: Freti nostro po^tifice accedere possumus ad
thronum gratiae cum fiducia. 28. Shoot anchor.
Trusting in our high priest we may go to the throne of grace with a sure
hope.

Hope is the shoot anchor of the soul which enters into the inward closet of
the sanctuarye, yet not so, but that Christ must go before. Faith is our
victory against the world. And what makes her to overcome, but that Christ
Lord of heaven and earth has us in his tuicion and keeping?

Because therefore our salvation is constitute and set in the resurrection of
Christ, and his high impery and rule, faith and hope found there how to stay
and uphold them selves. For except Christ by rising again had triumphed over
death, and had borne the chief rule to defend us with his might and power,
what would have been done unto us, in so great a power of our enemies, and
among so many violent assaults? Let us learn therefore, to what scope and
mark we ought to tend and shoot, which is, that we believe and trust in God,
but in and by Christ, risyng again from death. It follows.

Animas vestras castificantes in obedientia veritatis. Seeing your souls are
purified in obeyng the truth, through the spirit, to love brotherly without
fayning, love one another with a pure heart fervently. We have heard hitherto
how Peter exhorts us. First that we gird up the loins of our minds, that we
might walk sincerely in the faith. Secondly, because this thing did cost him
so much, that we should live in fear, not putting any confidence in this,
because we are called Christians: forasmuch as God is such a judge, which
respects no man, not one more then another. And now at ye last Peter goes
forward to make an end of this first chapter, saying, purifying your souls in
obeing ye truth through ye sprit.

Gala. 5.
Saint Paul to the Galathians rehearses the fruits which do follow faith,
saying: The fruits of the spirit are charity, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, temperancie. So also does S. Peter here
teach which are the fruits of faith, that is, that we do purify our selves
by obeying the truth in the spirit. For where true faith is, it subdueth the
body unto it, and restrayneth the lust and concupiscence of the flesh. And
although it does not utterly destroy it, yet it makes the body subject to the
spirit.

Saint Paul means the same, when he speaks of the fruits of the spirit.
It is a great labor to subdue the body unto the spirit, and to repres the
naughty and evil lusts, graffed in us by nature. For it is not possible for us
to live well without grace.

Why does he say: Purify your souls, rather then your bodies? Saint Peter did
know that our carnal lusts (yea although we be baptized) cannot be extincte
before we be dead. Now it is not enough that a man do refrain him self from
the act, and be only outwardly pure, having an heart burning with evil lusts:
but we must shoot at this marcke, that our souls may be so purified, that the
clensing thereof may come from the heart, and that the soul may be an enemy unto
evil lusts, and continually fight with them, until it be delivered.

Saint Peter adds here very aptly, that we ought to purify our selves, in
obeying the truth through the spirit.

Many things are spoken of chastity, and many be books written of the same.
They have taught to extinguish the carnal lusts of the flesh by long
fastinges, abstinence from flesh and wine.

Which things (although they somewhat help to that end) yet they are not
sufficient to extinguish the said lusts and desires.

Saint Hierome writes of him self, that he did so punish his body, and
brought it so low, that he was like to an Ethiopian or black Moore.
Notwithstanding he did not so much prevail by it. For he often times dreamed
in his sleep, that he was present in the company of the fair damsels at
Rome. And saint Bernarde (as I said before) did punish his body with so great
abstinence, that he stanck, and no man could abide his presence. They both were
marueilously tempted, and thought them selves able to overcome those
temptations, by those externe things.

But because those remedies which they used, were but externe and outward, and
not applied inwardly, where the root of temptacion did lie, they were not
sufficient to extinguish the ill desires and lusts of the mind. But Peter here
shows a true and effectual remedy for this mischief: that is to say, the
obeing of the truth through the spirit, which also is declared in many other
places of the scripture. As in Esaias: Esaias. 11.
Fides erit cinctorium renum eius. Faith shall be the girdle of his raynes.
This is the true plaster, with the which the raynes are girded up. The evil
which we would heal, is not outward in cloth and garment, but bred inwardlye,
and is fierce in the blood, in the flesh, and in the veins.

Wherefore it is not the best way to endeavor to extinguishe these lusts with
externe things only, and to debilitate and weaken the body with fastings and
labors, for that is not ye best and chiefest way, although they somewhat help
to that end, but it is faith which can extinguish and restrain them, that they
may give place to the spirit.

So the Prophet Zachary speaks of ye wine which Christ does offer to drink,
whereof virgens are gendered and begotten. Other kinds of wine are wont to
kindle evil lusts, but this wine, that is the Gospel, restrayneth those
lusts, and makes the heart pure.

And this is it which Peter says: when truth is received in heart, and
obedience given to it in spirit, that is the most present remedy and best cure
of all evil lusts and desires. For when the Gospel enters into the heart,
immediatlye all evil motions do cease and give place.

To be short, the meaning of Peter is this: If ye will remain chaste and pure,
it behooves you to embrace the obedience of truth, that is to say: It is
necessary for you not only to read and to hear the word of God, but also to
embrace it in heart.

Wherefore it is not sufficient that the Gospel be preached or heard once or
twice, but ye must cleave unto it, and follow it continually. 29. Fruit
hundred fold.
For the word of God has this grace, that the oftener ye handle it, and use
it, the sweter it waxes, and shall bring forth fructu^ centesimum tempore suo,
fruit an hundred fold in his time. It follows.

In fraternitatis amore, qui sit absque fuco: To love brotherlye without
fayning. For what end ought we to live this chaste and pure life? To obtain
eternal blessedness by it? No truly, but to this end, that we serve and be
profitable to our neighbors. What shall we do to repress sin? Forsooth we
must embrace faith of the word of God. Now we do restrain our sins to
profit other men, for when we bridle the body and flesh by the spirit, than
we may be some use and profit unto our neighbors. It follows.

Simplici ex cord diligite attentius. etc. Love one another with a pure heart
feruentlye. In these words Peter does very elegantly describe and express the
parts and nature of true love. 30. Love.
The same obedience of which we have spoken (says Peter) draws after it
love, not all manner of love, but that love which comes from the mind and
heart, wherewith we do vehemently and earnestly, and not fainedly love our
brother and neighbor. True friendship loves no colors, 31. Flattery.
true friendship has learned no flattery. Therefore says Peter love one
another with a pure heart, fervently, ready to bestow all that you have for
your neighbors sake. Charity, which is poured into the hearts of the
faithful, knows not a double or dissembling heart. Therefore Christ says:
Estote simplices sicut columbae. Be ye simple as Doves.

Love one another with a pure heart fervently. The Apostles Peter and Paul do
separate and deuyde a sunder brotherly love and common love. By brotherlye love
christians ought to be as brethren, and to make no difference between them
selves, for we have all in common, one Christ, one baptism, one faith, and one
treasure. I can not be in this respect of greater price, than thou art, that
which thou haste, I have, and am as rich as thou art, the same treasure is
unto us both: saving that peradventure thou do receive it more worthelye
than I do: as if thou should lay it up in gold, and I in some course cloth.
Therefore as we have grace and all the spiritual goods of Christ common: so
ought we to have, (if need so require) our bodies, our life, our goods, our
dignities and offices common, that we may serve and do good to one another in
all things.

Love one another with a pure heart feruentlye. Peter does significantlie here
say with a pure heart. And this word (...), which signifies without
dissimulation, is often used of ye Apostles. And for this cause undoubtedly,
because they saw before ye christians would call them selves brothers, but
falsely and hipocriticallie.

There were many fraternities erected in the world, which were nothing else but
mere lies and deceits, excogitate of the devil, and so brought into the world,
which wholly and utterly were contrary unto faith and sincere love. 32. Saint
Fraunces
For why should not Christ be as well mine, as saint Bernardes and his
fraternity? Why should not Christ be as well thine, as saint Fraunces and his
fraternity? Therefore when any do say: I shall go to heaven, if I be in this
fraternity, or in that fraternity: Answer thou him that he utters nothing but
blasphemies and lies. For Christ can suffer none other fraternity but common,
and such as we al ought to have among our selves.

I would not have you so to take me, as though I condemn all Fraternities. For
those fraternities may be suffered, where there be assemblies gathered together
for some treasure, whereby the necessities of the poor and of the sick may
be sustained and relieved. 33. Brotherne
But these fraternities are not such, that by them the souls may peculiarly
be the more holy: but they are only or may be permitted to provide for ye
body, and for necessaries of ye poor and nedy, as al our hospitals commonly ar.

But to speak of brotherly love, al Christians have one fraternity, which they
obtained in baptism. Of the which fraternity no man (be he never so holy)
has more then either I or thou have. For with what price he was redeemed, with
the same wast thou redeemed, and God bestowed no less for my cause, or for thy
cause, then for the greatest saint in heaven, saving that he peradventure had a
more firm and strong faith, then either thou or I.

Now common love is a little more large, then brotherly love. For common love
pertains unto the enemies, and specially against them which are not worthy
of love. For as faith does exercise, and sets forth her work, where she
sees nothing: so love ought to see nothing, 34. Unworthy
and to practice her work there, where nothing appears to be loved. As Christ
loved us, when we were in all respects utterly unworthy of his love. It
follows.

Renati non ex semine incorruptibile. etc. Being borne of new, and not of
mortal seed, but of immortal by the word of God, who loves and endures for
ever. All these things (says Peter) ye ought to do, because ye are not the
same now, which you were before, but you be borne a new, and made new men.
This thing was not brought to pass by your own works and means, but there
needed a new birth. For thou can not make a new man by thy own work, but he
must be begotten and borne. What Carpenter can by his own art and cunning make
a tree, which must grow out of the earth of his own accord? Therefore, as we are
not made, but born the children of Adam, and drew syn of our Parents: so we can
not be by our own industry the children of God, but must be regenerate and
borne again such.

The Apostle Peter means thus: Forasmuch as you are made a new creature, it
behooves also yt you behave your selves otherwise tha^ you did before, and that
you purpose to lead a new life. As you lived before in hatred, so live you now
in love. As you lived before in fleshly lusts, so live you now in pureness and
clearnes of life. Let all be turned vpside down. But how chances or comes
this new nativity and birth? Not of mortal sede (says Peter) but of
immortal, by the word of God, who lives here for ever: that is, we are borne
again of a certain seed, as we see all other things to spring and grow of
sede. If therefore that old nativity sprange and came of seed, it behooves
also the new birth to be of some seed. But what a seed is that? Truly,
neither flesh nor blood, nor none other corruptible thing, but the eternal word
of God, that is, the whole, whereby we live, whereby we are nourished, and
specially whereby we are regenerate. But after what manner is this wont to be
done? By this God sends forth his word, that is, the Gospel, which seed he
throws into the heart of man. If that sede abide in the heart, the holy ghost is
present, and frames, and makes a new man, which is far other then he was
before. He has other thoughts, other words, and other works. And by this
means is he wholly changed: whatsoever he fled before, that he now seeks,
whatsoever he sought before, that he now flees. And this seed of the spirit
cannot be changed, it remains for ever, and changes us in to it self.
Therefore, this marvelous nativity and birth is of an excellent seed. It
follows.

Quia omnis caro vt faenum. etc. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of
man is as the flower of grass. This place is taken out of the prophet Esaias,
Esaias. 40.
where it is said to the prophet: Clama, cry thou. And to him demanding what he
should cry, it was said again: ita clames, cry thus: omnis caro gramen est.
etc. All flesh is grass, and all the grass thereof is as the flower of the
field. The grass wythereth, ye flower fades, but the word of our God shall
sta^fast for ever. The prophet Esaias and Peter the apostle do mean no more but
this. The flesh of man is no more but corruption and death. All things ar
fading, brittle and frail. As ye gras (flourish it never so pleasauntly) the
beuty thereof immediately withers and perishes: so what soever flourishes in
man, whether it be in age or in beuty, in riches or any such like, in short
time it waxes old, it falls away, and perishes.

The Prophet Esaie with this sentence comforts ye Jews being captive in
Babylon, co^paring Babylon, the kingdom thereof, the riches and the felicity,
unto grass flourishing and fresh: whose flower and beauty straight way falls
away. And he wills the Jews to understand and that the council and decree
of the Lord, which promised them deliverance and return into Jerusalem, is
eternal and immutable: But Babylon to fall away as the grass, and the flower
of the grass, is an elegant and goodly president and spectacle of the misery
and frailty of man.

Here is to be noted that flesh profits nothing, when we need to be borne
again. By the name of flesh I understand all the glory thereof, as riches,
pleasures, wisdom, and what soever seems excellent and noble in mortal
things. It follows.

Verbum autem domini manet in aeternum: But the word of the Lord endures for
ever. The flesh passes away, the flesh with all her impurity corrupts, and
is corrupted: but the word of God remains for ever. That is to say, all these
things which we have spoken of in this whole chapter, as faith, patience and
holiness, are according to the word of God: they shall remain for ever. Math. 24.
For as Christ says in Matthew: Caelum et terra transibunt, verba autem mea non
transibunt, heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass. Now
Peter concludes, saying: Hoc est autem verbum quod euangelizatum et vobis. It
is the word that has been preached unto you. As though he should say, you
need not look far of to come to this word, ye have it before your eyes, this
is ye word which we prech unto you. By this word ye may extinguishe and
restrain all evil desires, you need not to go far for it, do you only
this, embrace it when it is preached unto you. For it is so nigh unto you that
you may hear it: as Moses says in Deuteronomie: Verbum quod tibi praecipio,
non long est a te, etc. The commandment which I command thee this day, is
not far of. It is not in heaven, Cap. 30.
that thou should say, who shall go up for us into heaven, and bring it us,
and cause us to hear it, that we may do it? Neither is it beyond the sea, that
thou should say, who shall go over ye sea for us and bring it us, and cause
us to hear it, that we may do it? But the word is very nere unto thee, even in
thy mouth, and in thine heart for to do it.

The word is soon preached and heard, but when it shall occupy and enter
into thine heart, it cannot again die and perysh, nor will suffer thee to die,
but will preserve thee as long as thou do stick and cleave unto it. As for
example: when I hear that Jesus Christ died, bare my sins, and deserved
heaven for me, and also has given me what goodness so ever he him self has:
when this (I say) is preached, than I hear the Gospel, than I hear the
word. This word when it is preached, the sound thereof passes away. But if
thou receive it in thine heart, and embrace it by faith, it can not fall away.
No creature is able to suppress this truth. The pit of hell can prevail
nothing against it: yea if I should stick in the very jaws of the devil, yet
if I could apprehend and take hold of this word by faith, I must needs be
delivered and remain safe where this word does abide. Therefore Peter says not
without cause, there is none other word to be looked for, beside that which we
have preached unto you. To this makes ye which Paul writes to the Romans:
non pudet me euangelij, virtus enim dei est in salutem omni credenti. I am not
ashamed of the Gospel, for it is the power of God to save all that do believe.

This word is ye divine and eternal power. For although the sound, voice and
talk thereof forthwith vanishes away, yet ye pith, the truth, the knowledge
which is contained in the voice, abides. As for example: When thou put to
thy mouth ye cup in ye which wine is contained, thou drinkest yt wine, but ye
cup remains: so ye word which is brought by ye voice, descends into the
heart, (the voice vanishing away:) therefore ye word is rightly called diuina
virtus, the power of God, yea God himself: for so God spoke to Moses in Exodus.
Exodus 4. John. 14.
Ego ero in ore tuo. I will be in thy mouth.

Christ says in John. Ego sum via, veritas et vita. I am the way, truth and
life. He that cleaves unto this word, is borne of God. Therefore that sede by
the which we are borne again, is our Lord God himself, and his word.

This is ye tenor and sum of ye whole first chapter. Now I do think it
expedient to give you an Epilogus or short recapitulation, 35. Epilogius.
of all that Peter has spoken in this chapter.

Peter has spoken here of faith, patience, of sanctimonie and holiness, of
pureness, and regeneration. The sum of all these is ye word, that is, Christ
preached unto you. He is ye sum of ye whole Gospel preached for your
salvation. That is to say. God being moved by his great goodness and free
liberality did appoint his son before the beginning of the world to be a
sacrifice for the sins of ye whole world.

After this Peter does show how God revealed this grace unto the Prophets,
signifying when these things should be, that is, when Christ should come,
what he should suffer, and how he should be gloryfied.

This done, Peter does show how Christ washed us with his blood, and gave his
spirit to incite and stir us to embrace these mysteries, that is, yt we
should be spirituallie borne again, and that she should be constant in
adversity by faith and hope: that we should obey ye Gospel, and love one
another brotherly without feining: and finally ye we should live everlastingly
with ye word, by ye which we are born again to be ye children of God. And thus
have you heard ye mind of Peter in this first chapter.

I intended (if it had pleased God to suffer me to remain in this office and
place) to have entered at my next coming into ye discoursing of the second
chapter, and so orderly to have gone through the whole epistle. But it has
pleased ye Queens Majesty to call me to another office and province, which to
sustein and bear I must needs confess my self to be among al other most
unapt, unmeet and most weak. Notwithstanding I must (as gods law does require
of me) show my loyalty and obedience unto my prince. Wyshing (if it had so
pleased God and her highness) that I might have still remained in this godly
exercise. But I trust ye another much more able, more worthy, and better
learned, shall be appointed to serve ye turn in this place. And thus desiring
you all to pray for me, as I may and will pray for you, yt God may give me his
grace so to use my self in ye office, to ye which I am called, yt Gods glory
may be advanced, and the christian congregation edified, to the extirpation of
al Idolatry, supersticio^ and hypocrisy: I commend you to ye tuition of
almighty God, who through ye merits of his son Jesus Christ, with the
sanctification of his holy spirit, preserve and keep you both now, and for
ever. To God the Father, to God the Son, to God the holy Ghost, three persons
in trinity, and one God in unity, be all glory, honor and praise, for ever
and ever. Amen.

Hic sequuntur Miscellanea praelectionis quintae, Tomi secundi.
Loins 1.
Loins are called in latin Lumbi. They are (as they which be expert in
Anatomy do say) the lower part of the backebone consisting in five joints
which are called vertebrae. Now vertebra, is a place or ioynte in ye body,
where the bones do not meet, but are knit together in such wise with sinews,
that they turn the more lightly. The loins ar set in the middle, between, os
sacrum, that is, the place where the excrementes do issue, and the vertebras of
the back. Lumbi do signify sometimes the pleasure and lust of the flesh, for
that effect is set in the Loins. As in Genesis. Reges de lumbis tuis
egredientur. Kings shall come out of thy Loins. Cap. 35.
So that in ye loins there is the simbole of generation.

Lumbus is called in Greek (...). It is properly as they say, the lower middle
part of the reins in man.

Baptista Egnatius does say, that it is that part where men are girt, or where
the girdle sits.

Lumbi are called in Hebrew Motnaim a nowne of the dual number because there be
in man two loins. God spoke to Moses saying: Fac tibi subligacula linea vt
operiat carnem nuditatis, a lumbis vsque ad femora. Exodus 28
Thou shall make them linen breches to cover their priuities, which from the
loins unto the thighs shall reach.

Lumbi sometime signify strength and power. Look in Hesichius, Lib. 1. Cap. 5.
writing upon Leuiticus. And it is used in the prophet: Naum corrobora lumbos
make thy loins strong, increase thy strength mightily. And so it is used in
many places of the scripture.

Lumbis succingi, to have the loins girded, signifies to be ready and lusty
to do any thing.

Lumbos nutare, signifies, to be depressed with false doctrines and opinions,
to walk in the vanitye of their sense, as David says in the psalms: Lumbos
eorum iugiterfac nutare: make their loins always to tremble: that is, take
both judgment and power from them.

Lumbis impingere, is a sign and token of sorrow and grief, that is, coming
upon one more and more. So it is used in ye prophet Jeremy: Vidi omnem virum
habentem manum suam super lumbos tanquam parturiens. Cap. 30.
I beheld every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in trauail, that
is to be in great heaviness, grief and sorrow.

Likewise in the psalm: posuisti stridorem in lumbis nostris. Thou have laid a
strait chain upon our loins. By this is meant, that the church is led sometimes
by Gods providence into troubles.

Of lumbus comes elumbus, or elumbis, which betokens weak and out of
power. For the chiefest part of the strength is set in the loins, as the which
alone with the help of another bone, does sustain and hold up the joining of
the body.

Delumbis is taken sometimes for effeminate and wanton, and so delumbe carmen,
is taken for a lascivious and wanton verse or song. Also ye verb delumbare
signifies to debilitate or make weak. And by a metaphor delumbare sententias
vel argumenta, is to spoil sentences and arguments of their pith and strength,
that is, to make them nothing worth.

Virgin untouched. 2.
Question.
IF a virgin be corrupt and oppressed by violence against her will, and so lose
her chastity, does she remain still a virgin, or no?

Responsio.
The divines do divide sin into two spices or kinds, that is: In peccatum
Voluntarium. Inuoluntarium.


Because sin voluntary is impertinent to this case, I will speak only of
inuoluntary or violent, as they call it.

Of violent sin there be. 2. spices, the one absolute, and ye other co^dicional

Sin violent absolute is, when it lies not in us to do or not to do, but
comes externly, we nothing consenting nor helping to the same. As for
example: if a violent wind should drive us thither whither we would not go: or
if the ministers of any Heathen Magistrate should by force move our hands to
the incensing of idols: than we being thus coacted, are delivered from all
fault and pain.

Sin violent condicional is, when he yt is constrained, either consents to
it, or not co^senteth. If he do consent: as for example, if he deny the verity
of the gospel, which hitherto he has confessed and professed, he (although he
be constrained through fear) is not void from sin. For he is not excused by
the terror of death, nor by the fear of torments. He ought rather to die, the^
to deny the truth. If he chose rather to die, the^ to do or consent to such
horrible things, the^ the tirant cannot constrain him against his will. He may
well kill him, but he cannot make him subject to sin, either volu^tary or
inuolu^tary. For by death he confesses the truth, by death he declares, yt he
will not do yt which they require of him being a live to do.

Antiochus Epiphanes attempted to pollute the holy bodies of the Machabees, by
the eating of meat forbidden by the law: but he choosing rather to die, than to
be profaned, by death overcame the Tirant.

But if there be no consent to inuolu^tary sin, but mere violence is inferred to
any godly man, yt violence does not pollute an holy and incorrupt mind. As for
example: if any godly man having his hands and fete bound, be carried and
brought into a profane church, where he is constrained (will he nil he) to be
present at wicked sacrifices, he is not subject to sin. Or if any holy virgin,
or honest matrone, in the time of wars be corrupt, and consents not to ye
wickedness, she does certainly remain vncorrupt before ye judgment of God. S.
Austine said not without great cause: No^ unjust aliquid pati, sed unjust
aliquid facere peccatum est. Not to suffer any thing wrongfully, De lib. arbit.
lib. 3. c. 16. De me^datio ad consentiu^ Cap. 7.
but to do any thing unjustly is sin. Again, ye said Austen in an other place
writes: Quod violenter, no^ praecedente libidine, patitur corpus, vexatio
potius qua^ corruption nominanda est. Aut si omnis vexatio corruption est, no^
omnis corruption turpis est, sed quam libido procurauit, aut cui libido
consenserit. That is to say: that which the body suffers violently, no
pleasure nor lust going before, is to he named rather a vexatio^ the^
corruption. Or if every vexation be corruption: yet not all corruption is
filthy, but yt which pleasure has procured, or to which lust has co^se^ted

Also the same Austine in an other place says: De ciuit. dei. Lib. 1. Ca. 18.
Proposito animi permanente, per quod etiam corpus sanctificari meruit, nec
ipsi corpori, aufert sa^ctitate^ viole^tia^ libidinis alienae, qua^ seruat
perseuera^tia co^tinentiae suae The purpose of the mind remaining firm and
steadfast, by which the body has deserved to be sanctified, the violence of an
other ma^s lust and pleasure, takes not away the holiness from yt body, which
the purpose and perseverance of his own continency does preserve and keep.
Saint Austine disputes much of such like things in that place.

In like manner we ought gently and with clemency to judge of the inuoluntary
death of furious and mad men, killing them selves.

Sobriety. 3.
HE who^ we call in latin sobrium, we call in Greek (...), which comes of ye
verb (...), which signifies to be of a sound mind, to be wise and ware, to
be chaste, modest, and temperat, to behave one gently, and live holy. Euripides
says: (...), id est, erga te sum modestus: that is, toward thee I am gentle
and courteous.

Sobriety is defined (as some say) quasi sine ebrietate, without dronkennes,
which is a sin to be abhorred in all persons. The prophet Esaias says: ve qui
co^surgitis mane ad ebrietate^ sectanda^, et potandu^ vsque ad vespera^. Cap. 5.
Vvo be unto you which rise early in the morning and give your selves to
dronkennes unto the evening.

This vice is described of S. Austine after this manner. Ebrietas est bla^dus
demon, dulce venenum, suaue peccatum, quam qui habet, seipsum non babet: quam
qui facit, peccatu^ non facit, sed totus est peccatu^. that is. dronke^nes is a
flattring devil, sweet poyso^, and a pleasant sin, which whosoever has, has
not himself, which whosoever does, does not commit sin, but is wholly sin
him felfe.

This vice did overcome those men which could not otherwise be allured with
more heinous sins (as saint Augustine writes in Genesis. Lib. 5.
) Ebrietas (inquit) decipit, quem Sodoma non decepit: vritur ille flammis
mulierum, quem sulphuria flamma non vrebat. Dronke^nes deceued him, who^ Sodoma
could not deciue: he was burned with the burning co^cupiscance of women, whom
the flames of brimstone could not burn.

Noe through the dronkennes of one hour, uncovered his priuities which he had
kept close before, by the space of. 600. years.

Lib. tertio. Floridorum.
Apuleus rehearceth a notable saying of one Aurelius a wise man, sitting at the
table: Prima cratera ad sitim pertinet, secunda ad amicitia^, tertia ad
voluptatem, quarta ad insaniam. The first cup quenches the thirst, the
second pertains to friendship, ye third to pleasure, the fourth gendreth
madness: and (as Menander writes) Multum merum pauca cogit sapere Much wine
makes little wisdom.

Astiages, when he demanded of king Cyrus why he had not drunk up the wine:
because I feared (quoth he by my faith) least some poison were mixed in the cup.
For when thou in the feast of thy birth day, had thy friend to thee, I
euidentlye learned, that he poured poison upon you. And by what means (says
he) O my son, knew thou this? Because (quod he) I did see you neither well
advised in body, nor in mind.

Saint Ambrose does say: Ebrietatis malum est pudicitiae periculum, that is:
the disorder of dronkennes brings chastity into peril.

Idleness. 4.
Idleness is called in latin otium, or as some write ocium it is a ceasing and
vacation from al labor. His contrary is negotium, business.

Otium sometime is taken for an easy exercise of the mind, or of the body, a
relaxatio^ from weighty affairs and matters of great importance. Whereupon we
call otium litteraru^, for the study of learning, because that kind of
exercise, is counted a delectation, rather than any serious occupation, (as
Cicero says) Quid dulcius otio literario: what is pleasaunter then the study
of learning?

Otium sometime is taken for quietness, Cap, 28.
tranquillity and peace, as Tully uses it in his familiar epistles: si antea
auditum erit otium esse in Syria. If it be heard before that there is peace in
Syria. These two last significations ar impertinent to my matter: therefore I
will speak some what of the first, which is properly called idleness, and is the
daughter of sloth.

The son of Syrach says: Multam malitiam docuit otiositas idleness has
taught much mischief. David being idle committed adultery.

Behold (says Ezechiel.) this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, Cap. 16.
pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her: and in her
daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and nedie. 1.
Timot. 5.


Saint Paul speaks of certain widows which being idle, went about from
house to house. Christ imbraided the idle persons, saying: Math. 20.
Quid statis hic tota die otiosi: why stand you here idle all the day?

Saint Augustine says. Quod in otio non debet esse iners vacatio, De ciuit.
dei. Lib. 19.
sed aut inquisitio veritatis aut inuentio. In idleness sluggishe rest ought to
be absente. And when a man is at rest, there ought to be either inquisition of
the truth, or invention of the same. And (as saint Hierome says) non sufficit
a malis esse otiosu^, si quis fuerit a bonis otiosus. Epist. 17.
It is not enough for a man to rest and cease from iuell things, if a man be
idle from good things.

Bernard. 5.
BErnard was an abbot of Clarenalla, he was a Burgondian borne and flourished in
the time of Fridericus Barbarossa. He entered into the monastery about the year
of our Lord. 1112. He was Abbot in the same place by the space of. 36. years,
and died the year of our Lord 1163. He entered into the said monastery when he
was twenty and two years old. He left behind him many goodly books which
are noble monumentes of his worckes. His life is described in five books which
were wont to be set in the end of all his worckes.

Fulgosus writes of saint Bernard a worthy history. When there was sent
unto Bernarde two hundred pounds of money, toward the building and repayring of
the monastery, the said money was taken away by robbers and thieves, which when
Bernard heard, he gave God thanks that he had delivered him of so great a
burden.

There is a proverb risen of Bernard which is this. Bernardus non vidit omnia.
Bernarde saw not all things, by the which is signified that a man be he never
so well learned, may be ignorant in some things. And that a man be he never so
expert and cunning, may fail in some matters. To this is the like saying. Non
nunquam bonus dormitat Homerus, sometimes the best horse may stomble.

Baptism. 6.
BEcause I intend to make a long discourse of Baptism, and all the
circumstances thereof in mine apology and answer to certain bills which were
thrown against me: I will in this place touch only one sentence of Paul,
written to the Corinthians.

The sentence is this Alioquin quid facient ii qui baptisantur pro mortuis? si
omnino mortui non resurgunt, cur baptisantur pro mortuis? Else what shall they
do, which are baptized for ye dead? If the dead rise not at all, why are they
then baptized for the dead?

There be diverse and sondrie interpretations how any are baptized for the
dead. Chrysostom says, that the Marcionites did accustom, when any of their
cathecumines died without baptism, to put one under the bed, and when they
came to the dead corpse, they asked whether he would be baptized. Then he which
lay under answered that he desired baptism. And so the dead corpse was
baptized. When the Marcionites for this matter were reprehended, they defended
them selves by this place of Paul.

This manner of doing and work was truly very superstitiouse and rather to be
counted a stage play then a christian rite. Nor the Apostle Paul does make
his argument as though he would ratify and allow this doing, but does show
only that these me^ (although they were not very well instructed of baptism)
did fear the state of the dead. And in his name did give the sacrament unto an
other, that the dead person should not be made frustrat of the resurrection.
And so by this their own fact Paul urges them to grant the resurrection
of the dead.

Saint Ambrose, willing to declare that the faith of other men may sometime be
praised, and not their fact to be proved, brings the example of Iephte. Who
although he did not well in slaying and sacrificyng his daughter, yet his faith
and constancy is praised in the epistle to the Hebrews. But this saying of
Ambrose is not to be embraced nor allowed. For, we ought not to do ill, that
good may come thereof: nor evil deeds oght to be excused by any good intent,
as they call it, nor evils ar to be praised, although they may seem to be don by
a sincere faith and a good mind. Iephte in deed is praised in the epistle to
the Hebrews, but it is not there expressed, that he was commended for slaying
and sacrificing his daughter. For, there were many things faithfully and luckely
done of him in the common wealth of the Israelits. There be other men, whom this
interpretation pleases not, neither they do think that this rite, which the
Marcionits afterward used, was observed of the Corinthians in Paul's time. For
the Apostle would not have refrained to have taxed and touched so great an
abuse of so worthy a Sacrament. But how so ever it be, this fond opinion, to be
baptized for ye dead, has old and ancient authors and defenders of the same.
For Tertullian when he entreated of the resurrection of the body, made mention
of this surrogat baptism, and does so interpret this place, that he would
deduce his argument out of this manner of baptising. Yet he does not affirm
that Paul does allow this rite, manner, and ordinance.

Saint Ambrose and Chrysostom do consent unto Tertullian. Notwithstanding,
Chrysostom confesses, (which is worthy to be noted) that it is an heresy and
superstition that one should receive the Sacraments for an other. But yet,
even at this day it is allowed and taught in the popish church, that they
which be present at mass, need not to communicate, because the priest does
receive the sacrament for all.

It is read in the life of S Benedict out of one of the dialoges of Gregory,
that Benedict commanded the communion to be given to a certain Nun which
was dead, so that the consecrate bread was brought unto the dead corpse. And
although many of the scholemen do say, that this bread or host was not
consecrate, they have not that out of the words of saint Gregory.

The Jews (as it is reported) do labor with the like madness, which do
circumcise the bodies of their children being dead, if they dye before the
eight day without circumcision, as though the Sacraments were magical
excantations, which do profitte (as they say) only opere operato.

But that one may communicate or receive the sacrament for an other, it is
contrary to the property of those mysteries. For the holy scripture calls
them, (...), consignations and seals of faith and the gifts of God, which
only have place there, where either faith is, or where the gifts of God are
collated and given. It is not convenient, that the mysteries be in one part,
and the seal set in an other part. Let this be a similitude, or example: Be
it that a kings or Prince does grant great privileges and large gifts to
any man by letters patentes: I pray you, where shall the seal be set? In the
paper or parchment where the grauntes are written, or else in an other piece of
parchment or paper? Truly, it ought to be put to the same. In like manner must
we judge, that he which believes, which is regenerate and incorporat unto
Christ, ought to receive the consignations and seals of those gifts by
himself, and not by his vicar or surrogate.

The second manner of interpretation of this place of Paul is this: it chanced
oftentimes in the primative church, that they which lay at the point of death
and were not baptized, desired baptism.

Saint Ciprian makes mention of this manner and rite. He was consulted, whether
they which were in the extremes of death (when they could not well be thorougly
baptized or dipped, but were only sprinkled with water) were to be counted to
be of the number of them that were baptized? He answers, that they were
baptized: and does persuade and counsel the grace of baptism not to be denied
unto them. And in this sense the interpretation of Paul's words is this: What
do they which are baptized for the dead? that is, which when the last hour
comes are rather to be counted to be of the number of the dead, then of the
living.

Saint Austine in the book of his Confessions makes mention of the giving of
baptism after this manner: where it is written that a certain frind of his was
christened in such extremity of life, that when he was washed, he felt
nothing, but when he was somewhat recovered, they declared unto him what was don
about him.

Saint Austin himself being sometime grieved with great sickness desired to be
baptized. Nor he leaves untouched the abuse of his time, in the which many of
a set purpose did defer their baptism, least if they should sin after
they had received it, their sins should have been more greuouse, and punished
with greater and sharper pains. Therefore when any of the Catechumines did
offend, if any man had rebuked him, it was said for his excuse: let him alone,
he is not yet baptized. Which thing saint Austin refelleth after this manner:
There is as much (says he) as if any man should be grievously wounded, and
should perchance receive an other wound, and they that saw this should say:
It makes no matter, or it skilleth not, for he is not yet healed of his old
wound.

The third interpretation of these words of Paul is that, which does affirm
Paul to speak here of true and lawful baptism, and not of the superstitious
baptising. We are all baptized for the dead, when we conf^sse this article,
that Christ rose from the dead, and that the resurrection of the dead is to be
believed and looked for. For if this article be overthrown, all the mysteries
of our faith do perish, and are nothing worth. Therefore, express mention of
this article is required in baptism. In the church of Aquilege, when the
profession of the faith was made, and the symbol rehearsed, and when they came
to this clause of the resurrection of the flesh, it was expressly said and
openly spoken: I believe the resurrection of this flesh. Furthermore, the
ancient fathers ordained, that solemn baptism should be celebrat and had in
the time of Easter. Also, the words of Paul to the Romans do manifestly show,
that this sacrament of Baptism respects the resurrection of the dead, when
it is said: do you not know, that as many as be baptized in Christ Jesus, are
baptized to die with him? that as he rose from death by the glory of the
father: so we might likewise walk in newness of life? etc.

Furthermore, the administration of the Symbol and outward sign, declares
the same. For they which are baptized, are dipped in water, and rise from
thence again, that death and resurrection from the dead might by it be declared.

Theophilacte understands, to be baptized for the dead, to be nothing else,
but to be baptized in this faith and belief, that our corrupt flesh, bodies
and bones to be raised again from the dead.

Martinus Lutherus, does judge, that baptism in many places was sole^nised and
given in the Churchyards at the sepulchers and graves of the dead, that the
article of resurrection from death should be confessed and confirmed, not only
by the profession of faith, by the ceremony of baptism, by externe words,
but also by the testimony of the place where the dead lay.

Right hand. 7.
THe right hand of god the father has in the scripture two significations.
First, the right hand of God is the place of the blessed, and eternal
felicity in heaven, as saint Austin writes in his book de agone Christiano.
Cap. 26
Dextera patris est beatitudo perpetua quae sanctis datur: sicut sinistra
rectissime dicitur miseria perpetua quae impiis datur, etc. The right hand of
the father is perpetual blessedness, which is given to saints: as the left
hand is rightly called the perpetual misery, which is given to the wicked, so
that the right and left hand is to be understand not in God himself, but in
the creatures.

Saint Austin spoke this according to the scriptures. For David sings: Notam
mihi facies semitam vitae, satietas gaudiorum in conspectu tuo est, and
iucunditates in dextera tua in perpetuu^: Thou shall make known to me the path
of life, abundance of joy is in thy sight, and great mirth at thy right hand
for ever. What other thing is this, then if the should have said? thou shall
lead me into life, that is, into heaven it self, where I shall be filled with
joys in beholding and having the fruition of thee. In thy right hand, that is,
in eternal blessedness, or in joys perpetual.

We read in the gospel, that the sheep shall be set on the right hand, and the
goats on the left hand. Therefore, the right hand of the father in this
signification is (as the divines term it) finita. And when we confess the
son to sit at the right hand of the father, we do confess that he is
delivered from all grief, all sufferings, and from the infirmity of man, and
that touching his human nature, is at rest, and at mirth in heaven, where we
believe our souls and bodies to be and to live for ever. But because our
bodies in blessedness shall not be in every place, but in one certain place:
therefore saint Austin said Christ our Lord, for the manner of a true body, to
be in one certain place of heaven.

Saint Ciprian also says: sedere ad dexteram patris carnis assumptae
mysterium est. To sit at the right hand of the father, is a mystery of the
flesh taken up.

Secondly, the right hand of God is taken for virtue, power, kingdom,
protection, and the might of God. David said, the right hand of God is high
and mighty, the right hand of the Lord makes strong things. And Moses
says. Dextara tua, Domine, magnificata est in virtute, dextera tua, domine,
fregit inimicum: Thy right hand, O Lord, is mighty in power, thy right hand, O
Lord, has vanquished the enemy.

In this signification, to sit at the right hand of the father, is to reign,
to exercise might and power, to execute the office of a Prince or King. For
David said: The lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand until I make thine
enemies the foot stool. In this sense the right hand of God is (as the
divines say) infinita, and is concluded in no place.

The old interpreters of the holy scripture do discourse this article, he
sits at the right hand of the father, none otherwise then is said before.

Saint Hierome upon the Ephesians writes: Per humanam similitudinem dei
potentiam monstrauit, non quo solium ponatur, and Deus pater in eo sedeat,
secumque filium habeat residentem etc. He showed by a human similitude the
power of God, not that there is a seat put in the which God the father sits
and has his son sitting by him, but that we can not otherwise understand
God, judging and reigning, but by our own words. Therefore, as to be nighe
unto God, or to be far from God, is not to be understand concerning the space
of places, but concerning merits, because saints be by him, and sinners
removed far from him: so to be at the right or left hand of God, is to be
taken, that the saints are on the right hand, and the sinners on the left.
Our savior approves the same in the gospel, where he makes mention of the
sheep at the right hand, and the goats at the left hand.

Saint Austine says. Credimus quod sedet ad dexteram dei patris: nec ideo
tamen quasi humana forma circumscriptum esse Deum patrem arbitrandum est, etc.
We believe that he sits at the right hand of God the father: Yet we must not
judge or suppose God the father to be circumscribed with the shape of man, that
when we think of him, we conceive in our mind either a right hand or a left:
nor we ought to think, that when he is said to sit, that to be done by the
bowing of hammes, lest we fall into that sacrilege, wherewith the Apostle
curses those, which change the glory of the incorruptible god, to the
similitude of a corruptible man. For it is an heinous wickedness to place such
an image in a christian church. It is much more wicked to place such an image
in the heart where the true temple of god is, if at the least it be clean
from earthly lust and error.

To sit therefore at the right hand of the father, is to be understand to be in
hie blessedness, where righteousness, peace and joy is, etc.

Golias. 8.
GOlias was a puissant king of the Philistians, whom David being yet a child
slew, when the Jews were afraid to fight with him man for man. His stature
was, as the Bible rehearses, six cubits and a spanne, which was ten feet
lackyng three inches, accomptyng it with the feet of men living at that time,
which undoubtedly were more then they be now. His habergeon weighed 5000.
sicles, which is two thousand and five hundred ounces, and the iron of his
spear weighed six hundred sicles, which is 300. ounces, whereby his greatness
and strength may be coniectured to excede any man living in this time.

Adoption. 9.
ADoptio was done two manner of ways. It was done one way be the Pretour or
chief judge. An other way, it was done by the people or Tribune, thas is the
chief officer among the communes, which adoption is called rather arrogatio
then adoptio. But Caius does make an other distinction between adoption and
arrogation. So that adoptio, is, when he that is not his own man, nor in full
liberty, does pass into an other man's family, and is counted his son.
Arrogatio, is, by the authority of the prince, who does adopte those which be
their own men, and in full liberty. For they were arrogate, that is, demanded
whether they would be in the steed of lawful children to him that did adopte
them. In like manner he which did adopte, was demanded whether he would
receive him that was arrogate in the steed of his lawful son. But in the
scriptures we be ye children of God, not by arrogation, but by adoption.

To speak plain, Adoptio is an election of an heir, out of the course of
inheritance, as by will or gift. Also adoptio, is sometime taken for graffing.
It may be applied to things inanimate or without life, as Plinius says:
Adoptare herbam, that is, to call an herb after a man's propre name. So
Lysimachus invented the herb Lysimachiam which holds the name of him.
VVeme^ also did affecte this glory, as Artemisia the wife of Mansolus adopted
an herb to her own name, which herb was called before Parth^nis: which
Arthemisia, was a noble princess, wife to Mansolus King of Caria, of a notable
chastity, and excelled so in love toward her husband, that when he was dead,
she caused his heart to be dried in a vessel of gold into poulder, and by
little and little she drancke it up, saying: their two hearts should never
depart a sunder.

Ignorantia. 10.
IGnorantia in greek is called (...). And signifies sometimes lack of
knowledge. Sometimes it is contrary unto knowledge, as when a man has habitum
falsorum principiorum, and falsarum opinionum, through the which he is let and
hindered from the knowledge of the truth.

A great question is wont to be tossed among the divines pro and contra,
whether ignorance does excuse men or no. Some hold yea, and bring for their
purpose this saying of saint Paul. First I was a blasphemer, a persecutour
and railer. Tim. 1. epist. Cap. 1.
But I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorauntly. To the which may be
answered there be two kinds of ignoraunces, that is.

1. Ignorantia naturalis. 2. Ignorantia affectata.
Or as the scholemen do term them.

1. Ignorantia inuincibilis. 2. Ignorantia vincibilis.
Natural ignorance is of it self offense and sinnne, because it comes of a
beginning infected with poison, Lib. 3. de libe. arbitrio. ca. 19
that is of the original sin.

Saint Austen says. Quod ignorans quisque non recte facit, and quod recte
volens facere non potest: ideo dicuntur peccata, quia de peccato illo libere
voluntatis originem ducunt. Illud enim praecedens maeruit illa sequentia. Nam
sicut linguam dicimus non solum membrum, quod mouemus in ore dum loquimur, sed
etiam illud quod huius membri motum sequitur, id est, formam and tenorem
verborum, and secundum hunc morem (dicitur lingua, alia graeca, alia latina)
Sic non solum peccatum illud dicimus, quod proprie vocatur peccatum (libera
enim voluntate a sciente committitur) sed etiam illud quod de huius supplicio
consequitur, that is. That thing which a man being ignorant does not well, and
that thing which a man willingly can not do well, are therefore called sins,
because they proceed of the sin of free will, the which goinge before
deserved these things followynge* For as the tongue is not only called that
membre which will move in the mouth when we speak, but also that thing
which follows the mouinge of this membre, that is, the form and manner of
words and speaking (whereupon one is called the Latin tongue, an other the
greek tongue.) So we call that not only sin, which is properly called
sin (which is committed willinglye by free will), but also that which
follows of the punishment of the other.

Obiectio.
Christ does say in John. Si non venissem and locutus fuissem eis, peccatum
non haberent. If I had not comme and spoken to them, they had had no sin.
Ergo they to whom nothing is showed and declared, are free from all sin and
blame.

Responsio.
Christ in that place does not speak of their innocence and giltlesnes, but
of their pretense. But every pretense is not just and good. The meaning of
Christ is no more but this: Now the Jews have nothing to pretend and
excuse their sin, because I came and spoke to them Again Christ does not
deliver the ignorant universally from all sin, but only from the sin of
rebellion and wilful obstinacy. For saint Austen does say: Habent
excusationem non de omni peccato suo, sed de hoc quod in Christum non
crediderunt, quod ad eos non venit, omnes enim qui non audierunt, nec audiunt,
possunt habere hanc excusationem, sed non possunt effugere condemnationem, qui
enim sine lege peccauerunt, sine lege peribunt, that is. The ignorant has
excuse not from all their sins, but of this, that they believe not in Christ,
because he came not to them. All which have not had, nor do not hear, may
have an excuse, but they can not avoid condemnation. For they which sin
without law, shall perish without law.

To this agrees Chrysostom. Non de hiis puniendi sumus quae sciendo peccamus,
verum etiam pro illis quae ignorando committimus, etc. that is: Hom. 7 in cap.
2. Math.
We shall be punished not only of those things which we commit wittingly,
but also for those things which we commit ignorauntly. I do bear them witness
(says Paul) that they have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.
But this is not sufficient for their purgation and excuse.

Saint Austen again does say: Non recte dici potest, si nescit homo, non
peccat, sunt enim peccata ignorantium, quamuis minora quam scientium. It cannot
be well said, that a man does not sin, De adult. coniugiis.
because he knows not, for there be sins as well of the ignorant, as of
them that know, although they be not so great.

Saint Bernarde does not ablude nor swerue from this judgment, who writes
thus. Vtraque cognitio dei scilicet and tui, tibi est necessaria ad salutem,
quia sicut ex noticia tui, venit in te timor dei, Super catica.
and ex dei noticia amor: sic e contra de ignorantia tui superbia, ac de Dei
ignorantia desperatio, that is. Both the knowledge of God and of thy self is
necessary to salvation, because by the knowledge of thy self, the fear of
God comes upon thee, and by the knowledge of God comes love: contrary wise
by the ignorance of thy self, comes pride, and by the ignorance of God,
comes desperation: This much concerning natural ignorance.

Ignorantia affectata.
The other ignorance is when a man willingly, wilfully and obstinatly is
ignorant of a set purpose and malice, as if any should say, he will not
understand and know that thing, which does and may displease him, nor will
understand or know when he may: Such ignorance was in the Jews enemies of
the grace of God. Paul says of them They not knowing the righteousness of God,
but seeking to place their own righteousness, are not subject to the
righteousness of God.

Christ answers the Pharisees, asking whether they them selves were blind.
Si caeci essetis, non haberetis peccatum, nunc vero dicitis peccatum vestrum
manet. If ye were blind, ye should have no sin, but now ye say, we do
sin, therefore your sin remains.

De. 12. grad. humilitatis.
Saint Bernarde speaks of this kind of ignorance very handsomlye. Non est
parum scire quod nescias frustra sibi de ignorantia blandiuntur, qui vt
liberius peccent libenter ignorant. It is no light matter to seek to know that
which thou know not, they vainlye flatter them selves, who are willingly
ignorant, that they may the more freely sin. Of such speaks the scripture
also. Nolunt apponere scientiam ne apponant dolorem. They will not know, least
their sorrow should be increased.

Obiectio.
Is there no kind of ignorance that does excuse?

Responsio.
Lect. 28. sapientiae.
The scholemen, and specially Holcot put two kinds of ignorance which they
call, ignorantiam inuincibilem, and vincibilem.

In quest. ex. vtroque test. quest. 67.
Invincible ignorance is that which can not be ouercomed with study or
diligence, (as saint Austene very learnedly writes.) Non omnis ignorans
immunis est a paena. Ille ignorans potest excusaria poena, quia quo disceret
non inuenit. Illis autem ignosci non potuit hoc qui habentes a quo discerent
operam non dederunt. that is: Not every on that is ignorant is free from pain:
that ignorant man may be excused from pains, which could not find of whom
he might learn.

But they can not be forgeuen, which having of whom they might learn, gave
not their diligence to learn.

Chrysostom writes. Non potest esse excusatio condemnationis ignorantia
veritatis, quibus fuit inneniendi facultas si fuisset quaerendi voluntas.
Ignorance of the truth can not be an excuse of condemnation, unto them who had
power and faculty to have found it, if they had had good will to seek it.

Ignorantia vincibilis.
Vincible ignorance is when a man desires not to know things which he ought
to know, nor to give his diligence to know those things, which pertain to
salvation.

Saint Austin says. Licet grauius sit peccare scienter, quam ignoranter, non
ideo tamen confugiendum est ad ignorantiae tenebras, vt in eis quisquam
excusationem requirat. Aliud enim est nescire, and aliud nolle scire. Although
it be more grievous to sin wittingly, then ignorauntlye, yet none ought to
flee to the darckenes of ignorance, to find in them an excuse. For it is one
thing not to know, and an other thing not to be willing to know. That which is
written in the book of wisdom, may well be veryfied in them. Excaecauit eos
malitia eorum. Cap. 2.
Their own maliciousnes made them blind.

Saint Austin agrees to the same saying: Impia men's odit etiam ipsum
intellectum, et homo aliquando minimum mente peruersa, De verbis domini. 78.
timet in telligere ne cogatur quod intellexerit facere. etc. A wicked mind
does hate understanding, and one of to perverse a mind fears to understand,
lest he be compelled to do that which he understands: whereupon the psalm
says. Noluit intelligere, vt benefaceret. He would not understand, least he
should be driven to do well

This ignorance comes of pride, maliciousnes and contempt. And this
ignorance is called of some, Ignorantia crassa and supina, and it is damnable.

The words Error, nescientia, ignorantia, ignoratio, have this difference.
Error est approbatio falsorum pro veris. Error is the allowinge of false
things for true. Nescientia importat simplicem scientiae negationem. Ignoratio
perteyneth to the very act and matter, which is utterly unknown, nor cannot
be known, except it be uttered. Ignorantia is when a man does not know that
which he is bound to know.

I shall think it nothing impertinent if I speak here a word or two of
memory, which is as it were almost opposite unto ignorance although not
directly.

De memoria.
All doctrine and discipline does consiste in memory, and we are taught but in
vain, if that which we do hear, pass from us and be forgotten. Quintilianus.

Notwithstanding evil things are better to be forgotten, then to be kept in
memory. Themistocles (as Cicero writes) passing by a certain schole
demanded what was there professed and taught. One answeringe that the art of
memory was taught, he said.

Mallem obliuionis quam memoriae artem memini eorum quae volo, obliuisci, non
possum quae nolo. I remember well those things which I would to be so, but I
can not forget those things which I would not to be so.

Cassius Seuerus, when his book was burned by the commandment of the Senate:
Nunc (inquit) superest vt ipse vnius comburar qui illos edidici. Now it rests
also that ye burn me alive, which have learned without book every word in
them. For that which is depely graven in mind, can not be taken away, but with
life and all.

A certain Proconsul, intending to torment and punish a certain thief, and
when he doubted what punishment he might take of him, one Polemon coming that
way, said: Iube illum edicere veterum scripta: Command him to learn without
book the writings of the old authors. For Polemon had learned by memory
many things. But in all exercyses he compted nothing to be more laborious and
paynefull then to conne without book. Therefore Fabius would have this kind
of labor and study to be devoured even from childhode. Haec Philostratus.

Oenipodes when he saw a certain young man getting to him self many books:
Non cistae (inquit) sed pectori. Not to thy cheste, not to thy press, but to
thy breast, and to thy memory. By the which saying he judged them not to be
learned which have nombre of books: but which out of books commit all
things to the treasure of memory.

Obiectio.
Why then, it needs not to have copies of books, nor it forces to have any
good library, yea it makes no matter whether we have any books or no.

Responsio.
Cartae sunt rerum fidae custodes, books are faithful kepers of things.
Seneca writes in his epistles: Epist. 46.
Non refert quam multos, sed quam bonos habeas libros. Lectio certa prodest,
varia delectat, multitudo librorum onerat, non instruit. It is not material
how many books, but how good books thou have. One special kind of reading
does proffit, variety delights, multitude of books lodeth, and not
instructs.

Mithridates King of Pontus is worthy to be had in admiration, which was wont
to give laws to. 22. diverse nations, over whom he bare rule in their own
proper tongues, and could speak to every one of them without an interpreter.

King Cyrus having mighty, huge, and great hosts, called every one of his
soldiers by his proper name.

Ambitio. 11.
AMbition is the inordinat desire of dignity and honor. Ambitio comes of
this verb ambio, which properly signifies to compass or go about, and by a
metaphor betokens sometime to flatter and circumuent. And because the Romans
when they did affect honor and bearing of rule, they went about to every one,
spoke fair, took them by the hands, and desired them that they would help
them with their voices: So it came to pass, that ambire, is taken to desire
honor, and the room of a Magistrate.

There is ambitus, and ambitio, but this is the difference, that ambition
properly is the immoderate desire of honor and praise. Ambitus is when we come
to public honor by filthy means and unlawful ways, as by flattery, fair
speaking, and giving of large gifts, which properly may be called bribery, or
simony: what so ever ambitus does, ambition compels to do the same.

Saint Austine has a notable saying: Laudari a male viuentibus nolo et
detestor, laudari autem a been viuentibus, si dicam nolo, mentior, si dicam
volo timeo ne sim humanitatis plus quam sodalitatis. etc. I abhor to be
praised of the ill livers, and to be praised of good livers, if I say I will, I
lie: if I say I will, I fear least I may be counted, more human then sound.
What shall I say therefore? Nec plene nolo, nec volo. Neither fully I nill nor
will. I fully will not, least I be endomaged by the praise of man: nor fully I
nill, least they may be unthankful to whom I preach.

Chrysostom writes: Opus quidem desiderare bonum, bonum est: In Math. homil.
25.
primatum autem honoris concupiscere vanitas est. Primatus enim fugientem se
desiderat, desiderante^ se onerat. It is a good thing to desire a good work,
but to desire primacy of honor is vanity. For primacy and honor do desire him
that flees from her, and burdeneth him that does desire her.

The like saying has saint Gregory: Locus regiminis desiderantibus negandus
est, fugientibus offerendus. The place of bearing rule is to be denied to them
that desire it, and to be offered to them that flee it. In pastorali.


Persius speaks in his first Satyr after this manner.

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter,
At pulchrum est digito monstrari et dicier hic est.
Except other men know that thou be learned.
Both thou and thy learning are nothing regarded.
For it is a goodly thing to be poynted with finger,
And to be said: lo, who goes yonder?
Phanorinus says: that men are partly to be mocked, partly to be hated, and
partly miserable. To be laughed at, because they aspire ambitiously to higher
degrees. Hateful, when they obtain them. Miserable, when they be void of
their hope.

An ambicious son of a certain cook, when being like to have office, came
into the field, and desired Cicero his consent. Tully knowing him to be a
Cook, said: Ego quoque tibi fauebo. Tully had a respect unto the Cooks
office, in saying: Ego quoque.

Eremites, 12.
THe Greek word (...), betokens solitudinem, a desert, a wilderness, whereof
comes Eremitae, which dwell in wilderness, and lead a solitary life for the
cause of religion. They are called also Anachoritae. They lived every one in
his proper Cel. They were very frequent and many in the East part, and in the
deserts of Egypt, Hom. 8. Math. 2.
whereof Chrysostom says: Si quis nunc ad Egipti solitudines veniat, paradiso
prorsus omnem illam videbit eremum digniorem, et innumerabiles angelorum coetus
in corporibus fulgere mortalibus. That is, if any now go to the deserts of
Egypt, he shall see utterly all that wilderness, more worthy then paradise, and
shall see innumerable assembles of angels, shine in mortal bodies.

But by Chrisostomes leave, these words be against the saying of Christ:
Nolite exire, nolite credere, will you not go forth, believe not.

Cassianus makes mention of a certain Eremite in Egypt, whose name was
Archebius: who lived. 37. years in the order of the Eremits or Anchorites. And
from thence he was taken of the Church, and made a Bishop.

I remember a pretty history of a certain Eremite, who lived very austerely,
and fared very coursely, who did spread his table with a net, when he took his
refection. At the last, whether it were through his holiness, or hipocrisy, he
was chosen to be a Bishop. And when he was bishop, he had forgotten his net,
and caused his table to be spread and laid with very fine and fair clothes. At
the last one demanded of him where his net was, and why he did not lay his
table with the net? What need I now (says he) the net? for I have caught
the fish that I would have: meaning by the fish the bishopric.

By this ye may see their hypocrisy, and what manner of men they were. At the
last they crept from the wilderness, to towns ends, where they might live more
easily, quietly, and daintely: but how continently they lived in their Celles,
I shall not need to speak. For it is to manifest to all the world.

Privation. 13.
TThey are properly called homines priuati, which are not set in any authority.
Priuatus also being a participle of ye verb priuor, betokens spoliatum, one
that is spoiled or robbed. Priuatio the verbal is the lacking of any quality
that is contrary: As voluptas est doloris priuatio. Pleasure is the privation
of dolor and sorrow. Aegritudo est priuatio valetudinis: Sickness is the
privation of health. But for privation in this signification, you must consult
the Logicians.

Be ye holy, as I am holy. 14.
THese words are written in Leuiticus: Leuit. 11.
and they are the words of God unto the people of Israel, after he had
forbidden them to eat of any creeping thing. For that was an abhominacion unto
the Lord. Therefore said God unto them: you shall not pollute your selves with
any thing that creeps, neither make your selves unclean with them, neither
defile your selves thereby. For I am the Lord your God: be sanctified therefore,
and be holy, for I am holy. By the which words is meant, that the people of God
should not be drowned in filthiness, or any kind of sin, whereof the creeping
Serpent was the first author and original. Who would not laugh at, or rather
lament the obstinate blindness of the Papists, which do wrest this piece of
scripture against marriage of Priests? Vvherin they offend in two points.
First, in that they restrain these words to be spoken only to priests, where
it was spoken to all the people. Secondly, in that they count Matrimony to be
unholy, where Saint Paul does call it both honorable, and also immaculate.

Al manner of companies. 15.
There be two proverbs, the one is, Polypi mentem obtinere, to follow the
nature of Polypus: which Polypus is a fish that changes his color often
times, and when the fishers pursue him, he does cleave to the rocks, and does
imate the couloure of the same rock, to the which he cleaves. The other
proverb is, Chamaeleonte uersatilior, more chaungeable than the Chamaeleon.

Which both proverbs may be very well applied and spoken of them, which
fashion and frame them selves to the qualities and conditions of them with whom
they be conversant. With the Papists, they will be Papists, with the
Protestants, they will be Protestants. Such may be well compared unto the
Serpent Chamaeleon, of the which there is great store in Aphrica, but they are
more frequent in India.

Plinius makes mention of this beast, and says, Lib. 28. cap. 8.
he is almost as byg as a Crocodile, but the backbone is sharper, and more
crooked, and the tail is greater.

Plutarchus writes, In commentariis de adulatione.
that the Chamaeleon will turn himself to al colors, saving to the white
color. Such Chamaeleons be these persons, which for the state and condition
of the time, will frame them selves to fashions, and will say with Terentius
his Gnato: Ais, aio, neges, nego: if you say it is thus, so do I also: if you
say nay, so will I. Plutarchus writes of one named Leontychides, who when he
was noted not to be so constant as he ought to be, answered: Mutor pro temporum
ratione. As the time changes (says he) so do I change.

Do you think that there be not a great number of such Leontychides in England,
which will turn with every wind, and will be of al religions? And when the
prince turns, they will turn also, and will with every wind turn as the
wethercocke. But what may we say of such? Even that which one Laborius said
unto Cicero. For when Laborias was appointed by Caesar to be one of the Senate
house, and he came to sit down among the Senators, Cicero said. Reciperem te
nisi auguste sederemus. I would receive thee, but that the roum is very
straight. Unto whom Laborius answered: At tu solebas duabus sedere sellis. But
thou art wont to sit upon two seats: noting Cicero his inconstancy, who
would seem to play on both the hands. What shall we say of that Chamaeleon of
Oxford, who has so often changed his color, and so often reuoking his
papacy, and reuolting again to the same. But least I might be noted Luctari
cum laruis, because he is departed out of this world, I will say no more of
him, least he have left behind a number of that hear, which will be as ready to
play the foxish part, as ever he was.

Take a young Fox or Cub (as some term it) and tie him with a chain, and feed
him by the space of seven year with milk and sops, as long as he is tied, he
will abide with you, but if the chain break, or any link thereof, he will forsake
his milk and sops, and go to his den as fast as he can run. So it is to be
feared, that there be a great many of such cubs, which as long as the chain
holds, that is, as long as the prince lives, and the law continues, they
will eat milk and sops with us, that is, they will be of our religion, and
profes the Gospel with us: but if the chain should break, that is, if the
prince should die, or the law change, the Fox never went so fast to his den,
as they would run to Rome again.

Confess. 16.
AS for the confession institute by God, as well the public as the private
confession, is so copiously declared in the scriptures, that I shall not need to
entreat any thing of it. Therefore I would wish the Reader to go to the
scriptures, which will fully instrust him what confession ordained of God is,
and into how many kinds it is divided.

I will concerning this Miscellane make some discourse of the confession of
sins institute by man. You shall understand that this confession is of two
sorts. The first is public, rituall, or ceremonial confession, which they
call as it were, exomologesin.

The private or secret confession is called auricular. The public confession
may be called rituall, because it is not so much the acknowledging and
confessing of sin, as the act of penance. Lib. etimol. 6 cap. 18.
And so Isidorus does almost define it saying: Exomologesis prosternendi et
humiliandi hominis disciplina est, habitu atque victu, sacco et cinere
incubare, corpus sordibus obscurare, animum maeroribus deiicere, illa quae
peccauit tristi tractatione mutare. That is to say: Public confession is a
discipline to cast down and to humiliate man by habit and diet, and to lie in
sack cloth and ashes, to make the body ill favored with unclean keeping, to
throw down the mind with heaviness, and to amend his faults with a heavy
demeanor.

I would not have rehearsed these words of Isidorus, Lib. de penitentia.
being a mean author, unless almost the same were read in Tertullian.

An example of this has Eusebius, saying: Eccles. histo. Lib. 5. ca. vlt.
Natalis martyr deceptus ab haereticis, tandem errorem intelligens, mane
consurgit. etc. Natalis the confessor, being deceived of heretics, at the
length knowledging his error, rose betime in the morning, put upon him sack
cloth and ashes, and with many tears bewailing his error, did prostrate him
self at the feet of Zepherinus the Bishop: and likewise with great
lamentation, being thrown down at the feet, as well of the Clergy, as of
Laity, caused all the Church to weep, and with continual prayer to crave
pardon for him of Christ.

But this ritual confession seems not to be commanded of God (as it was used
in old time) that at this day also, whosoever has committed any sin, should
forth with be compelled to do open penance. For where in the Gospel is such a
penance read to be enjoined to the sinful and adulterous woman? There were
many other sinners received into the savor of God by Christ, without such
manner of penance. For it is very well known how Christ our Lord dealt with
Mathewe, with Zacheus, with Peter which denied him, and with many other.
Therefore, I think and judge, that the Bishops and Priests in old time
invented this public confession for disciplines sake, and that there might be
less liberty and lisence to sin.

Sozomenus writes thus: Ab initio sacerdotibus placuit, vt velut in theatro,
test multitudine ecclesiae, peccata manifestarentur. Eccles. hist. Lib. 7. ca.
16
That is to say: At the beginning it pleased the priests, that as it were in a
theater the whole congregation bearing witness, sins should be made manifest.
Lo here he says, it pleased the priests. He adds also, that there was a
priest appointed, to whom they which had sinned, did come to confess their
sins, and to hear and learn their penance, that is, what they should do,
or what punishment they should suffer. And a little after the same Sozomenus
shows the use of the Romish Church in putting to penance.

Furthermore, he says that in the church of Constantinople, there was a Priest
appointed to hear the confession of the repentaunts, until a certain noble
woman, for the sins she had confessed, being commanded of the Priest to fast
and to pray, and therefore abode in the Church: was found to have committed
fornication with a Deacon. For the which fact the Priests were then ill
reported of. But Nectarius the Bishop being doubtful what punishment was
convenient for that offense, deprived the Deacon from his function and office.
And because some men gave counsel, that every man might have liberty (according
to his conscience) to come to the communion of the holy mysteries, the
penitenciary priest was no longer suffered to remain in that office. And since
that time this counsel took effest, and continues so at this day. etc.

This holy bishop Nectarius would not have abrogate this public manner of
confession, if he had understand and known it to be ordained of God: neither
it should have been lawful for him so to do For he did know (as Sozomenus
also does grant) that this form and manner of confession was used in the
church, by the counsel and devise of bishops. Neither we read, that Chrisostom
(which did next succeed Nectarius, who also was a very diligent and severe
bishop) did restore again this rituall kind of penance. In epist. ad heb.
hom. 31
For he writes thus: No^ dico tibi vt teprodas in publicum, neque vt te apud
alios accuses: sed obedire te volo prophetae dicenti, Reuela Domino viam tuam.
etc. that is: I do not say unto thee, that thou should utter thy self
openly, nor that thou should accuse thy self before other men: but I would
have thee obey the prophet saying, declare and open thy way unto the Lord.
Confess thy sins therefore unto God the true judge, with continual prayer to
obtain remission: not with thy tongue, but by remorse of thy conscience. And
than believe, yt thou may obtain mercy, if thou shall have it continually in
thy mind. etc.

In Psalm. 56.
Again, Chrysostom says in an other place: Si confunderis alicui dicere, quia
peccasti, dicito ea quotidie in anima tua. etc. If thou be ashamed to tell thy
sins to any man, because thou have offended, tell them daily in thy soul. I
do not bid thee to confess them to thy fellow servant, that he might imbraide
thee, confess them to thy God, which heals them. If thou will not confess
them, God knows them, which was present when thou did commit them.

Furthermore, he writes thus in an other place: Cave homini dixeris, ne tibi
opprobret. Neque enim conseruo tuo est confitendum, qu^m publicum proferat, sed
domino, qui tui curam gerit, qui et humanus est, et medicus: ei ergo ostendes
vulnera. That is: Tell not thy sins to man, lest he do imbraide thee. For thou
must not confess them to thy fellow servant, that may utter them, but to the
Lord, which takes care over thee, which is both merciful, and also a gentle
Physician.

He brings in also the Lord speaking and saying: Non cogo te in medium
prodire theatrum, ac multos adhibere testes: mihi soli dic peccatu^ tuum
priuatim, vt sanem vlcus. I do not compel thee to come forth into the midde of
the multitude, and to take many witnesses: confess thy sins to me alone
priuatelye, that I may heal thy grefe.

All these testimonies of Chrysostom do euidentlye enough prove and declare,
that this ritual and public confession (as it has been in time past used in
the church) was not institute of God, and therefore removed not without cause
out of the Church.

I would not have my meaning so taken, as though I utterly denied open penance
to be enjoined and done for notorious and open sins, that the congregation
may be satisfied for the offense committed. But my meaning is, that
Exomologesis (as it was used in Nectarius time) was not institute nor ordained
by God.

Of auricular confession.
Private or secret confession is wont to be made only to the priests, al
other arbitrers and witnesses being removed and set apart. In ye which
confession every man whispered privily his sins into the priests ear, and
receiving absolution of him, by certain conceived words, thought himself to
be purged from al his sins. This confession is called auricular confession,
which was unknown in the time of the Apostles. And although it began to take
rote and place in time past, yet in the beginning it was free and not used. At
the last it began to be commanded and extorted of the bishop of Rome, when the
state of the Church was most corrupt, in the year of the Lord. 1215. or there
about. It was disputed of. 80. years or more (before it was commanded by a
certain law) whither it was sufficient to confess only to God, or else to the
priest also?

One Hugo a learned writer of that time, says: Audacter dico, Lib. de. eccle.
pta^te ligandi et soluendi.
si ante sacerdotis absolutionem. etc. I say boldly, if any man com to the
communion of the body and blood of ye lord, before he be absolved of ye priest,
he undoubtedly eats and drinks his judgment, although he be greatly
penitent, and be sorrowful and does much lament. These be the words of Hugo,
spoken not so boldly as busily, and more then true, except Gods word be false.
This Hugo lived about the year of the Lord. 1130.

Not long after followed him Petrus Lumbardus, commonly called the master of
the sentence, because he gathered together the sayings of the fathers, and made
(as it were) an abridgement of their doctrine.

This man lived about the year of the Lord. 1150. He in his book of sentences
shows first the authority of the fathers, Lib. 4. did. 17 et. 18.
that confession made to God only is sufficient. Afterward, he brings in
other sentences teaching the contrary. Last of all, he himself giving
sentence, concludes saying: Ex his indubitanter ostenditur, oportere deo
primum. etc. by this doubtless it follows, that we must first offer our
confession to God, and then to the priest. Otherwise, no man can enter into
Paradise, if at the least he have opportunity and faculty so to confess.

Gratianus the patcher together of the decrees, which lived in Lumbardus time,
is more gentle and favorable. For he does define no certainty, but bringing in
sentences pro et contra, for both parts, concludes thus: Cui horum potius
adhaerendum sit, lectoris iudicio reseruatur. To which of both these parts a
man ought to lean and cleave, it is reserved to the judgment of the Reader,
that is, whether we ought to confess our sins to God only, or else to God
and to the priest also. For both the parts has wise and religious men for
fautors and defenders.

Fyftye years after this followed one Lotharius, a Doctor of Paris, a diligent
follower of Lumbarde* He being created Bishop of Rome, and called Innocentius
the third, summoned a general counsel called concilium Lateranense, Lib. 5.
cap. 12.
in the which he made a law which Gregory the ninth recites in his decretalls.
His words be these. Omnis vtriusque sexus fidelis, postque ad annos
discretionis peruenerit, omnia sua solus peccata saltem semel in anno fideliter
confiteatur proprio sacerdoti, etc. Every Christian of both kinds, when he
shall come to the years of discretion, shall by himself confess all his
sins at the least once in the year to his own proper priest, and fulfill the
penance enjoined unto him: These be the words of this new law.

Is not this a most wicked law to bind the poor penitent sinner unto one
only priest? And I pray you, who is able to confess all his sins unto the
priest? Does not the Prophet Jeremy cry: prauum est cor hominis et
inscrutabile: The heart of man is wicked and unsearchable? Does not David singe:
Delicta quis intelligit? ab occultis meis munda me Domine: Who understands
his offenses? cleanse me, Lord, from sins hidden from me.

Again in other place David says: Si iniquitate^ obseruaueris, Domine, domine
quis sustinebit? If thou, O Lord, straightly markest iniquity O Lord who shall
abide it? It is impossible for man to confess all his faults. Therefore this
their new law does nothing else but drive and drown me^ in the bottom of
desperation.

Obiectio.
There be scriptures, which do confirm this auricular confession, as yt saying
of Christ spoken to the leaper; Go and show thy self to the priest.

Responsio.
This place makes rather against their confession, than with it. For the
leaper was healed before he came to the priest. But the sinner (say they) is
not healed nor absolved before he go from the priest. And Beda writes, that by
the leapers are only signified heretics. If therefore they will estalish their
confession auricular, by the history of the leapers, the^ must none confess
themselves unto the priest, but only heretics. And thus ye may see how they
cast doung in their own eyes.

They do not only most shamefully detort this piece of scripture, contrary to
the native sense, but al other places of scripture which they are wont to
allege. Of many I will bring but one.

Bonauenture in his commentaries upon the master of the sentences, Lib. 4.
did. 17 quaest. ^
frames, or rather faineth two things to be in confession: the one he calls
formale, that is, absolution. And this was institute of the Lord, when he gave
the keys to the Disciyles. The other he calls materiale, that is, ye
detection and opening of sin. And he says, that the Lord did not institute
this part by him self, but did only insinuate it.

Then Bonauenture adds these words: Confession was insinuate of the Lord,
institute of the Apostles, and promulgate of S. James bishop of Jerusalem. For
as he did promulgate the sentence for not observing the legal ceremonies: so
did he inioyne confession to al sinners, when he said: Confiteminialterutrum
peccata vestra: Confess your sins one to an other. Thus much Bonauenture.

Who will not maruail, nay who may not rather lament the blindness of that
world? What is not to wrest the scriptures, if this be not? It is most
evident, that the Apostle James speaks not here of auricular confession, but
of that confession wherewith one neighbor does confess, and reconcile himself
to an other, when one has offended an other, and do pray one for the other.
There be two words in this saying of the Apostle, which being diligently
expended and weighed, will cause them to be laughed to scorn. First the
apostle uses this word (...), which signifies mutually, by course, one after
an other, and as ye would say, reciproce: Vvhervpo^ we may gather this: if the
lay men be commanded by this place of ^ames to confess themselves to the
priests: Then must ye priests by course confess themselves to the lay men.
For that is to confess themselves one to an other, as the Greek word (...),
imports. But if it do grieve the priest so to do, the^ let them acknowledge
this place of James to mak^ nothing for their auricular confession.

Furthermore, James says afterward: pray one for another, that you may be
saved. For he does couple and knitte, a^ it were under one yoke confession and
prayer. VVhereupon we may gather thus: If we must confess only to the
priests, than we must pray only for priests. But we must not pray only for
the priests: Ergo neither we ought to confess only to the priests. And thus
you may plainly se, that these scriptures which they allege for their purpose,
makes nothing for auricular confession.

Respect of persons. 17.
Thomas secu^da secundae. 4 83. art. 4.
REspect of persons is called in the Greek tongue, (...). And it is defined of
the scolastical divines after this manner: Acceptio personarum est inaequalitas
iustitia distributiuae in quantum aliquid attribuitur alicui praeter
proportionem. Respect of persons is inequality of justice distributive, when
any thing is attributed to any person beside proportion and equality.

Cap. 19.
God says in Leuiticus: Non consideres personam pauperis, nec honores vultum
potentis: Thou shall not favor the person of the poor, nor honor the person
of the mighty, but thou shall judge thy neighbor justly.

Cap. 5.
It is commanded in Ecclesiasticus: Iustifica pusillum et magum similiter:
Justify the weak and mighty a like.

Romans 2. Cap. 2.
S. Paul says. There is none acception of persons with God.

Have no respect of persons says James, in matters of faith.

Saint Austen, concerning this matter, writes thus: Si hanc distantiam sedendi
et standi ad honores ecclesiasticos referamus. etc. If we refer the distance of
sitting and standing to ecclesiastical honors, it is to be counted no light
sin to respect faith in respect of persons. For who might suffer a rich man
to be chosen to ye seat of the honor of the church, and to contemn and
despise a poor man being better learned and more holy?

Ad Pammachium.
Saint Hierom says: Nec bonis aduersariorum, si honestum quid habuerint,
detrahendum, nec amicorum laudanda sunt vitia. etc. Neither any thing is to be
taken nor detracted from our adversaries, if they have any honest thing, nor
the faults of our friends ar to be praised, but every thing is to be judged,
not by weing ye persons, but by expe^ding the matters

Lib. 4. de summo bono.
Isidorus says: Iudices iniqui errant a veritate sente^tiae, dum intendu^t
q^alitatem personae. etc. Unrighteous judges do err from the verity of the
sentence, while they consider the quality of the person, and do oftimes vex
and grieve the righteous, when unjustly they defend the wicked.

Lib. 2.. vili. conditioni^. humanae.
Innocentius has two goodly and golden saings against respect of persons. The
first is this: Vos non attenditis merita causarum, sed personar^^, non iura,
sed munera, non quod ratio dicter, sed quod voluntas affectet, n^^ quod
sentiat, sed quod men's cupiat, non quod liceat, sed quod libeat. etc. You do
not consider the merits of the causes, but of the persons, not the right^^, but
the rewards, not that reason prescribes, but that the will affects not that
the mind judges, but that it desires, not ye which is lawful, but that which
likes and pleases.

The other saying has no less grace then the former: Clamat pauper, et nullus
exaudit, loquitur dives, et quilibet applaudit. etc. That is: the poor man
cries, and no man hears, the rich man speaks, and every man flattereth,
the rich man speaks, and al do consent, and extol his words even to the
clouds, the poor man speaks, and they say, who is this? They say to the
rich man, sit thou here, they say to the poor man, stand thou there.

Xenocrates, seeing a certain thief lead to the galowes smiled and said: magni
fures minores morte damnant. Great thieves do condemn the less thieves to
death.

Iuuenalis has for this purpose a very meet verse.

Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas. Sat. 2.

The law vexes Dooues with penalty,
But she sets the Ravens at liberty.
Lie and Liar. 18.
OF lies there be three kinds, that is: Mendacium. Iocosum. Officiosum.
Perniciosum.


The first is called mendacium iocosum, a pleasant or sporting lie, as for
example: when I say that I do lie, and other men do know that I do lie, and
thereby do take some profit, or rather pleasure. This kind of lie (although it
be no great sin) yet it has very much leuity, which the Apostle reproves in
Christians, as appears in the epistle to the Ephesians. Cap. 5.
I do not judge that fables, parables, and fained narrations are to be referred
to this kind, which as the scripture in many places applies to very weighty
matters: so they have in them much grace, necessitye, and profit. Saint
Augustine does not place jest in words among lies.

The second kind of lies is called mendacium officiosum, a dutiful lie, if I
may so call it* As for example: when I do feign or tell an untroth for duties
sake, that is, that I may put away some great evil that might happen and
chance to my neighbor. Of this kind there he many examples in the holy
scriptures.

The midwiues of the Egiptians did save a live the new borne male children of
the Hebrews, which Pharao had commanded to be slain: and being accused before
the king, of breking and transgressing the law, they pretended by a dutiful and
witty lie a certain marvelous celeritie of bringing forth children, wherein
they much excelled the Egiptia^ women.

Rahab the harlot by a wonderful lie did mock the Citizens of Jericho, and by
lying did save the spies of the people of God.

Michol also did save her husband David by a lie, and sent away her father
Saules servant void of their purpose.

The holy woman Judith by lieng and dissimulation entered into Holofernes tent,
slew him, and delivered the people of God from affliction.

Furthermore, the ancient divines did dispute whether those whom we have
alleged have sinned or no, by lying and dissimulation.

Origin with his folowers, did permit and suffer a good man to lie, so that it
were profitable to them, for whose sake it was done. And Saint Hierom is
thought to favor Origens judgment. For he affirms that Peter and Paul did
for the time dissemble. In epist. ad Gala.
But Saint Austine admonished Hierome thereof, denying that the scripture would
admit any manner of lie. Saint Hierome contrariwise answered, that the best
interpreters in the primative church were of his judgment. There were learned
and long Epistles sent from them both to and fro: Which Epistles, seeing that
they are now extant, it needs not that I do dwell long in this matter.

Lib. cont. me^dacium. ca. 15
The same saint Augustine said: Nihil iudicandus est dicere, qui dicit aliqua
iusta esse mandacia, nisi aliqua iusta esse peccata, ac per hoc aliqua iusta
esse quae iniusta su^t. That is to say: he is judged to say nothing, which
says that some lies are just and right, unless he say that some sins are
just, and so by this that some things are just, which be unjust. What I pray
you can be spoken more absurdly than this? For whereof does sin take her name,
but in that it is contrary to righteousness? Now, those things that are done
against the law of God can not be just. The prophet David says unto God: Lex
tua veritas. Thy law is truth: Now sin, for as much as it is against truth,
cannot be righteous. For who doubts that every lie is not against the truth?
Therefore no lie may be called just.

Furthermore, other learned and godly men do judge Saint Augustine to speak
to sinister lie and obstinately against all kind of lies. Therefore, there be
some that, as it were going in the mid way, do not acquit these men (whose
examples I brought in) from al manner of sin, but do count lying to be a light
and small offense.

This is also an other example of a duetyfull lie, when a Physician affirms
that a sickeman, which is very weak, is not grieved with so dangerous a
disease, as he himself imagines, that thereby he may put him in hope to
recover his health, and that he may the less increase his sickensse by taking
thought. Also, when a Pastor or Curate affirms him self to have been
tempted, and to have escaped and overcome temptation, by the help of God
(although he do feign it) that he might the more effectually comfort him that
is afflicted and tempted, and might make him to hope, that he also should
shortly avoid the same temptation by the help of God.

The third kind of lie is called perniciosum mendacium, a pernicious lie,
because it comes out of an evil heart, and tends to the hurt of the
neighbor which deserved no harm. This kind is utterly condemned in all the
scriptures, and her fault increases according to the greatness of the
detriment. For false teachers do most perniciouslye lie, when with their false
and corrupt doctrine they do destroy men's souls, and bring upon their bodies
and goods the curse of God, with manifold perils and dangers.

To this kind perteyneth hypocrisy, which our savior Christ in the gospel
does greatly rebuke. But hypocrisy appears not only in deceiptfull words,
but most of all in the whole conversation of life, as when we do feign those
things to be, which are not, and so do lie unto God, and deceive our
neighbor.

Traditions. 19.
THE ancient fathers make mention of many traditions. First in the time of
Tertullian this tradition was used, that they should give honey and milk to
children, immediately after their baptism, vt (as he terms it) infantarentur.

In the time of saint Augustine and Ciprian this tradition was used, that the
Eucharistie, yea under both kinds, should be given to infantes, as necessary
to salvation.

Epiphanius says, that it was a tradition of the Apostles, In doct.
compendiaria aduersus haereses.
that the fridaye should be fasted, because Christ suffered on a fridaye.
Likewise, that the thursdaye should be fasted, because Christ on that day was
taken up into heaven, and when he was conversant in earth with his disciples
said, that they should not fast so long as they had their bridgrome with them,
but when the bridgrome should be taken from them, then they should fast.

Epiphanius also in the same place writes, Aug. in epist ad Cassolanu
and saint Austen confirms the same, that there was a tradition, not to fast
from Easter unto Pentecoste. Lib. de spiritu sancto.


There was an other tradition (as Basilius writes) that between Easter and
Pentecoste God should not be worshipped with bowing the knee, which tradition
was also observed on sondayes. There was a tradition of the Apostles at Ephesus
and in Asia, that Easter should be solemnized after the manner and custom of
the Jews. In the church of Rome the Apostolical tradition was said to be
otherwise.

Therefore, forasmuch as the traditions are so diverse, and do so much dissent
among them selves, they can not be the traditions of Paul or of the Apostles.
For Paul says, that in all places, and in every Church he taught one and the
self same doctrine. Whereupon Ciprian writes, that he would not admit any
traditions, which are not found in the gospel, or in the acts and epistles
of the Apostles. To the which I add those traditions which are necessarily
brought out of the sacred scripture. Other traditions (what soever they be) are
uncertain, and not used in all places. Wherefore, if a just consent ought to
be kept in the church, we must needs cleave firmlie and constantlye to the
scripture only.

I will bring one tradition more, by the which you may know what all the
residue are. Ireneus speaking of Christ said: Non ergo multu^ aberat a
quinquaginta annis. Lib. cont. Valentinianos 2. cap. 40. Lib. 2. ca. 36.
Et ideo dicebant ei: Quinquaginta annorum nondum es, and Abraham vidisti? that
is. He was not far from the age of.50. years. And therefore, they said unto
him: Thou art not yet 50. years old, and have thou seen Abraham? And he
confirms this his opinion by the Apostolical tradition, saying: From forty
or fifty year old he grew elder, in which age our Lord taught: as the
gospel and all the elders testify, which came to John the disciple of the
Lord, that John declared the same unto them. And our savior Christ lived unto
Traianes time. Furthermore, some of the elders saw not only John, but also the
other Apostles, and heard the same of them, and do bear witness of this
relation.

These be Ireneus his words, which is of the number of the most ancient
writers: But if we should receive and admit that tradition, there would ensue
a marvelous confusion (that I may say nothing else) of times also. For after
that account, the Lord Jesus came almost to the age of.50. years (let us
grant.48.) then it shall follow that he preached.18. years: when contrary
wise it appears plainly enough, that he began to preach about the.15. year
of the Empire of Tiberius. And in the.30. year of his own age. And they which
do account the time of Christ thoroughly, follow none other supputation. But
according to the Apostolical tradition (after the relation of Ireneus) Christ
should have died, risen again, ascended into heaven, and to have sent the
holy ghost in the seventh or eight year of Claudius the Emperor. But the
very order and discourse of the Evangelical history, and of the acts of the
Apostles do repugne to that supputation. For in the time of Claudius, Paul had
much to do. In that time also a great and sharp famine troubled the whole
world.

Therefore, the tradition which Ireneus records, does most shamefully deceive,
and is utterly false. Who therefore, after this foul error of tradition
perceived, would believe hereafter any traditions, yea be they reported to be
never so ancient? It may be that this tradition was taken out of Papias. For
as Papias did attribute much to lively tradicions (wherewith he was
meruailously delighted) so he had his folowers, Ireneus, Appollinarius,
Lactantius, and certain other through the reverence of antiquity in the error
of the Millinaries. Of the which heresy Papias (as some do write) laid the
first foundation.

Eusebius that learned Bishop does not attribute much unto ye judgment of
Papias, but says in plain words, that he wrote many fabulous things,

Lamb. 20.
PEter by the similitude of the lamb does signify that we have performed in
Christ and by Christ whatsoever was signified in the sacrifices of the old
testament. Peter specially alludeth to the paschall lamb And here we may
learn how greatly it proffiteth us to read the old testament. For although
the old manner of sacrificing is abolished, yet it does greatly help our faith
to confer and compare the verity with the figures, that we may seek and
find in this, whatsoever was contained in those figures.

Moses commanded to choose a lamb that was whole and without spot, to be
slain and sacrificed at the Pasche.

Peter does apply the same to Christ, and teaches that his sacrifice was most
lawful and approved before God. Because Christ was holy and pure from all
spotte of sin. For if he had had any one blemishe, he could not have been
offered rightly unto god, and less to have pacified gods wrath.

A comparison between Christ and the paschal lamb.
The lamb was male, and of the age of one year. Christ is strong and mighty,
the same to day, yesterdaye, and the same for ever.

The lamb was taken out of the lambs or kiddes. Christ came of sinners and
unrighteous men, as it is written in Mathewe.

The church of the Israelites were spared through the blood of the lamb. Cap.
8.
Through the blood of Christ being shed, the whole church was cleansed and
saved.

They be eaten spedilye and without taryinge: Christ is to be eaten by faith
with great desire, and without delay of time.

With the lamb were eaten sour herbs and unleavened bread.

The faithful christian ought to repent him of his evil life paste, and to
give him self to purity of life.

They did eat the lamb standing, having their loins girded, and holding
staves in their hands. This was the manner of waifaring men.

So we ought to behave our selves in this present world as pilgrims, to
contemn the world, and to seek for our country which is in heaven. And in
our journey to give our selves to temperauncie, and to have our feet shodde
with the gospel of peace: and to lean to the staff of gods help and mercy.
And to hasten with all festination from the seruiuitude and corruption of
sin. Let us wear the wolle of this lamb, that is, put upon us the holy
conversation of Christ. Let us nourishe our selves with the moistnes of this
lamb, that is with Christ's doctrine. Let us eat the flesh of this lamb,
that is: Let us comfort and make our selves strong with the worthy receiuynge
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.

All his blood. 21.
ALthough the question be superfluous, whether Christ resumed again when he
rose from death, all his blood which he did shed in the time before his death,
as some writers do hold: yet I will show in a word or two what saint
Austen, and other divines, and also what the scholemen did write of the age and
quantity of the bodies when they shall rise again, and of such particular
parts, which the bodies shall take again at the time of their risyng from
death.

For the first, saint Austen in his book de ciuitate dei, writes afafter his
manner. Lib. 22. ca. 15,
Restat vt suam recipiat quisque mensuram, vel quam habuit in iuuentute (etiam
si senex est mortuus) vel fuerat habiturus si ante est defunctus, etc. It
remains therefore that every man shall receive that measure which he had,
either in his youth (yea although he died an old man) or else which he should
have had, if he died before he came to the perfect state of youth. Ephe. 4.
And that which the Apostle Paul records of the measure of the age of the
fulness of Christ, is either to be understand, that the measure of his age may
be fulfilled, when the perfection of all the members in the Christian people
came to the same head: or else (if it be spoken of the resurrection of the
bodies) let us take it so spoken, that the bodies of the dead shall rise,
neither above nor under the perfect form and state of the iuuenile age: but
they shall rise in the same age and strength, unto the which we know Christ
to have come. Great learned men do define this iuuenile age to be about the
years of thirtye.

Therefore this place of Paul is not spoken concerning the measure of the
body, or of the stature, but for the measure or age of the fulness of Christ.
Hactenus Augustinus.

The master of the sentence seems to agree to the same, whose words be these:
Omnes in eade^ aetate resurgent, in qua Christus mortuus est, and resurrexit,
cuiuscu^que aetatis mortui fuerint. All shall rise again in that age in which
Christ died and rose again, in what age soever they died.

But although the age of all that rise shall be one and like, yet the stature and
quantity shall be diverse, that is, they shall have the same stature and
quantity which they had in their iuuenile age, or should have had if they died
before. For of the substance (of which the flesh of man is made) nothing shall
perish. But all the particular parts, which were dispersed before, gathered
together, the natural substance of the body shall be redintegrate and made
whole again. Thus much for the first.

Now for the second: Concerning every part that was in the body, the
scholemen and specially Bonauenture, disputing pro and contra, makes many
words. He demands whether the humors shall rise again in the body? He
concludes, quod sic: he demands whether the very blood rose again in the
body of Christ, and shall rise again in our bodies? He does conclude, quod
sic, and confirms the same by the authority of saint Ambrose, whose words
be these. Notum nobis facia^t quemadmodum in exanimae iam corpus and frigidum
se calor insinuauerit, spiritus ingesserit, sanguis infuderit etc. that is. Let
them signify unto us, how heat did insinuate her self, how the spirit did
put in it self, and how the blood did pour in it self into a cold body, and
body without life.

Bonauenture answering them, which do obiecte, In lib. 4. disti chon. 44.
that the humors and blood are not of the verity of man's nature, does make
three distinctions how any thing is of the verity of the nature of man.
Either (says he) it is of the verity of man's nature, concerning esse
necessarium, as all the principal members, or else, quoad esse integrum and
completum, as all these parts be which make the perfection of the body: or
else, quoad esse decorum, as which that makes to the comlines and beauty of
the body. And by this he concludes, that the humors and blood, which makes
to the fulness and integrity of the body, shall rise again in such quantity,
as is competent and convenient unto the body. And by this appears (says he)
that all the blood whith goes from us either by flebytynge or letting of blood,
or by any other means, shall not rise all and wholly again, but so much as is
mete and agreeable to the body. Haec Bonauentura.

Saint Austen demands, what he shall answer to the hears and nails,
whether they shall rise again, and every part of them shall be restored to the
body? and makes this answer. Lib. de ciuit. dei. 22. cap. 19
Quapropter si capilli toties tonsi, vnguesue desecti ad loca sua deformiter
redeunt, non redibunt. Wherefore if the hears so often shorn or cut, and the
nails so often pared do with deformity come again to their places, they shall
not come again. For no deformity shall be in the body.

And where the Lord says. Capillus capitis nostri non peribit. One hear of
our head shall not perish: non de longitudine (says saint Austen) sed de
numero capillorum dictum est. It is not spoken of the length of the hears, but
of the nombre of them. VVherof it is said in an other place. Capilli capitis
vestri numerati sunt omnes. All the hears of your head are nombred. And thus
may you see by the mind of saint Austen, that neither deformity nor
superfluity shall rise again with the body, but so much only as is congruent
and comely, no part of the substance of the body diminished.

Takes away sins. 22.
IT is in the greek (...), id est peccatum mundi, the sin of the world, in
the singular nombre. And the Euangeliste does express more by using the
singular nombre, then if he should have said, peccata mundi, the sins of
the world, in the plural nombre. This lamb is innocence it self, and only
he takes away sin from his, that is, takes away the tirannie and power of
all sins, that now there be no sin in the^. For as John in his epistle
calls malignitie the sin of all impiety, and (as it were) a world of all
sins, when he writes that the world is set in wickedness: so he calls here
the sin of the world, the sincke of all mischief.

Orig. hom. in Nomerio. Aug. cont. Faust. Lib. 22 cap. 30.
Origin, saint Austen, and Thomas, do read this place in the singular nombre,
peccatum, and non peccata. One thing also is here worthy to be noted, that
is, that the Euangeliste does say: (...). id est, tollit, he takes away,
that is, either because he utterly takes it away, or does lay it upon him
self. For we take up burdens which we lay upon our selves.

Chrysostom very well notes the present tence of the verb, because the
Euangeliste said not, tulit, or, tollet, but tollit, has taken away, or shall
take away, but does take, because all purgations of sins do always come
from him. As for example: When we do say: Helleborus does purge the brain, we
signify by these words that perpetual and natural strength and power to
purge the head is in Helleborus.

Vvherof there be two kinds, the one is called Helleborus albus, that is,
neesinge powder, the other is called Helleborus niger, which they call
setworte. And Helleborum edere, is a proverb, spoken to men which are very
melancholic, or be wild brained.

So long ere he came. 23.
CVrious and busy heddes which will take upon them to dispute with God) might
demand why it was so long ere God sent his son into the world, and
suffered all the world, sauinge the nation of the Jews, to live in idolatry,
and darcknes, by the space of 3000. years or more, before Christ came into the
world to give light? To whom three aunswers may be made: Romans 9. Ibidem.
First we may say to them with saint Paul: O man what art thou which
pleadest against God? Again: O the depenes of the riches, both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
paste findyng out?

Secondly, they may be answered by the saying of saint Paul in an other
place, where he writes thus. Cala. 5.
When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his son made of a
woman, and made under the law, that he might redeem them which were under the
law.

Thirdly and finally, this answer would suffice and satisfy a Godly quiet
head: Quia deo sic fuit complacitum. Because it so pleased God.

The like captious and curiouse heds we have in these days, which
contemptuously and scornefullye do demand of them which profess the purity
of the gospel: Where was your church before the time of Luther and Zuingius?
where was your church 60 years paste? as though God had had no church, but
such a church as the Pope had fashioned and framed unto him with the gloriouse
note or badge of universality. As though god could or did never reserve to him
self a church, unless the company thereof had been the greater sort and most
part of the world. And yet in the scripture it is manifest, that when all the
governors of ye church (as well the prince as the priest) did degenerat and
swerve from the true worshipping of God: yet God had a church, although it were
not so universal, as the Pope would have it. In the time of Achas King of
Judah, who was seen to be of the church, but Esaias and a few other? In the time
of Manasses sincere doctrine, celebration of the sacraments, were utterly
exiled, and this defection continued until the time of Josias: yet there
remained in the church some prophets although they were few. In the time of
Jeroboam King of Israel, who was seen to be of the church, but only Amos, the
shephearde or heard man which delivered the true doctrine of God? In the time
of Achab who were of the church, but only Elias and Micheas.

And yet answer was made to Elias by God, that he had left unto him
self.7000. that had never bowed them selves to Baal.

So it is not to be doubted, but that God did reserve some to be of his church,
although they were not so counted in all the time in which ye tyranny of the
Pope and his accomplices took the chiefest place. In so much that our enemies
need not to imbraid us, that this religion, which we now profess, was not
neither known nor professed before the time of Luther and Zuinglius. For there
were many which did not only confess, but also openly professed the purity
of the gospel long before the time either of Zuinglius or of Luther. As
Bertramus, and one Johannes Philosophus, cognomento Scotus, which was in
Bertramus time, which two lived almost.700. years ago. And after them
Berengarius, and after him came Johannes Hus, and Hieronymus de Praga, which
were condemned be the council of Constaunce for the profession of the Gospel:
beside many other which are recited in the book of Acts and monuments done in
the church lately setforth by the Godly and learned man master Fox.

But this religion is now (thanks be to God) more generally known and
professed, then it has been heretofore. Therefore if the enemies will ask why
the light of the gospel was not so generally known before, as it is was since
Luther began to write: Let them content them selves with this answer, quod
deo sic placuit, because it so pleased God. If they will go further, they show
them selves to be but busy bodies, who will never be answered nor satisfied.

Adonai. 24.
ADon signifies in Hebrew Dominum, and Adonai is dominus meus. The Jews did
always place Adonai in steed of Iehoua. But when it signifies a creature, it
is written with patha under nun. But when it is spoken of God the creator, it
is written with caemets, and adonai is put either for the singular nombre
absolutely, or else it is set pro domino meo. And when it is put in the plural
nombre, it is honoris gratia, for honors sake.

Secondly it signignifieth basim, that is, the foot of a pillar, or that
susteineth any thing: Cap, 26.
as it is used in Exodus. Et quadraginta bases argenteas facies sub viginti
tabulis. Thou shalt make forty sokets of silver under the twenty bords. But
in this signification it is pointed with Segol.

Given me to judge. 25.
Joan. 8.
CHrist says in the gospel of John: Ego non iudico quenquam I do judge no man.
Again he says in John: Pater omne iudicium dedit filio: The father has given
all judgment to the son. These two places (if they be carnally understand)
do greatly dissent: but they may be reconciled, if you understand the^
spiritually. For Christ does condemn the carnal and temerouse judgment of
the Jews, which did judge without respect and perfect knowledge of the
cause, saying unto them: vos secundum carnem iudicatis. You do judge after the
flesh, and do think that my judgment is carnal, and not godly and
spiritual. I do not judge any man after this manner, that is, according to the
eye sight. For I do judge according to the heart and mind, Esaias. 11.
not according to the outward person. And if I judge, my judgment is true and
right, because it is the fathers. I alone do not judge, but I and my father
which sent me, do judge. The father and I are one. The father has given all
judgment to the son. Therefore I do not judge, the judgment of the father
and the son is one. I do nothing by man's rashness, and therefore my judgment
is not wrongful. The fathers worckes and mine be common, the one does nothing
without the other. If I do judge, I do it not alone, but I and the father which
sent me. I am come to save the world, and to preach the gospel, not to
condemn the world. I came into the world as a savior: not a judge. He that
beleuetb in me or my word, shall be saved, and he that does not believe, shall be
condemned. Therefore thou condemnest thy self (O man) which continuest in
infidelity. If any man shall hear my word, and not believe it, I do not judge
him: the word which I have spoken, shall judge him at the last day. Joan. 12.


Knee should bow. 26.
Saint Paul writes to the Philippians, that God gave unto Christ a name
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of
things in heaven, and of things in earth, and things under the earth. Nomen,
name, in this place is taken for dignity and honor, and so it is used almost
in all tongues, especially in the scriptures it is a familiar speech. Paul
therefore by this word name, signifies high and great power to be given unto
Christ, and christ to be set in the chiefest degree of honor, that there may no
dignity be found like, either in heaven or in earth.

It is to be wondered of some which do coactly restrain this sentence of Paul
to the two sillables of this name Jesus Paul speaks of the whole Majesty of
Christ. For they which do consider and have no further respect, but only to
the two sillables of the name, do like as one would discuss and find out by
this word Alexander, the great prowess of the name which Alexander gatte him.
But I pray you how much more foolish are ye Sorbonists, which gather by this
place of Paul that the knee is to be bowed, as often as this name Jesus is
pronounced? As though this word were a word which had in the very sound all
the power included. But Paul speaks here of the honor which is to be given
to the son of God, and to his majesty, and not to the sillables either
sounded or written. And in this behalf how much (I pay you) did the
peltynge pardoners deceive the people in selling this name in golden or
painted papers. As though they might retain either remission of sins, or else
the savor of God there by. Notwithstanding, it is not to be gaynesaid, but that
bowing of the knee, and puttinge of of the cap are symboles of the honor or
reverence to be given to the majesty of Christ, when this name is heard. And
he that uses these symboles ought not to stand and stay only in the
sillables of the name. But to lift up his mind with great reverence to be
given to the majesty of the person, who is so named. As for example: when we
hear the Queen named in any solemn assembly, we do our obeysaunce in vailyng
our bonets, which we do not unto the letters written in this word Queen, or
to the word it self, but unto her highness authority and royal estate.

Petrus Galatinus, writes that never man was named Iesuah, id est, Jesus. But
only Christ the son of God, and says, that Iosue the son of Naue, and
Jesus the son of Sirach, and Jesus Iosedech were called corruptlye Jesus:
because their name is read in Hebrew not Iesua, but Iehosua: And that Iesua by
interpretation betokens salvation or savior, which pertains only to the
son of God: And that Iehosua does signify by interpretation Deus saluauit.
Although (says he) these three men named Iehosua do bear the figure of true
Jesus: for as Naue that strong and mighty man ouerco^minge his enemies,
brought the children of Israel into the land of promise, and as the most wise
doctor the son of Sirach gave in his time many godly and wise lessons: And
as the holy priest Jesus Iosedech did restore and build the temple of the
Lord: So Christ the true Jesus (the enemies of mankind bring vanquished by
his strength) brought his faithful into the celestial land, and by his
wisdom did illuminate the world, clensing it from error, and by his holiness
(as being a priest for ever) did build him a spiritual temple of lively
stones, that is, the church or congregation of the faithful. Haec Galatinus.

Our high Priest. 27.
AN high priest is called in latin Pontifex, and so called (as Scaeuola,
writes) a posse et facere, as you would say one that is able to do: or (as
Varro writes) it comes, a ponte and facere, to make a bridge: because the
bridge in Rome called pons sublicius, was made first of the priests, and
oftentimes repaired. Now sublica, or sublicium, betokens a proppe, a shore, a
post, or other like thing to keep a thing up. It signifies also a pile
driven into the ground for buildyng, whereof comes this adjective sublicius,
that is, made of piles or posts of timber. And therefore that bridge at Rome
was called pons sublicius: because it was made on piles.

Saint Paul in the epistle to the Hebrews does show that the dignity of our
high priest Christ (concerning his person) is far above the dignity of the
high priest of the old Testament in three things: 1. Gratiae plenitudine. 2.
Fideli intercessione. 3. Efficaci mediatione.


Concerning the first, our high priest is called Christus, which betokens in
latin vnctus, anointed. For God the father has anointed him with the holy
ghost and all power. In him dwells all the fulness of the godhead corporally.
Again, the prophet David says: vnxit te deus, deus tuus oleo laetitiae prae
consortibus tuis. Col. 2. psalm,
God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy felows. Of
the fulness of this ointment all have taken. For the ointment from the head of
the high priest Christ, did not only descend into his bearde, that is, unto
his Apostles and disciples, which being very nigh unto Christ, were joined unto
him as his bearde: but also into the skirtes of his garmente, that is, into the
extreme and miserably members of his faithful flock. By this ointment are
understand all the gifts of grace, as of mercy, meekenes and liberality.

Furthermore by this name Christ, that is, anointed, is signified both the
natures of Christ, that is, the humane and the divine nature, that Christ as
true and very man did receive the unction, and as God did give the ointment.

Finally the high priest of the old Testament was only man, but Christ was
both God and man.

Concerning the second, the dignity of the person of Christ does far excel
the priest of the old testament, in the faithful intercession for us unto the
father. For Paul says Christus assistens, Christ assisting, that is, being at
the right hand of God the father, does not only make interpellatio^ for us,
but also standing and assisting, does offer and exhibit his help unto us, when
we have fallen and be in danger, as John the Apostle says in his epistle: We
have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the righteouse, and he is the
propitiation for our sins.

Concerning the third, the dignity of the person of Christ is showed to be
far above the high priest of the old testament, in obteininge the end which
every man wishes for. And this is noted by this word pontifex, which
touching the etymologye of the word does signify factorem pontis, a bridge
maker. And he that makes the bridge, shoots at this mark, that the
wayfaringe man may pass over the water, from one bancke to an other. Now
Christ is the only mediator between God and man: who says: Nemo venit ad
patrem, nisi per me. No man comes to the father, but by me, I am the way, I
am the bridge, by whom only ye may pass through the bancke of misery, to
the bancke of felicity.

Now Christ again does excel the high priest of the old Testament in the
dignity of place. For the high priest of the old Testament went into a
temple made with man's hand, but Christ our high priest entered into a temple
not made with man's hand, that is, into heaven it self, which Paul calls a
greater tabernacle: partly, because it received more then the earthly
tabernacle, partly, because it concerns the greatness of heavenly treasures.

Finally, Christ does excel the high priest of the old Testament in a manner
of mediatio^, far more worthy then the rites and ceremonies of the old
Testament. For the priest of the old Testament when he should pray for the
people, entered not into the inward tabernacle once for all, but every year
once. Christ entered in once for all obteynyng redemption, and with one oblation
made perfect for ever them that are sanctified. Therefore Christ our high
priest is that lamb which was slain from the beginning of the world which
was verified in righteous Abel, Lib. 22. ca. 15,
bearing a type of Christ.

Again, the priest of the old Testament entered into the tabernacle with the
blood of beasts as of goats, and of calves, and the blood of other beasts.
But Christ entered into the tabernacle with his own blood. Whereupon the
prophet David says: Ephe. 4.
Holocaustum pro peccato non postulasti etc. Thou requirest no burnt sacrifice
for sin. Then he said: Ecce venio. Behold I come, that is to say: I will an
oblation and sacrifice for the sin of the world, which could by no means be
purged and cleansed by the blood of beasts.

Last of all the high priest of the old Testament did give only temporal and
frail things, and prayed only for temporal things to be put away. But Christ
our high priest gave eternal things which shall never fade nor fall away. The
high priest of the old Testament made intercession only for the nation of the
Jews. But Christ made intercession for the salvation of all mankind.

Shoot anchor. 28.
SAcram ancorem soluere, in greek, (...), is a proverb, used when we fly
unto the uttermost refuge. It is translated from shipmen which do call the
greatest and strongest ancor, sacram, the holy ancor which they then cast
forth, when they are in extreme danger.

Lucianus uses this proverb saying: In Jove tra gaedo.
Audi iam sacram (vt aiunt) ancorom, quanquam nulla vi queas abrumpere. Hear
thou now the holy or shoot ancor (as they call it) which thou art able to
break with no violence. For so he terms an argument which cannot be
dissolved.

Euripides says likewise. Mihi ab vnica fortuna pendet ancora: In hecuba.
My fortune does depend of one only anchor, that is, one only hope remains
unto me. De Lazaro concionc. 4.


Chrysostom does call the conscience (...): because she does never suffer man
to be taken away with the violence of lusts (as it were) with a storm of
winds, but always does resist them.

Ancoras tollere, is prouerbially spoken, to entend to go away, as the shipmen
do when they take up their ancors, meaning to remove.

Fruit hundredfold. 29.
WHen Christ had told the parable of the sede unto a great multitude, and had
applied the same parable of the diversity of seeds unto the hearers of the
Gospel: He did at the last compare the sede in the good ground, to him that
hears the word, and understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings
forth some an hundredth fold, some sixty fold, and some thirty fold.

Here may be a question moved, what is meant by the diverse numbers of fruits,
as a hundred, sixty, and thirty.

Some of the old writers do expound this same diversely, and do wrest and writhe
it to a marvelous strange sense.

Some of them attribute a hundredth fold fruit to virginity, In quaest.
Euangelii. ca. 9
the sixty fold fruit to widowhood, and to the married persons thirty fold. Of
this opinion is saint Augustine.

Other do ascribe an hundred fold to Martyrs, sixty fold to Virgins, thirty
fold to widows, and to matrimony they attribute nothing. As though (to be
married) were to be counted that kind of life which is not acceptable unto God,
but as a thing only suffered by permission, yea and some writers were not
ashamed to define (to be in wedlock) is nothing else but to be in the flesh,
and to serve wantonness. But what other thing is this (as saint Paul says) but
the very doctrine of devils?

Theophilactus ascribes these fruits, the hundred fold to Anchorits, the sixty
fold to Monks, and the thirty fold to married persons. But this kind of
interpretation, are not to assign the fruits of the Gospel preached, but to
commend the states of certain men, which are had in admiration. As though
Christ here should entreat of rewards to be given to them which embrace piety
and godliness. But here is nothing less meant then of rewards to be received in
the life to come: but of the fruits to be given in this life out of the word of
God. Here is nothing meant what fruits of piety, virgins, widows, married men,
Moonkes, or Heremites do bring forth, but how diversely the word of God brings
forth fruit in them that do believe. It may be said, that a faithful married
man may have an hundredth fold, and the virgin none, and that he which lives
in the world, may have an hundredth fold, and the Anchorite none.

Lib. 21. cap. Vltimo.
Saint Austine in his book De ciuitate dei, rehearses that certain had a more
foolish and more wicked opinion of this place, which expounded these fruits
so, that they said that every saint at the day of judgment, shall obtain and
redeem for his merits them that be damned, to whom God, through the diverse
merits of saints, should give eternal life. And of this mind were they which
thought that no man should be damned eternally, and which thought that the
saints were so merciful, that they would not suffer so many thousand souls to
be damned, but that they would pray unto God for them, that should be damned:
unto the which saints God cannot deny that which they require. Look more in
that place of saint Austine for this wicked and foolish opinion to be laughed
at.

But setting a part all such fond, false, and vain opinions contrary one to the
other, let us understand that the fruits of the word of God be these which
grow out of the word.

The similitude or parable it self declares no less. Wherefore is the seed
sown in the field, but that it may bring forth fruit in his kind? What other
thing should the seed of wheat bring forth, but grain and corn, according
to his nature and kind? So the Gospel preached, what other thing should it
bring forth out of a godly heart, then that which has in it self, that which
it teaches, and that which it delivers. Faith in Christ, amendment of the
former life, the knowledge of God, love toward God and our neigbbour, and such
other are sown and preached. And what other thing should the preaching of the
word of God bring forth, but such fruits?

That which Christ preaches of an hundred fold, sixty fold, and thirty fold,
is to be understand simpliciter: For that the Gospel does bring forth in one
faithful beleuer, more fruit, in an other less fruit, according to the measure
of the gift of God. Vvher we be admonished, not that one and the same measure
of faith, love, and piety, is to be looked for of all beleuers: but that the
same measure shall be different, which difference and equalitye makes not the
beleuers to be envied of God. He is no les beloved of God, which has thirty
fold, then he which has an hundred fold. He that wan two talents, heard also
these words: Euge serve bone, O good servant, enter into the joy of the Lord,
as well as he that had won five talents. Therefore they which be perfect, and do
bring forth an hundred fold, let them not contemn those which are not so
perfect, and bring forth only thirty fold. On the other side, they which be
infirm, and bring forth only thirty fold: let them not envy them which be
perfecter, and bring forth an hundredth fold.

Love. 30.
Love is called in latin Amor, in Greek (...), or (...), in hebrew Ahabah,
and it is divided into five kinds.

In Amorem dei, the love of God. Amorem proximi, the love of our neighbor.
Amorem patriae, the love of our country. Amorem seculi, the love of the world.
Amorem sui, the love of him self.


Love of God.
Love of God is both set forth in Deuteronomy, and also in Luke, Deuteronomy. 6.
Luke. 10.
where it is written: Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thine heart, with all
thy soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind.

Of this love speaks Saint Hierome saying: Faelix illa conscientia, ad
Demetriadem.
in cuius cord praeter amorem Christi, quae est sapientia, castitas, pacientia
atque iustitia, nullus alius versatur amor: Happy is the conscience of that
man, in whose heart beside the love of Christ (which is wisdom, chastity,
patience, and righteousness) none other love is conversant.

Saint Bernard upon the Canticles shows how God loves us, Sermo, 20.
and how we ought to love him, his words be these. Dilexit nos deus dulciter,
sapienter, fortiter, Dulciter, quod carnem induit, sapienter, quia culpam
cauit, fortiter, quia mortem sustinuit: Disce ergo Christian a Christo,
quomodo diligas Christum. Disce amare dulciter, ne illecti, prudenter, ne
decepti, fortiter: ne oppressi amore domini auertamur. That is to say: God
loved us swetely, wisely, and strongly, swetely in that he took upon him our
flesh: wisely and warely, for that we avoided sin: strongly, because he
sustained death. Learn thou of Christ (O Christian) how thou may love
Christ, learn to love swetely, to love wisely, to love strongly: swetely,
least being otherwise intised: wisely, least being deceived: strongly, least
being oppressed, we turn away from the love of the Lord.

Hugo shows the difference between the love of God, and the love of the world
after this manner: Amor mundi a principio dulcis esse videtur, sed finem amarum
habet: amor vero dei ab a maritudine incipit, sed vltima eius dulcedine plaena
sunt. The love of the world at the beginning seems to be sweet and pleasant,
but it has a sower end. Contrariwise ye love of God begins with bitterness,
but ye last end of it is full of sweetenes.

Love of neighbor.
The love of thy neighbor is set forth in infinite places of the scripture. I
will allege but only two.

The first is in Toby: Quod ab alio oderis fieri tibi, vide ne tu aliqua^do
alteri facias. That which thou hate to be done to thy self of an other, take heed that thou at any time do not the same to him. The like words spoke Christ
in the Gospel of Matthew: what soever you would that men should do unto you,
even so do ye to them.

Alexander Seuerus did set up in every corner of his palace this poisie: Quod
tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris: That thing which thou will not to be
done to thy self, do it not to an other man.

Romans 13.
The second place of scripture is written in the Epistle to the Romans. He that
loves another, has fufilled the law. For this: thou shall not commit
adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false
witness, thou shall not covet: and if there be any other commandment, it is
briefly comprehended in this saying, even this: Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self: Love does not evil to his neighbor, therefore is love the
fulfilling of the law.

De doctrina christiana.
Saint Austine says: Sola charitas est quae vincit omnia, and sine qua nihil
valent omnia, quae vbicunque fuerit, trahit ad se omnia: that is. Only love
and charity is that which vanquisheth all things, and without which althings
are naught worth: which love whersoeuer it shall be, it draws unto it althinges.

Again, in an other place he says: Non putes tunc amare seruum tuum, Super.
epist. Ioann.
quando eum non caedis: aut tunc amare filium tuum, quando ei non das
disciplinam: at tunc amarevicinum tuum, quando eum non corrigis. Non est ista
charitas, sed languor. Ferneat charitas ad emendandum and corrigendum. Si sunt
boni mores delectent, sin autem mali emendentur. That is to say: Do not think
that thou do then love thy servant, when thou do not beat him: or than
to love thy son, when thou do not chastise him, or than to love thy
neighbor, when thou do not correct him. This is not love, but faintnes.
Let love be fervent to amend and correct. If the manners and conversation be
good, let them delight thee, but if they be evil, let them be amended.

De form. vitae
We may conclude the love of our neighbor in these words of Seneca: Deum
amabis, si illum in hoc imitaberis, vt velis omnibus prodesse nulli nocere.
Thou shall love god, if you wilt follow him in this thing, to will to profit al
men, and to hurt no man.

Love of our country.
Concerning the love of our country, although I have spoken somewhat before in
the first Tome, yet I will bring in here what may be spoken of the country pro
et contra by two interloqutours. The first is named Philopatrios, the second is
called Misopatrios.

Philopatrios.
Your country you ought to have in such store,
That neither parents nor children you ought to love more.
And because against this you shall not say nay,
You shall hear what divines and other do say.
As upon the Psalms Austen does comment,
These words he has concerning this intent.
Valde patriam ille execratur.
Qui sibi been putat cum peregrinatur.
He has his country in much indignation,
Which thinks him self well in his peregrination.
The wild beast (says Casiodore) loving his den,
May be a special president for all manner of men:
To love their country and therein to remain,
And for the love of it to abandon no pain.
The birds of the air love their own nest,
And the beasts in the wooddes do go to their rest.
The fishes to their holes themselves do betake,
And should man then his country leave and forsake?
It is written of Plato very nobly
That we be not borne to our own commodity,
Our country the chiefest part does require,
And our friends and kin the next part does desire.
Ulysses the politic (as Homere does say)
Desired with his life to be at a stay,
If to his country he might come so near,
That he might see the smoke but once appear.
Be willing (says Periander) for thy country to die,
Thou can purchase (says Horace) no greater glory.
Misopatrios.
In the epistle of Cassiodore the nine and thirty
These words I read concerning our country.
Interdum expedit patriam negligere
Vt sapientiam quis possit acquirere.
Of our country sometime we must have negligence
To purchase wisdom, wit, and experience.
And I read in Euripides a poet of Grecia,
These two verses entreating de patria.
Omnis quidem aer penetratur ab aquila
Omnis vero terra viro forti patria.
As the Egle in the air does find a plain way
Finding nothing her flight to stop and to stay:
So a man that is strong counts every place,
To be his own country be it never so base.
Plutarchus to Traiane the Emperor, being Master of the schole
Does count him an idiote and a very stark fool
Which counts the Moon to shine more clear and bright
At Athens, then at Rome, and there to give more light:
So he that counts one place better than another,
May be dame Morias own natural brother.
Socrates being demanded where he had his nativity.
Answered the whole world to be his native country.
Aristophanes in Greek gives this same spell,
That there is his country where a man lives well,
Where learned Pythagoras the course of Astronomy?
Where obtained Socrates his civil mortality?
Where had Plato his profounde divinity?
Where gatte Aristotle the science of Philosophy?
By sitting still at home in his own country?
Nay, some went to Egypt, and some to Babilonia,
Some to Italye and some to Sicilia.
To a woodcocke I may him very well compare
Which to no place but to his country will at any time repair.
For when her bill is in a hole she thinks her self well,
And so does he which loves ever in his country to dwell.
Seek says the Scripture, and so shall you find,
Both treasures for the body, and also for the mind.
Love of the world.
1. Epist. 2
The love of the world is declared of Saint John to consist in these three
things.

In The lust of the flesh. The lust of the eyes. The pride of life.


The lust of the flesh comprehends al filthy and carnal desires.

The lust of the eyes comprehends as well all wanton sights, as the gredy
desire of money. Solomon says: Non satiantur oculi auari diuitis: The eyes of a
rich covetous man are never satisfied. Again the son of Syrach says:
insatiabiles oculi cupidi: the eyes of a covetous man are insatiable.

The lust of the pride of life comprehends ambition, boasting, desire to have
honor, and to bear rule.

Whatsoever the natural or carnal man does, he does it either for the love and
lust of the filthy pleasure of the flesh, or for the riches of the world, or
else for vain ambicion.

Concerning the love of the flesh, I remember two old verses.

Nescio quid sit amor, nec amoris sentio nodum,
Sed scio, si quis amat, nescit habere modum.
Elegia. 15
Propertius has a like saying.

Scilicet in insano nemo in amore videt. Plato said, that all they which were
in love, lived in an other body, and were dead in their own. Theophrastus being
demanded quid esset amor, what thing love might be answered, animi otiosi
affectus: the affection of an idle mind or soul.

When a certain Eunuche was taken in act with a concubine of the king of
Babylon, the king demanded of Apollonius, what he did judge to be done with
the Eunuche. What (says he) but that he live? The king marueiling at this
answer, Apollonius said: love will enforce him to suffer all torment and pain.
And therefore says the Poet.

Heu mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis.
Woe is me which with love am so endured,
That my love with no herbs can be cured.
Concerning the love of riches, Virgil writes: Quid no^ mortalia pectora
cogis, auri sacra fames? Aenaeid, 3.


Concerning the love of honor, and bearing of rule, Bernard has a notable
saying: O ambitio ambitientium crux, quomodo omnes torques? omnibus places?
nihil acrius cruciat, nihil molestius inquietat, nil tamen apud miseros
mortales celebrius negotiis eius. That is to say: O ambition the cross of
ambitious men, how do thou vex all men? how do thou please all men?
Nothing does vex more vehemently, nothing does disquiet more grievously, and
yet nothing is more frequent and solemn among miserable men, then the affairs
of ambition.

Love of our selves.
The love of our self is called in Greek (...), self love, of the which
Aristotle entreteth in his Ethics. This (...) is a perilous monster, Lib. 9.
cap. 8. De charita. cent. 3, 56.
and brings forth almost all mischiefs (as ye holy man Maximus records.)

Philautia omnium cogitationem adfectus inducentium causa constituitur. Ex hoc
enim generantur tres concupiscentiae cogitationes, etiam fortissimae, nempe
crapulae, auaritiae, et manis gloriae. Ceterum ex crapula nascitur scortationis
cogitatio, ex inani gloria superbiae. That is to say: Philautia, self love, is
the cause of all cogitatio^s gendring affections. For of it ar gendered three
strong cogitacions of lust, that is, of gurmandise, of covetousness, and of
vain glory. But out of gurmandise springs the cogitation of whooredome, and
out of vain glory springs the cogitation of pride.

Socrates says, if a man in the theater or sporting place should command all
shoomakers to arise, and none but they, they only would arise. Likewise if he
should command Smithes, Brasiers, weauers, and all other Artificers to arise
by them selves, and none but they, they only would arise. But if he should
command and say: Now arise you all that be wise and just, than al would rise.
Here you may see how the most part being foolish, yet seem to them selves to
be wise.

Diogines being demanded what was the hardiest thing in the whole course of
nature, answered: No sce seipsum, a man to know him self. And Demosthenes
did say, that the easiest thing of al things, was for a man to flatter and
deceive him self.

Esope said, that every man did carry two wallets or bags, the one before him,
and an other at his back. And that he does put into the wallet that is before,
other men's faults, and casts his own faults into the bag that is behind.
Whereupon Cicero saiih: Fit, nescio quomodo, vt magis in alienis cernamus, quam
in nobis ipsis, si quid delinquitur.

It comes to pass, I cannot tell how, that we see further in other men, then
in our selves, when any thing is done amiss. And as Menander writes, (...): No
man knows him self to be evil.

Flattery. 31.
Lib. 5. cap. 66
TO flatter in the latin is called, assentari, adulari, and blandiri. Valla in
his elegancies shows the difference between these three verbes.

Assentari says he is to flatter any body, affirming his sayings, and
upholding his yea, and his nay, or praising him to much, or else many times
otherwise than the truth is, to the end to get some profit and advantage
thereby, and it is properly in words. And therefore this kind of flattery
called assentation, is not in any brute beast, but only in man. Adulari is to
flatter another man in humbling him self, and being seruisable about him, and
to labor in such fashions to win and get his favor, whether it be by
voice and words, or else by gesture of the body, or by any other way and mean
what soever it be.

Nonnius Marcellus says thus: Addulatio est proprie canum blandimentum quod ad
homines consuetudine translatum est. Adulation properly signifies the fauning
and leaping of dogs upon their masters, from which property by translation
it is applied to men only, by use of speaking, and not by proper signification
of the word. Some Grammarians form adulo, of the word aula, which is lattine
for a Princes court (where such flattery is very much used, and is commonly
called holy water of the court) by changing the diphthong Au into V long. But
Valla holds with them yt do derive Adulor of the Greek word (...), which is
in lattin seruus. For adulari is a servile thing, and is only in such as can
abide to be subject and bound to another body, which is not in honest me^

Blandiri betokens to flatter, properly by touching and handling, and by
improper using by a Metaphor translated to the parts of the body, and many
times to the mind.

The Hebrews do say that this word Patha betokens to flatter, of the which
word it is very like that the Grecians borrowed this verb (...), which
betokens to persuade with fair flattring words.

Against al manner of flattery Solomon in his proverbs has a worthy saying:
Meliora sunt vulnera diligentis, quam oscula blandientis. Better are the
wounds of a lover, Prou. 27.
then the deceitful kisses of a flatterer.

Saint Austine writes: Quod duo sunt genera persequutorum, scilicet
vituperantium et adulantium, sed plus persequitur lingua adulantis, quam manus
persequentis. In psalm. 97,
There are two kinds of persecutors, that is, of raylers and flatterers. But
the tongue of the flatterer does more persecute, then the hand of the
persecutour.

Adulator (says Gregory) est qui palpando incedit, sed cauda ferit. A
flatterer is a scorpion which flattereth by faining, but gives a ierke with
his tail.

Antisthenes said, that it was better incidere in (...), quam (...): It is
better to fall into the hands of Ravens, than into the hands of Parasites. For
flatterers do corrupt the mind of the living, the Ravens eat only the bodies
of the dead.

Aristonymus was wont often to say: Ligna dum augent ignem consumi ab ipso:
sic opes dum alunt adulatores ab eis ipsis perire: That the greater fire the
wood makes, it is consumed of the fire. Even so riches (while they nourish
flatterers) they are devoured of them.

Saint Fraunces. 32.
Saint Fraunces was the first inuentor and author of the Minorite friars. He
lived about the year of the Lord.1208. Vince^t. lib. 3. cap. 11. par. 3.
titu. 24.
Many things are written of him which are recorded in speculo historiali
vincentii, and in the third Tome of the history of Antoninus. He lived as
they write in his youth in aboundau^ce of riches, in vanities of the world, in
pastimes, in wantonness, and unchaste songs, and was very prodigal. And thus he
lived unto the.25. year of his age, and than (as they write) was converted to
great holiness. In so much yt beside many other miracles (which he is reported
to have don) he was called Franciscus Seraphicus, by applieng this piece of
scripture unto him: Ascendit super Cherubin, et volauit super pennas ventorum.
He rode upon the Cherubin, and did fly upon the wings of the winds. But how
aptlye this piece of scripture is applied unto Fraunces, I refer it to the
godly and learned, who be expert in the sacred scriptures. It makes as much
for Fraunces, as a shoulder of mutton is mete for a horse. But because some of
the schole divines do place the order of Angels named Seraphin, above the order
called Cherubin, and for that Fraunces (as they say) went upon Cherubin, and
was placed in the order of Seraphin, therefore they call him: Fraunciscum
Seraphicum. O beta insipidiores, O noctuas in sole caligantes. O men more
unsavory then the Beete, O Owls and Bussards not able to see in the noone day,
which do make such shameful applications of the sacred word of God: because I
will not be tedious, I will show.ii. trifling toies, or rather vain fables which are written of him. First the devil (say they) tempted him of a grievous
temptation of the lust of the flesh: which Fraunciscus perceiving (putting of
his clothes) did beat him self with a very hard and sharp coarde, saying
unto him self: Eia a sine sic te manner decet. O Ass so it becomes thee to
remain. But when the temptacion did not depart: going forth at the doors in a
very sharp winter, he threw him self naked into agreat heap of snow, and made
of the snow seven balls, which he setting before him, spoke to his body after
this manner: Behold (says he) this greter balle is thy wife, other four be thy
children, two male, and two female: the other two be thy man servant and
maidseruaunt. Make haste therefore to put them on, because they die for cold.
This is very good stuff, and a very meet way (si diis placet) to restrain
the inward concupiscence and lust of the flesh.

The other thing which is reported of him is this. Two years before his death,
he saw in a vision, as it were, one of the Seraphins in the air, having six
wings, his hands spread abroad, and his feet joined together, and fastened to
the cross. Two of the wings were erected above his head: he had two spread
forth to fly, and with the other two he covered all his whole body. Fraunces
at the sight was marueilously astonished, and did both fear and rejoice. He
feared to see the fearful fastening to the cross. He rejoiced that the
Seraphin did so graciously and favorably look upon him. And when he had
thought with him self a long time, what this vision meant, at the last he saw a
miracle that the like was never heard before. For there appeared in his own
hands and feet (as it were) the token of fastening of nails. His right side
appeared as though it had been pierced with a spear: and in his hands and fete
there appeared certain long marks of hard and long nails. When this man of
God saw this wonderful sight, and that God had endued him with such a precious
treasure, he thought to conceal it from all men, rehearsing often times in his
mouth this saying of the prophet: in cord meo abscondi eloquia tua, vt non
peccem tibi. I have hidden thy words in my heart, that I may not sin unto
thee. He bare in his side the wou^d as long as he lived, which was not seen,
but only of his brother Elias the Friar, and that by chance.

Alexander the Pope, the fourth of that name, being elect Pope at Naples, about
the year of the Lord.1254. in the first year of his popedom, straightly
commanded, that the Friars should go and dwell in the mount Aluernia, where
these marks were made in the body of Saint Fraunces, and that they should
never depart from thence, and sent certain letters, in which he declares that
he saw with his own eyes these marks in Fraunces.

This they wrote of Fraunces, with mo other lies, wherewith I am ashamed to blot
the clean paper.

One merry story comes to my remembrance by the means of rehearsing the
wings of Seraphin. I heard of a Friar, which always in his sermons, did show
forth a feather, which he affirmed to be one of the feathers of the wings of
Gabriel: by which he proled from the simple people great sums of money. At the
last in his dronkennes this feather was taken out of his box, and coals put
in the stead thereof. At the next dai (which was Saint Laurences day) when in
his sermon he thought to pull out his feather out of his box, he found nothing
but coals And being dismayed, and yet intending to color and cloak his
knavery with so great a lie as the other was, taking the coals in his hand,
said to the people after this manner: O good people what a miracle is this? ye
feather of Gabriels winge is turned into saint Laurences coals. For these be
the very coals wherewith saint Laurence was burned. Such were the fruits of
our holy friars, and confirmed to be true by the authority of the holy
fathers. If this be not pagens of Antechriste, I think there be none. But
thanks be to god the friars with the whole rabble of their religion are sent
out of this Realm thither, from whence they came, that is, to their father of
Rome.

Brethren. 33.
BRother in ye Latin tongue is called Frater, Gel. li. 13. c. 10
born of one and ye same parents. And it is named Frater, quasi fere alter, as
Aegidius does teach, and Gellius after him.

Some authors do derive it of the greek word (...),: For the Gretians do call
those that be nere joined together in company, society, or otherwise, (...),
And they call the fellowship it self (...).

Frater is in greek (...), as ye would say Frater vternius. Brother of one
womb, because (...), comes of this word (...), which signifies a womb,
and (...), is put for (...): as ye would say, (...), a like brother.

And it is called in the hebrew Ach: And it signifies in the scripture not
only a brother that is borne in the same womb, but also it signifies a
nephewe, a cosen germane, a kinsman. As in the gosspell of Matthew it is said
of the brother of Christ, not that they were his brethren vternie, but that
they were cosen germans, sisters children.

As Jude, Simon, Ioses, James, and John, which were called the brethren of
Christ, yet they were but cosen germans unto him. Frater also be tokeneth a
neighbor, and specially him that is of one religion. As Paul uses it in many
places of his Epistles, and specially to the Corinthians, 1. Cor, 5.
where he says. Si quis, quum frater appelletur, fuerit formicarius aut
auarus: If any that is called a brother, be a fornicator or couetouse.

A brother is here called and meant of Paul, to be of one profession of Christ.
And note here that none may be called more properly fratres, brethren, than
Christians, and that for sundry and diverse respects.

Pater noster qui es in caelis. Our father which art in heaven.

Ephe. 4,
Vnus deus, vna fides, vnum baptisma, One God, one faith, one baptism.









By these notes ye may learn one goodly document, that is, that a christian
which loves not his brother, but hates him, or does hurt him by any manner of
means, either in person or in goods, he does lose the privilege, title, and
appellation of a brother. First, he leeseth to be called the son of God,
because he is made the child of the devil, as saint John says unto the
Jews: vos ex patre diabolo estis, you ar of your father the devil. Joan. 8.
Secondly, he leeseth the participation or communion of holy things done in the
church. Thirdlye, he leeseth the benefit and remedy of the blood of Christ.

Unworthy. 34.
Romans 5.
SAint Paul writes to the Romans: Christus, quum adhuc infirmi essemus,
secundum tempus pro impiis mortuus est. etc. that is: Christ, when we were yet
of no strength, at his time died for the godly, doubtless one will scarce die for
a righteous man, but yet for a good man it may be that one dare die. But God
sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us. Paul in these words sets forth three things.

First, the great benefit that was given to mankind, that is, the son of God
given to death for us.

Secondly, he makes a collation or comparison by the which the hope of the
faithful is greatly confirmed.

Thirdly, he shows that we ought not only to hope, but also greatly to glory
and rejoice of this love of God toward us.

He does with an amplification exaggerate, that Christ died not for all manner
of men: but for them which were unworthy of all help and mercy. Therefore, he
calls us Infirmos, weak, destitute, and void of all help and succor. And
when men them selves would not gladly dye: by this it appears how great the
charity of Christ was toward us, which would dye for us that were weak,
wicked sinners, enemies, and utterly unworthy.

These two particles, pro iusto and bono, may be expounded two manner of ways.
For the grecians do read here in this place (...). Which we may interpret
both in the neutre gendre, for a just and righteous thing, and also in the
masculine gendre for a righteous man. If it be taken neutrally, for a righteous
cause, then the mening is, that they which have reserved death, would be loath
to die with a quiet and pacient mind. Likewise, if (...), here be taken for a
good thing or cause, then the meaning is, that men will offer them selves to
death for some proffitable or well-beloved thing. As the parents for their
children, the husbands, for their wives, merchants for their merchandise.

Origin expounds it of the martyrs which suffered death for Christ, qui vere
bonus est, which is good in deed.

Other do rehearse Decios, Curtios, Godros and Philenos, Which all willingly
died for their country. All they might be counted to be enforced by some just
and proffitable cause to suffer death. For it seemed to be a just cause to
render such thancke and favor unto the country, that they would die for the
cause thereof.

Chrysostom understands per iustum and bonum, Ad Algati. quaest. 7.
a just and righteous man. And to Chrysostom do consent the most part of the
learned, although Hierome does expound (...). substantiuely for a just and
good cause.

Why Paul does say vix pro iusto, scarce for a righteous man, and adds
forsitan pro bono, peradventure for a good man, this may be the cause. That
they which may seem sometime to die for other (which appears very rarely) the
thing being well considered and weighed, may be counted for their own, and not
for an other man's cause, either for that they desire some glory thereby, or else
that they see them selves subject to all kind of adversity, which when they
can not suffer, they had rather die then live. How much Decii, Curtii, and such
others did differ from the pure love of Christ, it may be declared by many
arguments.

First, they were not of the same dignity and worthiness that they might be
compared with Christ. For the life which they lost, was not of equal price.
Furthermore (will they nil they) they should have once died and peradventure at
that time when their host was vanquished and slain of their enemies, and death
hangyng over a man's head, which can not be avoided, makes man the bolder to
die, which is reported of Solon. For he when he was called to bear weapon
against Pysistratus the tyrant, being demanded with what boldness he only
durst attempt this so bold a deed, beside other, answered: senectute, by
mine age. For when he saw that he was not like to live long, he easilye
persuaded him self to put him self in adventure to die for his country.

But Christ, when he was in no point subject or guilty to death, and purposed
to die for our sake, he declared a much more great love toward us, than they
had to their country. They died for their wives, for their children, for the
laws of their country: But Christ would be slain and die for us being
weak, for us, being sinners, for us being enemies, for us in all respects
being utterly unworthy. They by their death sought their glory and praise,
and were had in admiration of all men. But Christ sustained a death most
reprochefull and infamous. In so much that he was nombred and counted among
thieves and murderers: When notwithstanding he was the most innocent of all
other.

Finally, they in their death had no respect of God: but whatsoever Christ
did, he did it by obedience to the eternal God his father.

Therefore, we, if we respect other, our own selves, or Christ which suffered,
we can find none other cause of his death, but the mere love of God toward us.
For we were so miserable, so utterly lost, and so unworthy, that we could be
no merit of ours allure God to love us. For we were neither just nor good. But
it came I say only of the mere love and mercy of God through Christ to us.

This particle, secundum tempus, at his time may be referred to the death of
Christ, which happened not at all times, but at that certain time which was
prescribed and appointed of God. Therefore saint Paul says that christ was
given, when the fulness of time was come.

Saint Ambrose understands secundum tempus, of the three days, by the which
space Christ did lie in the grave.

Epilogus. 35.
Epilogus, is the last part of an oration which the latin men do call
conclusionem, or perorationem. The Rhetoricians do make three parts of an
Epilogus.

Enumeratio. Amplificatio. Commiseratio.
By enumeration repetion is made of things that were spoken before. It is
called in Greek (...). id est recapitulatio.

By amplification the minds of the hearers are stirred and moved to be
attentive.

By commiseration the hearers are moved, and bowed to pity and compassion.

Province. 36.
PRouincia is called in the greek (...). And it is properly that region which
is gotten by wars.

The first region that was called a province was Sicilia as Cicero teaches.

The Romans in old time called prouinciam any out region or far country
that they had subdued unto their dominion, empire and jurisdiction, and held in
the same province their power by a liuetenaunt sent thither to govern and rule
it. And because that those persons which were admitted and sent by the
Romans to rule in any province were sent thither as officers and with
commission, and with great charge, therefore the very office it self of rulynge
in any province, was also called in latin prouincia, and thereof by a metaphor
all the burden and labor, or business of doing in any manner of office, or thing
to be done, is called in latin speaking prouincia.

(...).
WHereas I purposed to set in the end of this book mine apologye, to answer
certain railing bills cast into the preaching place against me by certain
chattering choghes: I thought it good to defer the same unto an other time,
and to place it in my book entitled (...). Which by gods grace I intend to
diuulgate with a great deal more expedition, the^ I have done this. But what
impedimentes and stays I have had for the diuulgation of this present book so
long, it is not unknown to a great number of my diocese. The especial cause
why mine apology is not here inserte, is, least the book might grow to more
than to a just quantity. And by that means the title might be counted to be
false. For, The poor man's library is made for poor men: for such (I mean)
that have no great stoore either of books, or of money. Therefore, least the
price should be to excessive for poor men, I will now end bequething, this
poor man's library, to the poor.

Ni purges, et molas non comedes.

Certain Miscellans omitted to be added to the 3. Lecture in the second Tome,
as here does follow, where by you may easily see by the folios where they
should be placed.
Place this miscellan following in folio.51. before Purgatory.
Spes viua. 5,
EVery word of Peter has in it a marvelous Emphasis: as this word spes,
which is not a vulgar and common hope, but a lively hope, or the hope of life.
And therefore Peter calls it spem viuam. The Gentiles had a certain hope in
this life: of which Theocritus makes mention: Fidere Batte decet, melius cras
forsan habebis.
Sperandum est viuis, non est spes vlla sepultis.


But this hope is but a momentanie, short, and vain hope: but our hope whereof
Peter speaks, is a hope that never fails, by the which we are saved. And
this hope is nothing else but Christ, which leads us unto eternal life.

Place these two Miscellans one after an other in folio.59. before, many
places. Ego sum. Vnum sumus.

Ego sum. 8.
IT is written in Exodus that when god sent Moses to the children of Israel, to
say unto them: The God of their fathers sent him unto them, Moses asked God
what answer he should give them, if they asked him, what is his name? And God
answered Moses: Ego sum qui sum: I am that I am. For the future tense does
comprehend in it three tenses. The hebrew words are Aehiaeh aschar aehiaeh, id
est, ero qui ero.

The Hebrews are wont to put often times the future tense in steed of the
present. And they do write, that by this manner of speech the eternity of God
is signified. The Thalmudistes also do say, that this word Achiaeh ero does
contain the differences of three tenses, that is, the preter tense, present
tense, and the future tense, fui, sum, and ero, I have been, I am, and I shall be.
And by this they affirm the high and everlasting stabilitie of God, which ever
has been, is, and shall be. For God never began, nor never does end: but does
transcend and pass all reason of time. He only can say: sum and ero. I am
shall be. For he is the fountain and fullness of all substance and life: of
whom all things that be, have their being. Act. 17.
He only gives life and spirit to all: As Paul says: In ipso mouemur,
viuimus and sumus: In him we live, and move, and have our being. Wherefore,
because the eternity of God can not be comprehended within any bounds or
compass, therefore he can be described by no time. Whereupon he is rightly
called, qui est, qui fuit, qui erit, For all times, when we speak of God, are
confounded.

This name of God is expressed by John the Evangelist in the greek tongue
(...). id est, qui est, and qui erat, and qui erit: Apoc. 1.
which is, which was, and is to come.

Vnum sumus. 9.
CHrist says in John: Ego and pater vnum sumus: Cap. 10.
I and the father are one. In the which saying he dissolved not only that
question which the Jews demanded, whether he was Christ: but also showed the
detestable madness of the heretics that were to come.

First, Arrius did seperat the son from the substance of the father. After
him Sabellus confounded the person of the father and the son, making no
difference between them. Saint Austen says. Pereant vaniloqui, and me^tis
seductores, Arrianus and Sabellianus, etc. Let those vain deceyuers of the
mind, the Arrian and Sabellian be confounded and perish. For I and the father
are one: he said not: ego and pater vnus sum, I and the father am one, but he
said: Ego and pater vnum sumus: I and the father are one. In that he says one,
let the Arrian hear, that he says, we are, let the Sabellian hear. Let not
the Arrian divide vnum, let not the Sabellian put out sumus. Thus much Austen.

The meaning of these words: Ego and pater vnum sumus, I and the father are
one, is this: I the son an other person different from the father: and the
father, or the person of the father, being an other person different from
mine, are one, that is, are one essence, one power, one equality, one God, one
virtue.

As there is an absolute society between the father and me, so there is one and
the same consent of will. In all respects we are one, like mighty, willing
one thing, and nillynge one thing. Therefore, I and the father together defend
the believing, and do take cure and regard of them against all wolves, thieves,
and raueners, that they may not perish, but have life everlasting.

Some of the learned, do expound this place of John of the consent of Christ
with the father. For whatsoever is don of Christ: the same is confirmed by the
power of the father.

But in my simple judgment, they take it not in the worse sense, which expound
it, as well of the substance, as of the consent of Christ with the father. It
were great pity to open any window or startinge hole to an heretic.

Place these.4. Miscellans following in fol. 63. after the Miscelan He shall.
12. Nathan. 13. Factum est. 14. Men's. 15. Symbol. Athanasii.
Nathan. 12
2. Reg. 7.
THere were two of that name: the one was a prophet chaplain or confessor to
King david.

Angelomus does think, that this Nathan was Ionathas the son of Samma, which
was David's brother.

1. par. 3, 2. Reg 5. Luke 3, Homil. in. Luca. 28.
The other Nathan was the son of David, and brother to Solomon. Of which
Nathan, Philo writes, that Ioas, and the kings following did come. Origin
thinks that this Nathan was the Prophet, for he says: Non per Salomonem, sed
per Nathan nascitur, qui eius arguit patrem super Vriae mortem, that is: He
does not come of Solomon, but of Nathan, which reproved his father for the
death of Vrias.

Of Nathan the son of David, which was the second son of Bethsabe, begotten
after Solomon, this is specially to be noted. Saint Luke in his genealogy
does deduce the lineall descente of Christ from Nathan to Elie, who was (as
some do write) the natural father of the virgin Marie, and was otherwise
called Iehoakym. And so Luke does describe the legal genealogy of Christ.

Other do write, that these two Mathan, and Mathat, were brethren of the house
of David by Nathan. Mathan had to his son Jacob of his wife Hesta. When
Mathan was dead, Mathat had to his wife the same Hesta, of whom he bega^te
Heli. For Jacob and Heli were brothren born in on womb. Now when Heli was dead
without children, Jacob took his brother Helies wife, of whom he begat Joseph
being his natural son, but legallie being the son of Hely. For it is
written in Deuteronomie: Deuteronomy. 25.
Si frater absque liberis mortuus fuerit, alius accipiat illam in vxorem etc.
If the brother die without children, let the other brother take her to wife,
that his name be not put out of Israel.

The Jews in their commentaries do record, that David commanded, that if
Solomon should at any time be destitute of heirs lineallie descending from
him, the kingdom should come to the heirs and posterity of Nathan.

Factum est. 13.
Cap. 1.
Saint John writes in his gospel, quod caro verbum factum est: that the word
was made flesh.

We must not think these words to be spoken in such a sense, as the water is
read, to be made wine. For the water was made wine in such manner, that it
ceased to be water, and there remained only wine. But here the word was not
so made fleshie, that the word, that is, God ceased to be God, and there was
nothing else but flesh. God forbid. For it cannot be, that God was changed into
man, and left to be God. The divine substance of the word admits neither
change, nor end, forasmuch as it is immutable and infinite. Again, neither
the flesh of Christ leaving his own proper nature was changed into the word,
God forbid, this also. For if it should be so, as Christ should be on the one
side deprived of his divinity: so on the other side he should be bireft of his
true humanity, yt he might not be true man, nor truly conceived, nor truly
borne, nor truly have suffered and died, and therefore not to have truly rise^
again.

Let us therefore steadfastly believe, that God being made man, took unto him
that which he was not, and lost not that which he was. Wherefore in this
article of our faith, two things are chiefly to be believed the one, that two
are so united and knit together in Christ, that one and the same Christ is true
God, and true man. The second is, that the unity of the persons lets not,
but that the natures may be distinct and seperat, so that the divinity may
retain and keep that which is proper unto it, and the humanity likewise may
reserve that which belongs unto it. If we hold well these two points, we shall
easily refel all errors, which Satan by his members has brought into the
church, of the diuinitye and humanity of Christ. For Nestorius, Eutiches,
Seruetus, and the Anabaptists have done no small despite unto Christ, when some
of them went about to deprive Christ of his humanity, and other some went about
to deprive him of his divinity.

Chrysostom writes thus: Quum audieris: verbum caro factum est, ne turberis.
etc. When thou shall hear: The word was made flesh, be not troubled: For he
does not convert the substance into flesh (for it is a wicked thing so to
understand it) but abiding that which he is, took upon him the shape of a
servant. For, because there are some which say that the words of Incarnation
are (as it were) dreams and fantasies confounding their blasphemye, he did
put this particle factum est, not meaning to represent and show forth the
changing of the substance, but the assumption and taking on him true flesh.

Also saint Austen says: De Trin. 15
sicut autem vetbum nostrum vox quodammodo corporis fit, assume^do eam in qua
manifestatur sensibus hominu^: sic verbum Dei caro factum est, assumendo eam,
in qua et ipsum manifestaretur sensibus hominum. That is: like as our word is
made (as it were) a voice or sound of the body, by taking the voice unto it, in
which voice it is made manifest to the senses of man: even so the word of God
was made flesh, by putting on him flesh, in which the word might be manifest to
the senses of man. And as our word is made a voice, and yet not turned into the
voice: so the word of God is made flesh, but God forbid, that it should be
turned into flesh: for that word was made flesh, by taking the flesh, and not
consuming it self into the flesh.

Theodoretus and all other divines do expound Est in this place for assumpsit.
In Polymorpho


Men's. 14.
Men's is the principal part of the soul, which is called of some intelligence,
with the which only man being endued, does excel all other beasts, and by
the which he does contemplate and behold things incorporal and indivisible.
Whereupon some do think, that it is called Men's quasi eminens, because this
facultye of the soul does greatly excel all the other faculties.

Lactantius says: Primum non idem est men's in anima: aliud est enim quo
viuimus, Lib. 7.
aliud quo cogitamus. Nam dormientium men's no^ anima sopitur, and in furiosis
men's extinguitur, anima manet. etc. First, ye mind and the soul are not one
thing. For that is one thing whereby we live, and that is an other whereby we
think and understand. The mind of them that sleep, and not the soul is
brought from sleep, and in mad men the mind is extinguished, and the soul
remains.

Thales Milesius said, that the swiftest of all things that are is the mind:
for it is of such celerity, that in one point and moment of time, it does
behold heaven, it is over the seas, and goes to cities and nations.

They which do judge animum et mentem to be one, are deceived. For Men's is a
certain subtility of understanding or counsel consonant to reason. Animus is
the foundation of life and will.

Terence makes a difference between these two in Andria, where he says: mala
men's, malus animus. Men's sometime is put for the will or good intent, sometime it
is put for counsel, sometime for the mind.

There is a common distinction of these.3. words: Anima, Animus, Men's. Anima est
qua viuimus, animus quo sapimus, men's, qua diuina intelligimus. By the first we
live, by the second we understand, and by the third we perceive and contemplate
divine and heavenly things.

i. These. 5.
Saint Paul seems to call that part, which is called men's, spiritum. His words
be these: ipse autem Deus pacis author sanctificet vos totos, et integer vester
spiritus, et anima et corpus inculpatae in aduentum Domini nostri Jesus Christi
seruentur. The very God of peace sanctify you throughout: and I pray God, that
your whole spirit, and soul and body may be kept blameles unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Paul here divides man into three parts: into spirit, soul, and body.
Notwithstanding commonly man consists, simpliciter, of body and soul, and
then the soul does signify the immortal spirit, which dwells in the body.
But because there be two principal faculties of the soul (understanding and
will) the scripture sometime makes a distinction between these two, especially
when it will express the power and nature of the soul: but than the soul is
taken for the seat of affections, and is the part opposite to the spirit.
Therefore, saint Paul here does understand by the name of Spirit, godly
intelligence: As by the name of the soul are signified will, and all
affections. The meaning of these words of Paul is this: Than is a man fully
sanctified, and perfect, when his mind thinks nothing, his soul, that is,
his understanding and will covet nothing: neither his body does execute any
thing contrary to the will of God.

Finally, the Spirit properly here betokens the mind when it is endued with
the grace and gift of the holy ghost, whereof if it be void, it cannot
properly be called spiritus or men's.

Symbolum Athanasii. 15.
OF Athanasius himself I have spoken before in the first Tome: now I will
speak and entreat of the symbol or creed made by him, commonly called,
Quicunque vult.

The symbol of Athanasius comprendeth the catholic faith, in the true
profession of the holy Trinity, of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, true God
and true man, of his passion, death, desce^ding into hell, resurrection,
ascension into heaven, sitting at the right hand of the father, of his coming
to judge, of the resurrection of the body, and in the confession of the last
judgment, of the eternal fire, and of the life everlasting. And after that
Athanasius had rehearsed this confession of the faith, he said: This is the
catholic faith, which unless every one faithfully and steadfastly believe, can
not be saved.

Therefore, they that believe thus, have the catholic faith. It follows than
that they are not heretics, but catholics, knit together in the unity of
the catholic church, and of this faith.

Gratianus also did acknowledge the same, when he published a law to the
people of Constantinople, in the which he decreed, that they only which
worshiyped the holy Trinity with like honor should be counted to be of the
catholic church, and they that judged otherwise, Sozome. eccles. histor. lib.
7. cap. 4
should be taken for heretics. And into this faith we are so manifestly and
agreably baptized, that the confession of the same is made through all
Christendom, as well of them that be sprung up in years (if any be baptized) as
also of infants, by ye mouths of them yt be witnesses of their baptism.

Wherefore, they are very ungodly, and timorous me^, which not being content
with his faith, do require other things to be believed of the faithful, whereof
there is mention made, neither in the catholic symbol, nor in the tenor of
baptism. Neither they do require those things to be believed lightly, but with
like necessitye and condition, as the catholic faith is required to be
believed of them that will be members of the catholic church. As for example:
To believe in the saints that are dead, do thou not believe (say they) in the
saints. Thou art then an heretic. To invoke, and to pray unto saints.
Saints to make intercession for us in heaven. Images of Saints to be
worshipped in churches. The Mass to be a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick
and the dead. The substance of bread and wine to be changed into the body and
blood of Christ by the consecration of the sacrificing priest. That there be.7.
sacraments. The bishop of Rome to be Christ's Vicar on earth, and supreme head
and governor of all Churches. Not to be lawful for priests to marry: that I
may not speak of those things which they set forth to be believed, of man's
free will, of satisfaction, of good works, of indulgences, that is, the
marchandises of the Romish Antichrist, and his ecclesiastical traditions:
Unless ye believe all these things to be true and christian doctrine, you are
condemned to be an heretic: although you believe the old and ancient faith,
which these men do little esteem, but the ancient Pastors, and faithful
Ministers have only regarded.

Place this Miscellan following, in Folio.97. after the Miscellane: People of
the old Testament.
Agrippa. 23.
AGrippa was the son of Herod. He was made king of Chalcis, and chief
President of the temple, and of the priests to be created, five years after
the death of his father, and in the.22. year of his own age, and in the.51.
year after Christ. He was made king by Claudius the Emperor. Under him
Jerusalem was destroyed of Titus, Vespasianus son. He died.5. years after
the destruction of Jerusalem. He was called Agrippa, id est Aeger pedibus. vel
aegre partus, because when he was borne, his feet came first forth.

A diligent Table of the most notable things, matters, and words contained in
the first Tome of this book. This letter A. signifies the first side of the
leaf, and the letter B. signifies the second side of the same leaf.
A.
A ante A
AAron, whither he sinned or no in causing a calfe to be made. 269. b Aaron of
necessitye constrained to fashion a calf. ibidem Aaron judged of some learned
men greatly to have offended, because he feared man more then god. ibi. Aaron
attributed unto the Idol the unspeakable name Tetragra^ maton. 270. a Aaron
described, he bare the type and figure of Christ. He was forbid to enter into
the land of promis, he had four sons. His apparel and signification thereof
267 b
A ante B.
Abel and Cain, the mysteries thereof. 12. a Abel signifies vanity ibid. b Abel
the figure of Christ. ibide^ Abdias words attributed to John are most horrible.
76. b Abraham, the word whereof it is compounded 158. a Abraham, the father of
the circumcised. Whether he was a prophet and a Priest also. Why is name was
changed, his parents were Infidels, he was an Idolatrer first. ibidem. b
Abraham's faith counted for ryghteousnes. 279. a Abraham justified before
circumcision ibidem Abstenti who they were 24 b
A ante C.
Achan espied by Loath 52. b Achilles horse told before hand his masters death
67. a Actions of the body are governed by three virtues. 80. a Actions of man
about iocounde recreations, are observed with three circumstances. 93. a Acatius
diverse of that name. 223. a Acatius Bishop of Amidense, his noble act ibidem
Accidents do neither feed nor nourish 218. b Action of baptism requires
gods promises to be recited
A ante D.
Adam and Mathusalem concluded all the years of the first age. 127. b Adam, how
long he lived, and when he died. 128. a Ada^ after the death of Abel, purposed
to live co^tinent for ever. 131 a Adam, whereof he took his name. 139. a Adam,
whether he utterly lost the image of God or no ibide^ Adam whither he sinned
in pride and idolatry. 142. b Adam whether he sinned more grievously then Eve
ibidem Adam, whether he foreknewe his fault and fall. ibidem adam where he was
buried. ibid Adam the figure of Christ and of the Church 147 b Adonibezecke
did cut of the thombes and toes of.70. kings, and had the like done unto him.
216. a Adolesce^tiores viduas deuira, what is to be observed in those words of
Paul. 227. a Aduersari^s arguments against the true church, answered. 230. a
Adrianus the Emperor cried out and said: Turba medicoru^ perdidit Caesarem.
15. b Addicion is of.4. sorts 55. b Add and take away from the scriptures
thoroughly discoursed. 58. b add and take away from the scriptures, how many
ways it may be done, 60. a Adulterers, none suffered to be at Sparta. 63. a
A ante E
Aedilis an officer, what it is. 14. b Aegiptus totius mu^di horreu^. 161. a
Aetius a Sirian taught Christ's equality with the father in substance, Aened
et Iuri, what they signifye, and how the.70. were deceued. 274. b
A ante G
Agatho, the Pope professed obedience to the emperor 41. b Agar without
aspiration what it signifies 180. b Agrapha unwritten verities. 81. a Agar
written with chet what it signifies 181. a Agesilaus modesty expressed. 93. a
Agar and Sara what they do signifye 182. a
A ante L
Alexander deprived married prests. 4. Alexander made a decree that no man
should here the Mass of a priest concubinary ibid. alexander decreed that the
Pope should be chosen only of Cardinals ibidem Alexander buffeted and beat in
his chamber of Hildebrane. ibidem alexander dyed in prison ibidem Alanus many
of that name what they were, and what they wrote. 14 a alexander the great fell
sick at Tharsus, Philip his Physician recovered him 15. ^ alexander as he
drunk Philips potion gave to him Parmenians letters. ibidem Alcoran an
Arabical word 30. b Alcoran signifies a gathering together of commandments
into one book. ibid. b Alcoran feigned by Machomet to be sent from God by the
angel Gabriel. ibidem alcoran contains most shameful and abominable lies
ibide^ alcoran* the book of the Turks and Sarazens ibidem All kinds of
enchauntmentes, incantations and sorceries ar made by the covenant of
dysceitefull friendshyp with Satan. 32. b Al things necessary for salvation
written 57. a Alexander Seuerus spared not to put to death his familiar friend
Vetronius 62. a albion, why this realm of England is so called of some. 217
Alms how it is a remedy for sin. 240. a alms of it self does not
justify. ibi alms giving how to be understand in Luke ibidem Allegoria defined
246. b allegories, how and of whom they ought to be entreated 251. a Allegoria
defined of Augustine and Hierome ibidem allegories much used in Orators and
Poets, and to what end they are used in the scriptures. ibid. b allegories
elegantly written by Palephatus and Fulgensius. ibidem allegory differs from
a tipe. 252 a allegories, their conditions. 255. b
A ante M
Ame^tatae hastae, what they be, and what they signify 18. b Amurathes the
Turkishe emperor took in battle the city Thessalonica from the Venetians. 25.
b amurathes killed Vladil^laus king of Hungary ibid. Ambrose writes that all
the apostles were married, Paul and John only excepted. 35. a amos, what manner
of man he was there is no certain tradition. 71. a Ambrose bishop of Millaine
described 117. a ambrose very like unto Plato in many respects ibidem ambrose
when he lay a sleep in his cradle, a swarm of Bees covered his mouth and
face. ibidem ambrose wrote many incorrupt and pure books. ibidem. b Ambrose
sentences are most firm pyllers of the faith ibidem ambrose excommunicated the
Emperor Theodocius. ibid. Ambrose caused Theodosius to make a law that.30.
days should be prescribed, before sentence were given. 118. d ambrose his
arguments against praying to saints 211. a ambrose judgment of the marriage
of Priests discussed. 224. a ambrose taunted of Hierome for excusing Peter's
denieng of Christ by an allegory. 255. a
A ante N
Anselme a moonke, and archbishop of Cantorbury 3. b anselme condemned the
marriage of Priests ibidem anselme accused king Henrye the first, before
Paschalis the second being Pope ibidem anselmes goods confiscate and he
deprived from his bishopric. ibi anselmus archbishop of Cantorbury after
Lanfranke. ibide^ anselmes.3. in number. ibide^ anselme bishop of Lukes ibi
anselme made Pope by the craft of Hildebrand, and named Alexander the second
ibidem anselme made the gloss called Glosa interlinealis 4. b Anthoninus could
not cause Cicero to dye, as long as his Orations called Philippicae, do endure.
18. b anathematisati who they were. 24 b Anabaptists divide the person of
Christ 28. b anthonies fire a vehement inflammation of the body. 31. a
Anthonies fire called in Greek, (...). ibidem. Antiochus commanded the
scriptures to be brent 56. a antiochus died miserably ibide^. antiochus an
image of antichrist. ib antiochus what he was 64. b antiochus married his sister
unto Ptolomeus Epiphanes. ibidem antiochus caused his sister to kill her
husband Ptolomye syttyng at meat ibidem antiochus subdued the Jews that
dwelt at Jerusalem ibide^. antiochus spoiled the City Jerusalem, commanding
the laws to be burned and destroyed. 65. a antiochus constrained the Jews to
eat swynes flesh ibide^ antiochus caused the temple of the Lord to be called
the temple of Jupiter Olympicus ibide^ antiochus his cruelty 65. a antiochus
smytten with incurable plage ibidem antiochus had worms boiling out of his
body. ibidem antiochus flesh so stancke, that no man could abide him ibid
Angelus Politianus, a man excellently learned in Greek and Latin ibidem. b
Antithesis between Christ and the devil 89. a. b Anthropomorphitae, why
condemned of heresy 100. a Anna, how many were of that name and what children
they had. 108. b antithesis the figure what it signisignifieth 115. a Annus
magnus, or Annus vertens, contains.12554. years. ibid. b angelus what it is,
and what it signifies. 163. a angels entertained of Abraham and Loath ibidem
angels created of God ibide^. angels nothing so excellent as the son of God
ibidem. b angels made of God with other creatures. ibidem angels when they were
made, a curious question ibidem angels are celestial ambassadors. ib angels
what manner of bodies they took 164. a angels are substances, and not qualities
ibidem angels carried Lazarus being dead into Abraham's bosom. ibidem. b angels
very swyft and spedy. ibidem angel did kill in one night.185000. persons 165. a
angels whyther divided into nine companies or no ibide^ angels wherefore called
dominacio^s principalities and powers. ibid. b angels, what honor ought to be
ge^uen unto them 166. a angels, when, and why called archangels ibide^. b
angels called Cherubin and Seraphin ibidem angels be causes remote and
instrumental ibide^ angels ought to be sought unto neither with prayer nor with
Sacraments ibidem angels ought to have no temples built unto them 167. a
angel forbad John to woorshyppe him ibidem angel worshippers numbered among the
heretics called Angelici. ib Anabaptists described. ibid b anabaptistical
heresye mayntayned of the folowers of Memno. 168. a angry men and wayward are
to be restrained from all offices and functions 214. a angry man how he
differs from a mad dog. 215. a anger has destroyed many men. ibi anger, the
discomodities and dysprayse thereof ibidem Anagoge defined, and an example of
it 246. b anabaptists be oftentimes strive among them selves about allegories.
255. b anbaptistes, proofs of them selves improued 266. a antichrist in what
nation he shall be borne, and of what tribe, and whereof he shall come. 287. a
Antichrist under the name thereof is comprehended the whole kingdom of false
teachers. Antichrist shall show himself as it were a God. Antichrist defined
of Bernarde. ibide^ antichrist how declared of Saint Paul ibidem. b
antichrist is called the aduersarye and Vicar of Christ ibide^ Antistraticos,
who so called. 287
A ante P.
Apollo, athour of Physic verses, and music 8. a apollo in heaven is called
Sol, in earth Liber pater, in hell Apollo. ibi Apolinis oraculum a proverb. ibid
apostles allege always in their writings the scriptures 19. b apostles used
lots 52. b Apologia what it signifies. 54. b apochrypha rejected 57. a
apostles wrote that which they taught before by mouth. 58. a apostles more
perfectlye instructed after the ascension of Christ. ibid apocalips, whereof it
comes, and what it signifies. 60. a apocalips not counted of some among the
canonical scriptures. ibidem apocalipsis judged canonical scripture, and the
very work of John Evangelist ibide^. b apocalypsis interpreted by Ireneus
ibidem apocalipsis came forth in the end of Domitians raygne 61. a apocalipsis
dedicated to the Churches of Asia. ibidem apocalipsis contains nothing
contrary to the apostolik doctrine. ib apocalips contains the article of
justification by the blood of the lamb, and many other necessary doctrines.
ibidem apocalipsis does lively set forth antichrist his revelation and last
destruction ibidem apocalipsis does not much swerve from the vision of
Ezechiel. ibi. b apocalipsis the book proceeded from the holy ghost ibidem
apparitions of the dead are illusions 72. b apparition of Samuel was an
illusion of Satan 73. a Apostolus whereof it comes. ibid. b apostles are of
four sorts. ibidem Apostoli were certain magistrates at athens ibidem
apostles composed the articles of our faith called the Creed. 120. a apostles
being few went forth into all the world 241. a apostles manifestlye declined
from the bishops and church of Jerusalem 245. b
A ante Q
Aquinas, judgment touching original sin of Marye. 266. a
A ante R
Argus had an.100. eyes, what is signified thereby 15. a Aristocratia, what it
is. 25. ^ arrians divide the person of Christ 28. b Ars whereof derived 29. b
Ars defined diverse ways. ibidem. ars defined ibide^ ars divided into Theorica,
Speculatiua and Effectiua ibidem Ars sometime signifies craft and suttilty
ibidem Ars in Greek called (...). ibide^ arithmeticke, Geometry, music and
astronomy be called Mathematical sciences, and wherefore. 30 a arts and
occupacions used with hands, are called mecanicae arts and whereof. ibidem. b
Arioli what they be. 32. b archippus Paul's disciple. 45. b Artemisia droonke
her husbands heart when he was dead. 47. a artemisia built that sumptuous
sepulcher called Mansoleum. ibid arthur king, what he was, how he lived, and
how he dyed. 61. b arthur wounded to death besides Glastenbury 62. a
Ariopagites never wrote any play or comedy 63. a Arrius pains in hell wax
sharper and greater, when any is infected with his heresy 64. a Arbitramur
hominem iustificari fide absque operibus, expounded by Origin. 86. b arrius
confuted by manifest scriptures 88. b arrius form to Ammonius described. 109.
b arrius heresies and suttleties. ibid arrius, how many persons he did allure
to his opinion ibidem arrius styrred by emulation and envy to utter his new
doctrine. ibi. arrius fled into Palestine. ibidem arrius convicted in the great
council of Nice 110. a arrius received letters from Constantine the Emperor,
and the copy thereof ibidem arsenius arm falselye reported to be cut of by
athanasius. ibide^ aristotle prince of al Philosophers, whom he had to his
Masters and teachers 115. b aristotle had alexander the Emperor to his
scholar ibi. aristotle author of alexander the Emperors death 116. a
aristotle's sect called Secta Peripate ticorum ibidem. b aristotiles tyght in
number of that name. ibidem aristotle named of Plato a mule. ib ark of Noah,
and the length of the cubits thereof 134. a arator wrote upon the acts of the
apostles in verses 138. b Archetypa defined 179. a areopagites, were judges,
and not Philosophers. aristeuus by earnest request gat liberty to the Jews
which were in bondage in Egypt 273 article of the Trinity (as Cocleus
blasphemously says) cannot be proved out of the scripture. 289. a
A ante S
Aser in hebrew betokens Beatum blessed 109. a assiria destroyed under
Sardanapalis 126. a assirians took away much gold and silver from the
temple. 49. b
A ante T
Athens described 8. a athens called Cecropia. ibid. Athenae called of the
Greeks Minerua ibidem athenians taught the use of oil, the manner to plow and
to sow corn. ib. b athenians made laws three in number, and what they were. ibi
Atheniensium inconsulta temeritas a proverb, and what it means. ib Atticus
testis, vel attica fides, a proverb, and what it means. 9 a athanasius did
flee to Constantine 41. a athanasius accused falselye of a certain woman 110.
b athanasius cleared him self from magic and murder. ibi. athenodorus, his
worthy admonition unto augustus touching anger 214. a
A ante V
Augustine, where he was born. 10. b augustines mothers name Monica. ibidem
augustines brothers name Nauigius ibidem augustines masters name Manlius
Theodorus ibidem augustine learned the.7. liberal sciences without any
instructor. ibi augustine hated the Greek to^g. ibi. augustine given to
fleshlye lust at the age of.16. years ibidem augustine loathed the simple
style of the holy scriptures 11. a augustine a Manichie for the space of.9.
years ibidem augustine kept a concubine. ibidem augustine went to Rome
against his mothers will ibide^ augustine sick of a fever at Rome. ib augustine
an academike, who judged althings to be doubted of. ibi. augustine went to
Millaine to S. Ambrose ibidem augustine neither a Maniche nor a Catholic
ibide^. augustine married a wife when he was of the age of.30. years. ibide^
augustines wife not mariageable by two years ibide^ augustines concubine
departed from him. ibidem augustine took the second Concubine ibidem.
augustine asked council of Simplicianus, how he might come to the truth ibid.
b augustine becam a christian. ibidem augustine poured out abundance of
tears ibidem augustine herd a voice in the garden saying: toll lege, toll
lege. ibid. augustine reading a piece of the new testament, was throughlye
converted ibidem augustine tormented with toothache. ibidem augustine healed by
the prayers of of his brother. ibidem augustine shortwynded ibid augustine
persuaded by ambrose to read the Prophet Esaias. ibidem augustine baptized of S.
ambrose at Millaine at Easter ibi. augustine was baptized with alippius, and
his own son adeodatus being.xv. years old. ibide^ augustines apparel neither
to costly, nor to base. 11. b augustine at his table not to sumtuous. ibidem
augustine very barberous. 12. a augustines distichon against backbiters at his
table ibidem augustine (the city of Hippon being besieged) fell in to a fever.
ibide^ augustine being syck, did read the psalm of repentance. ibide^.
augustine at his meals loved reading and disputyng. ibidem augustine was
bishop.40, years. ib augustine lived.76. years ibid augustine died in the
year of our Lord. 437. ibidem augustine and ambrose did sing together Te
deum, answering one another ibidem. augustine a wonderful president of Gods
unspeakable mercy. ibid. augustus the Emperor. 16. a Audientes what they
were. 24. b augures what they be. ibide^. augustinus Steuchus, calls the Pope
a God 42. a ancient Fathers interpretacion, when to be reproved, and when to
be admitted 80. a auen Esras his interpretacion upon this place, tulit eu^
deus. 132. b ancient fathers what names they gave to their children. 148. a
authority of the law depends upon God 183 b Authenticu^ whereof it comes.
217 b Augusta the emperors wife wrote Hexametre verses to her Husband 223 a
augustines judgment of the marriage of priests in the old law. 225 a ancient
fathers austere and cruel against Matrimonye after the vow. 229. a augustine
repugnaunt to himself concerning marriages after the vow. 231. a augustines
mind concerning ceremonies. 243 b augustines mind concerning schisms made
through unworthy communicantes. 244. a authority of the primative church
greater then the authority of the Pope 289. b
B.
B ante A.
BArbarous works sometime to be read 28. a Babilo^, head of al Chaldye 47. a
Babylon built by Semiramis, or as the Hebrews say by Nemroth the Giaunt.
ibidem Babylon enlarged by Ninus. ibid. Babylon had walls of incredible
greatness 50. cubits in breadth, and 300. cubits in heyght. ibide^. b Babylon
had walls, the compass whereof were.480. furlonges. ibi. Babilons walls so
broad that two waynes might mete together. ib. Babilons walls beautified with
100. gates of brass ibidem Babylon one of the.7. wonders of the world ibidem
Basilius Magnus buylt an hospital for wayfaring and nedi me^. 49. a Baptisinge
only in the name of Christ, why it was done 90. b Baal, by incense offered
unto him, what Hierome understands thereby 180 a Babylons, two in number, as
Cosmographers do write. 135. a Babylon so called, a confusis labiis. ibide^.
Babylon called Chayrum, and now Alayer. ibidem Babylon nygh unto Egypt in the
coasts of Arabia ibidem. b Babylon, which it was, from whence Peter wrote his
epistle. ibidem Babylon the feate of the great Sultan ibidem Basilius Magnus,
who was his father, where he was bishop, and who^ he had to his master. 138. b
Basilius stood stiffely against the Emperor Valence ibide^. Basilius prayed
for the Emperor Valence 139. a Baal, in the masculine ge^der what it signifies
270. b Baal and Balim in the Hebrewe what they are. ibidem
B ante E.
Belinus made.3. archeflanius.1. at London.2. at York.3. at Carleil. 5 a
Belinus made Denmark tributary unto him ibidem Belinges gate made by Belinus.
ib Belinus made the tower of London ibidem Bees brought hoonye into Platoes
mouth ibidem Beutifieng of Churches, not to be reproved when they be ended. 50.
a Beasts cruel as Bears and Lions would not touch christian Martyrs 52. a
Beda an Englishman borne, for the modesty of his life called Venerabilis Beda,
with his whole life. 137. b Beasts having four feet, four of them are
namelye forbidden to the use of man 184. b Beasts granted to the use of man
what kind of them ibidem. a Bell, Baal, or in the latin Belus, the first king
of Assiria^s. 270. b Bedek in Hebrew what it signififieth 276. b Bethel, a city
of the tribe of Benjamin and Ephraim, how far dista^t from Jerusalem, and by
what other name it was called. 286. a Bethel called of Jacob the house of God
ibidem
B ante I
Bishops inuestiture in controversy between king Henry the first and
Paschal.2. Pope. 3. b Bias one of the.7. wise men. 14. b Bias carried all his
goods with him ibidem Bishops accused each other before Constantine the
Emperor. 40. b Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction over other bishops 41. a
Biblion, what it signifies 45. a Bishops of the churches are called angels 61.
b Bishops or priests in every church were called Cardinals 68. a Bishops and
priests with common council governed the church, and when they were first of
distinct and several office. 125. a Bigamie disanulled by the Scriptures and by
ancient fathers. 139. a
B ante L.
Bladud attemting to fly, brake his neck. 5. b Blessed is he that continues
to the end. 29. a Bloudshedders revenged of God himself. 126. b Blasphemia
divided into two parts 284. a Blasphemy against the holy ghost shall never be
forgeuen ibide^ Blasphemy, how it defined. ibide^
B ante O.
Borne not to our selves. 2. a Books of Machabees not Canonical 6. b Book of
Machabees counted Canonical of s. Austin, but how. 7. a Books of Machabees not
Canonical, by the judgment of Melito bishop of Sardinia, of Origin Hierome,
and others. ibide^. Books none to be received except they consent with the
scriptures. 57. a Bonifacius the.3. obtained his prerogative of the Emperor
Phocas. Bonum is taken for co^modum. 95. a Bonum mulierem non ta^gere, how to
be understood. ibid. Bonum what things it requires to be observed. ibidem
Bowing of the knee and incuruatio^ of the bodi wherein condemned. 271 b
B ante. R.
Britain made one Monarchy, by Mulmusius Dunwallo, duke of Cornwall. 5. b
Braggers boast of the holy Ghost to commend their strange doctrines. 58. a
Bruno Amorbachius, a man of incomparable learning. 206. b Brazen serpente, a
figure of Christ. Britania, whereof it is so called. 216. a. Brutus, why that
name was given to Julius Brutus, and of whom it was given. ibidem. b britania,
has no manner of proportion or analogy with this name Brutus. 216. b
B ante. V.
Buildyng of Temples not reproved. 50. a bull, did lick the feet of a martyr
with his tongue. ibidem. a burdens of the law which our fathers were not able
to bear, be utterly ceased. 290. b
C.
C ante A
CArleil, builte of Leil 5. b Cantorburie builte of Lud. ibidem. b Cassiodorus
was first a Senator of Rome, and afterward a Moncke. 6. b Cassiodorus wrote
upon the Psalter, and many other godly and learned books. ibidem. b Canah,
signifies to possess. 12. b Cain, the type of Antichrist. ib. b Cane, the
Emperor of the Tartarians. 31. a Cane has as much land under him almost as
Asia, Africa, and Europia has. ibidem. a Cane has the great region called
Cathaie under him. ibidem. a Cathaye divided into nine realms. ibidem. a
Cathaye wonderful rich in gold and silver, grain, wine, and such other
necessaries. ibidem. a Cathaye has people that honor Christ as God, but they
are not baptized. ibidem. a Carnal affections make the whole man dark.
ibidem. b Cardinal virtues.4. in number, what they be, and why so called. 36.
a Cardo, the hook of a door. ibide^. a Capitolium, the greatest tower in Rome
set upon the mount Saturnius. 48. b Capitolium, builte of king Tarquinius
superbus. ibide. b Capitolium called the Temple of Jupiter set in the cleeue
called Tarpetus. ibidem. b Capitoliu^, named, a capite hominia found there.
ibidem. b Capitolium, called before arx Tarpeia. ibidem. b. Capitolium, nombred
of Nazianzene among the.7. wonders of the world. ibidem. b Cardinals, from
whence they came and what they were. 67. b cardinals began but lately. 68. b
cardinals why they were commanded to wear red hattes. ibide^. b catholic
defined, and how it is derived. 124. b Catholicum medicamentum, catholica
praecepta, catholica peccata. why so called. 124. b cataclismus, what it is
134. a Caluarie, why so called. 145. b caluarie, whether Ada^s head were there
buried. ibidem. b cains murder wiped away in the Cataclisme. 152 canaan,
three things to be observed in him. 157. b Cathari, Petrus Brusius, chief
author of the heretics so called. 167. a calfe, why they made an image thereof
rather then man. 269. b Cathedra Mosis, defined. 281. a
C ante E
Certain commit robbery and theft that they may so give to the poor 51. a
cerinthus peruersly built his doctrine of the voluptuous reign of Christ for
space of.1000. years upon the Apocalips. 60. b ceremonies, some appointed by
god, and some by man. 93. b Caeremonia, diversely written and defined. ibidem
ceremonies being in number superfluous complained of S. Augustine. ibidem
Ceremonies of the Jews, to be kept not mortal simpliciter. 94. a ceremonies
legal, wherefore used of Paul. ibidem. b Cecilius Cyprianus, by what names he
was called, where he was borne, and what he was 113. a cerdon of a subtle and
unsteadfast wit, where he was borne 125. b Cerdoniani, the heretics took their
name of Cerdon, and what their heresy was ibidem certain notes and rules to
understand the holy scriptures 167. b cethura Abraham's wife 181. a ceremonies
of the Jews not pernicious immediately after Christ's Passion. 238. b
ceremonies of the Jews were pernicious after sufficient preaching of the
Gospel. ibidem ceremonies have always been diverse. 243 b. ceremonies used
with great liberty in the primative church. ibidem Centum viri, who so called,
and how many in number. 273. b
C ante H
Christ, king and Priest. 28. a Christ as king fought for us. ibide^ Christ as
Priest offered for us. ibide^ Christ's disciples being yet rude and raw could
not bear weighty and heavy matters 36. a christ reygneth in the church as
chief head and rular. 42. a christ's example of working on the saboth day. 192.
b christ requires none other intercessour but a devout mind. 211. a christ
to be inuocated the circumstaunces thereof. 211. b christ alone searches the
reins and heart. ibidem christ alone present in all places, christ is
omnipote^te, is most wise christ his will is always ready and most perfect.
212 christ in these words (This is my body) what he ordained. 217. b Christ's
earthly body is not the earthly nature of the Sacrament of the body and blood
of christ. 218. a christ is of greatest antiquiti. 241. a christ only is to be
heard. ibidem Christ is set before us to follow. 242. b christ is the prince
of peace. 256. a christ's reign dreamed of some in these days to be a
corporal reign. ibidem christ brings peace to the godly, and to the wicked
trouble. 357. a christ, with what garment he was apparelled. 268. b christ, as
an high Priest in what he excels the high Priest of the old law. 268. b
chrysostom writes an Homely de anathemate. 24. b chrysostom wills no man
to be punished anathemate. ibidem church, concerning only christ, is
monarchia 25. a church concerning bishops and preachers, is Aristocratia.
ibidem church concerning the people, is democratia. ibidem christen name
first given at Antioche. 26. b christians so called, a chrismate sacro. 27. a
christians in these days lack the fruits of true christians ibidem christias
do acknowledge one king, one savior and one head 28. a christians confess one
sacrifice for the remission of sins which is the death of christ. ibidem
church signified by Rachell with her beauty. 30. a church is bound to find
them that are not able to labor 49. a church has gold not to be kept, but
to be bestowed. ibidem church taught when the new Testament was not written.
58. a church never without the spirit of God. ibidem church depends only of
the mouth and voice of God. ibidem. b church the authority thereof commended
against heretics. 59. a Chrysostom a great prayser of Paul. ^4. a church,
churchyardes and parishes appointed by Dionisius, 67. b churches began not to
be builded sumptuously before the time of Constantine the great. 77. a
chrysostom what he was, where he was borne, of what lineage he came, and of
whom he was converted to the faith. 83. b chrysostom had to his scholemaister
Eusebius Emissenus ibidem chrysostom, by whom made Deaco^ and Priest. 84. a
chrysostom bishop of Constantinople after Nectarius. ibidem chrysostom did
see Hesichius, in his dream. ibidem chrysostom took his name of eloquence,
and therefore was called golden mouth. ibidem chrysostom had gift to heal all
manner of diseases. ibidem chrysostom ordained prayers to be said in the night
against the Arrians. ibidem Chrysostom deposed unworthy Priests. ibidem. b
chrisostomes works digested into 5. Tomes. ibidem chrysostom counted a proud
and ambitious man. ibidem chrysostom molested by false brethren, by courtiers,
by heretics, and by heathen men. ibidem chrysostom did eat alone without
company. ibidem chrysostom was always sickly. ibi. chrisostomes contentions
with Seuerianus, and Theophilus, and thoccasions thereof. ibidem chrysostom
rebukes very sharply Eutropius, lyeng before the altar. 85. b chrysostom
accused of the court to be an unmerciful man. ibidem chrysostom, wherefore
the empress Eudoxia, was sore against him. ibidem chrysostom reprehendeth
the silver image of thempresse Eudoxia, which was set up by the church of
Sophia. 86. a chrysostom sharply touches Eudoxia, whom he calls
Herodias. ibidem chrysostom, where he was taken of a fever and dyed. ibidem
chrysostom, Peter and John the Apostles appears to him before his death.
ibidem chrisostomes sanctimonie of life. ibi. chrysostom called of Theodoretus
Magnus, Johannes and doctor orbis terrarum. ibidem chrisostomes errors. ibidem
Church in Christ's time, began in the maunger 88. a Church of Constantine the
great received many priuilegies. ibid. b Church defined by S. Paul. 90. a
Church where to be found Austines saying thereof ibidem Christ, complementum et
propriu^ obiectum baptismi 91. a Church since Vincentius Lyrinensis tune has
been much corrupted 241. b Church, when it erreth. 242. a Church of Rome why
it ought now to be forsaken 244. b Church of Rome at the beginning was holy
ibidem Church, her signs and marks do not always appear outwardlye ibide^
Church when it appeared not outwardely 244. and. 245 Church of God extinct at
no time 245. a Chauod and Chaued in the Hebrewe what they signify, and how
they are written 274. b Chair of pestilence, how it is taken 281 a Church
primative, greater then the authority of the Pope 289. b Church is as it were
Isagoge. 290. a Church is a wytnes of the doctrine of the apostles. ibidem
C ante I.
Cicero, how his ancestors took that name 18. a Cicero saved Here^ninus from
death by his eloquence ibidem Cicero before his death saw a Raven smite a dial
out of his place. ibidem Cicero his garment bitte^ of the same Raven before his
death: ibide^ Cicero his head and hands smitte of by Herennius, and brought to
Anthony, and set over the place of judgment at Rome ibidem. b Ciprian, labored
to the people to receive an excoate person. 25. a Ciprians faults in doctrine.
114 a Ciprians conflicts with his adversaries. ibidem Ciprians kind of style
ibidem Ciprian called Tertulian his master ibidem Ciprians banishmente and
martyrdom. 115. a Circumstances in number three between the new testament and
the old. 169. a. b Ciprian and Cirillus how they are to be understood
writing upon the sacrament of the Lords supper. 218. a Ciprians mind
concerning sismes 244. a Circumstances of person puts us in remembrance of
many things 278 a
C ante L.
Clement and Ignatius to be believed before Ambrose and Chrysostom. 35. a
Clement and Anacletus names falslye alleged. 44. b Clement not the imediate
successor of Peter ibidem Clerus, what it signifies, and why the clergy are
so called. 52. b Clerus, signifies patrimony or an acre of ground, or a
garden ib Clerus, signifies a worm that destroys honye combs. ibide^
Clerus called of some piransta ib Clement rehearses a notable historye of
John. 77. a Cleophias described, and what it signifies. 131
C ante O.
Constantine, the son of Constantius a duke of Rome 38. ib Constantius sent
to Britayne to recover the tribute. ibidem Coil king of Britayne ibidem
Constantius took Helena Coils daughter to wife. 39 a Constantius with his wife
Helena, returned to Rome. ibidem Constantine begotten at Tharsus, and borne of
Helena being a concubine ibidem Constantine became so valiant that he was
surnamed the great Constantine. ibidem Constantine an Idolator ibide^
Constantine sacrifised to Idols by the impulsion of his wife Fausta ibidem
Constantine vanquished Maxentius ibidem Constantine became a christian, but not
baptized before his old age. ib. Constantine purposed to be christened in the
flood Iordayne ibide^ Constantine caused the book of the gospels to be carried
before him. ibidem Constantine made the bible to be copyed out, and to be sent
through the whole Empire ibidem Constantine saw a sign of the cross in the
elament shininge like fire ibidem Constantine hard an angel saying, in hoc
vince, in this sign of the cross overcome thou ibidem Constantine how many
years he was Emperor ibidem Constantine baptized of Eusebius bishop of
Nicomedia. ibidem Constantine died at Nicomedia, and was buried at
Constantinople. ib Constantine christened of pope Siluester as Iacobus Philipus
says ibidem Constantine could not be healed with Physicians ibidem
Constantine counceled by priests to bathe himself in the blood of young
children ibidem Constantines leprosye a fable. ib Constantine put one of the
nails wherewith Christ was crucified upon his bridle, the.2. in his Helmet,
and threw the.3. into the sea ibidem Constantine christened.65. year of his
age, and the.3. year of his empire. ibidem Constantine babtized after the
death of Siluester.5. years 36. b Constantine rebaptized as Isodorus says
ibidem Constantine baptized of Melchiades as Gratianus writes. ibidem
Constantine was baptized. ibide^ Constantine made Baptisterium at Rome ibidem
Constantines donation given to Siluester feigned 40. a Constantine said to the
priests ye cannot be judged of men ib. b Constantine did not think of the
preeminence of the Bishop of Rome when he spoke of the Bishops of the Nicene
council. 41. a Constantine excercised authority over the bishopes ibidem
Constantine commanded the Bishopes to a general counsel appoyntinge time and
place ib Constantine writes sharp letters in the behalf of Athanalius ib
Co^sta^tine did justify Cicilianus. ib Constantine confirmed the definitions
of the bishops concluded in Councels ibidem b Constantine embraced the
decrees of the Nicen council bidem Constantine sent into exile Arrius with.11.
of his fellows ibidem Constantine commanded the books of Arrius to be brent,
and all that kept them to be put to death ib Constantine was the first
presedent whereof the kings of Britayn^ had privilege to wear close crowns
42. b Colossis, a town of Phrigia, destroyed with an earthquake in the time of
Nero 45. b Colosians converted to the faith by Archippus and Epaphrias ibid.
Colossians turned from the faith by false apostles ibidem Colossians were
persuaded that angels were authors of our salvation ibidem Colossi, Images of
horrible greatness 46. a Colossi, some were.30. cubits high, some.40. some 70.
ibidem Colossi, of the son 70. cubits high made by Colossis scolar to
Lysippus ibidem Colossis, had a thome that few me^ might fadom ibidem Colossi,
2. years in making ib Colossi, cost 30. talentes for the making ibidem
Colossi, named of Aristotle, a brazen pillar 600. cubits high ibidem Colossica
onera, great burdens. ib Colossicus vir, a mighty huige, and tall man ibidem
Constantine the 5. called Iconomachus in derision 100. b Constantine whi he was
called Coproimnus ibidem Councels assembled under the Romish bishopps for the
extirpation of the popes adversaries and gods true doctrine these 500. years.
106 a Cohen, what it signifies. 125. b Contempt of parents how wicked before
god 157. a Corinthus, a famous city of Achaia of whom it was builded 177. a
Corinthus, first called Certheia ib. b Corinthe, by who^ over thrown ib.
Concubine in the hebrew tongue what it is called and what it signifies. 181. a
Concubinatus of the Romans not counted matrimonye ibidem. a conditions or
circumstances are to be observed, when the church or magistrate make any laws
186. a Councils, which did greuouslie err 198. b councels, of what sort are to
be admitted 199. b Council of constans when it began 133. a council of
consta^s took away one kind of the sacrament 134. a Council of constans
condemned John Hus ibidem Council of constans has two contrarietyes ibidem
Conscience of men terrefied with preaching of the law 239. b Conscience is
purged by repentance 240. a Common consent how it ought to be admitted 241. b
Conscience defined 258. a Conscience divided into 8. kinds, and the definition
of every of the^ ibidem. a 259. a conscience, how it is reformed 260
constantinus the Emperor had Paphnutius in great honor above al other men 272
confessors to be present at a malignant counsel it is unlawful ib. b
Corinthians abuse of the Lords supper condemned of saint Paul council of
Neocesar, and the Sinode of Gregorye the younger, what they decreed touching a
woman marienge two brethren 292 a. b
C ante V.
Curtius, died willinglye for his country 2. b cure of the church committed
to priests 40. a
C ante Y.
Cyrus the king cast out to be devoured of wild beasts 46. b cyrus, nurced
of a bitch ibidem cyrus chosen king of the Persians. ibidem Cyrus slain of
Toniris with.200000 persians ibidem cyrus head cast into a vessel of blood 47.
a cyrus first called Agradatus ib cirus so named of a river in Persia ibidem
cyrus could call all the men of his host (which were innumerable) by their
own proper names ib cyrus made a galory of gold and iuerie, and such a costly
place that it was counted one of the seven wonders of the world ibide^ cyrus
life written by Exnophon in greek ibidem cyzicum, a notable city of Bethinia
ibidem
D.
D ante. A
Dark why the body is so called. 31, b Darkness of us ar the carnal senses.
ibidem Daniell the Prophet of what stock he came. 174. a Daniel brought king
Darius unto Media. ibidem Day what may be understood thereby. 179. a David was
called Christ of the prophets by what figure. 205. a Darkness came upon all
the earth how it is taken. 222. b Daniels words concerning certeintie or
remission of sins corrupted. 240. a Daecas, what it is. 33. b
D ante. E
Dece^uiratus, what office it is. 14. a Decemuiri, added two tables of laws,
to the ten tables. ibide^ Demosthenes and Cicero, very shamefast and fearful
in the beginning of their orations. 17. b Demosthenes was a cutlers so^. 18. a
Demosthenes left very rich. ibide^ Demosthenes had an impediment in his tongue.
ibidem Demosthenes put small stones in his mouth, because he would speak
tretably. ibidem Demosthenes remained close in his study, two or three months
together. ibidem Demosthenes did shave part of his head because he would not
go abroad from his study. ibidem Demosthenes corrupted with money. ibidem
Degrees of excommunication. 24. b Democratia what it is. 25. a Devils ca^ do
nothing but so much as God suffers. 32. a Deutronomion whereof it comes and
what it signifies. 59. b Deutronomion* a commentary upon the ten
co^maundeme^ts. ibide^ Decretum what it is, and how many things it
signifies. 60. a Decreta senatus, and senatusconsultu^, how they differ.
ibidem Deckyng of the body moderated by three virtues. 92. b Demochares sent in
embassage to king Phillippe, his shameless license in words. 102. a
Demochares for his malepartnesse called Thersites. ibidem Deus. wherefore thrice
used in one sentence of Deutronomie. 123. a Deus, whereof it comes. 200. a
Decaloge given in a short sum by a general consent. 245. b Democritus
described. 166. a Democritus pulled out his own eyes. ibidem. b Democritus
for his excellent learning might have been called (...). 267. a Democritus
made a solemn feast to the hole army of king Xerxes. ib. Democritus his
excellent saying. ibi. Democriti, they were six of that name. ibidem
Desperation a vice most detestable. 179. b
D ante. I
Discipline what it is. 31. b discipline consists in.2. points. ib
Discipline has two parts that is to fear and love. ibidem Discipline no
where neglected, but where pride is. ibidem Discipline mother of religion.
ibide^ Dianas Temple made in twenty years. 46. a Dianas Temple set in a
marisshe ground. ibidem Dianas temple had a foundation of coals rammed hard
together and fle^ceis of woolle laid upon the same. 46. a Dianas temple 429.
feet in length and 220. in breadth. ibidem Dianas temple had 127. pillars
every one being 60. feet hight. ibide^ Dianas temple had the rooffe of Cedar,
and doors of Cyprus tree. ibide^ Dianas temple burnt by one Herostrotus, to get
him a name. ibidem Dioclesian 306. years after Christ began his cruel
persecution against the Church. 51. b Dioclesian joined with him in his Empire
Maximianus a fierce man, yet a fool. ibidem Dioclesian his palace burned.
ibide^ Dioclesian commanded the Temples of the Christians to be beaten down
flat to the ground upon Easter day. ibidem Dioclesian burned all the books of
holy Scriptures in the market place. 51. b Diocletian would be woorshipped as
God. ibidem Dioclesian reigned 20. years and then gave over his Empire. ibide^
Dioclesian, wherefore he gave over his Empire. ibidem Dioclesian dyed of a
miserable disease. ibidem Dioclesia^ (as some write) destroyed him self.
ibidem Dioclesians tongue engendered worms within the Jaws of his mouth, which
worms falling out infected all the house with stincke. ibidem Dioclesian
barkyng like a dog gave up his life. ibidem Difference between Saxum and
Lapis. 52. a Dies criticus, or decretorius, a day of judgment. ibidem Dignum
patella operculum, a proverb. 102. a Dionisius Ariopagita, who he was after
Erasmus judgment. 222. b Dionisius, Bishop of Corinthus books much
mentioned of, in the ecclesiastical hystory. 223. a Dionisius books judged of
learned men to be made of Appollinarius. ibidem Dionisius Bishop of Hierapolis
described. ibidem Dionisius Areopagita, first bishop of Athenes ordered by
Saint Paul. ibidem Distribuite tempora, and concordat scriptura, used of many
for a proverb. 279. b
D ante O.
Donatus being condemned in the counsel Arelatine, appealed to Constantine.
41. a Domitianus persecuted the Christians the 14. year of his reign. 60. b
Doctrine for repentance for the space of.30. days. 77. a Doctrine of the
Gospel very familiare to the Jews. 79. a Dove did sit upon Chrisostomes
head. 84. a
D ante. R
Draconites a precious stone made of the brain of Dragons. 30. a Draconites, a
stone of a wonderful bright color. ibidem Dronckardes and quaffers of wine to
be greatly discommended. 156. a Dronckardes may not excuse them selves by Noe.
ibidem. b
D ante. V
Duns expounded the.4. books of the master of the sentences. 10. a Duns a
graye friar. ibidem Duns, by surname called Scotus. ibidem Duns (as some write)
dyed of the disease called Apoplexia. ibidem Duns (as the most part write) was
buried quick and alive. ibidem
E.
E ante. A
Ears are as a tonnell to the body. 62. b Easter days celebration brought
into controversy. 83. a
E ante B
Ebionites aff^rme Christ not to be before his corporal birth. 76. b
E ante C
Ecpirosis defined. 134. b Echathenis a citi in Media. 174. b
E ante. G
Egypt described. 161. a Egypt whereof called Aeria. ibidem Egypt it reygneth
there, never or very seldom. ibidem Egyptians, why they honored Ceres for a
goddess. ibidem
E ante. L
Elfridus king of England ravished with famous Scotus. 10. a Elect of God care
not for things temporal. 13. a Elizeus refused the donation of Amon. 40. a
Eleazarus brother to Simon Iustus what he was, and how many years he satte.
272. a Eleazarus his words to king Ptolome. 273. a Elohim, how it is
understand of the 70. and what it signifies. 276. a
E ante. M
Emperors power over Bishops most authentical. 41. a Emperors letters
gathered together of the Bishops of the East and of the West. ibidem. b
Emperors commanded the sixte Council. ibidem Emaus what it was after the
euersion of Jerusalem, Emaus called Nicopolis Emaus how far distant from
Jerusalem. 131. b
E ante N
Envy lets every enterprise. 2. b Envy disdayneth the felicity of all
men. ibidem Envious men be rich with other men's loosse. 3. b Envy look more.
ibidem. a Envy the best souerayntie for eye sight. ibidem Envy cannot hurt
patience. ibidem Envious men tormented with other men's felicity. 10. b Envy
more of that. ibidem Ennius, Virgil Plautus, Cecilius Terentius, and Tullius,
accused for taking and translatyng other men's works. ibidem Enoch, his books
were before Moses books, his books mentioned of Tertulian, and the ancient
fathers. 127. a Enoche his testimony alleged of Jude not to be contemned.
ibid. b Enos, what it signifies. 131. b Enoche entreated of by Theophilacte.
ibidem Enoche, and Helie entreated of Austen, writtyng against the Pelagians.
ibidem Enoche entreated of by Chrysostom. 132. a Enoch, his translation
entreated of by Theodoretus. ibidem Enoch, and Hely written of by Iacobus
Naclautus. ibidem. b Enoch entreated of by Calvin upon Genesis. ibidem Enoch
entreated of by Chrisostom upon Genesis. 133. a Pnos him, the elect people of
God. 147. a Pnos, first began to call upon the name of the Lord how, it is to
the taken. 148. b Pnos, time compared to this our time of England. ibidem End
of his days no man does know. 201. a England first inhabited of the Grecians.
217. a England when it first received the faith of Christ. ibidem
E ante. P
Epitheton, a figure what it is, and for what cause it is used. 30. a
Epitheton, used for iij. causes. ibide^ Epistles and sermons contained in the
three Tomes of S. Ambrose be forged. 39. b Epistles decretall forged. 44 b
Epystles decretalles judged of a Monk named Caltesen to be Apocriphall. ibidem
Epistles, and certain books feigned in Clement, and Anacletus name. ibidem. b
Epistles decretall not cited for authority before the time of Carolus Magnus.
45. a Epistles decretall not alleged of none ancient writter. 44. b Epaphras
one of the 70. disciples. 45. b Epicures spotted with blood and slaughter. 56.
a epicures do laughet rue religion to scorn. ibidem epicures counted chief
felicity to co^siste in pleasure. 65. a epicures condemned Logic. ibide^
Epicurus did deride Gods providence of wordly things. ibidem epicures preferred
of Lucretius before all other Philophers. ibidem Epicurus of a most continent
life. ibidem epicurus a man of very spare diet, living only with broune bread,
and water. ibidem epicurus, his disciples turned their maistres opinion to
bodily pleasure. ibidem. b (...), has a double signification. 79. b epiphanius
where he was borne, he had to his master very godly Monks, he was provoked to
heresy, by the heretics called Gnostici, he builded a Monastery he was
Bishop of Salamine, his excellent virtues. 235. a. b epiphanius wrote
traditions he was some time deceived, he confuted Apolinaris his friend ibidem b
Epiphanius called of Hierome (...), he condemned Origins books, he was
reprehended of Chrysostom, his sayng to Chrysostom. 236. a epiphanius miracle
wrought upon a beggar. ibidem. b
E ante Q
equity defined.
E ante S
Essaei, why they dissented from the Pharisyes and Saduces. 43. b Essaei,
described of Josephus in his book de bello Iudcico. ibide^. Essaei, did loath
marriage. ibdem Essaei co^temners of riches haiuyng all things in common. ibidem
Essaei never changed their apparel. ibidem Essaei did never eat before they
did call upon God. 44. a Essei, when they disputed came together no less then
a hundred. ibidem Essaei very superstitious on the saboth day. ibidem Essaei
would not ease them selves, but covered it again with earth. ibid. Esaye, whot
he was and when he lived 71. b Esaye much more noble then any king by
preemine^ce of visions 22. a Esaye many things recovered of him ib. a Esaye
counted of the ancient fathers an Evangelist ib Esaye martired by Manasses
ibid Esaye, his words touching the works of labor 222. a
E ante T.
E the letter signifies Externe and express. 28, b
E ante V.
Euangelium the etimologie thereof and how many things it sgnifieth 37. b
Euangelia in the plural number betokens the sacrifices woonte to be offered
for joyful ridinges 38. b Euangelium signifies reward given to him that
brings merye ti tidinges ibidem Eusebius wroote 15. books v. of them were of
Constantine ib Euagrius Scolasticus wroote six books from the Empire of
Theodosius the younger unto ye 12. year of Maricius the Emperor ibid Euphrates
ra^ne through the midst of Babylon 47. b Euphrates a river in Mesopotamia. 136.
a Eutiches, the heretik described, his heresy where it began, where he was
condemned 233. a Eutiches called of Leo an impudent and unlearned heretic ib
Every man shall dye for his own sin 291. a Every preacher how he ought to
labor in the gospel ibide^
E ante X.
Excommunicat persons are not to be taken as enemies 24. a Excomunicati, who
they were ib Expositions of the scriptures has been diverse at all times, yet
not dissonant from the faith 260. a
E ante Z.
Ezechiell, and the whole histroy of his life and death described 278. a
Ezechiel in hebrew what it signifies ibidem
F.
F ante A.
F Signifies facere. 28. a Faith defined ibide^ Faithes etimologie given by s.
Augustine. ibide^ Faith woorketh by love ibidem. b Faith receaueth life of
love. ibidem Faith as well to be confessed with the mouth, as to be believed
with the heart 29. a Faith ought to be declared outward lie de precepto ibidem
Faith described by her letters, is not the iustifyeng faith, but faith
declaratiue. ibide^ Faith called of the schole men fides formata. ibide^ Faith
justifying goes before al manner of good works as. S. Gregorye says ibidem
Faith is the root of al good works after. S. Augustine ibidem Faith called of
the master of the se^tences ye Faith, quae no^ est virtus. ib Faith in act
does naturaly go before the act of charity as Lumbarde says ibidem Faith is
established by the only written word of God 55. b Faith defined 120. a Faith
constant and steadfast in Christ is not impudency as shameless papists do say
211. a Faith debated and concluded in latin. and at Smyrniu^ took place. 23^
Falling sickness called sacer morbus 31. a False prophets appoint places days
meats, oaths and vows 56 b Fast of the manichees described by s. Austen 184.
a
F ante E.
Fecialis, an herlde of arms 33. b Fenell good for eyesyghte. 15. a Festival
days of creatures are to be abrogate 190. b
F ante I.
Fiber does not bite of his stones 54 Fides described after the letters in the
word fides ibidem Fides informis, faith without love is the faith of devils
ib Fire in one hand a proverb what it means ibidem Fire how it shall come
at the latter day 71. b Fire, water, earth, air how they shall remain at
the latter day. ibidem Finger of God is called the holy ghost, and wherefore
by the judgment of. S. Augustine and Cirulus 33. a
F ante L.
Fleece of wolle described by Austen and Ambrose 173. a Flesh wherefore it was
abstayned from by Apolinus, Thianeus and Pithagoras 188. a
F ante O.
Foedus what it signifies and the etimologye thereof ibidem Former councels
may be amended by latter councels 199. b Forsterus writes a merye note in his
dictionarye of Hebrew 227. a
F ante R.
France when it enbraced the Orthodoxe faith 117. a Frugalitie defined 91. a
F ante V.
Fuluia a cruel and bloody woman. 18. b Fuluia pulled Ciceros tongue out of his
head when he was dead ib Fuluia rent in pieces Ciceros tongue with a pin ibidem
Fucies three in number and what they signifye. ^0. ^
G.
G ante A.
GAlen described his strange experiment, how many books he did set forth, his
death. 155. 116 gamas captain of the host infensiue to Chrysostom 85. b
G ante. E
Gehezi stricken with a foul leprosye. 40. a Gelasius mind for the receiuinge
of both kinds 220. a Gentiles came of Iaphet a younger son of Noe 12. b
Gentiles Athei 13. a Gerson condemns the book entitled the Roman of the
Rose. ib. b Gersons judgment of Councelles. 200. a Getae called of Appianus
Daci. 4. b Getae were named afterward Gothi ibidem. b Getae people most
barbarous cruel and unthankful ibidem
G ante I
Gift of prophecy how to be expounded 80 a
G ante L.
Glory of god defaced caused Moses to slay. 23000. persons at one clap. 284. a
Glottony divided into surfeiting and dronkennes. 154. b
G ante O.
God gives man not only authority to do things, but also faculty and strength
to do them. 5. a God executes judgment with severity in excommunication. 24.
a God brings the wonders and miracles of the wicked to such success that
the elect may understand the deceit of Satan thereby. 32. a God turns his
face against all Southsayers ibidem. b God sat upon his mercy seat and
talked with Moises 38. b God adds his plagues to the^ that do add unto and
diminishe the scriptures 55. b God will not be worshipped with doctrines of men
56. b God only to be soght for Counsel. ib. God never changes his mind as
men do 57. a God forbids to seek the truth of the dead 72. b God the first
author of the scriptures 128. b God more ready to show mercy then justice 157. b
God how he is named of the latins and Grecians 200. a God gives all things
necessary to man's life 20^. a God how he is provoked to anger. 215. a God
truly worshipped 118. b God has put in the soul of men. iiii natural
properties 258 a Good books of il me^ destroyed. 63. b Goods more then need
be the goods of the poor. 49. b Governor spiritual ought rather to dye*
then to consent to the Idolatry of the people 270. a
G ante R.
Gra^mer is called, Ars trinialis and wherefore 31. a Great personages some
delighte in wanton books 56 a Greater part overcame the better in the time of
Achab king of Judah in the time of Manasses, and in ye time of Ieroboa^ 287. b
288. a Grecians answer to Pope John the xxiii 234. b Gregorye the great
governed the church with great care and diligence 41. b Gregorye the great
confessed that themperoure had rule and dominion over the priests 43. a Gregory
the pope obeyed the emperor ib Gr^gorius Nazianzenus judgment of councels 198.
b Grocinus judgment of Dionisius Areopag^ta 223. a Grunnire comes of this
word Gry 10. a
G ante. Y
Gymnosophistae described 202. a
H.
H ante. A
HArpocrates an image holding his finger upon his lips commanded silence
H ante. E
Heaven and carth shall pass, but the word of God shall not pass. ibid. b
Heaven and earth shall witness against us 56 b Heaven and earth shall pass,
what it means 70. b Hebrews had original beginning of Sem Noes eldest son
12. b Hebrews do call a master Rabbi 73. b He that believes and is baptized
shall be s^ued. ibid Helena a fair maid and well learned 39. a Helena kept a
victualinge house whom Saint Ambrose called Stabulatia ibidem Helena builte a
temple where she found the cross, a fable ibid. b Helena brought with her
iii. nails wherewith Christ was crucified a fable ibid Helias alone resisted
many hundred of Baalistes 241. b Henry the first called for his learning
beauclearke 3. b Henriciam a Petrobrusani brought in the heresy of the
Anabaptists 167. b Hercules feet so much longer as other men's feet were 48
Hercules furlong longer then other furlongs ibid. a Heresis betokens election
ibid Heresis whereof derived, and what it signifies ibidem Heresis taken in an
il sense per Catachrelin 26 a Heresis taken of Saint Austen for an opinion
ibidem Heresis derived (as some say and write) of this verb (...) which
signifies to lean to ibid. b Heresy is what so ever sauoreth against truth
ibid. a Heresy a work of the flesh. ibidem Heretik differs from a scismatik.
ib Heretik defined of the scholeme^ ib. Heretic has 3. properties, false
belief, perverse will, and obstinacye ibidem Heretic he is not that does
err except there be in him a perverse will to persist ibidem. b Heretics and
sectaries what they lack 28. b Herod eaten with life 42. a Herodotus
entitled his ix. books by the name of nine muses 9. b Herodotus wrote al ye
history done in Europa and Asia by the space of 240. years ibidem Herostratus
glory and renoum gotten by a mischeuous act. ibid. a
H ante I,
Hiero punished a poet for rehersing wanto^ verses before his wife 62. b Hiero
embrayded for his unsavory breath. 63. a Hiero his wife a straighte keeper of
chastity. ibid. a Hierome with unspeakable labors did study to obtain the
knowledge of the three toonges 55. a Hieroms sentence concerning the
reprehension of Peter is not to be granted 238. a Hierome accused for
puttinge other men's sayings and se^tences in his books 15. b Hierom what year
he died 7. b Jerusalem the cities name assigned of the Hebrews 87. a Hilarious
the bishop came of a noble parentage 51. a Hilarious a great lover of ye poor.
ib Hilarious occupied husbandrye that he might give to the poor ibid Hildebrand
was intronizate of his sold ors without the consent of the clergy 4. a
Histories ecclesiastical from Christ unto the time of Marice written by
Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, Theodorus, and Euagrius ar
comprehended in.34. books and do count things don by the space of.590. years
ib. b
H ante O
Holy Ghost the only interpreter of him self in the scriptures 79. b Homo
Bulla a proverb what it signifies 301. a Hope is to be had of all men yet
lyuinge 24. a Horsemen having cote armor of gold were seen over Jerusalem to
course in the air by the space of fiftye days 65. a Hostia is divided into two
parts, of the schole men. 217. b
H ante V.
Huldarichus epistle to the pope for the d^fence of married priests 99. a
Husband of one wife how it is expounded ibid. b Husband why mentioned of Saint
Paul. 96. a
H ante Y.
Hyperbole what it is and examples of the same 78. b Hyperbole is much used in
the scriptures ibidem Hypotyposis what it signifies. 104 Hypocrites not
contented with the name of Christ. 27. a Hypocrites desire to have other names,
as to be called Dominiks Franciscanes. etc. ib. b
I.
I ante A.
I The letter signifies integrity and fulness of faith. 28. b Jacob whether he
sinned or no in bying the birth right of Esau. ibidem Jacob whether he lied or
no in saying to his father I am Esau ib Jacob in byinge the birthright whether
he committed cimonie or no. ib Jacobs benedictio^ upon the Patriarchs
expounded.3. waxes 247. b Jacob Isaac his so^n was called Israel. ibide^ a
Jacobs blessinge given to Benjamin is applied to Paul and what is meant thereby
34. b James died before Peter.7. or.8. years 44. b James named Iustus supposed
to be the young man that left his synne^ cloth behind him and fled away naked
ibid. a Idolatria defined 270.
I ante E.
Jehovah, how it was written in the ancient books 122. b Jehovah was
dangerous to be pronounced saving in the sanctuary. ib Jehovah how it is
derived. ibid. Ieremias what he was 64. a Ieremias sanctified in his mothers
womb ibidem. b Ieremias prophesied being but a child ibidem Ieremias
prophesied the fall of Jerusalem by the hebrew letters.4. times repeated ibidem
Ieremias drove away venomous worms in Egypt ibide^ Jeremy stoned to death in
egypt. ib Jesus Christ is the searcher of men's hearts 286. a Jews brought up
in the study of prophets even from their youth. ibi Jews not called Hebraei,
of one Heber, but of Abraham. 136. a Jews their vain dreams. 226. a Ignorant
man is not a divine, but a distayner of divinity 55. a
I ante L.
Isles in this part af the Ocia^ were all called Britanie 217. a Illotis
pedibuset illotis manibus what is signified thereby. ibide^. b
I ante M.
Image and similitude of God in Adam what it is 139. b Image and similitude how
they differ ibidem image of god is not made with ma^s hand 100. a Images
divided into.2. sorts 271. a images thoroughly entreated of 100 a images made by
man's hands be nothing but earthly and corruptible. ib Images were abhorred of
the primative church and for the^ Constantine the.5. was called Iconomachus in
derision ibidem. b Imago dei, and ad imaginem Dei, how they differ 142. a
images decreed to be retained in the church by ye 2. counsel of Nice. ib. b
I ante N.
Incantacyon divided into four kinds ibid. a Incantation has four spices
Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy and Pyromancy ibid Incantators who be so called
ibi. b Incestuous persons taxed 292. a Incestuous persons by carnal meddling,
who are so judged ibid Incestuous men murtheres and Pirates are admitted
bishops and priests among the Papists, and married men refused. ibid. b
Inductio defined. 219. Inchau^ters have lost their faith. 33 Inchauntme^t
brought from the Persians ibidem Inchaunters of Pharao resisted Moises by
enchauntment ibid. a Inchaunters by the sufferaunce of god do make ye elements
to shake. ib inchau^ters trouble the minds of me^ and kill them force of
enchaunting. ib Inchaunters of Pharao why they could not turn dust into life,
and an answer to the same ibid Inchanters of Pharao confounded by a vile and
base thing ibidem Infirmity of man is to be regarded Infauntes when they
received the Eucaarist 262. b Infantes receive the Eucharist at this day in the
church of Lotharingia 263. a Interpretacion of the scriptures divided into
diverse senses 246. a Interpretations of many men with out the spirit of God
are called of Saint Peter private interpretation ibidem Interpreters of the
scripture in number.72. commonly called Septuaginta 273. b Invocation of
Saints falslye advouched 87. b
I ante O.
Job a figure of Christ in what respect 250. b Ioannes Fysherus Bishop of
Rochester sediciously withstod king Henry the eight when he died. 124 Ioannes
Gutenbergius first inverted printing ibidem. b Ioannes Raulius condemned the
fables of Openus Dauus ibid Ioannes Meldine^sis author of the Roman of the Rose
63. a John the Evangelist described with his life 76. a John was bishop of
Ephesus ibid John had the region of Asia ibidem John when he was bishop of
Ephesus there is no certaynty ibi John being very aged went to Ephesus after
the death of Timothy. ibi John wrote his Gospel to resist the heresies of
Cerinthus and of the Ebionites ibid. b John's persecution ibid. b John wrote
many miracles before his death ibid John has many miracles falsely imputed unto
him ibid John builded not church in his own name at Ephesus ibid. a. 77 John
drank poison ibid. a John by his prayer threw down the great temple of Diana
ibidem John committed a young man to the tuicion of a bishop ibidem John
revoked the same young man, from theft and murder ibidem. b John departed from
the bathing house where Cerinthus was 78. a John's death is of no certainty ibi
John dyed 68. years after christ. ib John banish into Pathmos. ibid, b John
went down a live into his grave ibidem John also supposed to be the young man
that left his linen cloth and fled away naked ibidem John reproved of the
angels for falling at their feet ibide^ John's diciples weaker, then the new
doctrine might be exhibyte unto them 37. a John's twoe of that name 60. b John
the Apostle delivered unto Chrisostme a book 84. a John and Philippe the
Apostles apparision to the Emperor Theodotius 908. b John the Pope was deprived
from the papacye for fleing from the council of Constance 133. b John.23. pope
discribed 234. a Joel the son of Pathuell is not discribed in the scriptures,
his authority much esteemed of Peter and Paul: his death uncertain. 261 a
Iohels words concerning certainty of remisio^ of sins discussed. ib Jonas
reprehended by Loath 52. b Ionathas was espied by Lots. 52. b Iouinia^ impugned
of s. Hierom. 87 Iouinianus discribed his heresies by who^ they were condemned
64. b Iouinianus Emperor of Constantinople described 96. b
I ante R
Ireneus described 82. a Ireneus saying concerning doctrine in the church
24. 2. b
I ante S.
Isaac called Christ ibidem. a Isaac Abraham's son was the figure of Christ
180. a Isaac in hebrew what it betokneth. Isaac lived with Sem. 110. years ib
Iscariots what it signifies 285. b Ischschah, what it signifies ib Ishe in
hebrew betokens a man and how it is written ibide^ Isis reported to have
first found out the Egiptian letters ib Isis wherefore she came from Achaia
unto Egypt ibidem a Ismaell was borne without the word 182. a Ismaell not
promised of god is only the son of the flesh ib Israel of diverse men
diversely expounded ibidem Isrell interpreted in the book of hebrewe names
ibidem Israel how it is expounded 140 Idea called of Plato first shape or
intelligence of things 103. a
I ante V.
Judas Machabeus purified the temple of Jerusalem again the 25. day of
November 6. b Judas Machabeus withstode the commandment of Antiochus ib Judas
Machabeus slain in battle by Demetrius ibidem Judas Lebbius described 137 b
Judas admitted of Christ to the last supper 244. a Judas infidelitye did not
corupte the rest of the disciples at Christ's supper ibidem Judgments of god are
called Abisus profunda 157. b Iulianus Apostata scofinglye demanded what manner
of spech the serpent used 69. a Iuorye good for the white dicease of women 54.
a Just man gives his bread to the hungry 50. a Justice (as Cicero writes) is
obedience to laws written and made 36. a Justification thoroughly discussed 193
K.
KEdoschim, in the hebrew tongue what it signifies 250. b King commanded to
have Gods books always in his hand 56. a (...), in Greek, what it signifies
76. a
L.
L ante A
Laws made at Athens concerning women. 3 in number 8. a Lapis Lidius what it
is 19 a Lapis Lidius is not the lode stone. ib Lapis Lidius is called
heraclius, not of Hercules but of heraclia a city. ib Lapis more les then
Saxum. 52. a Laicus, whereof it comes, and why so called ibide^ Laocoon, the
first thrust his spear into the wodde^ horse at Troy. ibi. Laocoons image cut
out ex vno lapide. ibide^. Lapis is that which is dug or taken out of the
ground ibide^ Lapis betokens a mile ibid Lawful to use lots ibidem La^d of
the living why so called. 71 a Law divided into three parts. 93. b Law
judicial remains concerning the substance 94 a Lamech.2. things are to be
noted in him Lactantius Firmianus described. 212. and.213. a. b Law written in
figures, and the hebrew tongue cannot be translated without great labor. 272. b
Law when it was made. 279. a
L ante E.
Let him that stands, take heed that he fall not 24. a Leages confirmed by a
sow slain with a flynt stone 33. b Leo.1. desired the emperor Theodosius that
he would command a general council to be kept in Italy ibide^ Leo.10. would
not defraude his soul of the pleasures of this life. ibi. a Leo.10. was called
Johannes Medices before he was Bishop of Rome 65. b Leo.10. was instructed
with good literature from his youth. ibidem Leo.10. was made cardinal at the
age of.13. years by Pope Innocentius ibidem Leo.10. given to delicate idleness
of the body 66. a Leo.10. loved Musicians, wine, and costly fare ibidem Leo
persecuted the Gospel with insaciable hatred against Luther. ib Leo made a
wicked answer to Cardinal Bembus ibide^ leo called the Gospel of Christ a fable
ibidem Leo did spread abroad most large and foolysh pardons ibide^ Leo had many
of his guard slain when he went to Mass. ibidem Leo enriched his bastards
ibide^ Leo sytting at a banquet and being very merry dyed ibidem Leo spoke.3.
words when he dyed concerning the ouercommyng of the Frenchmen ibide^. b Leo
Bizantius words to a certain rayler 215. a Letter that kills which it is 250
a
L ante I.
Lia, signifies labor 13. a Lia, life active ibidem Libellatici what they
were 24. a Liberal sciences.7. in number, and why so called 31. a Little ones,
why they be so called in the scriptures 35. a Liuius counted the Prince of al
latin Historians 33. a Liuius has only of these books which he wrote
being.120. in number, only three decades, and an half remaining ibidem. b
Liuies fame brought noble men to Rome to see him. ibidem Liuie lived.80. years
ibid Liuie dyed the.4. year of the empire of Tiberius ibide^. Liuie buried at
Padua ibid Linen twyned, what is meant thereby 172. b Litanie when it was
inverted. 209. a Litanie divided into a greater, and into a lesser ibi. b
L ante O.
London built of Brutus 5. a London founded when Helye was high priest of
Israel ibidem London first named Troynouant. ibidem Lots be of three kinds,
diuisoria, consultoria, diuinatoria ibid. b Lot diuisoria tolerable ibidem Lot
consultoria and diuinatoria wicked. ibid. lots may be used in giving alms to
one of.2. poor persons having need Love is divided into.2. kinds 242 a
L ante V.
Lucianus Atheos torn with dogs. 17. a Lucian wrote works in Greek to the
number of.171. ibidem Luke who he was, and what works he set forth 75. a Luke
learned the Gospel, not only of Paul, but also of other Apostles ibidem Luke
wrote the Acts of the Apostles in order as he saw the^. ibid. b Luke, how long
he lived. ibidem Luke had no wife. ibidem Luke buried at Constantinople. ibi.
Luke both a paynter and a Physician. ibidem Luke was hanged upon a green Olive
tree. ibidem Luke (as Platina says) had a wife. ibidem
M.
M ante. A
MAn may give office, but not faculty to do the office dulye. 5. a Man falling
is to be corrected with the spirit of lenity. 24. a Mahomet was first a poor
man, a byer and seller of camels. 30. b Mahomet acquaynted with Sergius the
moncke an heretic. ibi. Mahomet took upon him to reform the old law and the
new. ibid. Mahomet, won great realms. ibi. Mahomet at the age of 40. years
dyed of the falling sickness. ibide^ Mahomet feyned the angel to be sent to
him in message. 31. a Mathematicum, what it signifies. ibidem Matthew had two
names. 34. b Maxe^tius drowned in Tiber. 39. a Magistrate ecclesiastical and
magistrate te^porall distinct things. 40. a Mansoleum the tomb of Mansolus king
of Caria. 47. a Massilienses being a heathen of a very pure and incorrupt life.
62. b Massilienses never heard comedies or plays. ibidem Man, first and the
second difference between them. 70. b Ma^s doctrine forbidden to be believed as
necessary to salvation. 87. b Marcionistes taught that Christ suffered but by
opinion. 92. a Marriage of Priests attempted to be broken of Siricius in Spain
96. b Marriages touched of the Sorbonistes with a banbery gloss. 97. a Marriage
of ministers after their entrance into their ministry approved by Councels
and scholemen. ibidem Marriage of priests allowed by S. Austen. 99. a
Magistrates, whereof admonished by Cato the elder. 103. a Maximus Bishop of
Jerusalem, his eye put out, and his hamme cut of. ibidem Manes described, his
cruel death, his sect, where and when it spread abrod, and how long his
heresies were held of S. Austen. 124. a Marcio^ ye heretic described. 125. b
Mathusale^, how long he lived. 128. a Marcion the heretic called of
Policarpus the first begotten son of Satan. 283. b Man ought not to marry
his brothers wife. 290. b Men now living for the most part not worthy the name
of Christians. 27. a
M ante E
Melciades and Siluester dead before Co^sta^tine was baptized. 39. b Men wrote
first in the leaves of Palm trees, afterward in the rindes of trees,
afterward in volumes of lead, and in claye, and afterward in wax. 45. b
Melchisedech, first founder of Jerusalem. 87. a Men to be detested, are of
three sorts. 91. b Messiah, how called in Greek and Latin. 119. a Menander
described. 138. b Medici suscitabunt, translated of the 70. for mortui
resurgent. 276. a
M ante I
Minerua found out clothyng, weauyng and spynnyng. 8. a Minerua feygned of the
Poets to be borne of Jupiters brain. ibi. Minerua and Neptunus conte^ded who
should give the name to Athenes. ibidem. b Minerua, throwyng a spear upon the
ground brought forth an Olive tree. ibidem Misonianus a valiaunte horseman
laughed to scorn diuinatio^s. 33. a Misonianus killed the bird wherewith the
Romans would have taken divination. ibidem Miracles and signs of the Lord in
numerable. 57. b Michael the archangell and the devil strove and disputed
about the body of Moses. 129. a Millinaries heresy described, and who was the
first author thereof. 222. a Ministers and Priests were married in Epiphanius
his time. 225. b Minds sluggishe are to be excited and stirred by examples and
threatenings of the law. 278. a
M ante. O
Momus the God of fault findyng. 10. b Monarchia, what it is. 25. a Monckerie,
no mention made thereof, by any worthy writer 200. years after Christ. 44. a
Monckerie began about the end of. 300. years after Christ in Egypt and about
the beginning of 400. years. 45. a Monks first that were, Anthonius Pambus,
Macarius and Paulus. 45. a Monks two kinds ibidem Monastical life rehearced
of Basilius ibidem Mordred slain in battle besides Glastinburye 62. a
Modesty defined, the commendatio^ and effects thereof. 92. b Moses, his birth
and death. He was the first that gave letters to the Jews as Eusebius
writes 127. a Moses, why he was called a priest 138. a
M ante Y.
Mysterium, the Etimologie thereof and how many ways it is taken 34. a
Mysteries of God are to be searched with great reverence 55. a
N.
N ante A.
NAzianzen counted the hospital of Basilius to be nothing inferior to one of
the.7. wonders of the world 48. a Nazianzen counts 3. other things to be
three of the 7. wonders of the world, and what they be ib Nabuchadonozor
described. 262. a Nane was called Jesus when his name was given long before 130
b Naretia Budea a very froward woman and her death 216. a
N ante E.
Neptanus, smitynge the ground brought forth an horse 8. b Ne gry quidem a
proverb 10. a Nemesis a goddess, punisher of offenders 47. b Nemesis called of
some fortune ib Nemesis called Adrastia of Adrastus the king ibidem Nemesis
called Rhamnusius of the town Rhamnutia ibidem Nero the Emperor fished with
golden nets 104. a Nero the Emperor was thought to have been Antechriste 287. b
N ante I
Nicence counsel speaks of certain degrees in the church 24. b Nicen
council 41. b Nicholaite, a sect of heretics making their wives common 56. b
Nicolaus had a fair woman to his wife. ibidem Nicolaus, praised Clemens
Alexandrinus ibidem Nicolaus the popes words to king Lotharius having twoe
wives 153. b
N ante O.
Noctua volauit, a proverb 9. a Nothing spoken that was not spoken before 16. b
Non anginam patitur sed argentanginam, and whereof it sprange 18. a Nothing
more desirous of reuengement than a fearce woman ibid. b Nothing more cruel
than a raginge woman ibidem Nothing weaker than Satan if God do resist him
32. a No man can conuenientlye minister the word, and also the table 40 b No
pope has a better spirit than Peter had ibidem Nothing so sumptuous but time
does dipatch it 48. b Noble, honorable, and worshipful men ought specially to
read the holy scriptures 56. a Noe why he should not be accused of dronkenes
proved by three reasons ibidem Noe whether he did ill in cursinge Canaan 154. b
Noe why he cursed Cham and not Canaan 155. a Noe called of some Iamin 156. a
Noe with sorrow of mind did pronounce the curse upon Canaan ib
O
O ante F.
OFrings in the church very ancient 50. b
O ante L.
Oligarchia, consists in tyranye, and is to be removed from the church 25. a
Old garments and old bottles what they signifi 37. a Oliphant his nature
described 53. a Oliphants where they breed, and where they be greatest ibidem
Oliphants made very tame ib Oliphantes understand the language of their
teacher ibidem Oliphant described throughlye ib Olphants teeth true Iuorye ib
Oliphantes do kneel and rise, and have not only one bone in their knees as
some do write. ibidem. b Oliphants fear fire greatly ib Oliphants do not
ge^der before the age of 20. years ibidem Oliphant touches no more his female
when she is great 53. b Oliphantes live 200. years 54. a Oliphantes worship
the sun and moon ibidem. a Oliphants when they be hunted do not strike their
teethe into trees ibidem Oliphants eat great blocks and devour stones
ibidem Olipha^ts love dates above al other things ibidem Old and new
testament how they differ 168. b
O ante P.
Opinari what it signifies 91. b Opinio, fides, scientia, scrupulus how they
differ ibidem. b Opinion sometime taken for a fantasy, sometime for estimation
and commendation 92. a
O ante R,
Oraculum, whereof it is derived and what it signifies 38. a Oraculum, sometime
signifies the church or place where oracles are given ibidem Oraculum does
signify a short and worthy sentence ibidem. b Oraculum Apolinis, Sibillae
folium. Ex tripode dictum three proverbs which do signify any thing to be so
true as truth it self ibidem Origens book wherefore condemned 85. a Oracles of
Apollo deceiptfull 89. a Orthodoxum, what it signifies 100. a Origin described
Origins masters 136. a Origin wrote 6000. books 137. a Origin what
persecution and torments he suffered ibidem. a Origens death ibidem Origin ill
reported of the learned for using allegoryes 255. a Original sin of Marye is
called into controversy 265. a
O ante T.
Otho, Archbishop of Colo^ made an oration of the Emperors side for the
election of the pope 40. a
O ante V.
Ouidius, who he was and his life 15. b Ouidius in great favor with the
emperor 16. a Ouidius exiled into Pontus by Augustus where he died ib. a
Ouidius exiled for abusinge Iulia, the Emperors daughter ib Ouidius (as others
say) exiled for writing the book de art amandi ibidem Outward veil what it
signifethe 172. a
P
p ante A
PAtria, how it is derived. 2. a Paul's Church brent diverse and sondrye
times. 5. a Paul's cross thrown down with an earth quake. ibidem. b Paul's
Cross builte again by William Bishop of Cantorbury. ibidem Paul's Church
buylt as some suppose by Mulmusius. 6. a parasitus, whereof it comes and what
it signifies. 14. b parasitus, was an honest man. 15. a parasitus, has the
lust syllable save one long. ibidem Parmenion sent letters to Alexander and
accused philippe the physician. ibidem. b pausanius, being of great age never
used physician. ibidem Patience makes the conuicte better then the victor.
ibidem. a patience more entreated thereof. ibid. paul does stricke with
Anathemate, him that preaches any other doctrine. 24. b paul preached at
Thessalonica. 25. b Paul wrote two Epistles from Athenes to the
Thessalonians. ibidem. a Paul, why so called diverse judgments. 34. b paul,
so called of Sergius as Hierome writes. ibidem Paul before his conversion
called Saulus, and after Paulus, as some suppose. ibidem Paul (as Origene
thyncketh) had two names. ibidem paul's conversion diuersely written of. ibidem
paul, when and at what time converted. ibidem paul was converted 7. and 6.
months after the Ascension of Christ. ibidem Paul had a wife as diverse
do write. 34. b paul's stature described of Nicephorus. 35. a paul's wife
mentioned of Eusebius. ibidem. a paul and peter suffered both in one day and
under one tyrant. ibide^ paul slain two years after the death of Peter, as
Abdias writes. ibidem paul's death, the cause thereof not recorded. ibidem
paul's death thought of Chrysostom to be for alluryng to the faith Neroes
harlot. ibidem paul called of Nero, a corrupter, a knave, and a wicked manne.
ibidem paul counseled of Nero, to turn again his harlotte from the faith.
ibidem Paper named Carta of Carthage, the City whence Dido came. 45. b
Parchment invented after Paper. ibidem Parchement named Pargamena. ibidem
Parchemente named Membrana. ibidem Parasanga, vi. miles, and a quarter. 48. b
Paul went to Jerusalem not to receive any doctrine of the Apostles. 58. b
Parochi, what they be. 67. b Parents first, not safe against temptation in
paradise. 70. a Paul's saying (have we not power to lead about a wife) is of
diverse diversely expounded. 98. a Paul led not his wife with him when he went
about to preach. ibidem. b Paul had a wife after Ignatius, his authority.
Paul's marriage proved by this word Circumducendi. ibidem Paulus, patriarche of
Constantinople left his cure, being taken with a fever. 100. b Patripassiam,
heretics so called. 125. a Patriarchs marieng two wives at once what
mystery they did set forth. ibidem Pastors teaching Christ and his doctrine are
to be heard. 186. a Patience, the comme^dation and effects thereof. 215.
and.216. a. b Papias, of a very dull wit. 222. a Paul's mind in willing
younger widows to mary. 232. a Paul truly reprehended Peter for disse^blyng
with the Ge^tils. 238. a Paul why he feyned him self a Jew, and why he
circumcised Timothy. ibidem. b. and.239. a Papists make the text of the
scriptures doubtful and uncertain. ibi. b Papists do consent in persecution
and do dissent in sects. 241. a Paphnutius alone resisted the Counsel of
Nice. ibidem Paschal la^be was a figure of Christ 252. a Paphnutius described.
272. a Paracletus defined. 288. a Paraclytus written with ypsilon, what it
signifies. ibidem. b
P ante. E
Perfect Sacraments of salvation cannot be committed unto the^ that be
settled in old traditions. 37. a Peter would have refused the Empire of Nero,
if Nero had offered it him. 40. a Peter imagined the kingdom of of Christ to be
terrestrial, ibide^. a Peter would not take the care of the poor least he
should be hyndred to preach. ibidem. b Peter would not suffer Cornelius to
fall down before him. 42. a Peter wrote the second epistle against those
blasphemers which would have a new word beside the word of God. 58. a Peter
brought the keys to Chrysostom. 84. ^ Peter, whereof he took his name. 125. a
Pellicanus, his exposition of these words. Credo videre bona domini. etc.
183. b Peter why he dissembled. 238. b Peter's words to Simon Magus discussed.
240. a Peace of the mind and conscience. 252. b Peace of the world in deed is
no peace. ibidem Peace of Christ is perpetual. ibide^ Peace of the godly
retained only by faith. ibidem Peamain, what it signifies in Hebrew. 274. b
Petrus Gallatinus words uttered against him self. 275. b Peter why he was
reproved of Paul. 280. a
P ante. H
Phileni, two brethren that dyed for their country and their history. 9. a
Phisitia^s ought to be faithful. 15. a Physician begins where a Philosopher
ends. ibidem. b Physician best pleased when other men be diseased. ibidem
Philosophers, the Patriarchs of all heretics. 30. a Phariseis, and John's
disciples rooted in the traditions of their forefathers. 37. a Pharisie, the
word whereof it comes and what it signifies. 42, b Phariseis what they be,
and why so called. ibidem Phariseis had many profane and wicked opinions.
ibidem Pharisees consented to the death of John Baptiste. ibidem Phariseys
proud and bostyng of their works. ibidem Phariseys, did were long garments
and made broad hemmes in them ibidem Pharisees philacteries were of purple as
Epiphanius, and others do report. 43. a Pharisees, where they took occasion
of their philacteries. ibidem Philacterium, what it is. ibidem Phidias made the
Image of Venus, and the Image of Nemesis, 10. cubits high. 47. b Pharisyes
accusation refelled of Christ with 4. sillogisticall arguments. 284. a
p ante. I
Piramides in Greek wheerof it comes. 46. b Pighius mind of the Council of
Constaunce. 235. a
P ante. L
Plato, his books conteyne the first part of Genesis. 6. a Plato first
called Aristotle's, and afterward Plato. ibidem Plato, so called of broad
shoulders, or as other write of a broad visage. ibidem Plato lived sole and
chaste and dyed at the age of 81. years. ibidem Plato showed to Socrates in
his dream by a white cygnet. ibidem Plinius secundus, wrote the natural
historye, and in whose time he lived. 14. a Plinius counted pater fabularu^.
ibi a Plinius would leese no time. ibide^ Plinius perished in the hill of
Vesuimus. ibidem Plinius Cecilius, nephewe to the first Pliny. ibidem Plinius
wrote elegant epistles. ibi. Plinius secundus wrote an Oration named
Paniegericus to Trayane the Emperor. 14. b Plinius made consul of Trayane.
ibidem Plinius helped the daughter of Quintilian. ibidem Plinius succored
Martialis the Poet. ibidem Place be it never so holy cannot keep man from
sin. Placenta taken for Messiah him self. 275. b
p ante O.
Poet strycken blind for vsyng the mysteries of God. 34. a Pope holper then
Peter, and the angels. 42. a Pope to be abhorred as Antichriste ibidem Poor
people ought to be relieved with the goods of the church 49 a Pope took
example of Dioclesiane for priuies to kiss his feet 51. b Pope does curse in
the name of Peter and Paul 56. b poligamia condemned by S. Paul counted
lawful among the Jews 96. a popes election when it began to be confirmed of
the Emperor 234. b popes bond slaves do kiss his feet 171. a policarpus
discribed 283 a
P ante R.
Procumbentes, what they were 24 b prophanum, the etimologie thereof and how
many significations it has 34. b Prophanum, written of some with P.H. and by
old authors with. F ibidem. b propitiatorum, how named and what it signifies
37. b prophets are the mouth of God 57. a prophesies of Oseas, Amos, and
Zacharye why they were placed among the small prophets 72. a prophaeta what it
signifies 74. a prophetare, in the scriptures taken diverse ways. ibidem
Prophets false are understand by the name of a prophets. ibidem. b Prophets
false are known by iii. notas. ibidem Prophets godly are known by three
tokens. ibidem Private interpretation what it signifies. 79. b Private
interpretation given only by the holy Ghost. 80. a Prophetical doctrine what
faith and credit it requires. ibidem. b Priests wives and children cruelly
handled of the Papists. 96. a Priesthood does not break matrimony. ibidem.
b Priests that they ought to keep their wives Paphnutius in the Council of
Nice proves. 99. a Praxeas an heretic. ibidem Proscription, is of diverse
significations. ibidem priests, lawful for them to marry. 224. a prayer
public to be joined with fasting commanded of Saint paul. ibidem. b
priests of the old law were not contaminate with simple copulation. 226. b
primas fides discussed. 228. b (...), how it is used. ibidem prophets and
Apostles had errors in their Churches. 243. a priscillianistes defended their
errors by allegories. 252. a probet seipsum homo, discussed at large. 264. a
proof of our selves wherein it consists. ibidem. b priests what things
does commend and set them forth. 269. a properties of God to be attributed to
creatures, is most detestable. 272. a promise of God expounded by S. paul.
279. a
p ante V
publius decius the Father and the son, slain for their country. 2. b
purple coulor what it signifies. 172
p ante y
pythonissae, what they be and why so called. 32. b
Q
Q ante V
QVirites, what it signifies. 14. b
R.
R ante A
RAzias act recorded in the Machabees not commended. 7. b Rachell, signifies
Oue^ a Sheep. 13. b Rachell, life contemplative. ibidem Rachell, why she stole
her fathers Idols, and what it signifies. ibid. Rabbi, whereof it comes. 73.
b Rabbini, what they are. ibidem Rabbi, title thereof redeemed of the Jews by
favor and money. ibid Raah in Hebrew, what it betokens. 160. b Raylyng is to
be avoided of Christian men. 215. b Raylyng against a good man returns to the
rayler and abides not in the good man. ibidem Rationale, what manner of garment
it was. 268. a
R ante E
Religio, the etymology and signification thereof. 9. b Redemption of the soul
of man are his own riches. 50. a Reue^gement, examples thereof. 216. a Rentynge
in pieces of the dayle, what it signified to the Jews. 173. a Repentance
wherein it chiefly consists. 240. a Redemption is of two sorts. 266. a
Rede^ptio praeseruatiua, more subtle then sauory. ibidem
R ante I.
Righteousness what it signifies and how many ways it is taken 37 b
Righteousness in hebrew how it is called, with the signification thereof. ibidem
Righteousness is not a part by it self but is the mother of all virtues 36. a
Righteousness specially taken is one of the.4. Cardinal virtues ib. a Rich
men excel because they have occasion to help other 50. b Ribbon in the Caldis
and Siriane tongue signifies a master 73. b
R ante O.
Rome was without a Phisician 600. years 15. b Romans in time of misery
choi^^ Dictatorem 25. a Romans referred weighty matters to quirites ibidem
Rome not converted to the faith in the time of Constantine 40. a Rome, the
city, receptacle and seat of Antichrist 61. b
R ante V.
Rudis what it is, and how many things it signifies 36. b Rudis in Mathewe
how it is taken ibidem Rudis a substantive what it signifies 37. b
S.
S ante A.
Satan persuades crueltye under color of righteousness 24. a Sacrum what it
signifies, and how many ways it is taken 31. a Salitores what they be 32. b
Solomon had two names 34. a Saduces what they were, and whereof they took this
name 43. a Saduces had many duilishe opinions ibidem. a Saduces enemies to the
pharisees ibidem Saxum is properly that sto^e which is cut out of rocks and
quaryes 52. a Satan why he used the serpent, rather than any other beast
69 b Satan's properties with his suggestions 89. a. b Saba what it is, and how
many significations it has 133. b Salem had three names, and what they were
158. a Saritha derived of Israel, what it signifies 160. b Sacramentum where
it is used and not used 174. b Sacramentum, what it is. ibidem Sacramentu^
taken of Vegetius, for an oath 175. a Sacraments instituted of GOD only.
ibidem Sacramentum, entreated of, by Augustine. ibidem Sacraments, two only
recited of Tertulian. 175. b Sacramentum, wherein it does consiste. 176. a Sara
being barren gave Agar to Abraham to wife. 181. b Sara, what it signifies.
ibidem Saints living in heaven ought not to be inuocated. 212. a Sacraments
whereof they take their names. 217. b Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ has three similitudes in it, after the Judgment of all the fathers
that were before Gregorye. ibidem Sacrament, when the natural property thereof
is changed. ibidem Sacramental bread and wine is not transubstanciate.
ibidem Solomon, what things he desired of God in his prayers. 276. a Sa^pson,
with the Iawe of an ass, slew a thousand Philistines. 280. b Saboth day of
ancient institution 188. b Sabbatum, is of a large significacion. ibidem
Saboth spiritual. ibidem Saboth an outward ordinance of Religion 189. a
Saboth manifestly expressed in Nehemias ibidem Saboth commanded of God to the
whole family ibidem. b Saboth commanded for what causes. ibidem Saboth
breaker who is. ibidem Saboth, exempte from all bodily works. 190. a Saboth
is cerimoniall and moral. ibidem. b Saboth day changed in the primitive
Church ibidem Saboth sanctifieng of the Christians. 191 a Saboth abusers,
Saboth kepers, and Saboth contemners. ibide^. b Saboth to be dispensed with all
for necessities sake. ibidem. b Saboth has a mystical signification. 193. a
S ante. C
Scotishes of whom so named. 10. a Scotus disciple of Beda. ibidem Scotus a
great Philosopher. ibide^ Scotus lived in the time of Carolus Magnus and
Bertram. ibide^ Stotus translated the books of Dionisius the martyr ibidem. a
Scotus made a book of the body and blood of Christ. ibidem Scotus teaching
children, was persed with writing pensels, and so dyed. ibidem Scopae
dissolutae, what they be, and what they signify 18. b Scripture, which is
called Canonical. 19. a Scismaticke, who is he 26. a Scriptures sufficient to
salvation without tradicions of man 57. a Scriptures only are the stay and
pillar of our faith, and the fondacion of the Church. 58. a Scriptures,
dignity and misterye thereof. 79. b Scriptures to be expounded of every man,
whether it be lawful. 88. a Scriptures, Cyprians sentence, touching the
authority of the same ibidem. b Scriptures, without the Popes Canons are meare
darkness, as they say. 89. b Scriptures not written before Moses. 127. a
Scriptures of the new Testament were written, after they were preached of
Thapostles and disciples. 128. b Schaddai, in Hebrew what it signifies. 220. a
Scriptures, how they are made uncertain. 24. b Scismatickes do separate them
selves from the Church, without just cause. 242. b Schism, for what cause it
ought not to be made. ibidem Schism ought not to be made for diversity of
doctrine. ibidem Scriptures, who understands them. 243. a Schism ought not
to be made for disordered life of Ministers. ibide^ Schism, ought not to be
made for rites, and Ceremonies. ibide^. b Schism, ought not to be made for
unworthy receyuers of the communion. 243. b Schism divided into three kinds.
245. b Schism Apostolical, what it is. 246. a Schism heretical, and who
were the authors. 246. a. Schism, schismatic and who were the authors.
ibidem Scriptures, when they grew more and more to be expounded diverse ways.
Schiloh with He, whereof it comes, and how the 70. interpreters do use it.
277. a Schiloh written with Ched, what it signifies. ibidem. ^ Scripture
Canonical of the Prophets of the Apostles, what soever shall be spoken after
the^ may be cut of, and have no authority. 290. a
S ante. E
Seruius, what he was, how many of that name, and what books they wrate. 33. b
Seruius Sulpitius, a familiar friend of Cicero. ibidem Seleuchus, governor of
the city of the Locrecians 36. b Seleuchus, made holsom laws ib. Seleuchus
made an holsom statute that all adulterers should lose both their eyes. ididem
Seleuchus son, for adultery lost one of his eyes. ibidem Seleuchus him self
for obseruyng the law, lost one of his eyes, for his sons fault. ibidem
Semiramis, recovered Babilo^ one part of her hear being down. 47. b Semiramis
gave a goodly note against covetousness. ibidem Semiramis, tau^ted Darius, for
opening the grave, for money. ibid. Seven wonders of the world nothing
remaining now, but vain names, and titles. 48 b Sedechias the king saw his
sons slain before his eyes 56. a Sedechias eyes put out. ibidem Sedechias
bound in chains. ibide^ Sedechias burned the book of Ieremye. ibidem
Sedechias carkas unburied. ibide^ Serpent did not speak by his own power, but
by the mouyng of Satan. 69. a serpent why he was called subtle. ib. b Serpent
why not feared of the woman. 70. a Serpent had not the same shape of body, that
he now has. ibidem Serpent, that deceived Eve, what he was. 67. b Serpent why
he tempted Eve rather then Adam. 70. a Seth the son of Abraham did first
ingraue heavenly discipline in two pillars. 127. a Seth discribed, and how he
took his name. 131. a Seth and his nephews invented the science of Astronomy
ibidem Senacharib, king of Assiria^s, murdered of his own sons. 135. b Sem,
who he should be, there be diverse opinions 157. b Sem was 390. years old, when
Abraham was borne. ibidem Sem the high Priest of GOD in Salem. 158. a Sem
counted Noes eldest son. ibi. Sem king of righteousness, both by name and
birth. ibidem Sem was the father of all the children of Heber. ibidem Sense
literal defined when it must be used, from whence the knowledge of it comes.
246. a. d Sense spiritual defined and divided. ib Sense spiritual entreated
of the fathers as well greeks as latins. ib Sense allegorical, wholly and only
applied of (...). ibidem sense alligorigally how it was made in the time of the
Heretics, called (...). Philo^ declares 247. a sense anagogical in Dionisius
time used and applied to the interpretation of the ceremonies ibide^ sense
allegorical and Anagogicall, after Origynes mind ibidem sense of the
scripture after Hieroms mind ibidem sense of the scripture taken 4. manner of
ways after Augustine. ibide^ sense historical defined example thereof Sense
aetiological defined example thereof ibidem sense literal, the chiefiest se^ce
wherefore, when it ought to be used, and when not 248. a se^ce aetigoligalical
and literal both one sense anagogicall, examples of it ib sense alligoricall,
mingled with se^ce anagogical of Austine and Hiero^. ib. sense of the scripture
taken 3. manner of ways after Hierome 250. b sense mystical of the scriptures
sometime do rather kill, then edify, an example ibidem sense literal is the
foundation of every doctrine ibide^ sense of the scriptures drawn into
allegories has caused many heresies to spring up 251. a sense allegorical
gives six observations 253. b servants not to be vexed with to much labor
upon the saboth dai. 190.
S ante I.
Simon a craftye marchante of the greeks 36. a Simple what it signifies and
how many things 35. b Simplex, is called in the hebru tongue Thom ibide^
Simple men in Greek are called (...), ibidem simplisiti of doves what it
signifies simon of Athens daily feasted the poor 51. a simon brake down the
hedges and walls of his orchards and garden for the poor ibide^ Similes
habent labra lactucas a proverb, and the original thereof 102. a sinope a citi
in Po^tus of Galatia. 125 Sisiphi saxum voluere, a proverb 177 simeo^ knew ye
Messiah should suffer simion comfort Marye ibidem Simonides, a very famos
Poet 200 b Siluius brother to Astanius, why he was called Posthumus 216
similitude of nourishing 218. a similitude of unity ibidem single life is not
to be vowed 131. a single life of his own nature has not perfection 231. b
single life wherefore to be preferred before matrimonye ibidem simulation when
it is good, when it is evil 239. a simulation of Christ ibidem simulatio^ of
Peter why it was evil simulatio^ of Peter called of Augustine perverse and
hipocriticall ib singularitye is to be avoided 260. b singlaritye an example
thereof 261. a simon Magus described, the whole course of his study, he called
him self god, how long he practiced magic frelie, he was won to the gospel
by Philip the Apostle, when he opned and declared his dissimulaon, he said that
Selene the harlot was the first co^centio^ of his mind when he came to Rome,
he co^tente^ded with Peter before Nero his death 262. a. b sin against the
holy ghost fix spices thereof are rekened 281. b sin against the holy ghost
defined. ib sin against the holy ghost, called of Christ, blasphemi and
railing. ib sin against the holy ghost, what called of Augustine 285. a sin
against the holy ghost not utterly trremissible ibidem
S ante O.
sorcerer diverse sorts 32. b sortiligi what they be ibidem sozomenus and,
Socrates ecclesiastical writers 38. b socrates wrote 7. books ibide^
sozomenus wrate nine books ib sophodes was rebuked of Pericles for his wanton
books upon a fair person 62. b soul none can attain by reason what it is
66. b soul defined ibide^ soul a very substance and no qualiti. ib soul the
substance thereof is simplex substantia ibide^ soul from whence it comes, and
how it enters into the body 67. a soul how it is made and when ib soul
formed of god a new 67. a souls do not appear after their death 72. b souls
somtims called again of god into their bodies, be examples of the resurrection
ibidem souls separated from the bodies, do remain in the places, to which
they are sent 73. a sprites damned do exercise the^ selves in desceitefull
apparitions ibide^ souls after death affirmed to appear of Rabanus and
Gregory, and that prayers do profyt them 72. b soul of man has 3. powers
123. b soul with the 3. faculties memory, mind, and will, do represe^t the
triniti somthings in the scripturs are commanded generally, somthings
perticularly 279. a somthings out of the church may be exhibeted, yt be good
and profitable. 281 Sunday to be sanctefied 189. a. b
S ante P.
spires of Egypt, vain and folish oste^tations 46. a spires built because no
monei should be left to the successors ibide^ spires 3. built in Egypt of an
incredible hight, under which the kings of Egypt were buried ibide^ spires in
Egipte were 20. years in building ibidem spire in making had 3300. woorkmen
dailye laboring about it ibidem spire spent in building. 1800. tale^ts, in
Radish roots garlike, and onions, which woorkmen devoured ib Spire of Cheophes
king of Egypt cost by estimation.2200. tu^nels of french crowns ibidem spires
supposed to be made of Joseph in Egypt for keeping of corn ib spiridion
described, and greatly commended for his virtues 212. b spiridio^ reproved
Triphilus for refusing the word Grabatum 223. b spiridions miracles. 224. a
Spiridion confuted a pratlinge and babbling Philosopher ibid. a Spiridions
words to a stranger that refused to eat flesh in lent. ib
S ante T
Stephen stoned.7. yers after christ's ascension 34. b Strength sometime joined
with anger 36. a Stadium properly is a place where horses or me^ did wrestle or
run. 48. a Stadium that is a furlong ran by Hercules drawing his breath but
once ibid Stadia three sorts Italica of 652. fete in length, Olimpica. 600.
fete in length, Pithica. 1000. fete 48. b Stadia Italica.8. do make a mile in
Italy ibidem Strangled meats, when and for what cause forbidden of God. 116: b
Strangled meat what doctrine it sets forth ibidem Strangled meats a law
made thereof 127. a Strangers how entertained of Spiridion 186
S ante V
Supersticion, etimology thereof and how many ways it is taken. 30. b Sumptuous
sepulchers are called Mansolea 47. a Sum of the 4. commandment. 188. b
Succession of wicked pastors do not prove a church 195. b Succession of true
pastors much esteemed in the primitive church. ib. Succession Apostolic is
nothing worth without Apostolyke doctrine bid.
S ante W
Swinkfeldius utterly rejects the text of the scryptures. 239. b
S ante Y
Synagoga what it betokneth. 30. a Synagoga signified by Lya with her bleare
eyes ibid. a Syberite discommended of the Lacedaemonians 63. a Syberite persons
disordered and very wanton ibidem. a syberites were the first that taught
horses to dance at the sound of ye trompe ibidem Syberitica mensa a glotonous
table or belly chere ibidem Sybarissare to play the Epicure. ib Synodus
whereof it comes and what it is 100. a Simbolum what it is and how many
significations it has 120. b Symbol of the Apostles called iudicium ibid
Symbola what it signifies allegoricallye. 121. a Symboles of Pithagoras ibid,
b Simbolus in the masculine gender a seal or signet manuell ibidem Symacus and
Aquilas translation preferred before the 70. interpriters
T.
T ante A.
TAlent of Egypt, 50. minae 46. b Talentum aticum minus how much it is after
Tounstall 4. b Talentu^ by a metaphor what it signifies ibidem Talmud, the
book of the Jews 30. Talmud signifies doctrine or discipline ibidem Talmud,
when it was written and made ib Talmud, when it was written, Petrus Galatinus
assertion ibide^
T ante E.
Temples high and sumptuouslye built were often touched with lighning a toke^
of gods wrath. 49 Templum domini Templum domini, how to be understand 209. a
Testimoni of profane authors speaking godly and truly not to be rejected
127. b Tertulyan what he was, with his life wholly declared at large 134. a
Temple figurall does rent his veil 173. a
T ante H.
Thessalonians searched the scripturs whither Paul preached true or no. 19. b
Thessalonica what it is, and whereof it took his name 25. b Theodosius the
Emperor how many men he slew in Thessalonica ib Theodorus Gaza about 120.
years ago forsook Gretia, and came to Italye ibidem Theodorus Gaza set
forth the knoledge of the greek tongue through Europe ibidem Theodoricus
Historicus wrote two books from the time of Theodosius the younger unto the
time of Anastasius 38. b Theodosius did not appoint a council in Italye but in
Grecia 41. b Thebae cities.9. in number set in diverse parts of the world 48. a
Thebae in Egypt most famous, built of Buziris king of Egypt ibide^ Thebe in
Egipte in compass 140. furlongs ibidem Thebe in Egipte, hollow underneath
standing upon vawtes ib Thebae had 100. gates in every gate 200 kepers ibidem
Thebae had a cave always full of wind saving in the time of Interlunium ib
Theopompus lost his wits for interminglinge Moses law with his writings 55 a
Theodectes was stricken blind for intermingling the seripturs with his
tragidies ibidem Things unreasonable and vnlyuing many of them speak with
man's voice 69. a Theophilus a proper name and frinde of. S. Luke, unto whom
Luke dedicated both his books 75. b Theophilus a general name and what it
signifies ib Theophilus a mighty prince ib Theophilus diverse of that name 76.
a Theodosius repented and was reconciled to the church 118. a Thalmudists, what
ordinance they made touching these words deus and sanctus 123. a Thomas
Munserus first sowed ye heresy of anabaptisme in our time 153. a Thomas Eliots
mind concerning Britain 216. b Thousand years what is me^t thereby. 222
Timothy Bishop of Ephesus 76. a
T ante I.
Timotheus described 80. b Timotheus, Paul's companion, and wherefore
circumcised of Paul. ib Timotheus, companion to Paul in his peregrinations
messages and other affairs ibidem Timothy sent of Paul to thesalonica to
comfort the brethren ib Timothy made bishop of Ephesus where how long he
continued it is uncertain ibide^ Timothies death diversely taken of the
writers 81. a Timothy when he died, what christ said to him ibide^ Titus,
who he was, where he was Bishop, where he died, and where he was buried ibide^
titus whi not circu^sised of Paul. ib tidings brought to ye emperor of the
sedition moved at Thessalonica. 117
T ante O.
Toure of London as Lelande writes buylte by Belinus 6. a To believe in Christ
is to grow in virtue and grace 28. b To sit in the cheer of pestilence,
what it signifies 281. a
T ante R.
Tragedye, describes kings and princes and great persons 19. a Tragedye has
a very sad and heavy end ibide^ Tragedy differs from comodie in two
respects ibidem True chrtstians are contented with the title and name of christ
27. a Traian gave a sword drawn to the ruler of the city 36. b Traiane, what
he said to the ruler Tripartite historye, of whom so named 38. b Tripartite
history of whom translated out of greek into latin ib Tripartite historye
where it begineth ibidem Tripartite history, by whom made one continual
historye ib Tripartite history, how mani years discourse it continues ibidem
Traian the Emperor found. 5000. free borne children to schole at his own
charges 51. a Troilus what he was and how he died. 62. a Traditions of the
church much set by of Basilius Magnus 81. b Trinitye comprehended under the
name of Christ 90. b trinity entreated of by s. Austin. 11^ Trinitye to be
questioned of a perverse curiosity 122. a Trinity Alanus history concerning the
same ibid. Trinyty the misterye thereof is expressed by this word Jehovah. ib.
Trinity expressed by a similitude of Saint Austen 123. b Traditions without the
Scripture are very uncertain 131 Tree of knowledge of good and evil 145 Tree of
knowledge of good and evil why forbidden to eat 146 a Transubsta^tiatio^
confuted. 218. 219. Tropologia defined and an example of it 246. b True
worshipping of god taught by the prophet Esaias in Judah. 287. b
T ante V
Tubalcani, the first inuenter of bras and iron 153. a
T ante W
Two people signified by Abell and Cain 12. b
T ante Y
Tyranny worse then other committed by Phalaris 101. b Typus, what it
signifies. 179. a Type wherein it consists. 252. a
V.
V ante A
VAlerius Maximus, how many were of that name, and what they wrote 14. a
Valerius Maximus was soldier unto Sextus Pompeyus ibi Valentinian, how many
years he reigned after Constantine 40. a Vallas his argument concerning the
Apostles wifes 98. b Veil of the temple 172. a
V ante. E
Verity preuayleth antiquity 3. a Vergill did read Ennius 28. a Virtues
theological.3. in number and which they be 36. a Virtues Cardinal pertayne to
outward works ibid. a Virtues theological pertayn to inward actions and
motions, and so tend to God ibid. a Vessels of the living rather to be
preserved the^ the vessels of Metal. 49 Vetronius smothered to death with smoke
62. a Verses of the Psalms some are applied to Solomon being a type, and some
also to Christ. 276. a
V ante I.
Victor Bishop of Rome impugned of Ireneus 83. a Vial of Gods anger expounded
very il and clean contrary by Liranus 190. b Virgins covered brought in after
Ciprians time 230. a Virgins ordinate who they were and when they began ibid.
b Virgins of Carthage coming into the temple bareheaded reprehe^ded of Paul
ibid Virgins after what manner they were covered with an holy vail. ib Virgins
when they began first to have houses made for them ibid Virgins what they were
that Cyprian spoke of 231. a Vineyard of God, and the pleasant garden of fruit
may be called man by Anagoge 249. b Virgin Mary had Christ to her savior 265.
a Virgin Mary was faultye in her time ibidem. a Virgin Mary, that she was no
sinner, it is now constantly and universally believed ibid. a Virgin Mary had
al her goodness of God ibid. b Virgin Mary is the spiritual sister of Christ
ibidem Vincentius there were many of that name 267. a Vincentius the first
described with his cruel martyrdom ib. b Vincentius Lirinensis described. ib
V ante N.
Understanding is the eye unto the soul 31. b Unwritten verities answered
unto by master doctor Cra^mer. 81. b Vnctio, has many significations in the
scriptures 193. a Universality how it is to be followed 241. b Universal
number makes not the church ibid. b Universal church of the Israelites
allowing the calfe reprehended of Moses ibid
V ante O
Votary life called a lost life of Bernard 98. a Vow of chastity when it is
wicked and blasphemous ib. a Vow of widows what it is after the judgment of
ye Papists. 229. a Vow of Widows after the judgment of the Orthodoxes ibid
Vow breach to me damnable with Saint Austen and other fathers, what is the
cause 231. a Vows wicked are to be broken. ib Vow of Single life not meant of
S. Paul 232. a
V ante R
Vrim Thummim, what is signified by it 268. a
VV.
VV ante A.
WAnt of charity, is the death of faith 28. b Wanto^ books, how hurtful they
be 62. a Wanton song makers worse then witches ibidem Water of baptism is
holy 282. a
VV ante E.
We our selves must first be made clean and then cleanse other 55. a We must
first be made wise, and so teach other wisdom ibide^
VV ante I.
Wisdo^e sometime accompained with naughtines 36. a Wife of Esaie was a
prophetisse as some do write 74. b Widows, what was their Ministerye in the
church in Paul's time 227. b Widows younger, wherefore they had damnation 228.
a widows faith and promise to the church ibidem widows of what age they were
to be chosen in the church ib. b
W ante O
Word written only necessary to salvation 55. b word written discoursed
thoroughly 57. a Women why forbidden to speak in the church 74. b women, many
godly of them did prophecy in the Congregation. ib worshipping of God two
kinds, one inward an other outward 270. b
W ante R
writing paper invented of king Alexander 45. b writing tables invented before
the battle of Troy ibidem
X.
X ante E.
XEnophon what he was and what he wrote. 16. b Xerxes invaded Greece
with.7000000. strange Soldiers 9. b Xerxes slain of his uncle Artabanus idid
Xerxes bewailed the mortalitye of man ibid. b
Z
Z ante E
ZEdechias, the last king of Judah and Jerusalem 64. a Zedechias eyes pluke
out and he led bound to Babylon ibid Zedechias what he was ibid. a Zedechias,
for holdinge the tribute from Nabuchadonozor. saw his own sons slain before
his eyes. ib
Z ante O
Zoilus 10. b
FINIS.
The table of the principal matters and words contained in the second Tome.
A.
A ante B
ABstinet aeger, egens cupidus gula, simia virtus, properly expounded 88 b
Abstinence of Saint Bernard, what lothsomnes it gat him
A ante C.
Actions moral, be very sin, and do displease God, without faith in God
30. a Achas king of Judah in his time the Church had but a small number. 127. a
Achab in his time only, Elias and Micheas were of the church. ibid
A ante D.
Adoption defined according to the civil laws 115. a Adoption.2. kinds
thereof. ibide^ Adoption has diverse significations. ibidem Adoption, how
therein we are the children of God. Adrianus the emperor wherefore made a
laughing stock. 99. b Adonai what it signifies. 127. b Adulari what it
signifies. 123. b Adulation what it properlye signifies ibidem. b
A ante F.
Affection and good will to do good to our neighbor, is accepted where occasion
wants to help in deed
A ante M.
Ambition what it is. 118. a Amditio and ambitus how they dyffer. ibide^.
A ante N
Andronicus kinsman to S. Paul, his conversion to Christ. 5. a Ancoras tollere,
is prouerbiallye used to go away 130 a Antisthenes his saying against
flatterers 134. a
A ante P.
Apostle what it signifies 30. b
A ante R.
Arrogatio what it is 115. a Artemisia wife to king Mansolus, king of Caria,
her excellent love toward her husband, an herb of her name ibide^.
Airstonymus saying against flatterers 134. a Arrius and Sabellius did separate
the son from the substance of the father. 138. a Arogantia and (...),
causes every man to prefer him above another 99. a Aurora, what it is 94. a
Aurum in the scripture has six significations ibid Aurum how it is called in
greek and in Hebrew ibid
B
B ante E
BEnedicere or Benedictus has diverse significations 42. b Bernard Abbot of
Clarenalia where he was borne, what time he flourished, at what years he entered
into religion. Benedict commanded the communion to be given to a Nun that
was dead 113. a Be ye holy for I am holy, the exposition and meaning of these
words 119
B ante L.
Blud sprinckling in the old law the mystery thereof 28. a. b Blandire what it
signifies 133. b
B ante O
Bonauenture confuted 122. a Book of wisdom is not in the canon of the
Hebrews ibide^. b Book of wisdom title thereof, sauoureth of the Greek
eloquence, rather then of any other thing. ibi Book of wisdom supposed to be
the book of one Philo a Greek borne. ibidem Bonauentures judgment how any
thing is of the verity of the nature of man 125 a Books of wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus custom obtained to be called the book of Salamon. 95. a Book
of wisdom Dreido in his dissolucion of the fyfte difficultye what he writes
concerning the same book ibidem Book of wisdom sentences thereof might of
likelihood be written by some author full of the spirit of God ibide^. b Book
of wisdom not affirmed of S. Hierome, but of the Jews to be the book of
Philo. ibidem Book of wisdom Austines saying who wrote it ibidem
C.
C ante A.
CAlling what it is 40 a Calling.4. kinds are commonly numbered among the
doctors. ibi Caius Caligula the.4. emperor of Rome, his life described, his
acts and death. 90. a Carnal lusts of the flesh how extinguished 107. b
Camaeleonte versatilior a proverb expounded 119. a Cameleon a serpent or beast
in Africa or India ibidem Camoelion described by Pliny and Plutarchus ibidem
Caro in greek how it is derived 95. b Caro in greek and in hebrwe how it is
called ibidem Caro in the scriptures has many significations the same being
orderlye declared bide^. 96. a Caula materialis Causa formalis Causa effic^ens
Causa finalis what the definition of these are 93. a
C ante E
Coelum is taken many ways in the scriptures 70. b
C ante H.
Children to be contracted and married with the consent of their parents is of
nessecitye and not only of honestye 82. 83. a. b Christ only and none other is
named Jesus as Galatinus says 128. b Christ's dignity is far above the
dignitye of the hye prestes of the old testament 129. a Christus betokneth
vnctus anointed ibide^ Christ that is anointed signifies both the natures of
christ ibidem Christians are called brethren for diverse respects 135. b Christ
entered into the inward tabernacle once for all ibidem Christ entered into the
tabernacle with his own blood ibidem Christ gave eternal things ib Christ
made intercession for the salvation of all mankind ibidem Christ whether he
took again all his blood at his resurection discused at large 125. b Christ
the measure and fullnes of his age recorded of Paul to the Ephesians how to
be understand ibidem Charity is the greatest mean and way to preserve the
church 97. a Christ entered his glory by ye cross and aflictions 100. a Christ
for what end he came 102. a Christ after what sort he ought to be preached
ibidem b Christ was showed in the old time to the prophets and by the prophees
ibidem Christ signified sometimes by Isaac to be slain of his father ib
Children of God ought not to frame them selves to the desires of the world
ibidem Christ is our hope 138. b Children by nature ought to represent and
follow their father ibid.
C ante L.
Claudius.5. Emperor of Rome, his living, manners and death described 9. a. b
C ante O.
Confession ought to be made before God 120. b Confessions of sins diversely
expounded by the doctors. ibide^ Confession auricular, and the form thereof
121. a Confession auricular unknown in the time of the Apostles ibi Confession
auricular extorted and commanded of the Bishop of Rome ibide^ Confession
made to God only, is sufficient ibidem. b Confession auricular, after
Gracianus judgment whither necessary ibidem Confession auricular divided
into.2 parts after Bonaue^tures mind 122. a Confession auricular to one only
priest commanded of Innocentius the.3. drives men to desperation ibidem
Confession after Saint James mind discussed ibidem Confession is joined with
prayer. ib Confession public and private copiously declared in the scriptures
119. b Confession instituted by man is of two sorts 120. a
C ante R
Crosses upon our selves having no need ought not to be laid otherwise then
god does appoint. 64. b Cras of the schole men is taken five manner of ways 77
b. Crassus the name of a Roman who is said never to have laughed in his time
5. a
C ante V
Curiousness merrily alluded unto Florus of Vespasianus the Emperor 100. a
Curiositi in demau^ding whi it was so long or god sent his son into the world
reproved and answered. 127 a
C ante Y
Cyrus the king his answer to Astiages when he asked him why he drank no
wine 111. b Cyrus could call every soldier in his host by his proper name.
117. b
D
D ante A
David and Paul by fleyng escaped the danger of their enemies. 89. a
D ante E
Deformitye shall not be sent in the bodies of the^ that rise again 125. b
Desteny what it is after the opinion of the divines 33. b Desteny defense
thereof taken out of a play called ^egio in verses defended of the one speaker,
and impugned by the other 34. 35. a. b Desteny and predestination in what point
they differ 31. b. and.33. b Deacon was deposed of bishop Nectarius for
committing fornication with a woman penitentiari 120. b Descendit ad inferna
the old and latter divines judgment thereof. 73. b
D ante I
Distinct degrees of honor in heaven diverse arguments made for the co^futation
thereof. 60. a. 62. 62. a. b Difference is made of Saint Hierome inter carnem et
pulpa^. 95. b Dioclesian emperor of Rome a cruel persecutor of the Christians.
66. a
D ante O
Donatistes threatened to destroy the^ selves rather then they would return to
the church. 88. b Donatists desired to be killed with iii. kinds of death. 89.
a
D ante R
Drawing of man to god ought not to be vaynly conceived. 28. b Dronkennes
described of saint Austene and the force thereof. 111. b
E.
E ante G
EGo et pater vnum sumus what it meneth. 138. b
E ante L
Election iii. points thereof handled. 26. b Elected how we are ibid. b Election
what it is ibid. Election of our brethren we ought not to be scrupulous or
inquisitue of the same ibidem Elders sometimes do teach the true worshipping of
god sometime nothing else but mere vanities. 105. a
E ante M
Emperors and Monarchies would have them selves worshipped for Gods 99. a
E ante P
Epilogus defined and divided into. iii. parts 136. b
E ante R
Error, Nescientia, Ignorantia, Ignoratio. how they differ 117. a Eremites are
called also Anachoritae 118. b
E ante. V
Evil things are better to be forgotten then to be had in remembrance ibid. a
Every man ought to understand according to sobriety 99. a Eucharist given to
infantes under both kinds in Austines and Cyprians time 124. a
E ante X
Examples of justification 92. b
F
F ante A
FAtum vnde dicitur. 33. a Faithful christians may grant that there is fatu^
ibidem. b Faith the energy force and strength thereof 65. b Faith by the eyes
thereof Christ is seen in his mistical supper. ibidem Faith it is against the
nature thereof to say that Christ is carnallye in the sacrament 66. a Faith
and trust in Christ the fruit thereof ibidem Faith the end and reward
thereof ibidem Fast in the old law once in the year was ordained to purge sins
86 a Fasting the day thereof was made solmne day among the Jews ib Fasting
was commu^ded both in the old testament and in the new ib Fast^ng must be
temperate ibidem Fasting first made by Montanus the heretic ibide^ Fastings,
diversities thereof reported to be in the church in the reign of Theodosius
the^peror. an. 453. ib Fasting goes before prayer ib Fasting was ordained
with prayer when. S. Ihon wrote his gospel. 87. a Fasting did not deliver the
Ninevites from peril ibidem Fasting honor thereof what it is ib Fasting all
the lent without amenment of life causes greater damnation ibidem Fast how a
man ought declared by s. Austine ibidem Fastings are so to be mesured as a man
may suffer them ibidem Fast how the mouth, eyes and other members of the
body ought so to do rehearsed by. S. Barnarde 88. a Fasting in.5. things
may be unlawful ibide^ Faith and good works concur together 14. b Faith,
good works are the fruit thereof ibidem Faithful christians tim in this world
is but a pilgrimage 105. a Faith is our victory against the world 107. a
Faith the fruits which do follow it ibidem Fast abrogate from Easter to
penticoste 124. a Faith has an end, a question and answer concerning the same
96. a Faith, hope, and charity do remain of these.3. charityes the greatest
ib Faith shall abide in heaven Ireneus censure and reason thereof ibide^ Faith
shall endure in heaven Phocius his opinion thereof ibidem Faith is an evidence
of things which are not sent ibidem Faith and hope of every man profits him
self. ibidem. 97. a Faith, hope, and charity, in what time they are, and do
continue: ib Faith more worthy and superior to charity ibide^ Faith how
described of. S. Ihon ibidem Faith does regenerate us and make us the sons of
God ib. them Faith and charity the papist ascercion concerning justification
thereof ibide^ Faith why and how it justifies. ib Faith as it is our action
does not justify 93 b Faith which shows her self fourth by good woorks
and godly conversation commended of Peter ibide^ Faith which is not lively how
to be counted ibidem Faith wherein it stands ib Faith of the Jews and of the
Turks is a vain faith 103. a Faith christian does wholye trust and lean to
the word of God ib. b Faithfullman death being offered ought wholye to commit
him self unto Christ ib
F ante E.
Feasts of ye Jews and feasts kept in our days, wherefore co^stitute and
ordained discoursed at large ib. b. 98 Fear how it is called in latin greek
and hebrew with the signification thereof ib Fear two kinds thereof and what
they be entreated of at large ib et 99. a
F ante I.
Fides, wherefore this word takes her name, and how it is called in hebrew,
greek and latin 93. a Fides iustificans the definition thereof ibide^ Fire in
latin, how called and wherefore it is derived 94
F ante L
Flatterye is commonly called water of the court 133. b Flee and not Flee in
times of trouble whether we may or no, a question with an objection and answer
to the same discoursed at large with many circumstances. ib and.90. a. b Flesh
is tamed with sobernes 97, b Flesh called in latin caro how it is said
properly, and the definition thereof 95. b Flesh rises and rebelleth against
the spirit 101. b Flesh of Christ what manner of flesh it was, and whether
it had a soul 42, a
F ante. R
Frater how it is derived, and what signifies 135. a Frendshyp which is true,
loves no colors, neither has learned flatterye. 108. a Fraunces, the first
author of the m^noritie friars. 134. a Fraunces, why he was called Seraphicus
ibidem Fraunces lived dissolutely in his youth. ibidem Fraunces grieuouslye
tempted of the devil which the lust of the flesh. ibidem Fraunces reported
to have seen a strange vision a little before his death. Fruit hundred fold
attributed to virginity 130. a Fruit sixty fold attributed to widowhode
ibidem Fruit thyrty fold attributed to married folk. ibidem Fruit hundred fold
ascribed of some to martyrs. ibidem Fruit sixtiefolde ascribed of some to
virginity. ibidem Fruit thirty fold attributed of some to widows. ibidem
Fruits of the word of God what they be ibidem. b Fruit hundred fold*
sixtyfold, thyrtyfold, preached of Christ. is to be understood simpliciter.
ibidem
G
G ante. I
GIrde up our loins how to be understood. 101. a Gyrde up the loins of
your mind what it signifies. ibidem Gyrdyng spiritual what it is. ibide^
G ante L
Gluttony to overcome and to suffer faith to wax fainte and cold with idleness
it much hurts. ibide^. b
G ante. O
Gold what it is called in Latin, and whereof it is derived. 94. a Gods what
they did. Enclides being demanded, what answer he made. 100. a God what he
has commanded, think upon that with reverence. ibidem God can not be truly
glorified with out the knowledge of Christ. ibi. God, to give glory unto him
what it is. ibidem. a. b God his wisdom how it is known. ibidem God the
ryghteousnes of him how it is known. ibidem God his puissance and power how it
is known. ibidem Gods mercy how it appears. ibid. Gods verity wherein it is
opened and declared. ibidem Gods benefits they which feel ought to give
glory unto him. ibi. Gods glory is given unto him in 4. things. ibidem Gospel
was sent of the holy Ghost from heaven. 101. b God works by means and ways
which are not to be neglected. 32. b God true cannot nor ought not to be
expressed or fassioned with similitude. 46. a God does not afflict us but for
the best. 64. b Gold in the fire and the faithful in adversities an apt
similitude thereof. 65. a Godly and faithful me^ do prevent the judgment of
God by prayer. ibi. Good works we are hounde to do. 104. a God judges all men
a like, but the world judges by respect of persons. ibidem. b God judges
every manne by his works, how it is to be understood. ibidem Goods of
this world must be used as though they were not our own. 105. a God from
everlasting did fore ordeyne his son to be sacrificed for the expiacio^ of
our sins. ibi. b Golias a king of the Philistians whom David slew, his
stature, the weight of his habergion or harneys. 150. a God should not be
worshypped with bowyng the knew between Easter and Pentecost. 124. a Go^den
hills a proverb in the Greek tongue explicated. 70. b God is without
beginning and endyng. 138. b Gods eternity expressed of Saint John the
Evangelist. ibidem. a
G ante. R
Grace the word expounded. 30. a Grace offered who soever contemns, let him
look for the great wrath and displeasure of God. 102. a Grace is offered by God
the father to none, but by Christ only. ibid.
H.
H ante E.
Heaven how it is called in Latin Greek and Hebrew. 69. a Heavens ten are
reported to be after the minds of the Philosophers. ibid. Heaven is taken
iij. manner of ways among the scholasticall divines. ibidem. b Heaven third,
Saint Paul's note touching the same. ibidem Heaven first, second or third, what
it signifies to be taken into. 70. a Heaven third what it was the opinion of
diverse learned men and Doctors of the Church. 70. a Hell the word what it is
called in Latin Greek and Hebrew. ibide^. b Hell, diverse significations of
this word. 71. a Hell, a general Counsel concerning Christ's going down
thither. 73. b Helias by fleyng escaped the furye of Queen Iesabell. 89. a
Helleborus is of two sorts. 125. b Helleborum aedere, a proverb and what it
signifies. ibidem Hell one demanded of Socrates what was done there, the
answer thereto. 100. a
H ante. I
High priest of the old testament gave only temporal things. 129. b Hye
Priest of the old Testament was only man. ibidem. b
H ante. O
Hodie the acception and understanding of this Latin word in the Scriptures
of his diverse signification and acception. 58. a Honor and glory no
distinction of degrees thereof in the kingdom of heaven as it is supposed of
some. 59. b. and 60. a Holiness is not only attributed to God in the Scriptures
but also to man. 104. a Holiness comes not of our own worckes, but of faith
only, ibide^ Homaeosis in Latin how it is called, what it is, and what
commodity this figure brings. 90. a Homaeosis how many ways it may be
varyed. ibidem. b Homaeosis sundry examples of the same. ibidem Homaeosis three
kinds of spyces thereof as Mancinellus declares and which they be. 93. a Hope
which is seen is not hope. 96. b Hope is our Shoteancor. 107
I.
I ante C
I Come what it is and what it signifies. 93. a
I ante D
Idolum the interpretacion thereof.45. a and.47. a Idolum nihil est in mundo how
expounded of Saint Paul to the Corinthians. ibidem Idolum, and Similitudo,
after the mind of Origin how they differ. ibidem. b Idolater why sometimes
suffered of God. 46. b Idleness in Latin called Otium contrary to Negotium and
his diverse acceptions. 3. b
I ante. E
Ieiunium in Hebrewe and Greek, how it is called. 85. b Ieiunium takes the
name of Intestiuum a bowel, or gut. ibidem Ieiunium a fast is a discipline and
hastenyng of the body. Jeroboam in his time king of Israel, only Amos was of
the Church. 127. a Jews do circumcise their children being dead if they die
before eight days. 113 a
I ante. G
Ignis fire in the Scripture how many significations it has with the
expositions of the same. 94. b Ignorance is the chiefest spryng of all evils.
103. a Ignorantia how it is in Greek defined and divided into two kinds. 1^5.
b Ignorance whether it does excuse men, or no discursed at large. ibide^
Ignorantia either it is called naturalis either affectata ibide^. b. and.116.
Ignorantia affectata, defined. ibide^. b Ignorance divided of holcot and the
schole men into two kinds. ibide^ Ignorantia vincibilis, what it is. 117. a
Ignorantia other wise called Crassa or supina.
I ante M.
Images the first inuentors thereof. 46. a Images of them selves what they are.
ibidem. b
I ante. N
In domo patris mei multae mansiones sunt, the exposition of this place of
Saint John. 59. b
I ante. O
Ioannes Philosophus cognomento Scotus when he lived. ibidem. b In haereditatem
incorruptibilem et incontaminatam etc the exposion of this place of S. Peter
63. a Incredulity the fountain of al mischief 103. a
I ante V
Justice shall be the girdle of his loins and faythfulnes the gyrdle of his
reins what it signifies 101. a Justification the order thereof in.4. things
rehearsed 93. b Iunias a notable Jew conuersante among the Apostles 5. a
Judgment how it ought to be given 128. a Iunias and Andronicus did first of
all institute the Romans in the christian religion 1. b
I ante W
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, this place of Genesis expounded
with certain other words of ye text in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. 62. a. 63. b
K.
K ante I
Kingdom of heaven like unto a grain of Mustard seed 92. a
K ante N
Knowledge is all unsavory without the knoweledge of Christ 103. b
L
L ante A
LAberius appointed a senatoure of Caesar, his check or tau^t to Tullye 119. b
Lamb mentioned of Peter by a similitude what it signifies 125. a Lamb whole
and without spot commanded of Moses to be sacrificed applied to Christ ibidem
Lamb Paschall, and Christ a comparison between them. ibidem Lamb how it was
eaten of wayfaryng men. ibidem
L ante E
Lent with us one only is observed. 87. a Lentes iij. are made of the
Montanistes. ibidem Leonticius noted in Plutarche for his inconstancy and his
saying in Plutarche. 119. b
L ante. I
Life when it perishes, Seneca, his complaynte thereof. 99. b
L ante O
Love divided into 5. kinds. 131. a Love of God and love of the world how they
differ. ibidem Love of our neighbor is set forth in infinity places of the
Scripture. ibidem Love of our country discribed. ibide^ Love of the world
consists in three things. ibidem Love ambitious. 133. a Love of our selves is
a perilous mo^ster. ibidem. a Love true the parts thereof. 108. a Love true
loves no colors neither has learned flattery. ibidem Love brotherly and
common love do differ and are separated. ibidem Love common what it is. ibidem
Loins in Latin called Lu^bi, what they are. 100. a Loins in the scripture
what they signify. 101. a Loins of Judah Christ borne thereof. ibidem
L ante. V
Lust of the flesh comprehends all filthy desires. 1^1. b Lust of the eyes
what it comprehends. ibidem Lust of the pride of the flesh. ibide^ Lumbi the
loins how it is called in the Greek and Hebrew. 109. a
L ante. Y
Lies divided into 3. kinds. 123. a Lie sportyng or pleasant example thereof.
ibidem Lie sporting has in it much leuitie. ibidem Lie duetiful example
thereof. ibidem Lie duetifull and witty inverted of the Egyptian midwyues.
ibidem Lie of Rahab the harlot. ibidem Lie invented of Michol. ibidem Lies
invented and made of the godly disputed upon of the fathers. ibi. b Lies to
sinisterly reproved of S. Austen. ibidem Lie pernicious condemned in all the
Scriptures. 124
M
M ante. A
MAhomet the first of the Turckes his father and mother. 47. a Mahometes
education his function or occupations. ibidem. a. b Mahometes works which he
wrote. 48. a Mahometes Prophecies. ibidem. b Mahometes strifes, troubles and
conflictes. ibidem Mahometes vices and wickedness. 49. a Mahometes death. ibidem
Mahometes testimonies of diverse men of him. ibidem. b Mahometes aenigmata, or
rydles. ibidem. b. and.50. b Machabees books what the old fathers of the
Church have said of them. 56. a Magistrate to whatsoever he consents, the
same does the public and common consent of the people seem to grant. 85. a
Marriage ought to have the consent of the parents ibidem Marriages done without
the consent of Parents the Canonistes do judge lawful. ibidem. b Marriages
with the consent of Parents is both comelye and necessary. ibidem. a Marriages
contracted without the consent of parents, be not true marriages. ibidem
Marriages requires consent of Parents ex necessitate non exhonestate solum.
ibidem a Machabeus did choose rather to dye then to break the law in eating
meats forbidden. 100. b Nathan and Mathat were brethren of the house of David,
by Natha^ as some do write. 138. b Man ought to take no more upon him then his
degree and calling does suffer. 99. a Man having estimacion of him self more
then is mete is made destitute of wisdom. ibidem Man that is curious is more
profitable to his enemies then to him self. ibidem. b Many desire to utter
high things rather then things meet. ibidem Ma^s temeritie ought not to
search that which is not, least it find not that which is. 100. a Man let
him not come in the sight of God without his Mediator Christ. 10^. ^ Manii sieve
Lucii, they which are borne in the morning are so called. 94. a Man's power
vaynely defended of the schole men, and the grace of God smally defended.
ibidem
M ante E.
Memoria, memory defined. 117. a Men good and godly are subject as long as they
live to persecutions and diversities 30. a Meats and drinks that are set
upon our common boorde being blessed are not so good as the Sacramental meat
and drink. 43. b Meats of the body and soul what they be 186. a Measure is
to be observed in all things 99. a
M ante I.
Missa the word interpreted after the hebrew and latin 37. a Missa the word
never used of the Greek church ibibem Mithridates king of Pontus could speak
diverse languages and tongues 117. b
M ante O.
Moises and Helias why they appeared unto Christ, rather then other did,
certain reasons and causes 5. a Moises and Helias were truly and indede present
with Christ in his transfiguration, or else but a vision to the sight of the
apostles discoursed. id
N.
N ante A.
NAme of christ to be worshipped with bowyng the knee what it signifies with
Paul to the Philippians. 128. a Nathan there were two of that name 138. b
Nathan the Son of David, one thing specially is to be noted of him ibidem
Natalis being deceived of heretics reuertes to the truth, and does penance 119.
b. and.120 a
N ante E.
Necessities enforcing us to fast.2. in number 20. b Nero an Emperor of Rome,
his life at large described, and his death 10. a. and. b. and.11. a Nepesch
has diverse significacions 75. b
N ante O.
No^ relinques anima^ mea^ in inferno, the opinions of all the doctors, latins
and Greeks concerning this place of the psalm. 71. a. and 72. and.73. a. and.
b No man is tempted above that he is able 80. b
P.
P ante A
PArabola how called of Cicero, and what it signifies according to the mind
of Beda. 91. a Paradigma called in latin Exemplu^ an example, exhorting or
deterring ibide^. Paradigma exhorting, an example thereof ibidem Paradigma
deterryng an example thereof ibidem Pax expounded 30. a Papias attributed much
to lively traditions, and who were his folowers 135 Papias first author of the
heresies of the Millinaries. ibidem Papias wrote many fabulous things as
Eusebius writes. ib. Pardoners did sell the name of Jesus in golden and
painted Papers. 128. b
P ante. E
Peter three things especially to be noted in his first Epistle. 1. a Peter
his proper name was Simon and the exposition thereof. ib. Peter why he was
called Cephas, where he was borne, and who was his father. ibidem. b Peter's
personage described of Nicephorus. ibidem Peter's words to his wife going to
her death. 2. a Peter's miracles, his confession of Christ, his preaching, his
boastyng of him self, his weakness. ibidem. A Peter whether he suffer death at
Rome or no, with the opinion of all the learned men. ibidem. a Peter's vision
that he had marching forward out of Rome to flee from Nero. ibidem. b Peter the
disposition of his first Epistle. 3. a Peter the prince of ye Apostles. ib. b
Peter and the two other Apostles, whether they knew Moses and Helias, who^ they
never saw. 5. a Peter's words have in them a marvelous Emphasis. 138. a Peter
raised a woman named Tabitha from death to life. 5. b Peter and Simon Magus the
sorcerer talked together and wrought miracles diversely together. ibid. a Peter's
miracle in raising a young man before Simon Magus which was Neros kinsman.
ibidem Peter's first part of his Epistle explicated. 38. a. and.39. a Peter's
text of his Epistle in qua^ angeli desiderant. etc very well expounded. 67. a
Person second in trinity wherefore he is called Dominus. 44. b Pestilence in
the time of it, whether a Christian man may flee from it. 76. and. b. 80. and
b Peter why he did call the time that he was in the last time. 106. b Peter why
he does say purify your souls, rather then your bodies. ib Peccatum divided
of the divines into voluntarium and into inuoluntarium. 110. Pentecoste what it
signifies and how to be understood. 97. b Pentecost called festum hebdomadum
and nouarum frugum. ibide^. b
P ante O.
Polipi me^tem obtinere, a proverb in the Latin tou^g expounded. 119. a
Polipus a fish that changes his color oftentimes. ibidem Pons sublicius a
bridge in Rome, made first of the Priests, and why it was so called. 128. b
Power ecclesiastical which the Papists do usurp upon the prerogative of
Peter as they think, whether it leueth upon the word of God or no. 13. 14. 15.
16. 17. a Points in what, the ecclesiastical power agrees with the law and
word of God. 12. a. and.17. b. 18. 19. 20. a. and. b Pontifex whereof it is
derived. 128. b
P ante R.
Proselites what they were, proselites and the Greek word there expounded. 1.
a Priesthood the office of it ought not to be bought for money. 40. a Primacie
above other potentates or princes at large handled. 12. a Princes secular; what
authority they have in causes ecclesiastical. 12. and. a. and.20. b. 21. 22.
23. 24. 25. 26 Priesthode, whether it be extant in the Church now after the
order of Melchisedech. 35. b Prophets by what means they did search before of
the kingdom of Christ. 64. a Prophets and their writyngs were not only given
to pertain to the^ of the old Testament, but also to us. 65. b Privation and
who are said or called Priuati homines. 118. b Prouincia defined. 137. a
Proverbs of Solomon were not written and couched of him into one book. 95. b
Pratyng and talkyng without the authority of Scripture ought to have no
credit. 102. b
P ante. V.
Purgatory that there is none. 51. a 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. b Purgatory impugned
by certain places of the holy Scripture. 56. 57. 58
Q.
Q ante. E
QVae supra nos, nihil ad nos, a proverb rehearsed of Socrates. 99. b
R.
R ante. E
Religion in the cause thereof fathers are not to be heard. 85. a Redemption is
not purchased with corruptible things as gold and silver. 105. a Respect of
persons defined of the scholasticall divines, and taxed of the divines. 122.
b Respect of persons taxed of Innoce^tius with.2. golden sayings. ibi. b
R ante. I
Righteousness of man without Christ is nothing but blasphemye. 105. a Right
hand of God the father is taken in the Scripture after.2, manner of ways. 114.
a
S.
S ante A
Solomon repented him of his Idolatry, before his death, after the opinion of
some doctors, and the number of his books. 31. b Solomon his bryngyng up, his
prayer to God for wisdom, his falling to Idolatry, his number of wifes and
concubines. ibide^. a Sacrificium and sacramentum, the difference between them,
and what is a Sacrament, and what is a sacrifice. 35. b Sacrifices six kinds
thereof. ib. b Sanctus, how largely this word is taken in the Scriptures. 10.
3. b. and. a Sacram ancoram soluere, a proverb what it signifies. 129. b
S ante. C
Scriptures make no difference by the flesh but by the spirit. 104. b
S ante. I
Sicilia, is the first region that was called a province. 137. a Sin of the
world taken away by the lamb expounded. 135. b Sit at the right hand of the
father what is meant thereby. 114. b Sin vnuiolent and his ii. parts the one
absolute, the other condicionall. 110. b Simon Magus flees in the sight of the
people by magical arts. 5. b Sicut and quasi in the holy Scriptures what it
signifies. 92. a Simonie, a marie tale thereof. 10. b
S ante. O
Sobriety what it is. 101. a Sobriety what it is called in greek and the
definition thereof. 111. a Such lyppes such lettuse, a proverb at large
explicated. 5. a Soul that it does not sleep, reasons out of the Scriptures,
to prove the same. 67. b. and.68. b soul in what state it is after death
certain questions handled touching the same. ibide^. b. and.68. b Son has
power over his own body, and may mary at his own choice. ibidem. a
T.
T ante. A
TAbitha cumi the true interpretation thereof. 50. b
T ante. E
Temeritie, ignorance and blasphemy of certain fantastical heads.
Temptation ii. kinds thereof. 79. a
T ante. H
Thales the Philosopher derided and mocked of his own maiden. 99. a Thursday
and friday to be fasted, was a tradition of the Apostles. 124. a Things which
God would have to be hidden, are not to be searched. 100. b Theophilacte his
opinion for this place (to be baptized for the dead.) 113. b Themistocles
saying to one that taught a schole of memory. 117 a. and. b
T ante. O
To morrow how it is called in Latin, Greek and Hebrew 77. b To obey in the
Scriptures what it signifies. To be in wedlock how it is defined. 130. a
T ante. R
Traditions all are vain and foolish which are repugnant to the doctrine of
Christ. 105. a Traditions manifold, mentioned of the ancient fathers. 124. a
Traditions of the Apostles at Ephesus, at Asia, and in the Church of Rome, for
the celebratyng of Easter, was said to be diverse. 124. a Traditions, which
were received of Cyprian. ibidem. b Tradition recorded of Iraeneus, confuted.
V
V ante. A
Vapor what it is. 82. b
V ante. E
Virtue, interpretation thereof, and of his diverse acceptions in the Scripture.
70. b Vertebra, what it is. 100. a
V ante I.
Visio triplex, three manner of visions. 69. b Virgin oppressed by violence
against her will, whether she remain a virgin or no. 110. b
W.
W ante E.
WE must in all our doings say (if God will.) 80. b. and.80. a
W ante O.
Word of God endures for ever. 119. a Word of God offered or brought has a
marvelous enargie and liberality in it. 102. a Works of the law did not
justify of them selves, neither could remit sins. 105. a Word of God the
force and strength of it. 107. b Worshyppyng of GOD without Christ, nothing else
but mere vanity. 106. a Worckes of supererogacion what they be. 30. b World,
joys thereof disturbed by diverse misfortunes and afflictions. 66. a Woman
when she comes to adult age, is released from the power and authority of her
father. 85. a
FINIS.
Faults escaped, desiring thee gentle Reader, to correct the same in thy
book, before thou begynnest to read this work, which shall help thee much
in the understanding of those places. The order of which correction here under
thou may see. The letters a. and. b. which stand by the first numbers,
signify the sides of every leaf, a. signifieng the first side, and b. the
second side.
Leaf Line. Faults Corrected. 1. a 1 (...). (...). 2 a 21 teret feret 2 b 23
ocerbos acerbos 4. b 20 exsuperare exuperare 5. a 5 which helped which is
helped 5. a 6 so he that so he does that 5. a 22 of our own of our own power 5.
a 3 Mulumsius Mulmusius 6. b 28 Mabees Machabees 8. a 5 an image an image of
him 8. a 13 Apollonis Apollinis 9. a 28 that where that when 9. b 30 tua
religione cu^ tua religione 10. a 14 Sabellianus Sabellicus 10. a 27 grun ire,
grunnire 11. a 2 chanced he chanced 12. a 11 Vandoles Vandales 13. b 2 kind
of life of man kinds of ma^s life 16. a 12 vberimus vberrimus 16. a 26 conuice
convince 16. b 27 (...), (...) 16 b 29 successiuis succisiuis 17. a 4 been
feign have been feign 17. b 27 Inhibita Imbibita 17. b 32 iudicem Indicem 17. b
33 resplendiscet resplendescet 18. b 12 (...) (...) 18. b 34 it might they
might 19. b 44 ostendabatur ostendebatur 23. a 32 tradare Satanae. tradere
Satanae 23. b 6 tradare Satanae. tradere satanae 35. a 24 suscipire suscipere
35. a 28 necait necuit 35. b 12 poor pure 39. a 33 that Constantine says that
co^sta^t. 43. a 1 Phylactaries Phylacteries, 44. b 16 Contine Constanstine 45 a
10 Panubus Pambus 45. b 9 were before was before 46. b 22 did worwip did
worship 46. b 34 Tonigris Tomiris 47. b 37 Adrasto Adrastus 48. a 5 capital
capitol 48. a 8 Iouia Ionia 48. a 34 use a furlong use no furlong 49. a 15 of
epistle of the epistle 50. a 20 reprihendere reprehendere 51. a 20 unto the
church. unto the poor 52. a 24 it is no place it is in no place 52. b 23 did
not flatter did flatter 53 a 24 Matholus Mathiolus 53. b 22 promusside
promuscis 54. a 34 Baritus Barritus 63. a 4 to our vice to our vicious 63. b 8
far excessive. fare excessive 69. b 32 nor asseiges nor sieges 71 b 12 aquae
dilunii agnae dilunii 71. b 15 innocation innovation 72. a 2 tribunatus. tribu.
74. a 34 it signified is signified 79. a 37 he says says 79. b 16 expound
expende 80. b 33 Sopronius Sophronius 81. b 32 (...). (...) 81. b 33 (...).
(...) 81. b 35 Enomius Eunomius 85. b 7 freely reprehe^ded freely reprehend 86.
b 23 that Jerusalem then Jerusalem 86. b 32 writes writing 97. a 1
Sarbonistes Sorbonistes 98. a 25 If they be If thou be 99. a 5 sometime abuse
sometime use 101. a 22 mortal books moral books 102. a 15 which way which
was 105. b 17 who as some say which child as 106. b 33 admistration
administration 109. a 30 minorum minorem 112. a 23 Athasius Athanasius 117. b
31 meet thou that mete that thou 118. a 30 councealer concealer, 120. a 20
postolos. apostolos 121. b 25 periculosus periculosius 123. a 26 exercitum
exercituum 124. a 5 ingritie integrity 126. a 24 Vlepianus Vlpianus 132. b 6
Nadantus Naclautus 132. b 6 medella. medulla 132. b 42 naturum naturam 134. a 3
worte wrote 134. b 31 space of.15. space of.50 135. a Nehemas Nehemias 135. a
31 the monarchy ye first monarchy 135. a 8 Selentiam Seleutiam 138. b 19
Missa Nissa 148. a 30 of the time but the time 148. a 31 and not passive spoke
not passive 148. a 40 was of that is of that 155. a 30 proueniemus perueniemus
163. b 11 witnesit witnesses 169. a 24 voluntary voluntarily 169. a 33 assent
essence 175. b 14 sanguis sanguinis 178. b 16 dithera diphthera 178. b 36 he
that is be as the wings 180. a 8 violence take it violent take it 194. a 38
Trinitate fidei fide trinitatis 195. b 42 if your own of your own 220. b 31
frurore furore 222. a 31 of the blessed of the blessing 224. a 38 Spyrion
Spyridion 226. a 10 semniale somniale 226. b 28 Misterus Munsterus 227. a 3
Rabbine Praga Rab. of Praga 229. b 5 Latonius. Latomus 230. b virgins not
co^se. virgins consecrate 250. a 36 in the better in the letter 261. b 32 who
but 268. a 20 two holes three holes 274. a 34 assarted asserted 281. b 10
administrated, administered 287. b 33 Achab Achas

Faults escaped in the second Tome of this book.
IN fol. 2. page. a. line. 1. He was of a pale and whitely face, is twyse
printed.

In the same fol. page b. line. 35, for tollerauerunt, is tolerauerunt.

Fol. 3. page b. line. 20. for videbitur, is videlitur.

Fol. 10. page a. line. 6. for Domitius, is Donictius.

Fol. 14. page a. line. 29. for remiseritis, is remisceritis.

Fol. 15. page a. line. 17. for aequali, is aegnati.

Fol. 18. page a. line. 16. for summis apostolis, is summus apostolus.

Fol. 21. page b. line. 11, for Achitob, is Achitus printed in two places.

Fol. 22. page a. for Iosaphat, is Leosaphat.

Fol. 25. page b. for, that the tithes should be paid to the church, and that
the solemn feast of Sunday should be kept: is put, that the tithes should be
kept.

Fol. 72. page a. line. 12. for those words, is, those words of Peter.

Fol. 94. b. line. 2. for primative, is put private: for gigno, is gignenpo.

Fol. 120. page a. line. 16. for Natalis the Martyr, is Natalis the Confessor.

FJNJS.
LIEFE IS DEATH AND DEATH IS LIEFE AETATIS SVAE XXXX
1562 woodcut portrait of profile of a man

Imprinted at London, by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martins.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, per Septennium.

These Books are to be sold, at his shop under the gate. 1565.


