THE FOVRTH PART OF THE TRVE WATCH: CONTAINING PRAYERS AND TEARS for the
CHVRCHES. OR A help to hold up the hearts and hands of the poorest servants of
God, until our Lord Jesus Christ shall have rescued his Glory, Kingdom, and
People in all the world, and fully prepared the way to his most glorious
appearing.

In praying learn to watch, in watching pray; in watching and praying is our
victory.

Zech. 4. 6. Not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of
hosts. Hos. 12. 4. He had power over the Angel and prevailed, he wept and made
supplication unto him. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pavier. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS Ladies, the Lady ZOVCH, wife to the
Right Honorable the Lord ZOVCH, with her Noble Sisters, Lady DVDLEY, and
Lady WINFIE^D, all Grace and happiness.
IT is too well known (Right Honorable and Worthy Ladies) how both in Court
and Country the hearts not only of poor simple women laden with sins, bu^
of our chief Ladies and of all other, are stolen away (so much as the Lord
permite) from all true allegiance and obedience to our Lord Jesus Christ and
his Anoinced, to join themselves to the Church of Rome, to the endless
perdition both of their souls and bodies. This also is as evident, that this
is wrought principally by this subtlety of the old Serpent: That they in that
Church have more holy devotions, and do also spend much more time therein, than
we in ours.

By this enchantment amongst others, Satan and his instruments seek to devour
not widows houses alone, as those did in the days of our Savior; but in time
to swallow us all up quick unless our mighty God stid deliver us from their
jaws, as hither to he has done. Considering therefore how the Romish Seducers
swarm in every place, to the present indangering of all the Churches and
people of the Lord, and even this our nation amongst the rest; and having heard
moreover (by one of special note in D. Wh.
the Church of God, for his learning able to silence the proudest Adversary)
that some of our most Honorable and chief Ladies, have in these and the like
respects, earnestly desired that some amongst us would more seriously labor
herein, that we might match them even in this kind, not as theirs in blind
and vain superstitions, but in true, sincere and holy devotions; I have
thought it my bounden duty, to tender for the good of all sorts, such
meditations and prayers as the Lord has in his mercy been pleased to
vouchsafe unto me in this behalf.

This also the rather, for that he having long ago put this very same care
into my heart, to seek hereby as much to save us all, as they do to destroy
us all, has now much more enflamed it, with an ardent study hereof: upon this
religious motion, and most honorable desire of those great Personages,
mentioned to me again and again, and that in Gods special providence, as I
have taken it, to stir me up more earnestly hereunto. Let me therefore herein
(right noble and worthy Ladies) humbly beg pardon, if I presume upon your
truly renowned courtesy, and tender and compassionate affection, to be more
than ordinary in this my dedication to your Honors, upon this important and
extraordinary occasion, from this intolerable insulting of the common
Adversary, and the pitiful deluding and destroying of multitudes of poor
unstable souls, and also the endangering of us all, to lie open daily more and
more unto the butcherly cruelties of Rome, when they have thoroughly prepared the
way, by drawing enough unto their part, through this and other their cunning
stratagems and strong delusions. Grant me leave (dear Ladies) I beseech you
(though a thing unusual in such dedications, which are wont usually to be
very brief; yet (to manifest my long study and earnest desire for the saving
of such of our brethren and sisters, as are endangered Romans 9 2. 2 Samuel 5. 1.
to be destroyed by this and the like subtilties of Satan) to help hereby, and
by our instant prayers for them, to pull some of them back again from the
subtle Serpent, unto our Lord Jesus Christ; and withal to keep others from
falling away from him, even so many of them as belong to the election of grace,
and to leave the rest of them more without excuse. Now is the time that Michael
and his Angels strive specially Apoc. 12. 7.
against the Dragon and his Angels, about the whole body of his Church. Now is
the time, that our Lord Jesus looks for us all to help him and his poor
Church, to remember our Baptism vow in a special manner, to ^ight manfully
under his banner, and to stand for him, for our selves, and for our brethren.

I have therefore presumed upon the occasion of that their right Christian and
tender commiseration, to write a general Epistle to all the plain and
simple-hearted people of our land, seduced by those deceivers, or in danger
thereof: and not only to them, but to all sorts: That all may take the better
notice of the delusions of Popery, the difference between the devotions of
the Romish Synagogue, and of the true Church of Christ, and to make fully known
unto them all, that they must all either renounce Popery, and profess the
Gospel with us, or else profess themselves therein to be of Satan, and to
stand for his religion against our Lord Jesus Christ. That thus all may get out
of Baby^on, seek to save themselves, and help to pull out and save all others.

And so much the rather, for that this very service has been required of me
particularly by a truly religious, worthy and ancient professor of Christ's
Gospel, in the behalf of a great and honorable Lady, who has been drawn
away by this same delusion principally; to wit, That they have more holy
devotions in their Church, than we in ours, and do spend more time therein.
Whereupon he requested me to write some Epistle, to help to reclaim her,
and to bring her back again unto us. Which service or a greater I could not
well deny, as God should be pleased to vouchsafe me ability and
opportunity, especially having been long obliged by his ancient love, though
the unablest of thousand others.

And moreover, for that I have likewise stood for many years (after a sort)
bound by promise, for the very like service in effect unto a Gentleman, much
respected generally of all that are affected to that Romish Religion, for his
special devotion in that superstitious kind; one worthy indeed to be duly
respected of all, in regard of his good parts of nature, learning, and also
descent, if the Lord shall be pleased to show him that mercy to reclaim and
bring him back into the bosom of his own true Church and people again.

This have I therefore more heartily wished to accomplish, not only for that I
have remained long thus bound by my particular promise unto himself (as after
shall more fully appear) but likewise for that I was specially obliged in
duty, both to his father, being a worthy Judge of our Land, and in love to
his eldest brother, who was a rare hope in his time, even in his tender years
(as the Commons house of Parliament could then have borne witness) if our God
had been pleased to have prolonged his days. And this the more cheerfully
also, for that the Lord had formerly showed mercy on that his hopeful
brother, vouchsafing me, a poor and weak instrument, to help to pull him
from Satan to Christ; out of deep despair, whereunto he had fal^e by reading
some part of their devotions, even of Parsons Resolution of the pains of hell,
and to bring him to much assurance and comfort in Jesus Christ, by the right
use of a little part of ours, viz. of the practice of some directions in the
first part of the True Watch. My trust is therefore that your Ladyships and all
others will judge my boldness to be borne withal, though I thus presume,
because I know assuredly, that you will not only join your hands, but your
hearts to the reclaiming and saving of them both, and of all other so deluded,
and even enchaunted with their sorceries, and that they themselves will most
praise the Lord for this service, if ever he shall thoroughly open their eyes;
whereas otherwise without unfeigned turning and speedy preventing it, they will
undoubtedly fall into a far more forlorn and irrecoverable despair, when it
will be too late.

And who knows how far this service may prevail, being both thus requested
and also promised; and now thus undertaken in all dutiful and loving
affection, and also in uprightness and singleness of heart toward them, and
toward all other, as before our blessed God, who has ever been wont not
only to work by the weakest and unlikeliest means, that himself alone may
have all the glory, but also to do the greatest good to his Church, by the
extremest rage, yea by the deepest and most mischievous plots of the
Adversaries against it. Who knows, whether his goodness may not make it an
instrument, through your instant prayers, with the prayers and tears of many
of his people furthered by this occasion, to pull not them two alone, but with
them likewise many thousands, yea hundred thousands from hell, and to bring
them to heaven, and withal to keep innumerable souls from ever declining
from the Lord. Yea, what knows any one, whether he may not make it a means
amongst others, to help to save us all, and with us, all Christ's true
Churches, from that common calamity and destruction, which Satan and his
Agents do fully assure themselves in time to bring upon them all, and upon all
the people of the Lord. Our bloody enemies, having so resolved never to rest,
until, under the name of Heretics, they have utterly rooted us all out, from
off the face of the earth. My trust is therefore (Right Honorable) that all
who unfainedly love Christ's Gospel, and the souls of these our deluded
brethren and sisters, and desire the saving of the Church of God, will think
it an acceptable service, to set before the eyes of all the world, the
palpablenesse of this most notorious delusion: and to take away that forged
imputation and shame from the true Church of Christ, and from all the Israel of
God; viz. That our Adversaries of Rome have more holy devotions than we, and
also do spend more time therein, than we in ours.

Accept then, I beseech your Honors, this poor service here now in this
entrance into this fourth part of this Watch thus undertaken chiefly upon the
occasion of that most Christian desire of those great Ladies, to whom yet I
durst not presume to dedicate it, being unknown unto them: albeit I have heard
much good concerning them, and heartily pray that all heavenly graces may be
ten times more resplendent in them, to their everlasting praise and happiness.
Accept it as one special use and application of all the three former parts of
it, to the helping of the poorest and weakest Christians in all the land, that
every one herein may have the benefit of all the former, that all in praying
may learn to watch, and every one in watching may learn to pray, and each in
watching and praying, may not only help to save themselves, but also their
own native Country, with all the true Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to pull all Gods Elect out of the mouth of the roaring Lion.

All may see (so far as I am able to conjecture) that to be true, which was
mentioned, That the battle of the great day is come; That Satan has openly,
and even visibly entered the field with his armies to fight against the Lords
most glorious Majesty and his Armies, even against all his poor Church at
once; for that this spiritual war is set on by his principal Commanders,
the Pope and his Cardinals, with their chief Agents the Jesuits, and other
Seminary Priests, and managed and foughten by his most deadly weapons, lying
and murder.

We are therefore ever to keep in memory, that we are not now so much to
labor to fight against flesh and blood, as against Ephesians. 6. 12.
principalities and powers, the Princes of the darkness of this world, and to
that end to be armed Verse. 11.
with all the complete armor of God, both defensive and offensive.

To this end, like as I have long traveled to help all our poor Country
Schools, and all of the inferior sort, that the meanest of them, who will
suffer themselves to be directed, might not need to fear the insulting of
any, or of all the proudest Jesuits, in regard of laying a sure foundation of
all good learning in our Grammar Schools (with all sweet delight both to
Master and Scholars) neither does it repent me, but I bless the God of
heaven, that gave me a heart so to abase my self; so have I here for all the
poor people of the land, labored to prepare and fit them weapons against this
great day. Which day all my labors will witness for me, that I have long
feared, seeing the malice and rage of the Adversary daily growing more and
more, with the increase of our iniquities to provoke the Lord to send it upon
us, like as upon all the other Churches; to the end to make us all to seek him
by unfeigned repentance, and that every one of u^ may turn from our evil way
unto his Covenant. That thus seeking him unfainedly, he may take our cause into
his own hand, fight his own battles, and save us from these our merciless
enemies. The better instructed sort of Christians, who are able to pray better
of themselves, need them not, I have therefore endeavored to fit them chiefly
for all the younger and weaker sort, who would as feign learn to pray, to save
themselves and the land with all the Churches, and long as much to be helpers
in this work, as any of those who are best instructed.

Wherefore (dear Ladies) as you have so much rejoiced in the former parts of
this Watch, and to do all things which may tend not only to the saving of
your selves, but also of our native Country, and to make us a happy people;
so I assure my self, that you will not disdain these poor helps, though they
be composed in a plain, easy, and homely style; so as to lead the poorest
by the hand, and to support their weakness, to help to confirm weak hands
and weary knees, that all herein may help together. It is not any painted
(much less Players) eloquence, that will pacify our blessed God, and defend
us, or put to flight our proud Adversaries. We have had a great while too much
experience of that, in too many both of our Sermons and Prayers; no, no, it
must be the evidence and power of the word of the Lord, sent forth by the
sighs and groans of his holy Spirit, though all heavenly eloquence rightly
used, be his most gracious gift, and if ever, now specially to be wished. Thus
have I studied to fit weapons, as he has enabled me against this time of
need, meet for all sorts; that old and young, noble and ignoble, yea our most
honorable Ladies may have their weapons from his Armourie; so as all, from the
chief of them to the very poor woman that grindes at the mill, may in this
Judge. 5. 23.
battle help the Lord against the mighty, and so keep that bitter curse from
all our land. That Iael may strike the nail into the Judge. 4. 21. 5. 26.
temples of Sisera. And that thus in the ^ud, she that sits at home may have
part in the spoil, and all of us jointly together, when we shall see the Lord
to have got himself the victory with his own right arm, Judge. 5. 1.
may sing the song of Deborah Exodus 15. 21.
and of Miriam, yea of all the host of heaven, saying; Praise, Apoc. 5. 13.
and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb for evermore.

Pardon me (worthy Ladies) I humbly again beseech you, if so much presuming
upon your Ladyships patience, according to my assurance of your tender
commiseration, and true Christian humility, I have so far passed the bounds
of an ordinary Epistle in this matter of such extraordinary moment and
importance, so nearely at this present concerning the safety and happiness of
your Honors, and of all the people of the Lord. If I may (by the worthy
ensamples of your honorable Ladyships) provoke other of your noble rank and
condition (as who have most leisure and best opportunity) and so others of his
servants and children to a holy emulation, seriously to meditate hereof, and to
put all these in practice, only so far forth as his heavenly Majesty calls
all hereunto, and expects these duties at the hands of every soul, I shall
have an abundant reward of all my poor travels. Or if I may but help to awake
such of his servants, as to whose view they shall be presented, to labor to be
for all the rest, as the Angels for Lot, to pull all from Satan to our Lord
Jesus Christ, and chiefly those of our own native Country, who are so seduced
by Antichrist, and by those who are sent abroad by him into the world to
deceive, and to draw all to his part.

Read and consider, and so far as your Ladyships shall clearly see our Lord
Jesus Christ leading you by the hand, so far follow him, doing as he directs
you. So you shall not only be sure to save your own souls, but also help to
save all sorts, and more specially all the Honorable, and others; who either
shall look at, or hear of your worthy ensamples; yea, your native Country
(as was said before) and all the true Churches of Christ, and shall in like
manner be helpers, to gather in all the remainder of his Elect, both Jews and
Gentiles, so to prepare the way to his most glorious coming. Thus shall you
increase your own eternal honor and happiness, and shall shine more and
more in all heavenly graces and good works, and in greater glittering before
the Lord, his Saints and Angels, than by being adorned with all the gold,
pearls and diamonds, which the whole earth can afford.

In which humble desire, I take my leave, and commend your Ladyships unto that
Celestial grace, which performs all the holy desires of them that fear him
and trust in his mercy, and so shall ever remain

Your Ladyships in all service and entire affection, John Brinsley.

TO ALL THE PLAIN AND simple-hearted people of our Land, seduced by Popery;
that they may forthwith bethink themselves, both from whom they have departed,
and also upon what grounds; and to let them know that they must either return
to our Church again, or profess themselves to be of Satan's Religion, and so
will remain to fight under his banner against our Lord and Savior.
BEloved in our Lord Jesus Christ, so many of you, as of whom we may hope that
you belong to the election of grace, for whom my hearts desire and continual
prayer to our God is, that you may be saved; give me leave to show my unfeigned
affection toward you, in performing that service for you all, which has been
requested at my hands, by such as wish much better to you, than you do unto
your selves. And that but only in these two things: First, in manifesting in
what an estate and condition you presently stand, and so your danger eternally;
and after, in helping to procure, that all the people of the Lord may cry
instantly and jointly for you, that he may show you mercy, in opening your
eyes, to see how palpably you have suffered your selves to be deluded, and in
plucking you out of the very jaws of that old Serpent. Howsoever, for the
present, you take it at my hands, yet y^ time will come, as I certainly assure
my soul, that you will either bless y^ God of Heaven for the endeavor of my
ardent affection toward you, if it shall be available for you, or cry out
against your selves, with wringing of your hands, and tearing of your hair, when
it will be too late, and no more place found for your repentance. Vouchsafe me
this favor, that being amongst the weakest of all my brethren, I may leave all
matters of higher dispute, in maintaining the truth of Christ against the
Jesuits and other Seminary Priests, by whom you have been so enchanted and
abused, unto my more learned and reverend brethren, who have already entered
the lists with them, and to others exercised in that kind, whose books I
acknowledge my self unworthie to bear; and that (since what spare thoughts God
has vouchsafed me from my necessary calling, I have specially employed in
this kind, to help his people in holy meditations, and other like devotions)
I may thus far only presume without offense: First, to put you in mind of
your Baptism vow, and Covenant made with our blessed God, from which you have
so far departed. And in the second place, to advertise you, that you may
consider well upon what grounds you have departed. And finally, whither you are
come. Whether by their cunning sleights you be not gotten under the very
banner of Satan, to fight even against our Lord and Savior Jesus* Christ,
though you do not imagine so much, but the clean contrary.

In every one of these therefore, I desire to deal lovingly, plainly, and
ingenuously, as in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, before whom I stand:
as he shall be pleased to assist me with his grace, and according also to the
weight of the business which we have in hand, which concerns the saving of
every soul of you.

For our Baptism vow and Covenant, (which we are all bound to perform all
our days, as we look to have the Lord our God, or any benefit by our blessed
Savior, or ever to appear with boldness before his Tribunal) I refer you
first unto it, as the sum of it is set down expressly in our public form of
Baptism; and if you please, as it is (amongst other of our books) more
particularly and largely explained, but even in the first part of this Watch,
The Rule of Life: In which little book, I have labored, so far as the Lord
has enabled me, to shadow out the same vow, and so to trace out the narrow
path of life, as to direct every soul from step to step, and as it were, to
guide them by the hand, until we have finished our whole course, and shall
have entered within the gates of the Celestial Jerusalem: which, though it be
but amongst the least and weakest of our helps for our de^otions, yet I would
wish every one of you so drawn away from us, to read, that therein you may
first see and know our way of life, before you so condemn it; to try what
iniquity you find in it, Ier. 2. 5.
before you so utterly depart from it, and herewithall from Christ's true Church
and Spouse, your mother, which has bred and borne you, and consequently, even
from Christ himself, so far as I am any way able to conceive, judging as
before his heavenly Majesty. And having so read and thoroughly weighed and
compared it with your way of life, according to any of your books of the like
kind, then to give sentence (as before him to whom you must surely give an
answer, even for this) whether is the better and more holy, your way or ours,
whether more agreeable to his heavenly pattern.) And thus much for the first
point, and your Baptism ^ow, which you seem to have so far abjured, in so
departing from the bosom of your mother, and utterly casting her often: and to
leave it to your more serious meditation and more mature deliberation.

For the second: viz. Upon what grounds you have departed; I will content my
self to have instanced but only in this one; which, as is said, has been of
late such a principal cause of your departure, and as I my self heard one
poor soul, who had been seduced, specially alleging it (before sundry
witnesses, and some of them most learned) as a maine cause of her joining to
that religion, viz. That they have in their Church and Religion more holy
devotions than we in ours, and spend more time therein. That by the
palpablenesse of this delusion fully discovered, you and every one of you may
judge of all the rest of their delusions, which have nothing the like power so
to bewitch you, and to steal away your hearts.

And that I may proceed in order, to make all the mysteries of this delusion as
clear as the Sun at the noonday, even to the understanding and full
capacity of the simplest in the land, I will divide it into three parts, which
are the three heads of this fell destroying Hydra, so maine a cause of your
present departure from our Church and Religion, and of your turning to Popery:
To wit, Because The delusion what, and the parts of it.
they have in their Religion more holy and and better devotions, and do also
spend more time therein, than we in ours. The first head then of this poisoning
Serpent is this; That they have more helps for devotion in their religion, than
we in ours. The second, That their many devotions are more holy and better than
ours. And the The first part of the delusion.
third is, That they spend more time in these their holy devotions, than we do
in ours. That in Popery they have more devotions than we in our Religion.


For the first of these: That they have more helps for devotions, that is, more
such as which those of our common sort may have, understand and use, it is as
true as that which he, who lately writ the Gag for the new Gospeller, has
published Like that in the Gag for the new Gospeller.
in print to the view of the world, and which he has not been ashamed to set
in the very forefront of his book, in the Preface to the Reader, within
twelve lines of the beginning to the very same end, which this delusion tends:
viz. to help more easily to deceive all the simple, and to make them more to
abhor all our Bibles, and thereby our Religion, whereof the sacred Bible is
the ground^: and so to take away the very life of their lives, and indeed to
prepare the way the better for the full effecting of their bloody designs and
desires against us all. Which I would therefore desire all (who would not
willingly be so palpably abused by these murdering Jesuits, or who would but
know these deluders and their Religion aright, and also the danger that we
stand in perpetually by it) to take notice of. His words are these, that he
would advise all of, That England has brought forth within these few years*
past, to the number of* This twenty is but one this two and fifty years, By
this shameless lie judge all the rest.
twenty several sorts of Bibles sarr^ different one from another. These are
his own very words: for the truth hereof, let every one enquire diligently,
whether England ever brought forth any more Bibles, since that translated by the
Bishops, printed 1572. save that one appointed by our Sovereign Lord and King
to be most carefully translated, and that to satisfy the Papists, and to take
away all their calumniations against our Translations; and the same very
little differing from the former, but as may fall out with the best
Translations. For mine own self, I have enquired of the most learned, and can
hear of none other.

But to pass over this most intolerable and shameless untruth, together with
that which they had devised in like manner for the present hiding their own
wickedness in the Powder Treason, for the dispatching us all, as it were, at one
blow, like as it has been generally reported, and received from thence till
this day: to wit, That the Puritanes had blown up the Parliament house;
intimating thereby, that they therefore were well worthy to be destroyed out
of the earth: and so under the name of Putitanes, to have taken occasion
hereupon, to have murdered all who truly professed Christ's. Gospel in all the
Churches. And also together with that like fair pretense of a marriage, under
which they effected that most bloody, detestable, and merciless massacre at
Paris, in butchering of a sudden so many of the Flower of the Nobility,
Gentry, and principal professors in France. And likewise to omit that
intendment 88. in a like treaty, and all other their stratagems of the same
nature, by which they have so much promoted the Catholic cause, as they call
it, and still do to this very day, and so far surprised the Church of
Christ, and prevailed against us all, all of them being of the same nature, and
from the same Author.

To pass over all these, and to leave them all, as rightly due to Popery; for
Ioh. 8. 44.
that lying and murder, the two chief works of the Devil, are now well
known to all the world (even to all, that will not wittingly put out their
own eyes) to be the t^o principal pillars, which have always supported and
promoted Popery and the kingdom of Antichrist, and must now specially, if ever
heretofore, stand him in stead. And to come briefly to show the palpablenesse
of this first delusion, and that it is of the very same nature with all the
former mentioned; namely when they say, That they have more holy devotions, What
is to be understood by Devotions.
that is, more books and helps for devotions, viz. more holy directions for a
true Christian life, for the right practice of Christianity and piety, more
helps for holy meditations and contemplations, for examining our hearts and
lives soundly according to the word of the Lord; so for true humiliation and
repentance, for holy prayers, thanksgivings, and the like, than we have, I
refer all who are willing to know the truth, to that catalogue of our
devotions, even of those which are extant in Print, and may be had by all, who
will use or see them, as it is set down in the end of this book, as it is
gathered out of Master Maunsels catalogue, dedicated to Q. Elizabeth, printed
anno 1595. and of those which have been since. Which Catalogue alone (to
compare it with all the English devotions of the like kinds, that For their
devotions wherewith they cozen the world and extremely oppress the poor
superstitious souls which will have them, see them in their Catalogue of their
English books dispersed within these two years last past with their prices,
as they are in Mr GEES late discovery, viz. Foot out of the Snare, p. 9^.
they have in the world much more of these which their common sort can come by
and make use of) will I hope quite smite off this first head of this killing
serpent. And especially when the works of some one of our men there mentioned,
alone, being well applied and practiced, may afford sufficient matter in that
kind to any poor Christian, for his whole life, to make him a blessed man;
yea much more blessed than all the devotions of Popery can, as will appear
after: and what may we think then of all the rest of them together?

And thus much briefly may suffice for the cutting off this first head of this
Hydra.

But the second head of this subtle The second part of the delusion.
serpent may seem more dangerous, as it is indeed, and more full of deadly
That the Popish devotions are holier than ours.
poison, to wit, that their devotions, viz. those commended most unto you by
your Church and Jesuits, are more holy and better than ours. To cut off this
therefore likewise, as it is a thing more necessary, so it may seem more The
holiness of devotions wherein.
difficult. But that this may be as easily and surely effected, we are wisely
to consider, wherein the holiness and goodness of all true devotions do
consist. This we may do specially, by considering the matter, ends, and fruits
of true devotions.

For the general matter, those must Which devotions are best in regard of the
matter and form in general. Ephesians. 2. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 1 Ioh. 5. 47. Mat.
16. 18. Mat. 24. 35.
needs be the holiest and best, which are most directly grounded upon the
sacred Scriptures, that sure foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, whereof
Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone; upon which as all the true Church is
built, so all her devotions; against which foundation the gates of hell shall
never prevail more than against Christ himself; they being holy as his own
Majesty; and heaven and earth may pass, but not one jot or tittle in them,
till all things in them be fulfilled; for that such devotions in regard of
their matter are the Lords, so far forth as they are si^mely grounded upon that
sacred word. In regard of the more particular, matter.


For the more particular matter likewise, those must needs be the best, which
tend most to advance the glory of our God, and the scepter and kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ; which most magnify him, giving all our salvation to the
rich mercy of our heavenly Father, in and through our Lord Jesus Christ alone;
and so which are most powerful and effectual to pull down all the pride of
sinful man, and to make us to renounce all, but Christ Jesus Phil. 3. 8, 9.
Romans 3. ^7. 4. 2.
alone; to account all but loss and dung, in regard of any rejoicing in our
selves, of any justification or merit, but only in Jesus Christ, and to be
found in him alone, not having our own righteousness, but the righteousness
of God in him. So those which most serve to cause us wholly to deny our selves,
and thereby to be made fit to come unto and follow him, as his true subjects
and disciples, and which make most to the saving of all his Church and chosen
flock, by him alone, and to leave all, who will not so receive and follow him,
and hear his voice only (as his enemies) more without excuse.

And as these, so those in like manner which give most full assurance of Gods
favor and love, and of true pardon of sin and eternal life by Jesus Christ
alone, and which thus give most strong and most abundant consolation only in
him.

Those likewise which are most powerful and effectual to increase our faith
in him, and therewithal our love, and all the rest of the graces of God, even
all parts of true sanctification and repentance, which are nothing else but the
fruits of our holy faith in him, wrought in us by his blessed Spirit when that
we truly believe in Christ.

Or to speak all more shortly, those devotions must needs be best, which most
frame all to the lively image of our Lord and Savior, and so do most form
Christ in us, to wit, which most fashion us to that absolute pattern of true
holiness, which is commanded in his blessed word, and not to superstition
contrary to it and condemned in it.

And also those, whereby we may be best assured to receive most power to
prevail with the Lord, and to obtain all good things from him alone.

Or yet more for the understanding of all: Those must needs be best, which do
best direct and help us to perform all our vows and promises made to him, and
so to walk with him all our days, doing only that which he requires in all
things, that so we may be assured of all his promises, both for this and the
better life, to be fully performed to us, for the saving our selves and all the
people of the Lord.

Or most briefly, according to our A most evident trial according to our
Saviors direction.
Saviors direction, which stands sure for ever, in the three first petitions.
Those which most tend to advance his glory and kingdom, with the
accomplishment of all his heavenly will alone, and not the will of sinful man,
must needs be the best of all. The reason is, for that these three first being
obeyed and sought first aright, will certainly bring the three latter petitions
and blessings for our selves, both all things needful for this and the better
life, with forgiuenenesse of sins, deliverance from Satan, and from all the
evils that he intends against us. That we shall see our Lord Jesus manifesting
his kingdom, power and glory for us, and making us partakers of the same for
evermore.

For the ends and fruits, those must Trial by the ends and fruits of devotions.
of necessity be the best, which as they do most directly aim at all these
things mentioned, so do likewise serve as Gods instruments to help us to
work these things most powerfully and effectually.

Finally (for the form and manner Trial by the manner.
of sending them forth unto the Lord, or performing them any other way) those
must needs be best and holiest, which are done with most understanding, 1 Cor.
14. 9, 11, 14, 15.
and so with the holiest and most fervent affections rising thereon; and Matt.
6. 7.
which are also uttered or performed in best order and with fewest vain
repetitions.

And contrarily those must needs be the worst which are contrary to these, in
regard of their matter general or particular, and which conduce to contrary
ends, and have most contrary effects and operations, and are done in a manner
farthest differing from these.

Now having set down these general rules and directions, which may serve for
our discerning of the true and sincere holiness and goodness of all
devotions, and which are the best; we are in the next place to consider
briefly, and in a general manner, what is the most special and principal
matter of our devotions; and then what is the chiefest matter of theirs; and
after in the third place, to compare them more particularly together, and so
leave the discerning and judgment of them, to every conscience, as in the
presence of the Lord.

For our devotions they are such generally Our devotions what in general.
as agree to the former rules. Both that we may so keep his watch, and walk
with him here, as we may be sure to find him God all-sufficient, to live and
reign with him eternally. And also that we may so pray, as we may be* certain
to be heard, and to prevail with his heavenly Majesty for our selves and for
all his Churches and people, in all that he shall see best for his own glory,
and the saving of all his chosen flock, and in whatsoever he has promised to
grant, even every thing in the due time, and especially whereby we may be sure
to find him a sanctuary, whatsoever come to pass.

But for those devotions of theirs Their devotions of what sort.
(whereof they glory so much, and wherewith they seek to inchant not you
alone, but if it were possible, all the people of the Lord, and even to pull
all from Christ to Antichrist) See their books of their chief devotions as
they are called by Master G^E, who was best acquainted with them.
what are they for the most part, but either meditations of their Legend
stories, as of that material Cross whereon, and those nails wherewith our
Savior was nailed; or concerning the Virgin Mary her milk and merit: or their
Ladies Psalter, all full of blasphemies, and such like sluffe, as that is,
which is in that book so lately published See their Letanies to our Lady, in
that book, and namely, that sung at the intended ^panish invasion.
by the Spanish Monk; or tales of Saint Francis, of this Saint and that, of
their Shrines, and the miracles done by them, or in the numbering and often
repeating upon their Beads, their Pater nosters, Creeds, Ave Mary's, Rosaries
and the like, many of them in an unknown tongue, and in a most superstitious
and blasphemous manner; or prayers to the Saints, devotions to the Cross, and
to all their holy relics, with innumerable other fearful superstitions. All
of them being to the great dishonor of the Lord, and the dreadful provoking
of his heavy wrath, in filling up the measure of their sins, in stead of any
comfort that any poor souls shall ever find in them.

Or which is far worse, what are Their more profound meditations and
devotions.
their deeper and more profound meditations and devotions, I mean, of their
holy Jesuits, and Iesuited Catholics? but what meritorious works they may
do, for promoting the Catholic cause; how to hold up and to advance the
throne of their holy Father, that he may be the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, opposing and exalting 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
himself above all that is called God. Yea to advance their own pomp and
tyranny in all the world, that they may at their pleasure reign over both
souls and bodies of all, as they do in all countries, where they prevail and
domineere.

And thus are their chief meditations, how to take away whatsoever may be any
hinderance hereunto, by murdering Kings and Princes, seeking to subvert whole
states, so to bring all again to adore that Romish Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
Apoc. 13. 11. etc. 14, 15, 16, 17.
to cast Christ Jesus out of his Throne, and that that man of sin may seat
himself every where as God; to destroy utterly all that will not worship him,
and take his mark, yea all the people of the Lord, who truly worship Christ
Jesus, and to root the remembrance of them from off the earth.

So that whereas the scope and effect Scope of all their d^votions.
of all our meditations and devotions is only to save the souls and bodies of
all men; theirs are in very deed for the most part to destroy all, either
souls, or bodies, or both; intended chiefly by their Jesuits and Seminary
Priests, to work that zeal in men, as may make them ready to ruinate their
own native country, to have their hands imbrued in the blood of their mother
that bred them, rather than to be hindered in their wretched designs. And not
only to take away the Lords anointed, with all his royal seed, and all not
joining to them, but even those of the same profession with them, and of the
nearest of their kin, (so that they can do it warily enough) if they be like
to be any impediment to the accomplishment of their desires, as the powder
furnace gave sufficient evidence. Yea the very best of their devotions (more
than where they agree with the word of the Lord, and so with ours) are such as
concerning which, the Lord himself does in his word, and will one day demand
of them before Esa. 1. 13.
the whole world; Who has required these things at your hands? For, for those
meditations of Jews de Granado and others, so far as they agree with the word
of the Lord and with ours* they are not properly Popish, but Christian
devotions, and so in deed ours, reserved amongst them, as the Scriptures and
other parts of Gods truth, for the cause of the true Church, the little
remainder of Gods people hid amongst them, even in the midst of Rome.

Now to take any of these devotions Comparing of them together.
of theirs, as they are theirs properly, and the very meanest of ours, but even
these whereunto this is the entrance, (prepared of purpose to help the poorest
and weakest Christians in our Church, and even all those who have not yet
entered into this way of piety, but are only desirous to offer their best
service to our Lord Jesus and his poor Church, if they may be fitted and
admitted hereunto) and to compare them to those of theirs in all or any of the
former respects, I doubt not to refer them to any conscience, in all the world,
if it be not altogether seared and stark dead: whether are more agreeable to
the former rules, and so the better. But to come more particularly, Particular
comparing of them for more evidence.
to set them opposite, that thus they may the better appear, as when white and
black are set to be beholden, light and darkness both together; and to do it
so, as the simplest in all the land may see it plainly, and be able to judge;
and therefore with some little repetition.

1. Ours directly grounded upon the word of the Lord, theirs more than for a
show grounded only and professedly upon the doctrines and traditions of men,
yea in deed on the doctrines of that man of sin.

2. Ours tending wholly to advance the glory of our God, and giving all glory
to him alone, excluding all rejoicing in our selves, that he that rejoices may
rejoice only in the Lord; theirs robbing him of his honor, giving it to
creatures.

3. Ours tending only to magnify our Lord Jesus Christ and his merit alone,
with the all sufficiency of it, for our salvation, and for whatsoever else we
stand in need of, we coming only to our heavenly Father, as it were with his
beloved son Christ Jesus in our arms, presenting him for us, as
all-sufficient, that we may be accepted in and for him, so making him our alone
Savior, Mediator, and Intercessour: they come putting many other things in
the place of him, and of his alone merit and intercession; as namely, the
Virgin Marie and other Saints, with their Merits, yea Crucifixes, Masses,
Indulgences, Relics, and a number of other things, which being in any sort
put in the place of Christ Jesus, of his satisfaction or merit, and having his
honor given to them in whole or in part, make all (...) devotions to be most
abominable.

4. Ours tending altogether to humble man in regard of any thing in himself,
and wholly to beat down all the pride of sinful man; to make him utterly to
deny himself, and all con^dence in himself; thus to make him fit to fall
down with the poor Publican, and with Marie Magdalen at the feet of our Lord
and Savior, to lay fast and lively hold on him, to present him only for us to
God his Father; theirs tending to puff and lift up sinful man like Lucifer,
to cause him to be utterly thrust down to hell.

5. Ours teaching and helping us in all things fully to understand, yea to
observe and keep our Baptism vow and Covenant made with our blessed God,
according to his heavenly word; theirs to keep all in blindness and ignorance
of that their Baptism vow in regard of any true understanding or holy
performance of it.

6. Ours teaching and assisting us to fight manfully under the banner of our
Lord Jesus Christ, against sin, the world and the devil, and so to continue
Christ's faithful soldiers and servants, to our lives end, according as we
have vowed and bound our selves; theirs to fight Giant-like, or as the Angels
of the Dragon, under the banner of Satan and Antichrist, against our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, and against all his true Church; to maintain all their
abominable Idolatry and superstition, and all the bloody and filthy sins of
Sodom; To fight for all the worldly pomp and tyranny of their Popes and
Cardinals, and of all the rest that persecute Christ's Church. Thus to continue
Satan and Antichrists faithful soldiers and servants to their lives end; to
fight ever against us, until they have utterly destroyed us or themselves; and
all indeed because we will not falsify our vows and sacramental oaths made
to our Lord Jesus Christ, like as they themselves do.

7. Our devotions teaching and stirring us up all our days, to observe every
particular part of our Covenant both for Law and Gospel; theirs not only to
hold all in ignorance of their Covenant, and so altogether in an unpossibilitie
to keep it, when they know it not, and every one of them necessarily liable to
the wrath of God; but also in effect teaching the violating of all, both Law
and Gospel, thrusting ou^ some parts wholly, as the second Commandment in
many of their books; adding and detracting at the Popes pleasure, and that
nothing is to be taken for Scripture and for Gods Word, but only as it has
warrant and authority from him; in so much as a Papist dare not believe the
Trinity from the infallible Testimony of the written Word of God, without the
authority of their Pope.

8. Ours teaching and helping to walk in the narrow path that only leads to
life, prescribed by our Lord and Savior; theirs drawing from this narrow path
into bypath devised by man* and so into the broad way leading to destruction;
seeking to kill all, who resolve to obey our Savior, in laboring to keep the
narrow way, and who will not run those bypath, and the broad way with them.

9. Ours directing and helping us to live the life of faith, living only by
the word of God, which together with the Spirit can alone give faith; theirs
the life of unbeleefe, grounded merely upon the word of sinful man, for that
they believe the word, not for it self, but only so far as it has
authority from the Pope, as was said, which in truth can never give any sound
faith. Yea ours directing and assisting to live not only the life of faith in
general; but of the true justifying and saving faith, which is wrought only
by the particular applying of Christ and all his promises to our selves, from
which particular applying of Christ proceeds all true confidence, and every
part of sanctification; theirs directing to believe, but without any such
particular application; and only in general, and as the wickedest and the
very Devils believe; for they believe there is one God, and quake and tremble.
Now that this general belief of theirs, and this implicit faith can never
breed the true justifying, sanctifying and saying faith, I appeal to the
consciences of all, any more than the most sovereign plaster can heal, if it
be not particularly applied and kept to the sore, or more than meat can nourish
and strengthen, if it be not eaten and digested, and even turned into our
nature: or yet any more than a graft can grow by the stock, if it* be not
grafted into the stock by special application, conjunction and union to take
sap from it.

10. Ours directing and helping to live the life of true godliness, being
guided only by his word and Spirit, which life alone has all the promises,
both for 1 Timothy 4* 8.
this and the other life; theirs for most part, in stead of this true
godliness so guided by Gods word, directing to live the life of bodily
exercises, as Paul calls them; in superstitious penance, fastings, whippings,
with other willworships, devotions and works devised ^eerely by man; which
bodily exercises Col. 2. 23.
and devotions, have only a show of wisdom from men vainly puffed up by their
fleshly minds, no promise at all; but contrarily all the threatenings in Gods
book for adding to his word, and detracting from it, in matter of Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
22. 32. Prove. 30. 6. Apoc. 22. 18.
his worship and service, and for rejecting his Commandments, setting up man's
in stead thereof; and so placing sinful man in the room of our most holy,
blessed, and glorious God; the creature above the Creator, yea in truth, Satan
above God, like as in all 1 Timothy 4. 1.
their devilish and lying doctrines.

11. Ours teaching and working by the practice of them full assurance of Gods
favor and love in Jesus Christ, which only brings with it joy unspeakable and
glorious; theirs teaching and bringing but only hope, without any ground of
true faith, and therefore teaching doubting continually, which when the
conscience is awaked, brings the very flashing of hell fire with it.

So that ours, in the right use of them, are heaven upon earth; theirs, when
their consciences shall be awaked, or when they but see what they have done in
them all, a very hell upon earth.

12. Our devotions are in the end the sweetest in the remembrance of them, and
of all the time before that ever we have spent in them, since we believed in
Christ; so as every one of our devotions made in faith, as our Religion
directs, and every moment of time so spent in them, has a certain reward;
theirs being done without warrant of the word, yea contrary to the word, and
therefore superstitiously and sinfully, not only wanting all such expectation
of reward (for who required the best of those things at their hands) but also
having an expectation of vengeance, when the conscience begins to be a
little awaked. So that experience teaches, that then they are feign to
renounce all but Jesus Christ, and so all confidence in these things, and to
wish then with Balaam, to die the death of the righteous; toward which death of
the righteous, we are always going forward; and which life we striving to live,
shall be sure to die the death thereof, and our last end to be like to our life.

13. Our devotions in so many of us as practice them aright, are as our
Religion, viz. that pure Religion and undefiled before God even the Father,
which James speaks of, directing and Iam. 1. 17.
helping to visit the fatherless and the widow in their adversity, and namely
those of them who are of the household of faith, and the members of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world. So as we
practicing rightly out devotions, there cannot be a lying tongue found in our
mouths, nor a hand or heart defiled with blood, but we shall seek by all
means to save both souls and bodies of all sorts, even of our wickedest
enemies, and the most bloudily-minded against us. Their Devotions contrarily
are in truth, as their Religion, to devour widows houses, under a pretense of
long prayer, and to destroy all the innocent, the fatherless and widow, even
al who are of the household of faith, and the members of Christ, which are
indeed the Innocents that save all the rest. Job 22.


And by these, they make themselves notorious and infamous to all the world, to
be the most polluted with execrable lying and the murder of innocents, of all
other religions, that ever were in the world before, as will further appear
after, whereby all their chief professors, and namely their bloody Jesuits
have made themselves odious even to all Nations.

14. Yea and to pass by many other; our Devotions are as our Religion, to make
us faithful and loyal subjects, and not to be so bold, as to have an evil
thought in our hearts against him, whom the Lord sets over us, but to be as
David, whose heart smit him, for touching but the lap of Saul's garment, and so
with that holy servant of God, and with the children of the Captivity, and with
Daniel, yea with all the holy Martyrs to be content to endure whatsoever from
them, and from all in holy and lawful authority under them, that in our
patient sufferings, Kings, Princes and Rulers may see the truth, and what is
pleasing to the Lord, and also what they ought to maintain and do for their
own salvation, and of their Royal Progeny and Dominions; theirs in all these
things, to make all to be contrarily affected, viz. to arm and flesh all to
rebellion, and the murdering of Kings and Princes when they can do it
co^veniently. After that those their ghostly fathers have made them to drink
deep enough of this cup, and to be truly devout in the manner of their
devotions: though I hope better things of you, to whom I write, yet it cannot
hurt you to be warned.

15. Moreover for the manner and form of our devotions; All our devotions
which are agreeable to our doctrine, are sent forth from understanding hearts,
and so with a holy zeal, inflamed by the spirit of judgment, and the Esa. 4.
4.
spirit of burning, mixed with the sweet perfume of Christ's merit, and so
offered up to our heavenly Father, as they may be most pleasing, coming to
him, Apoc. 8. 3.
as out of the hand of our Savior, yea offered also in order without any vain
Matthew. 6.
babbling or idle repetition: Theirs contrarily are for most part and usually
without any understanding at all; like as all the devotions of their ignorant
sort are, especially those which are in an unknown tongue; and so without all
holy affection. For all holy affections must of necessity be grounded upon
knowledge, without which the heart cannot be good; neither can Prove. 19. 2.
there be any faith in such, nor any Romans 4. end.
thing but sin, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And not only so,
but also theirs are full of vain and idle repetitions in that blind manner, a
matter directly condemned by our Savior as Matthew. 6. 7.
hypocritical and heathenish, when men think to be heard for their much
babbling. Finally, for that theirs are usually sent forth in a proud opinion of
their own merit and worthiness to be heard, or as they come out of the hand
of some Saint or Angel; to whom therein they give this honor and prerogative,
which solely belongs to our Lord and Savior, viz. of presenting Romans 8. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Apoc. ^. 3.
our prayers and supplications unto his Father alone.

I might prosecute these comparisons in many other instances, as namely, that
our devotions make us still better, the more they are practiced by us, and more
like to Christ Jesus; theirs as they are theirs properly, as those which I
named, make them still and ever worse and worse, and more like to Satan, as he
is transformed into an Angel of light; as namely in all their Jesuits, their
chief professed holy men, being indeed devils in carnate, and so accounted to
all States, and specially for those chief works of their lying and murder,
which are manifest to all, to be their principal study: Ours (to repeat it
again, that it may leave the deeper impression in every soul) tending to save
all both souls and bodies; theirs to destroy all, not only us whom they term
Heretics, but themselves eternally, and all other whom they seduce by their
delusions.

But to omit all further comparisons, for that it would be too long, and only
to content our selves with these, and to come to a conclusion of this second
point, viz. That these things being so, as every one who professes Christ's
Gospel, and holds the Religion of our Church, must needs acknowledge, and
even the very consciences of our Adversaries will surely do, when they shall
be awaked to answer as before the Lords Tribunal; I now here appeal to every
soul, whether are more holy and so better, their devotions or ours.

And thus I hope this second head Conclusion of this second point.
of this monstrous destroying and devouring serpent, is utterly smitten off for
ever hereafter hurting any of Gods people, who uprightly weigh these things,
and to whom it is given to believe the Gospel of Christ, and withal to lay to
heart that forewarning of Paul concerning the strong delusions 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11,
12.
of Antichrist, amongst which these are not of the least. And for them to ^rag
of the number of them being such, is to boast of their store of poison and
pestilent infection enough to destroy not only themselves, but even all the
world And thus much for the second head. The third part of the delusion: that
they spend more time in their devotions than we in ours.


To come therefore to the last head of this deadly Serpent, which is yet more
perilous and full of mortal poison than the former: viz. That they spend more
time in their devotions than we do in ours, and therefore their religion is
better. To cut off this likewise,

1. I answer, that their devotions being such as those which we have heard,
viz. Idolatrous, superstitious, and against the direction of the Lord, yea
against his express charge, (like as all theirs are, so far as they are
properly theirs) the more time they spend in them, the more they increase their
sin, and so the wrath of God against themselves, with their own everlasting
misery, so that to glory of their many devotions spent in that kind, is but
to glory in their shame and in their sin, even in the launcing of their own
souls, in a devotion like to the devotion of Baals Priests.

2. Thus I answer, that a Papist, being a right Papist, holding their usual
tenets, and following their practice, can never make one prayer which can be
acceptable unto God, nor do any work which can be pleasing, for that Rh^m. on
Romans 3. verse. 22. sect. 7.
they do not only condemn, but also scorn, yea persecute that true
justifying faith, which consists in a particular applying of Christ, and in a
peculiar and full assurance of Gods favor and love through Jesus Christ alone;
without which faith there can be no sanctification, for that all our
sanctification flows from our justification, and our justification from this
particular saving faith, thus applying Christ to us, and making him ours, and
so making us flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones; whereby all our good
works flow from him by his Spirit, when we are so united and incorporated into
him thereby.

Now they denying and scorning that whereby they should be made good trees,
can never bring forth any good Mat. 12. 33.
fruit pleasing and acceptable unto the Lord: For first, the tree must be good,
and then will the fruit be good, and never before, but scorning that whereby
they should be made good trees and living members of Christ, and have his
Spirit, they can never do the works of Christ, or bring forth the fruits of the
Spirit.

3. Though they could make never so many prayers, and those good prayers in
regard of the matter, yet none of those prayers can ever be accepted; but God
threats to hide his face from Esa. 1. 15.
them, because their hearts and hands are full of blood, all of them, at least
the most devout of them, wishing and seeking the blood of all heretics, and
so of us whom they principally account to be such amongst all other.

For their very hating of us so mortally they are murderers, and much 1 Ioh.
3. 15.
more, hating and seeling to root us all out, only for our love to our God,
even for his names sake, and for our cleaving fast to him alone; and therefore
cannot have eternal life abiding in them, much less can any of their prayers
be heard so long as they so remain.

4 Moreover, for all their canonical and set hours, if they be either in such
kind of prayers as theirs are properly; or else if they be with the neglect
of that particular calling wherein every one of them should walk, to eat
their own bread, and not to be as Caterpillars and idle bellies, to live of
the spoil of the Church or Commonwealth; and much more, if they be to deceive
and to delude poor souls in an opinion of me^ it thereby; and most of all in
putting their works so done in place of the merit of Christ, as in adding them
to the treasure of the Church; though by them they afflict and humble their
bodies never so much; yet all these the more they are, the greater is their
sin and misery, as was said before: for who required any Esa. 1. 12. Psalm.
50. 16.
of the best of them done in this manner at their hands? And much more any of
those which are in themselves idolatrous or superstitious.

5. For true and holy devotions, and which are pleasing and acceptable unto
God, I doubt not constantly to affirm, but that the poorest and weakest true
Christian in our Church (which rightly holding the doctrine of our Church, and
justified by the blood of Christ through a lively faith in him, makes
conscience of all his ways, and so uses to pray according to his will, in the
name of Christ only, both spends more time in true holy Devotions, and shall
be more accepted with the Lord, yea shall have more power to prevail with his
Majesty for whatsoever he seeks, and shall also bring more comfort to his
own soul, and find a far greater reward from the Lord, than the proudest
Pharisaicall Papist in all the world.

For that the prayers of such an one so made, are the prayers of faith, unto
which all the promises are made; and contrarily all the prayers of the Papists,
so far as they are Papists, and so made, can be no other but prayers of
unbeleefe, and so can look to receive nothing, because indeed they are nothing
but sin, and displeasing to his Iam. 16. 7.
Majesty.

And if the poorest Christian, and he that spends least time do this, what
shall we think of many thousands others, who have set themselves unfainedly
to seek and walk with God? Yea, what shall we think of all those, who
knowing their own sins and weaknesses, and the continual endeavors of Satan
against them, with their own necessities, and the necessities of the Churches,
are driven to be instant with the Lord day and night? And chiefly what shall
we judge of all those, who do at this day truly take to heart the dishonours
done unto his glorious Majesty, the oppositions against Christ's Gospel, his
crown and dignity, with the state of his poor Churches and people therein;
the rage and fury of Satan and Antichrist? who have therefore set themselves
truly to help our Lord Jesus in his members to pacify his wrath, and for the
restoring of his captives with the glory of his Sion.

Yet have we too just cause to accuse Just complaint against the greatest part
of those who prosesse the Gospel.
and condemn our selves herein, not only all our Atheists and profane sort,
but also the multitude generally, that we suffer our adversaries so far to
condemn the greatest part of us, who profess the Gospel, that they should
labor far more in their superstitious devotions, to increase their sin and
judgment upon them all (though this have been always the nature of
superstition) than we in our holy and true devotions to increase our own
happiness, and for the saving of us all. Notwithstanding that whatsoever
deadness and want is amongst us in this behalf, it is not through the fault
of our Religion, which teaches and enableth us otherwise when it is rightly
known and practiced, but it is the want of true knowledge, and of a sound and
conscionable practice of our Religion.

Hence it has been, and is one principal end whereunto I have bent my
studies in these poor labors, the better to awaken us, and to put more life
into us, to begin more universally and jointly, and also more incessantly to
importune the Lord herein, being provoked by their ensample.

That thus we may labor as powerfully and as earnestly with the Lord hereby,
for the saving of our selves generally, and of so many of them with us as
belong unto his eternal election, as they do by theirs, to destroy both us
and themselves together.

And thus much also, for cutting off Conclusion.
the third head of this subtle serpent, which I trust shall thus fall with the
rest. And now that this Hydra is so laid in The further manifestation of that
assumption, which fully demonstrated, all must renounce Popery or be
professedly of Satan's Religion. Se^ Watch, Part 3. page 340.
the dust, and all his heads taken utterly from him, for so poisoning and
destroying any more; let me once again come unto the further demonstration of
that assumption, concerning which that learned Gentleman (of whom I made
mention in the Epistle Dedicatory) professed long ago, that if it could be
proved, viz. that Popery teaches lying and murdering for the supporting of it,
he would utterly renounce his religion and embrace ours. For that this does in
like manner, and as nearly concern every Papist in the world, as it does him.
That they must needs every one either profess with him, that if it can be
proved, they likewise will utterly renounce Popery, and embrace the Gospel, or
that they are of that Religion which is of Satan, and will so remain,
whatsoever the Lord shall manifest to the contrary. Which point, as all may
see, does fitly come in to be yet more plainly demonstrated in this place, and
upon this present occasion.

The Syllogism whereby I endeavored The Syllogism grounded upon our Saviors
own words.
to let him see the danger wherein himself and all the rest of them who are of
that popish Religion do stand (because that Religion so far as it is
differing from ours, and properly Popish, holding their chief grounds, must
needs be of the devil.) was grounded upon the express words of our Savior
to the unbeleeving Jews, who therefore sought by lies and all devices to kill
him, even for the truth, which he declared unto them, as now they do^ us all.
The words are, John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of
your father will you do; He has been a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth.

This I framed in the plainest manner that I could, for the easier
understanding and trial of it, as now I do^; that every one may be better able
to discern of the truth and weight of it, thus:

That Religion which teaches lying and murder for the supporting and advancing
of it, is of the Devil; But the Religion of the Iesuited Papist it a Religion
which teaches lying and murder for the supporting and advancing of it.

Ergo the Religion of the Iesuited Papists is of the Devil.

First the proposition I showed to be strong from the express words of our
Savior, and not possibly to be gainesaied; for that if liers and murderers are
of the devil, then that Religion which teaches lying and murdering to support
and advance it self, must needs be so likewise.

He therefore being pressed with the Assumption, denied it, only by
distinguishing, that howsoever some of them had practiced so, yet it was not
their doctrine, and that if it could be proved to be their doctrine, he would
utterly renounce his Religion, and join himself again to us.

This I undertook to prove unto him: but living some miles dist^nt from him,
and having my calling to follow, which I was necessarily to attend; the Lord
our faithful and most gracious Father, seeing my unfeigned desire for his
reclaiming and salvation, undertook for me the proving of it, in such a
manner, as whereby to give satisfaction for the truth of it to all the world,
and for ever to stop his mouth, and the mouths of all our adversaries, even of
every one affected to that Popish Religion, and that two ways.

First, this conference of ours, and How the Lord manifested the truth of this
Assumption, that this is their doctrine.
so my promise being but a little before the powder Treason, it proved it
self, or rather, his heavenly Majesty manifested it by themselves, leaving
them up to themselves in that very powder Treason, wherein there was for the
supporting and advancing of their Religion, first such a murder intended as the
world before that day never heard of.

And secondly, a lie as great as it, devised not only to cover that bloody
fact, for the present; but by it to have destroyed all the rest, who had
escaped that blow, even all truly professing Christ's Gospel; in all countries
of the earth, under the name of Puritans; for that they had committed such a
fact, viz. That the Puritanes had blown up the Parliament house: like as when
it was discovered, they gave it forth, that the Puritans had intended it. That
which should have been their own most detestable act, they father upon the
people of the Lord, whom they would have butchered by it, and blown up for
ever.

Now this whole act of this devilish and deadly preparation, we know, was
proved to be done by the advice of Father Garn^, and other their superiors.
And therefore it being their doctrine, that they are to obey their Superiors
and Ghostly Fathers, chiefly in all things which concern the promoting of the
Catholic cause* and therein to be ever ready to adventure their lives; I
appeal to the conscience of this Gentleman, and the consciences of them and
you all, whether it be not their doctrine by necessary consequence.

2. His heavenly Majesty and goodness declared it thus further for me soon
after, upon the same occasion of the Powder Treason; in causing Now L. ^. of
Lic^field.
Mr. Doctor Morton (a man meet for his learning and knowledge of their works)
to prove it against them, in his book called, An exact discovery of Romish
doctrine in the case of conspiracy and rebellion, written by direction from
our Superiors; together with his Defense thereof in his Encounter against
Parsons. In which he does manifest this to be their plain and direct doctrine,
setting down their places out of sundry of their chief Authors.

3. The Lord has moreover caused it to be published not to our Nation alone,
but as it were to the whole world, in that book which is called, Revelatio
Cons^iorum qu^ (...) Synod^ Tridentinae ^ant inita, and in hunc usqu^ diem
continuata: viz. I he revealing of Popish conspiracies, between the Pope, the
Emperor, and other Popish Princes and States of the Christian world from the
beginning of the Council of Trent until this day, for the utter rooting out
of the Gospel of Christ, and destroying the professors thereof, either by
fraud under pretense of peace, or other leagues, or by open hostility and
cruelty, whenever their time and opportunity serves; which book has sundry
of the Popes Bulls annexed to it to the same purpose. And likewise the Lord has
caused it to be thus divulged by sundry other books and means. But this I
have already set down in the Part 3. c. 11. p. 340, 341.
third part of this Watch, and namely in the Idolatry of Judah hastening the
Captivity; which matter (if ever heretofore) concerns our whole Nation, and
even all the Churches seriously to lay to heart.

Now this one very fact of their^ alone, might have been fully sufficient to
have caused all of them to have acknowledged the truth of that Assumption; and
thereupon to have utterly renounced Popery, and embraced the Gospel again; if
God had been so pleased to have opened their eyes, o^ touched their hearts to
have considered of it as in his presence, and much more those mentioned books,
and many such like discoveries.

But since that (notwithstanding all manner of convictions by such notorious
practices formerly, such manifestations by writings, and even from their own
books) most of them in stead of renouncing Popery, and joining to us again,
are much more obstinate; and the number of them is increased, and that they do
daily grow in their induration against all the Lords most gracious warnings of
them; and that all the Jesuits and Iesuited, do set themselves as Pharaoh and
Egypt, to pursue all his Israel at this once, into the very heart of the sea;
and also seeing that all their simpler sort are so far enchanted by their
Iannes and Ia^bres, those their Jesuits and other Seminary Priests through
their illusions, and hopes at length to prevail, at least by these their
practices of equivocations and murders, I have thought it my duty yet once
again to manifest here still further the evidence of this Assumption, viz.
That Popery practices and teaches lying and murder to support and advance it
self; and therefore is undoubtedly of the Devil.

Who can tell if yet at length our blessed God will not be pleased to awake that
Honorable Lady, and that devoted Gentleman, with others of them, (which I beg
of his sacred Majesty even upon my knees) to consider better of their estate
and courses, and get themselves out of the power and paw of Satan. At least my
certain hope in the Lord is, that it may be a means to help to keep many
others from ever so coming under Satan's banner:

And here I cannot but again wonder The Lord himself also daily more and more
manifesting the truth of it, to leave all the obstinate more without excuse.
at the goodness of our God, and of his special providence answering for me,
and performing also my poor desire herein likewise, above all that I could
ever expect, at this very instant of time, now that this my hearts desire
toward them, and our prayers to God for them, are to come into the press, and
into the public view of all, and but even as it were immediately before.
Which thing I cannot no^ dare otherwise expound, but because he would have all
sorts to take notice of his love and care for us, and for all that are his
people, to warn and save us all; and also of his infinite mercy, even to
them, if any warning may yet serve to prevail with them: or else of his most
just vengeance, if they will suffer themselves still to be so wilfully blinded,
and carried against him, his truth and servants in such a furious rage to their
own certain perdition, and will not yet turn and betake themselves unto the
colors of our Lord Jesus Christ.

First, he has manifested it anew, in discovering again, (even as it were to
all the world) the wickedness of that Religion in this behalf, in causing our
whole nation, not only to take more full and certain notice of their dealing,
and to be enforced to seek by all means to prevent the mischief and danger
by it; but also all the Churches, even all the earth, to see how by delays and
fair pretenses (which have indeed been nothing, but mere untruths and guls,
to speak plainly of them) they have devoured so great a part, and are ready
presently to swallow up all, under pretenses of marriages, of more strong
leagues, and more firm peace, according to their ancient devices and
practices, and agreeably to their holy Councels at Trent, in the book
mentioned before: so as even all the world rings and cries out of it.

2. In the new French practice of the Se^ the book entitled, An admirable
discovery of an horrible attempt; standerously ^hered upon them of Rochell.
Jesuits, confirmed both in print, and also by letters to sundry Merchants
from men of credit, whereby they sought to make our Religion odious to Kings,
Princes, and States, for treasonable plots: and so to set them all to band
themselves to root it and us utterly out of the earth, and specially to make
France once again to flow with Christian blood; for that such as they are,
have not yet drunk blood enough, though all their Iesuited sort are made
drunk already, with the blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus.

3. By causing at this time their Art of equivocating and lying to come to
light, and to be published to the view of all sorts amongst us. How these
Jesuits have beaten their brains, and even gone beyond Satan himself, in
devising, maintaining, and practicing this devilish Art, which we may well
call their new Black Art, for which I refer all to Mr. Masons book of The
new Art of lying, covered by Jesuits under the veil of Equivocation. That all
may see and be for ever fully satisfied, that these are their doctrines, and
the very chiefest of them, in the refining and perfecting whereof, they bestow
most pains.

4. By that late and notable Discovery See Foot out of the Snare, page 25.
out of their own books, by Mr. Gee, who was one of them; wherein he has set
down such impious tricks and devices of their Priests and Jesuits, that (as
he there says) all may justly hoot at them, for most abominable impostors and
liars. The reading but of some of which will manifestly clear whatsoever I
have spoken in this behalf, and this Assumption. This likewise coming forth
in Gods special providence at this very instant, for the more full conviction
of all, or leaving all more without excuse, and to stop every mouth that shall
plead for them.

Yet to pass over all these, and this also; that all sorts do know, that
their Jesuits and Confessors are the chief contrivers and abettours of all
their chief stratagems, and that nothing is done without them. And albeit we
are nothing to regard words, when their deeds, according to their Doctrines and
Constitutions, are apparent to all the world. And that although they may delude
little children, by affirming that these are not their doctrines (if any dare
still deny it against the witness of his own heart) yet men, having their
brains in their heads, can never be so besotted, unless they will wilfully
join hands with them, or suffer their eyes utterly to be put out.

For that which they say; That they are not their Doctrines, unless we can
show them out of the Council of Trent, or some of their chief Councels; can
any man imagine, that the Councels would openly profess them to proclaim to
all the world, that they and their Religion is of Satan? or can we think or
imagine, that so many of their Jesuits should publish them unto the world,
unless they were the advice of their Popes, and indeed their Doctrine.

But to pass all these things over, All their Doctrines lies in hypocrisic.
and to leave them to their further consideration, to work better upon their
consciences: what can they yet, or any other say to their Doctrines, which the
Holy Ghost calls, Lies 2 Timothy 4. 2.
through hypocrisy, devised to devour us all?

Such as this here discovered, That they have more holy devotions than we, etc.

And even for all their Doctrines jointly to leave it to the consciences of all
whether all of those wherein they differ from us, and for which they so
contend, be not Doctrines merely devised to please the corrupt nature of man;
to hold up that Hierarchy of the Pope, and tyranny of that Sea of Rome, viz.
of their Pope, Cardinals, Abbots, and the rest: And also for their bellies; and
that they may keep all the world in slaverie, and to hide their wickedness.
And more specially what their Doctrines are concerning Purgatory, Masses,
Indulgences, Pardons, even for the time to come; Miracles done by this Saint
and that, and by this Relic and that: and concerning their holy Relics
themselves, and so all their doctrines of Equivocation, mental Reservation,
and the like, whether they be not all (to speak as the thing is) notorious
lies to keep the poor people in ignorance, and in their blind devotions and
slavery to them; yea to muzzle them in their murdering zeal against the true
Church. Which if it be so, then the Assumption is most manifest to all the
world, even to children, and almost to sucking babes: That Popery teaches
lying and murder, or that which tends thereunto, viz. to the destroying of all
either souls, or bodies, or both.

Now for the truth of all these things, Appeal for the truth of the Assumption.
I appeal first to the Lord Jesus, the Judge of all, to judge between us; and
that I have written according to the persuasion of my heart, grounded upon the
word of the Lord, and upon their writings and dealings.

2. I appeal to the sacred Scriptures, by which we and they and all our
doctrines must be judged. 3. To the universal consent of all the true Church
of Christ. 4. To every one who professes the Gospel according to the doctrine
of our Church, and our good laws. 5. To their own hearts and consciences, I
mean of all the learneder, and cunninger sort of them, and to the consciences
of all, when they shall be so awaked, as to think that they are to appear
before Jesus Christ to give an account.
For particular proofs of these and other disputes, I leave them to the
Treatises mentioned before, and also to the more learned, and them who have
better leisure. It may be sufficient for me to have made them manifest to all
who profess Christ's Gospel, and who judge indifferently, and to leave them
and their consciences thus convinced unto the Lords Judgment fea^. Appeal for
the evidence of sundry Consectaries.


And now these things being so, I appeal again to their consciences, and the
consciences of all the world, concerning the evidence and necessity of these
Consectaries.

1. Whether the Assumption being true, that Religion of theirs be not of the
Devil, by our Saviors own reason, and therefore that all of them must either
renounce, and even abjure it, or else profess themselves to be of Satan's
Religion, to maintain it, and to fight for him against our Lord Jesus Christ,
and that they will still do it.

2. Whether all sorts are not bound to seek to save themselves from that lying
and murdering Religion, and to use all warrantable and holy means, both to
reclaim all from it, to the end to save them, both souls and bodies, and also
to deliver all the Churches and people of the Lord, from the danger of being
suddenly surprised, and murdered thereby; and so far as God inables them any
way, to take away all the dishonor and provocations of his sacred Majesty,
which may come thereby, as by all other such heinous sins. This I humbly
submit to the judgment of all; seeing whosoever is not with our Luke 11. 23.
Savior is against him, and that whosoever saves not, destroys. That the
Magistrates and all in authority are the keepers of both the Tables, each
according to his place: and for that the blood of all must be required at the
Pastors and Watchmens hands, Ezekiel. 33. 7, 8.
according to the charge committed to every one of them, if they be not
faithful in their several places designed to them by the Lord.

I could wish them and all other of the simpler sort to read such little
treatises as show how Popery is against the main grounds of Religion, and first
principles of the Catechism; as namely a little book called a pill to purge
out Popery, with the shifts of the Jesuits by Master MVLL^N and the like.
Request to all opponents.
Wherefore I entreat them and all others seriously to think hereof, as in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, before whom I have written, in duty to his
heavenly majesty, for maintaining his glory, and holding up the scepter of our
Lord Jesus, and in love and duty to all sorts, chiefly to all in high place,
for the saving of all, or to leave the obstinate utterly without excuse.

And thus much also for the proof of the Assumption, and the shutting up of
this enclosed Epistle.

Unto which, if this Gentleman, or any one for that Honorable Lady, will
offer to reply, let me but crave this of him, whosoever he be, which equity
and wisdom will require.

1. First, to do it in love and with good advice, as in the presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ, without all shifts or devices against the light of his
conscience, even as I have endeavored, and only for the finding out and
maintaining the truth, whereunto (God willing) I shall ever yield, if any one
in any thing shall rightly show me my error, and I shall moreover acknowledge
my oversight.

2. And secondly, let me request of him, that he will bethink himself
wisely, for what he pleades, and also for whom, whether he do it not even for
Satan, and for the upholding of his kingdom by his chief works of lying and
murder; and also to consider against whom he does it, whether it be not against
our Lord Jesus Christ, and against all his Saints and people: and withal to
think, how hard it is for him to kick against the pricks, and that against
the light shining clearly in his heart. And yet Acts 9, 5.
more also, to ponder wisely what it is to give Satan advantage, but by one lie
only wilfully maintained, and especially such a lie, as tends but to the
murdering of one soul. And how much more then, when it is to maintain the Art
of lying devised by and for the devil himself; to hold up his kingdom, and
to overthrow the kingdom of Christ, and for the deceiving and destroying of
innumerable souls, even of all bewitched by them; and tending to the
destroying of all the people of the Lord, and the rooting them out of the
earth. How dreadful it will be to stand before Christ, to give answer but for
the blood of one soul alone; when Abels blood, the blood but even of his body
alone, cries so loud from the earth, and makes Cain such a runnagate all his
days, to be in hell whilst he was yet here in the earth; yea before he came
into that place of torment designed for him and for all other wicked men, and
chiefly for all liers and murderers, to be tormented there for ever.

4. And finally, let me wish him for his credit (if he respect nothing else)
to answer all these books which I have mentioned, as well for the cause of the
learned as the unlearned, because they are (as it were sent of God) to manifest
the truth hereof; and then I have no doubt, but he our most blessed and only
wise God, will both reply and answer for us still, and so maintain his own
cause, as to put them all to silence, at least in the pit which they are
digging for us, and that for evermore.

Thus have I through the good hand of my God, made way to the satisfying of the
holy desires of those worthy Personages, which wish so Honorably and
Christianly unto you, and that we may match our chief Adversaries in our
devotions; although we do already (as all may plainly see) go so far beyond
them in this kind; and also to the end that you who mean plainly, and have
not your hearts yet tainted with their bloud-thirstie desires, and all others,
may perceive, how you have been and are deluded, and even enchanted in every
one of these respects: by which scale, all may measure the rest of their lying
doctrines and devices. And withal I hope that I have made it evident to the
consciences of all, that all sorts must renounce Popery, and embrace the
Gospel; or else profess themselves to be of their father the Devil, and that
they will fight against Christ. To try if the Lord may be pleased yet to show
them mercy, to come out of the snares of Satan, either by the clear
manifestation of these delusions of his, or by the prayers and tears of many
of his people, crying jointly for all, to hale and See Peter's enlargement,
concerning the power of faithful prayer.
pull them out of Egypt and Sodom, for what are not the joint prayers of Gods
people able to do?

Now these things being so, this delusion so laid open, and the Assumption so
plainly proved and demonstrated to the convincing of every of your
consciences, as I am fully persuaded before the Lord, give me leave in tender
commiseration to turn my speech unto you all, who dare still stand out against
his Majesty.

Oh bethink your selves in time, what it is to fight against the light of your
own hearts! what will follow the wounded conscience, when the Lord shall wake
it and call it to an account, which he will certainly do, either in this
life, or so soon as ever you shall depart hence. Remember the cases of Cain,
Saul, Judas, for fighting so desperately against the light, and so standing
forth against the Lord and his most gracious offer of mercy.

Oh bethink your selves in time of his terrible and most glorious Majesty,
against whom you have so fearfully sinned, as to provoke him not only against
your selves, but against this whole Nation, even against us all, for your
causes, in departing from him and his holy Religion, to a Religion of such
abominations, and so manifestly convicted and declared to be of Satan his
sworn enemy!

Remember the dreadfulnesse of his wrath, so declared in the irrevocable
punishment of the Angels that so fell from him, of Adam, the old world, Sodom;
and that which shall be so fearfully 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.
revealed when Christ shall come with thousand thousands of glorious Angels, in
flaming fire, to render vengeance to all who know him not, and who will not
yield obedience to his heavenly Gospel, and much more to all his obstinate
enemies.

Consider well how your sin is increased not only being committed so
contrarily to your Baptism vow, but also by all the evictions of the
abominations of that idolatrous, lying, and murdering Religion, especially in
this Nation, since the time of the first casting it forth so publicly by
Parliament, and even until this very day, and now last of all by this
Discovery of this forged delusion, wherein so many others of yours like unto
it are included.

Think what it is, not only to be barred out of Heaven, deprived utterly of
all the joys thereof, but moreover to be thrust into hell, to abide the
torment thereof with Satan and his Angels for ever and ever: which must needs
come upon you, if that Religion of Rome be such, and have such supporters, as
you have or may see set before your faces.

If you will not read this, but be as the deaf adder stopping your ears,
and in stead of Satan hiding away and blinding your own eyes, yet I hope you
have each of you some faithful friends, who (believing the Gospel* and
persuaded of your delusions as I am) will play the parts of faithful
Physicians, and true loving friends toward such as are endangered by extreme
distempers in burning fevers or the like, or in extreme peril of perishing by
water or fire, or any way else; viz. which will make these things known unto
you, and urge them upon you for your preservation and recoverie, so to declare
their uttermost love unto you, to the end to convert you, and bring you to us
again, and to our Lord Jesus Christ, and so save you from hell: though for the
present they adventure your displeasure, as I also must.

Howsoever, this shall be my rejoicing and my witness for me before the Lord,
for my duty toward his heavenly Majesty, and toward his Vicegerent our
royal Sovereign, and of my love and duty toward this Church and Nation, and
even you all in this behalf. For which, entreating him in his rich mercy to
make it effectual, I commit it and you to his Grace, which works above all
that we can conceive, and shall rest ever striving with you,

I. B.

TO EVERY TRVE CHRISTIAN Soul, rightly taking to heart the estate of Christ's
poor Churches and dispersed Flock.
CHristian Reader, if thou take to heart the dishonours done unto our most holy
God, the trampling under foot the Gospel and Scepter of our Lord Jesus Christ
in so many parts of his Church, the miserable estate of his people and servants
professing his name, under the slaverie and tyranny of Antichrist; or the
woeful condition of the remainder of Gods elect not yet called and gathered
forth, but remainining under the power of Satan; or if thou regard but the
saving of thine own soul, afford some assistance to him and his poor people,
especially now that he so graciously calls upon thee, and offers thee so much
direction and help thereunto, even in these meditations and prayers besides
many others.

Consider of them well; and so far as thou find him calling on thee, to
put them in practice, set thy self forthwith to help in this blessed work.
If any of them, either meditations or prayers, seem unto thee weak, as they
must needs be, having been written for most part when many others slept; and
that because of the industry of Satan and his instruments, that they might not
be any hinderance unto my calling, yet are they such as thy Christ expects at
thy hands, so far as they are soundly grounded upon his sacred truth, and
agreeable to his heavenly will. Give him thy heart and best affections, and
better the form in th^ne own devotion, remembering ever for whom they are
chiefly intended, viz to help the weaker sort, which are not able to pray of
themselves, according to th^se occasions.

If they seem over long for thy occasions, yet are they so divided, as thou
may leave off and begin again wheresoever thou please, only fitting some
general beginnings and ends of the prayers, according to the other, or
according to thine own holy meditation.

I^ this offend thee, that they are s^t down in a book, remember the public
prayers, that in all ages have been so in the Church, and yet most pleasing
and available. Let the consideration of so many of thine own nation, yea so
many of the chief thereof, so fearfully seduced, and even bewitched by
Jesuits, and other Seminary Priests, and every day more and more falling
away, to the indangering not only of themselves, but of the whole Land
continually, provoke thee to this duty: and especially seeing they profess
themselves to have been drawn to that Romish Religion hereby chiefly; That
they in their Church have more devotions, and spend more time therein, than we
in ours.

Let this move thee to take some pity of them, and to help by thy prayers, to
pull them out of the fire of Gods vengeance, and likewise to keep others from
falling from him. Let their blind zeal and superstitious devotions (which
condemns the coldness and security of the greatest part of those, who
professing Christ's Gospel, yet pray so litt^e, and which is one principal
cause of their stumbling, I speak upon certain knowledge, both concerning
high and low, noble and mean^) let this, I say, provoke thee to more devotion
in holy meditations and instant prayers, according to the word and will of thy
God, and enforce thee hereunto, to spend daily some part of it, as God gives
thee more ^it opportunity; or as thou have more neglected these. They (as is
said) use some devotions daily to pull souls out of Purgatory; be thou
instant for them, to pull them from the power of Satan to Christ.

Begin thus to redeem thy time, so badly misspent, and that so long, until
thou shall see Gods glory recovered, the scepter of his Christ set up again in
all places whence it is removed; with the deliverie of thy brethren in all
foreign part^; and the dangers past which are so threatened toward all the
Churches, and namely our ne^rest and faithful neighbors, and even toward thy
self. Suffer not these blinded souls to rise up in judgment against thee,
that they have spent more time and pains in their devotion to serve Satan and
Antichrist, and to hold up his throne, to their endless perdition; than thou
to serve our Lord Jesus, to the saving thine own soul, and the lives of all
his people.

If thou would be ready to spend thy goods, and to adventure thy life for the
glory of thy God, for thy Christ, and his Church, at his command; yea if thou
would bestow any labor or cost, to save thy native Country or Countrymen
being in danger, and much more the Lords Anointed, with our Royal Prince, and
that most illustrious Prince and Princess Palatine, all of whom have showed so
much love to Christ's Gospel, and if thy heart be truly affected to that sweet
and happy progen^, then be ready to help them all by thy prayers: especially
since thou may do this without any cost or loss, and have help offered
from his Majesty, and the same also, not only put into thy hands, but, as it
were, into thy mouth; and withal thy hands holden up by him to do it. Do it
therefore as well as thou caust, if thou regard but thine own case, either of
soul or body, thy present or eternal estate.

I have purposely in many of the prayers, followed the order in the first part
of this Watch, which I have taken for a good direction, both for that it has
been so often tried by the learned to be according to the true Rule of Life, and
for that the places for proofs are there quoted to avoid further labor: and
that thou and all the weaker sort may learn together both to watch and pray
for your selves and all the people of the Lord, and so be sure to prevail with
his heavenly Majesty.

If thou shall find or suspect any error, wherein thou dare not join,
signify it as in love and in the fear of the Lord; and I shall (as I have
ever bound my self) be most ready either to give thee satisfaction, or to
reform it; and yet in the mean time proceed in the rest jointly with thy
brethren.

Let us all join as being of one heart and soul, wherein we all agree, crying
unto our heavenly Father, compassing him about at his feet for our selves and
all his dear children, and he will surely hear our cries, and in his due time
reveal every difference unto us, and wherein the error lies.

I tie thee not to days nor hours, but as thou observest the Lord offering
thee fittest opportunities, and as he shall move thee thereto: though because
of Satan's subtlety, and the falsenesse and corruption of our own hearts, we
shall find by experience, that all the bonds whereby we can bind our selves
to holy duties, especially of this nature and importance, are far too little,
so we^ do it in an holy wisdom and wise consideration, that we bring not a
snare upon our selves.

Wonder not that I so often go^ over that heavenly prayer of our Saviors, and so
strictly tie my self unto it, for that I find it the wisdom of God, and the
power of God, ministering still now and most heavenly matter even to this our
present purpose; and also am fully assured that all the true Churches and
people of the Lord both do and shall so find it, and that more and more, as we
more labor according to it; having also such sure directions and such
undoubted promises; every part and pecce of it containing promises to the
prayer of faith, and to every true believing soul. Whereby we may have a
certain assurance from our Lord Jesus Christ the author of it, that he will
accompany it to every soul (that shall be so prepared, and so use it as be
has directed) with the power of his own spirit, and be wonderful in granting
all things which we so beg according to his heavenly will, above all that any
heart can conceive.

Remember also for thy better encouragement, how every prayer herein tends to
the appeasing of the Lords heavy indignation, which has been thus far
declared against his people: and this by our joint seeking to give him his
glory in helping to reclaim and reduce us all to the obedience of his blessed
Covenant of Grace, wherein is our life, and thereby to the deliver^e and saving
of all the Churches, the eternal salvation of all belonging to that his
election of grace, be they now Atheists, Papists, wicked, profane, or
whatsoever, and so to prepare the way in the universal repentance of the
Churches to the coming of the new Jerusalem, and the eternal glory of Sion.
So that every one of us striving to pray faithfully and fervently, and to put
in practice whatsoever we thus pray for; so far as it concerns us, shall in
every prayer and petition be true helpers unto our Lord Jesus and his poor
Church; and for every such a service, even every hour so spent, receive our
pay, and in the end for all a rich and most full reward.

Let every prayer be a^ the Sun, beginning at thy self in thy meditations,
but diffusing and spreading the b^ames into all the Churches, chiefly to those
which stand in most need thereof, and to every one of Gods chosen in all the
world, so far as he shall enable thee and it concerns them, and from them
ever reflecting to thy self again.

Thou have heard the sound of the cruel wars abroad, the late prevailing of
the enemy, the overthrow of the Churches, the new threatenings of those bloody
intendments against all the rest, and the increase of their rage daily. In
these poor helps, and the like, the Lord offers thee weapons, and directs
thee so to use them, that thou may help them in the remotest parts; calls
upon thee loud to come and help them, assures thee of a blessed victory in
the end, that then thou and all the true Church and people of the Lord shall
sing the songs of Miriam and Deborah, and of the 24. Elders, and triumph with
Christ eternally, when all who have refused to help, shall weep and wail for
evermore.

Thus entreating that the Lord may at length awake thee and all his people,
that we may each give up a happy account, and escape the dreadful doom and
sentence, for neglecting his glory, kingdom, and people, and may hence forward
carefully use all the means which his goodness affords unto us for our
present and eternal happiness, I commend thee to his grace, and rest

Thy fellow-souldier in Christ thus striving with and for thee, I. B.

The Contents in general.
1. AN Epistle to all the plain and simple hearted people of our land seduced
by Popery, or in danger thereof.

2. A preparation to instant prayer, according to the necessity of the times,
and the present estate of Gods poor Church.

3. The prayer it self, divided into several parts, according to the several
branches of that heavenly pattern which our blessed Savior has set before us
all to follow; containing in it the principal part's of the Catechism, and
how to make right use of all, specially for these times; and so in praying,
better to imprint and remember the whole.

4. A continual quickening and putting new life into our prayers, that we may
never be weary, nor ever give the Lord over, until we have prevailed with his
heavenly Majesty.

In the preparative this is ever to be had in fresh memory.

That all who are to help in this work, are to labor to bring their hearts
to a due consideration of all these things following, and to have a right
feeling and practice of them, so far as they concern us.

1. How the Lord has been wont to look for some to help him, in all the
great deliverances and distresses of his Church: and how he expects the service
of all his at this day. 2. What necessity there is of servent prayer at this
time, above all former times: in what need the whole Church, and every
particular member stands of our prayers: what a right feeling of the miseries
and estates of our poor brethren each of us ought to have; and how we ought to
seek to help them herein to the uttermost of our power. 3. What ones we must
be, and how qualified in all things, if we look ever to be heard in our
prayers for the Churches, and hope to have our persons accepted. 4. How our
prayers must be framed, that they likewise may be sure to be pleasing and
availeable with the Lord. 5. What assurance we may have of the power of our
prayers, so sent forth to prevail with our God, and to overcome. 6. How
without these things, and much more if we be of contrary minds, and
dispositions; our prayers are turned into sin; and do help to kindle the
wrath, and to draw down the vengeance of the Lord more speedily and fiercely
upon all. 7. That every one must strive, to be of the number of them, who are
helpers in this work or perish, and how graciously the Lord calls every one of
us hereunto. 8. Particular prayers for helping the Churches, framed according
to our Saviors direction: and the present necessity of all.
1 A Prayer that we may be made fit and accepted into this service of prayer
for the Churches.

2 A prayer for increase of love to all Gods Children, and that we may keep a
continual fresh remembrance and feeling of the miseries of all our distressed
Brethren, without which we cannot pray for them as we ought.

3 A prayer that we may know God to be our gracious Father in Christ, and to
grow in the assurance thereof daily, without which we cannot prevail with him.

4 A prayer that we may not deceyve our selves in our imagination, that we are
Gods children (as most do) and so remain unfit for this service.

5 A prayer that we may find in us the particular marks of Gods children, for
our further assurance and boldness in prayer.

6 A prayer for knowledge and right use of the means, whereby we may be made
Gods children, and so grow up in our confidence and power in prayer thereby.

7 A prayer, that al may understand how dear Gods children are to him, that
they may be to us likewise, and we thereby able to pray more earnestly for them.

8 A prayer, that we may be able to lift up our eyes to our heavenly Father,
looking beyond all earthly means, in all the troubles and perils of the
Church, without which we cannot pray as we ought.

9 A thanks giving for the deliverie of the Churches from Egypt and Babylon,
with an earnest prayer for the full accomplishment thereof, and that we may
never look back to them again, to provoke the Lord against us by the same.

10 A prayer, that in token of our thankfulness for our deliverance, we may
all seek to give him his glory in our unfeigned repentance, and walking
conscionably in all his holy Commandments.

11 A prayer that we may all give God the glory of his inward worship,
according to the first Commandment, to help to pacify his Majesty toward ye
Churches.

11 A prayer to be able to discern the sin of the Churches, whereby he is
di^onored and provoked even by the transgression of the first Commandment.

12 A humble confession of the sins of the Churches; and an acknowledgement
of Gods righteous proceeding against them, for our unthankfulness and
transgression of his lawe^; and for that though we have heard of the miseries
of our Brethren, we have not been humbled, nor made our supplications for them
as we ought, according to Nehemiah.

13 A humble confession of the sin of our Land, so polluted by all the Popish
sort, rejecting the Lord, and setting up the Pope of Rome, with his idolatry
and superstition, in place of him, and his pure worship, to provoke his Majesty
against us.

14 A prayer for all the simple-hearted, seduced by the Jesuits, and other
Seminary Priests, that they may see how they have bin deluded, to help
thereby, to pluck them from satan, and bring them to our Lord Jesus Christ.

15 A humble Thankesgiving for our dread Sovereign, with our gracious Prince
and Princess, and all the Royal Progeny; and for all our deliverances and
preservations by them: with an earnes^ Prayer, that our sins being forgiven,
they may be each in their times and places, the happiest heads of the most
blessed people, that ever have been in the world before.

16 A humble Thankesgiving, that God has thus far heard our prayers; with an
earnest supplication, that he may go on to perfect his work; and that as we
have made entrance into this service, so we may all proceed, until we shall
see the full deliverance of all his Churches, the new Ierusa^em, and the
eternal glory of his Sion.

The other Prayers, and that which (God willing) is to succeed, see in the end
of all, after the Table of the particular Contents.

Rules to be observed in the use of all the Meditations and Prayers.
REmember throughout to expect not excellency of words, but the power of God.
Remember Da^ Sling, and I^suahs Trumpets of Rams horn. Thine eye being on
thy Book, let the eye of thy soul be at thy Christ, making intercession at
his Fathers right hand; laboring to feel all in thy heart, and especially to
have a right sense of the necessities of all for whom thou prayest, and so
praying in Faith thou shall prevayle.

Rules to help to keep us from ever declining from the Lord, and from all
delusions, cheefely by Popery.
1 Labor to walk with thy God, as Enech, making conscience of all thy ways,
specially of thy particular calling, and every holy duty, in the due time;
fearing all occasions of evil, watching and taking forthwith, all occasions of
good*

2 Pray as he has directed thee, respecting ever his glory and kingdom, and
the general state of his Church, before thine own particular.

3 Strive to live under the best means, and with the best company which GOD
shall vouchsafe thee.

4 Remember ever those strong delusions of Popery, sent in Gods justice for
contempt of the Gospel, in not receyving the love of his truth, mentioned in
the Epistle to the poor seduced people, and withal keep ever in mind those
principal supporters and pillars of Popery, (viz) lying and ^irther, the
chief works of Satan, which show that that Relig^on is of him likewise.

5 Consider well, how Popery overthrowes many of the chief Principles of the
Catechism. For this

See a Pill to purge out Popery.

6 Be afraid of conferring with the Serpent, viz. inticers to Popery, or any
evil, and of reasoning with temptations.

7 In all such doubts, first conserre with God, by holy Meditation and Prayer,
as D^niel and his compaaions, after, with thy faithful Minister, or some of
the worthiest servants of God, so far as God offers thee any opportunity.

8 Strive to rejoice in the Lord always* and in thy happy estate through Christ*
Pray continually, by lifting up thy heart through him. In all things give
thanks whatsoever come to pass. So thou shall see the event happy, and thy
self ever to prevay^e with God, and more then a Conqueror.

Places of Scripture to be ever in our hearts, to quicken us and stir up in
us the power of prayer.
THe eyes of the Lord are upon Psalm. 34. 15.
the Righteous, and his ears [are open] unto their cry.

Thou will prepare their heart: Psalm. 10, 17.
thou will cause thine ear to hear.

To judge of the fatherless and 18.
oppressed, that ^the man of the earth may no more oppress.

Yea, before they call, I will Esaias 65, 24.
answer: And whiles they speak, I will hear.

But let him ask in Faith, James 1, 6.
nothing wavering.

The effectual servent prayer James 5, 16.
of a righteous man avayleth much.

Elias was a man subject to 17.
the like passions as we are* and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain,
and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months.

And he prayed again, and the 1^.
heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.

[Concerning him when he was rapt up into heaven, thus cried Elisha after him:]
My 2 Kings 2, 12.
father, my father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.

[And for Elisha, the king of Israel coming down to visit him in his last
sickness, wept over his face with the same words,] O my father, my father, 2
King. 13, 14.
the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.

[Of him that makes and keeps peace with God, thus says the Spirit:] Thou
shall make thy Prayer unto him, and Job 22, 21, 22.
he shall hear thee, and tho^ shall pay thy Vows, etc.

The innocent shall deliver the 3^.
Island: and it is delivered by the pureness of thy hands.

[But as for the wicked thus he speaks, which he would have all men take
notice of and ponder well, having set a double note upon it.]

The Lord is known by the Psalm. 9, 16.
judgment which he executes: the wicked is snared in the works of his own
hands.

What have thou to do to take my Psalm. 50, 16, 17*
Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
words behind thee?

Errata.
Amend these slippes following, with what is defective in this first draught
through want of meet leisure, and our God will (I hope) bring it forth again
with all the rest of it, much more polished, for his own glory^, and for the
good of all his people: whereunto I trust, during life, I shall not be wanting,
as his goodness shall vouchsafe to assist me.

Page 7. l: 7* put out those 7 lines twice repeated. p: 8, l: 10. for our read
this. p. 10 l, 16. and p. 91, l. 5. unto: p: 99, l, 3. but moreover: l 7, third
general. p: 103. may. 109 l. 1. seek all. p: 157, marg. for Deuteronomy read Genes.
p: 161. l: 2. for to do, ^: as. p: 164, l. 1. admitted. l: 4. these. page: 189.
l: 5. as at Marg* l. 17 Deuteronomy: 30, 29. p: 220. marg: lin. 1. That. p: 291, l.
15. not only. p: 300. l. 20. for (...) read may est. p: 306. l. 10. run on* p.
3^6. l. 18. for best, most. page 348. l ^9. and. p. 384. l. 2. have.

A PREPARATIVE to instant Prayer, according to the necessity of the Times, by
thinking day and night of these things following, until we have gotten them,
or the sum of them into our hearts, and can have them ever as it were before
our eyes; to cry instantly to our holy God, like as he has directed us.
The first general Meditation; How our Savior looks for some to help him, in
the delivery and saving of his Church.
FIrst, we are seriously To meditate.
to meditate, and to bring our hearts to a due consideration, how our blessed
Savior, like Esaias ^9, 26, etc. 63. 3, 4, 5
a^ in the redeeming and saving of his chosen slocke from hell; so in all the
greatest extreamities How our Savior has been wont to look for some to help
his Church in all her extremities.
of his poor distressed Church, mentioned in his Sacred word, has been wont
to look long for some, that would offer themselves to help it; and when he
has found none, to uphold or succor it, in his tender pity and compassion,
his own arm has saved it, his righteousness it self has sustained it, in
what sort he has seen it best.

And although he has suffered His usual manner then, to find out some to stand
in the breach, and by whom he migat* show himself gloriously for it.
it oft-times to be greevously afflicted, yea sometimes almost utterly consumed,
yet how evermore, when he would deliver and save it from the violence and rage
of the wicked enemies, or other imminent calamitles, by some great and glorious
deliverance, his usual manner has been to seek and find out some one at
least, that should stand up in the gap before him, in more special manner for
it, that he might not destroy it; and by whom he might show himself wonderful
for his people and chosen Flock. Thus he found out Joseph, Moses, As Joseph.
Samuel, David, Iehosaphat, Ezekiah, Daniel, Hester, Mordecay, Ezra, Nehemiah,
and others.

Yea, how he has moreover ever sought and found out some Some to be helpers
by their prayers and tears.
few, whom he has vouchsafed to be his helpers, at least by their prayers and
tears, for saving the rest: such as of whom he has said, The innocent Job
22. ^0.
shall deliver the yland.

These he looks and calls for at this day: And of this little number, every
true believing These henow looks for.
soul must needs desire to be one, if he love the Lord Jesus Every one must
needs desire to be of this little number.
Christ, and his Church; yea, if he but love his native country, or his own
soul: or if he but only fear that dreadful curse denounced against Meroz,
Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel Jude 5, 23.
of the Lord: curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the
Lord against the mighty. And much more must he needs contend for this, if he
rightly consider what a high honor and happiness it is, to be one of that
little number, chosen and singled out hereunto, to be if it were but as any
one of Gedeons three hundredth. Judge. 7, 7.


Howbeit, every one having Yet everyone is not fitted for this service.
some few good desires, is not fit to serve under, and to help our Lord Jesus
in the great Our Savior has taught whom they ^ust be.
work. He himself has taught and directed us plainly, both whom we must be,
and how we must be qualified and fitted every way, if we will be his
Soldiers, and so fight in this spiritual battle, as that we may hope to
prevail. That every one of us must learn, and have in our hearts these
instructions and directions following, which our Lord and Savior has in his
infinite Wisdom set before our* faces, in that absolute form and pattern of
prayer, which for this end, and for every occasion of supplication to be made
to him, and to his Father in his name, he has given as a perpetual direction
unto his Church: unto which pattern, as of all other the most effectual,
sufficient, and certain to this purpose, I have herein still wholly tied my
self.

He then that desires to be any one of those whom he looks for, to help him
herein, and that will so pray, as that he may be sure to be accepted and
prevayle; must know, as first Gods usual manner of proceeding in the delivery
of his To medi^ate in the second place, of the necessity of seruent prayer at
this time, above all former.
Church, so secondly, the necessity of servent prayer at this time, above all
former times, in what need the poor Church, and every particular member of it
stands thereof, and must labor to have a true and lively feeling in his heart,
of the miseries and dangers which the Churches are in. Thirdly, what 3. What a
one he must be.
a one himself must be, and how qualified in all things, that his person may
be accepted, if ever he look to be heard. Fourthly, 4. How his prayers must be
framed.
how our prayers must be framed, that they likewise may be sure to be pleasing
and avayleable with the Lord. Fifthly, 5. The power of such prayers.
what power and assurance our prayers so sent forth, have to prevayle with God,
and to overcome. Sixthly, that all other but these are unmeete and 6. All other
unmeet.
unable to help, and after a sort, excluded from this service, and much more
all that are of contrary dispositions. Seventhly, 7. How yet every one must
endeavor to be an helper
how every one that looks to be saved by Jesus Christ, and to stand at his
right hand, must endeavor by all possible means, to be fitted for this
service, to be a helper to Christ's poor Church herein.

The second general Meditation, concerning the present necessity of this
work, and the lively feeling thereof, How every one that looks to be saved by
Jesus Christ, and to stand at his right hand, must endeavor by all possible
means to be fitted for this service, to be a helper to our Saviors poor^
Church herein.
THat we may know the To see the necessity of this duty by considering.
present necessity of this duty, and be able to cry more instantly, the Lord
calls us seriously in the second place, to meditate day and night, according to
every part and petition of that heavenly prayer 1. The estate of the Churches,
of our Saviors, concerning the distressed estate of his poor Churches at this
day, and of all other poor souls belonging to his eternal election, living
under the captivity and bondage of Satan, and the tyranny of his cursed and
crucll Instruments. 2. How the Lord calls for our helps, in teaching us to cry,
Our Father*
And withal, he would have us wisely to consider how he, even our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, calls for our duty by this very prayer, amongst many other
means: teaching us here to cry unto him for the rescuing and delivery of all
hi^ Children* Our Father* which art in heaven. And to this end, how we are to
labor to bring our own hearts, and the hearts of all other the people of the
Lord, to a lively sense and tender feeling hereof, so far as God enables us,
and offers u^ opportunity.

The first particular Meditation of this second general point, concerning the
calamities and dangers of our brethren in all places, and those threatened
toward our selves; and the chief means of deliverie and preservation from
them.
FIrst we are to lay to heart; Our Father which art, etc. 1. To lay to heart
the calamities and perils of all the churches and people of God at this instant.
how many of our Brethren, the dear children of our heavenly Father (for whom
our Lord and Savior has taught us thus to cry, as for our selves, Our Father)
are now in grievous calamities of all sorts; that many others of them are in
extreme peril, to be forthwith utterly destroyed, and devoured by the rage
and power of Satan, and of his bloody instruments. That we also our selves,
with all the rest of the Churches and sincere Christians in all the world, are
in extreme danger every moment of time (as any of the designs of the Jesuits,
or other merciless enemies take place) if our heavenly Father do not still
protect and preserve us. And therefore as very many of our brethren abroad are
in continual feeling of their miseries, and of our heavenly Fathers most heavy
displeasure against them for all their undutifulnesse, crying at his feet, for
his Fatherly pity, love, compassion to deliver and save them; so we ought
likewise to do for them, even so many of us as are already assured, or ever
will assure our own souls, that we are his natural children, and hereby 2.
Pet. 1. 4.
do desire to declare our natural and childlike love and fear, in seeking to
appease his displeasure, that he may spare his people.

And much more are we to 2 To seek to prevent or mitigate the displeasure of
our heavenly father.
seek to prevent or mitigate, the same heavy displeasure kindled against our
selves, and hereby to stay the ^age of Satan and Antichrist, all of us being
hated and devoted alike to destruction, by the malice of the Serpent and his
cruel instruments; and all of us having provoked our heavenly Father alike
(yea we more then any other) to leave us into their hands, to be so tried by
them, until we be truly humbled, in feeling our disobediences, and be
sensible of our provocations of him by our want of commiseration toward them,
and of not taking warning by their example; That thus we may lift up our cries
to heaven, that he in the tender bowels of his compassion, may both succor
and rescue them, and also save us from the li^e miseryes, which seem ready to
rush upon us for all our sins and provocations. We are withal to labor to
bring our hearts to a right consideration, that our heavenly Father has in To
consider how God has ordained Kings and Queens for nurses to his church.
Esaias. 49 23.
the riches of his mercy ordained Rulers and Governors and all in lawful and
holy authority, especially Kings and Queens to be in his place, as nursing
Fathers and nursing Mothers to his poor children, to deliver and pull them out
of the jaws of the dragon; to carry them in their arms, and in their bosoms
from the fury and violence of the Serpent, and to preserve and protect them
that they may profess his name in peace and safety; and that therefore Satan
must needs malign them above all other, even for this especially. And likewise
that he has ordained the prayers of his people and children to obtain this
at his hand, so to incline the hearts of all Kings and And the prayers of his
people so to incline their hearts. 2 Timothy 2. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Princes and all in authority to pity them.

The second particular Meditation of the second general: How he has been
wont principally to get himself glory in saving his Church by Princes and
Governors. Hallowed be thy name. As the Lord has been wont to glorify his
name by Kings and Princes saving his Church, so we may now expect.

SEcondly, we are to labor to bring our hearts to a true understanding and
feeling hereof, that as the Lord has been wont to glorify his great name in
former ages, thus in his pitiful compassion saving his Church and Children by
Kings and Princes, and other deliverers raised up for them, and like as he
has magnified his power and Fatherly care so often before our eyes in such
miraculous and gracious preservations of us of this nation, and other our
brethren abroad unto this day, especially when we were in the midst of the
fire: so he can and will magnify it again in a most wonderful manner, if we
that If we can give Christ glory in our repentance.
are his children can but give him glory in being unfainedly humbled for our
own sins and the sins of his people, and can meet him in faith by
entreaty of peace, crying instantly unto him; Glorify Lord thy great name; and
doing only as he commands. And seeing all the bloody enemies of And the ra
there for that the enemy seeks to trample his glory under feet
Christ and his Church seek to trample his glory under foot, he will
therefore the rather get himself glory upon them, as upon Pharaoh, before all
the world, when we shall be rightly prepared for the same.

The third particular Meditation of this second general, That as Satan and
Antichrist have set themselves to fight against Christ his kingdom so our
Savior has ordained Kings and Princes to hold up his Scepter, and to defend
and protect his Subjects and Gospel. Thy kingdom come. How the enemies set
themselves against Christ.

THirdly, we are to bring our hearts to a due consideration and deep
pondering hereof; how as the Giants before the flood: so Satan, and his
Soldiers have set themselves to fight against heaven, and the host thereof,
yea even against Jesus Christ our Lord and King, and how they have cast down
his Scepter, Throne, and Dignity, and trample his crown under their feet, in
all the places How they have prevailed.
where they have prevailed, and where they bear rule over Gods poor heritage.
And that as they have begun and fearfully prevailed in many places; so they
have resolved to Resolved to proceed.
proceed throughout the earth, to set up Satan and Antichrist in the very
Throne of our Lord Jesus Christ, to defile again his Temple, to make his house
again a den of Thieves. That That Antichrist may fit again as God in his
Temple.
Antichrist may fit again as God, in the Temple of God; yea in those very
places where he has been formerly long cast forth: so that the zeal of his
house even in this behalf, should eat us up.

And also, we are to bring our souls to a true sense hereof, That as they
thus seek to lead Christ and his armies captives.
that as they thus seek to tyrannize over his people and children, to lead in
triumphs as captives, both our Lord Jesus himself, and his armies, and to
keep under all that belong to the Lord Jesus as slaves for ever; so our
Savior has on the other side ordained and appointed Kings and Princes That he
has ordained Kings to hold up his Scepter,
under him to hold up his Scepter, even his heavenly Gospel; and that he has
likewise decreed and ordained, that even those of them which before had given
their power unto the beast to fight against his Sovereign Majesty, and against
his people, should again withdraw Apo. 17. 16, 17
all their power from the beast, when they shall see his wickedness fully
discovered, and give it wholly unto his heavenly Majesty, to accomplish all his
will, in making the And to make the whore desolate.
Whore desolate, and for the advancement of his everlasting Gospel, when they
shall truly behold the power and glory thereof.

The fourth particular Meditation of the second general; How Satan and
Antichrist set up themselves to be obeyed, and to destroy out of the earth all
that seek to obey the Lord.
FOurthly, we are to endeavor 4. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
to bring our hearts to a lively meditation and weighing hereof; How Antichrist
and How Satan and Antichrist seek only to be obeyed
all his limbs who persecute Gods Church, and all other wicked and ungodly
men, are so far off from obeying his heavenly will and commandment, that they
have set themselves to satisfy only their own wicked lusts and wills, and
to disanull all the commandments of our blessed God, both of his Law and
Gospel, and all To destroy out of the earth all who obey the lord
his holy and blessed will revealed in the same; and with them, to destroy out
of the earth, all those that desire to obey him according to his heavenly word;
or that make any true and right conscience of his ways and will: yea, to put
out all the true saving knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to set up their
own wicked inventions in place thereof, and how they are in a dreadful manner
proceeding herein. That, as was touched before, there is Nothing but the power
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Vicegerents, to hinder it.
nothing but the mighty hand and power of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy
care and vigilancie of his Vicegerents, whose hearts he shall in mercy raise up
for himself, and for his poor Church, together with the prayers of his own
Children, to prevent the same.

And withal, we are to strive How difficult for us to lay these things* to
heart.
to bring our hearts to a true feeling, how hard a matter it is for Gods own
dear people and children, being free from these trials, to lay these things to
heart as they ought to do, and as his people have been wont; and also how
difficult it is for them which are tried by these greevous afflictions, And for
them who are under the trial, to submit themselves.
which they undergo, to submit themselves to Gods will, and to make a right use
of them all, and to cry with our Savior; Father, if it be thy will, let this
cup pass from us, yet not our will, but thy heavenly will be fulfilled. Blessed
be thy holy name. That so we may the more commiserate That we may more
commiserate them.
their estate, and help them crying herein.

The fifth particular Meditation of the second general, Concerning the
innumerable miseries which our Brethren endure, deprived of the outward
comforts of this and the better life, and how near the like may be to us.
We are yet further in the Give us this day our daily bread.
fifth place by continual and serious pondering of the^, To bring our hearts
to a feeling of their miseries.
to bring our hearts to a more right fellow-feelling of those innumerable
miseries mentioned before, which our poor brethren, the dear children of the
Lord, do endure in every place, where Satan and Antichrist have prevailed,
especially by this late bloody sword, wheresoever it has come; how they have
been, and still are in so many places deprived Both bodily.
of all the comforts of this life, of food, raiment, harbor, liberty, means
of health and peace, lying under famine, nakedness, slavery, sickness,
peril, sword, and all the miseries that follow upon them where the merciless
idolatrous soldier is made drunk with the blood of Gods Saints, having none
to fly to to succor them, but only to cry unto the Lord. And more also
enduring the famine* of their souls, having none to feed them with the word of
life, none to minister a word of comfort to refresh their fainting hearts.

And withal we are wisely To think how near the like may be to us.
aforehand to lay to heart, how nere the like miseries may be unto our selves,
how we have How we have deserved to drink more deeply then any other.
deserved to drink of the same cup in a deeper measure; for that we have not
known the day of our long visitation which has been in so much mercy; but
have abused these, and all other our Blessings, so as never Nation more. And
finally, that we are the faster How we hale on these.
haling and pulling these evils upon us, for our want of commiseration; for
that our bowels have not, nor yet do earne over them for their innumerable
miseries which they abide; and that we have and do so generally by our
impenitency and induration fat our selves as against the day of slaughter.

How by those principally How the Lord has hitherto preserved us by Kings and
Princes.
whom the Lord has set over us for our foster fathers and mothers, we have
hitherto been preserved from these thus far forth, through the tender mercy
of our heavenly father, and may hope, that he will so preserve us still, i^ we
shall once be awaked, to make a true and right use hereof.

The sixth particular Meditation of the second general, concerning the sins
of the Churches, and namely, the general abuse of the Gospel, and the
blessings which accompany it, and that our sins are most heinous for our
unthankefulnesse. Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass
against us.

Sixthly we are moreover to travel with our own hearts to bring them to a
right sense and feeling of our own sins, and the sins of other To bring
our hearts to a sense of the sins so provoking the Lord.
Churches, and chiefly the most heinous and crying sins thereof, which have
provoked the Lord to so heavy displeasure, thus to begin to proceed against so
many of his own deer children abroad, and amongst Chiefly carnal gospeling*
other, that carnal Gospelling of barely professing the name of the Gospel,
but without any power or life thereof, so much complained of in all the
Churches.

That our blessed God, having committed unto us the hid treasure of his
heavenly Gospel, we have not esteemed of it accordingly: that we have only
professed it i^ word for the most part, but have not showed forth any power of
it as we ought. That we have not caused our light to shine so before others,
that yet sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, as that they seeing our
good works, might come from the kingdom of Satan to God, and glorisie our
Father which is in heaven. That That the Lord has, and is still so fearfully
proceeding for these sins* according to the denunciation in his blessed Law.
Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
thus he has now already so fearfully proceeded against so many of our
brethren in foreign parts for these and other sins, according to the
threatenings denounced in his Law, and is so still going on forward in the
height of his displeasure, and yet we for the most part, remain without any
true sense hereof, and the best of us without that which we ought to have.

Then from them abroad, we are to come home unto Our sin in not submitting
our selves and seeking to pacific the Lords wrath* who has so (...) and so many
(...) (...) with (...), that he might spare us.
our selves, and to our own sins; and herein to consider seriously, that
our sins of this Nation, may justly s^eme more heinous then theirs, or of any
other people under heaven, and therefore cry louder for vengeance, both in that
the Lord has so long called us to repentance, not only by the voice of his
Spirit in his heavenly Gospel, and by as many of his worthy By his Messengers.
Messengers, as ever he sent to any Nation before; but also so long warned us,
and striven with us, that he might spare us, by all the other means that ever
he used to reclaim any people, both by mercies By mercies and judgments.
and judgments, and by his fatherly rods and corrections; more especially by
such wonderful preservations of us Wonderful preservation and deliverances.
from our just fears, and so admirable deliverances, when we were in the
midst of the fire, and when yet we were without any sense or fear thereof,
or power to help or save our selves.

Also, for that our outrageous That our sins are so overspred and committed
with so high a hand.
sins and abominations are so generally overspred and committed with so high
a hand; yea, that we are so much worse and worse for being smitten, that we
seem desperately incurable, falling away more and more, though We worse
notwithstanding so many tokens of Gods displeasure.
we see so many tokens of the Lords wrath; the bloody enemies executioners of
his vengeance on every side of us, and as we may justly fear, so many of these
incendyaries the Jesuits, and Iesuited Papists in the midst among us.
Whereupon all sorts, even mere natural men, have and do daily more and more
fear some terrible scourge from the Lord, and wonder at our peace, especially
considering the lamentable estate of so many other poor Churches, No warning
serving us.
and the restless plots of the enemy, and most dangerous stratagems against
them, and us all, through the Lords mercy discovered daily, and that yet we
have not been warned by their ensample; nor yet so much as in any To take
their miseries o^ our own perils to heart.
meet measure as we ought, take their miseries and perils to heart.

Yea, which is more then To labor for a feeling.
all these, our gracious God would not have us to rest, until we have a due
feeling, and a right consideration hereof, that we principally above all That
we are the men prin cipally devoted to destruction.
other, have been the men devoted to destruction, by the bloody designs of
those most barbarous and merciless enemies Most en^yed by the enemies of the
Church.
of the Church, and have (...), and are, most en^yed and hated by them, for
that from and by us heretofore, God has given them the greatest foyles, like
as I trust, he will still do for evermore.

And which is a higher degree Our sin of carnal Gospelling, greater then of
other Churches, not only showing forth*
of our danger, that we are not only guilty of their sin of carnal
Gospelling, and careless profession in showing forth so little power in the
practice of true piety in our general and particular callings and duties,
which is the very life and true power of godliness; but contrarily, by our
ungodliness, our profaneness and abominations in every kind, we have in so
many even utterly denied all the But so much denying all power of godliness.
true power thereof, which consists in the right performance of all holy
duties; as being ashamed to be noted Ashamed to be noted for more careful
profession.
for more sincere profession; yea, we have so scorned and trampled it under
foot, as that Causing gods enemies to blaspheme.
we have caused Gods enemies to blaspheme.

And which is yet also more to anger his heavenly Majesty, for that we so
generally, Our sin increased to the uttermost by our turning against Christ
Jesus, as against our greatest enemy.
not only our Papists and Atheists, and all our notorious profane persons,
which swarm almost every where, but even all sorts of Laodicean lukewarm
professors are so far turned even against Christ Jesus himself (we may
speak it with grief and trembling) and that as against our Though he have so
ui^ibly protected us.
greatest enemy: although he has hitherto so miraculously, yea so sensibly,
and as it were visibly defended and protected us) and for that we do yet
further daily rise against him, still more and more.

That all this appears most manifestly herein; in that This (...) apparent,
that we so many of us seem deadly to: hate all power of godliness.
howsoever these can some of them a little endure the outward and common
profession of his heavenly Gospel in word; yet the power of it, to wit, to
submit themselves to live according to it (wherein chiefly his kingdom
consists) they cannot endure, but rather seem to hate it most deadly. And
also, how this heinous and crying sin shows it self, as in the sight of the
Sun, in all the odious names wherewith true godliness Manifest in all the
odious names wherewith it is branded.
is branded, which are so frequent every where, and cast upon those that seek
thus unfeignedly to turn away the vengeance, by endeavoring to walk in all
things in all the commandments of our blessed God.

We are therefore ever to be considering, and never to Not to rest till we
have brought our hearts to a seeling of our sins, and how they are increased.
rest, till we have brought our hearts unto a right feeling of those, and all
other our most intolerable and loud crying sins, and how they are every
hour haling and pulling down the vengeance of God upon us, as the like have
done upon the other Churches, and do still more and more, as they are thus daily
more and more increased. And moreover, that there is nothing that keeps back
his vengeance, but only his infinite mercies, and ^ndlesse patience and
compassion, That noth^g keeps b^ck his vengeance, but his in^init mercy,
which we have so much abused* as that we may all justly wonder, that it is
not turned into burning fury to consume us at once, and together with that his
endless compassion, the loud cries of And the cry of his servant*
his poor children ever sounding in his ears: even the cries and sighs of
th^se which are, and have been so hated, Which are and have been so hated.
contemned, greeved, and injuried by all possible means, which the Lord has
permitted to be exercised and practiced against them, chiefly by all the
Popish sort in every place, and namely, against his Prophets and Messengers
sent unto us, in as much mercy as ever his Prophets were sent to Judah. For
which yet when they were so mocked and misused, the Lord could spare no longer,
there could be no further remedy, but brought upon them the King of Caldea, 2 Chronicles. 36.
and all other the miseries of their long and woeful Captivity.

And yet further, (...) Lord Nothing can give us any true security, but our
unfeigned repentance.
calls on us to bee^ever pondering, how nothing can prevent this wrath to give
us any true security of our further escaping, either general on particular,
but only our sound and true repentance; not in any formal fashion, but
unfeignedly humbling our selves, and rightly endeavoring to take away all our
crying sins, and to stoop unto the Lord our heavenly father, doing in all
things as he requires, that his wrath may be fully appeased toward us. Till
this, nothing but expectation of some dreadful scourge.
That until this time we live but under a continual expectation of the
direful execution of all his terrible plagues denounced in his holy word
against us; either some such sudden blow of his vengeance to fall upon us, as
was intended at the powder Furnace, or some cruel or bloody invasion, as in
88. or some such ma^acring as was in the year 72. at Paris, and lately at
Nigripelles in France, and Heidelberg^ in the Palatinate; or such cruel and
merciless proceedings as in Bohemia, and sundry other parts of the Church:
from all which evils, and the like, we are ever to cry that the Lord may
evermore in his endless compassion, preserve and keep us.

And yet to proceed one degree higher: The Lord calls loud upon us, to be
think our selves wisely of that judgment which is heavyer then all the former,
if for our contempt of his Gospel, and all other our sins, he should suffer
us, as he has done others, to have our Candlestick removed, the blessed
Gospel The remooving of our Candlestick heavier then all other outward
judgments, and how we deserve it
of his Son, the very life of our lives, to be taken from us, and the most
abominable mass, even the abomination of desolation to be set up in the place
of it, with all the ^abble of their cursed Idolatry, And to have their Idolatry
set up.
and all filthy abominations of that Strumpet of Babylon, and withal to have
the bloody knives of outrageous Knives at o^ throats.
and merciless Idolaters, at our throats every moment of time, which Jesuits,
and others of them so affected, are so manifestly, yea so shamelesly and
impudently plotting and practicing day and night, against all the Churches, and
whereof they have themselves so gloried and triumphed long ago, as if it had
been already fully effected and dispatched.

That some of these must of necessity come to pass (if we judge according to
the word of the Lord, or but to common Some of these to be feared, for want of
performance of ou^ Co^so often renewed by us*
reason) we have just cause to fear; for want of performance of our promises
of repentance. For that here unto we have so often, and so solemnly bound our
selves every one, at least by those in our places, I mean by our Magistrates
and Ministers, as namely we did in those sundry and solemn Fasts by
commandment As in (...)
in the year eighty eight, when thereupon our God showed himself from heaven to
fight for us: as accepting our vows and promises of true repentance and
amendment, and upon that condition ^aring us, to prove and t^ie us what we
would do; and still from time to time, yea, from year to year, and even from
day to day expecting the true and unfeigned accomplishment thereof.

And more also by renewing Fasts since.
our promises and vows in all the Fasts which were after in the days of our
gracious Deborah* while we lived in fear of the time, when she should be taken
from our head, and of the many evils to follow thereuppon, even that whereof
our enemies were wont so to brag, that there would come a day, and concerning
which we were still crying to our tender Father, to save us from the danger
and dread thereof.

Yea, and yet more since that The peaceable bringing in of our gracious
Sovereign.
time, when our God brought in our dread Sovereign, and set him so over us, as
if there had been no change, but all had been done for the perpetual
establishing of us and our posterity, at what time he cast such a fear upon
all the enemies, that not a dog wagged his tongue against any of the Israel
of God. What promises of thankfulness every one of us did make, who in any
sort laid these things to heart; by promising repentance and amendment of all
our ways, and for ever to honor and obey our Lord Jesus Christ.

And most of all, when of al other times he did most apparently show himself
from heaven, as reaching down his hand, and plucking us all out At our
deliverance from the hellish Furnace.
of the very jaws of the devil, and out of the midst of the Furnace, where
of all our holy and frank acknowledgments in our many Thankesgivings and
Prayers extant in Print, and commanded to be used and practiced generally, and
most solemnly once every year, and all our good Laws made thereupon, shall
ever bear So many ways witnessed.
witness against us before the Lord: besides, every one of our Covenants at
our Baptism, wherewith we all stand obliged, and multitudes of other promises,
whereby we have also renewed our bonds unto this day.

So that we are wisely to How these must either work the performance of our
promises, or arm the Lord against us.
ponder, how now at length all these must either work to bring us to a sound
and unfeigned performance of whatsoever we have so promised, and to a true
submission to our Lord Jesus Christ; or else arm him to come against us in his
terrible vengeance, for all our falsi^ying of our vows and promises unto him,
and thus dallying with him, and most heynously abusing his sacred Majesty. Not
to rest till we have brought our hearts to consider our dissimulation with the
Lord.


We are therefore never to rest until we have brought our hearts to a lively
sense and true meditation of these things, and how we have indeed dissembled
with his greatness and holiness, as our forefathers did which the Lord so
complains of, so often repeating it. Then they cried Psalm. ^07. 6. 12. 19. ^3.
unto the Lord in their troubles, and he delivered them from their distress:
but they kept not his great goodness in remembrance, but presently forgot his
wondrous works, and with them all their vows and promises, and did worse then
their forefathers, yea then ever they had done before.

And yet more then all the former, this ought more deeply to pierce into our
hearts, that as we have always thus dealt with his heavenly Majesty, so we
are now instead of repenting, far worse in every kind, and much further off
That we are now so far further off from repentance.
from any hope of repenting or turning unfeignedly, or so much as of humbling
our selves in any such public manner any more; that the most godly and
religious begin to make doubt, nay extremely That all begin to be almost out
of hope o^ it.
to fear, and to be as it were out of all hope of any sound humiliation,
whereby to turn away the vengeance threat^ned, and each almost, only seeking
to save his own soul.

Together with all these and above all of them, we are seriously and wisely to
lay this to heart, how the people How Judah went further then we*
of Judah went far further in performing their vows both in the days of
that worthy Hezekiah, and that holy Josiah, and in taking away all the
abominations whereby the Lord was provoked, and also in restoring and
performing all things which he required in his Law, and which they had
promised for pacifying of his wrath, even to a general renewing the Covenant
amongst all the people Even to a general renewing the covenant outwardly.
outwardly at least consenting thereto; yet when the hearts of the people
consented not so, as did the hearts of their Kings, and namely as did the heart
of Josiah which melted into tears for the abominations and plagues, nor yet
continued, but started back Yet starting back.
from the Lord ever and anon, and fell to their ancient sin again; the Lord
after all their warnings, brought upon them The Lord brought that Captivity.
that terrible Captivity for 70. years, without any further sparing or remedy.

This he did unto them notwithstanding their good Notwithstanding all other
means of their security.
Kings, and some worthy Rulers: yea all their holy Prophets, namely Jeremy; so
importuning him day and night, Ezekiel falling upon his face, and even
expostulating with his Majesty for Jerusalem his own City, and for his
people (being as a brand plucked out of the burning) and notwithstanding their
mourners, mourning and crying for all the abominations, and lifting up hearts
and hands day and night unto the Lord, yea notwithstanding all his former
indulgences and mercies, all their privileges and prerogatives, and his
covenant only with them, and all his gracious promises made to them above all
the people of the earth.

Finally, we are ever to be beating heereon, what just To be thinking of the
removing the Candlestick from other Churches.
cause we have to think, that he having remooved the Candlestick from other
Churches so sinning, we cannot escape, but the longer his waiting and
forbearing is, the severer his vengeance must needs be when it comes.

And above all these, we are to labor to bring our hearts to a due
consideration and wise foresight hereof: that howsoever it go for the
general, Though God spare the w^ole at the (...) of ^is dearest.
that the Lord shall save us (which we still and ever pray for) or do still
defer his wrath, at the cries of his own dear children who stand in the
breach; and though he may spare us in the bowels of his compassion, thus
earning over us (as sometimes he did over Ephraim in like case^) O my people,
how should I leave thee up to so many miseries, as thine enemies are devising
and practicing against thee? how shall I leave my great name to be blasphemed
amongst my proud enemies? or though he do still save us like as he so often
saved and delivered his people for Moses alone, thus importuning him (albeit
he have over-just cause to say to us as he said to Judah before her
Captivity, though Noah, Job, and Daniel were amongst us, yet they should
neither save son nor daughter, but even their own souls) yet I say,
howsoever he shall deal in mercy for the general, we must notwithstanding
know undoubtedly, that every particular Yet every particular soul not turning
and helping, must perish.
soul that turns not to God by unfeigned repentance, and that prepares not
himself to come thus to help by his prayers for pardoning the sins of the
Land, and pacisying of the Lords wrath, must certainly perish.

And to conclude this point, Kings and Princes ordained and used, to bring Gods
people to repentance. As by Moses, etc.
we are to meditate likewise seriously, how GOD has principally ordained and
ever used, when he would save his people, and call and bring them to true
repentance, to do it in like manner by Kings and Princes, or other Rulers,
stirred up extraordinarily, and by the voice of his true Prophets, calling
them, and his people by them thereunto, as by Moses, Joshua, Iehosaphat, As by
Moses, etc.
Hezekiah, Nehemiah, the king of Nineuy, and others, even when he would but save
them from the present temporal destruction.

And therefore as we are to To pray therefore as for all of them, so chiefly for
our d^ead Sovereign.
pray instantly for all the Rulers in the several Churches; so above all, for
our dread Sovereign, to whom he has given such excellent understanding of
his heavenly will, and whom he has bound unto himself by so many bonds of
such great deliverances, and the like mercies and favors above all the Kings
and Princes of the earth; that they may all yet, whilst there is time, now the
Lord calls so That all may inquire wisely into the causes of all their evils.
loud upon them, set themselves to enquire wisely into the true causes of the
evils already upon the Churches, and of those which are further threatened.

That they may truly consider, That all is from the lord to bring us to
repentance, that he may spare us.
that all this is from the Lord, in his everlasting commiseration and fatherly
pity, tendering us as his dear children, thus calling us all to a general
and unfeigned repentance, that he may spare us; And he may take our cause in
hand.
and that himself may take our cause in hand against his own and our bloody
enemies. That they may with holy Josiah, first inquire rightly into all the
crying sins in every state and degree within their Dominions, and into all the
provocations of the wrath of By seeing how our sin is increased.
God, and see how the sins of our time, seem to be above the sins of Judah
before the Captivity; our glorious light and all other means which he has
used to reclaim us, being rightly weighed.

And secondly, that they may consider wisely of the danger, which both
themselves And our dangers.
and all theyrs, yea all their Dominions stand in for the same, according to
all the Lords most terrible warnings and denounciations.

And thirdly that they may And by inquiring the means to p^isie the wrath.
think seriously as in the presence of the Lord and inquire from his mouth of
the means yet left to pacific and prevent the same.

And finally, that they may set themselves forthwith, to put all the same in
execution And setting themselves to the speedy execution thereof.
with holy Josiah, and do in all things belonging thereunto, as the Lord
himself directs and commands; for that this alone can bring comfort and
boldness to them and theyrs in assurance of the Lords merciful love and
favor, and that they and theirs shall abide still, and ever before the
presence of the Lord. Thus are we to labor to prevail To labor to prevail
for all herein, chiefly for our dread Sovereign bringing thus the greatest
deliverance by his hand.
espcially for our Sovereign Lord, and his, that our God may yet by him
magnify the riches of his mercy above all former times, bringing thus to us and
all his Churches a third greater deliverance and cause of rejoicing by his hand
(through our unfeigned repentance, and the like repentance in all the Churches)
then ever heretofore. And thus we are earnestly according to our bounden duty
to stir up our hearts by our due meditations to cry for him, and to do what
we can both by our prayers, and all other holy means, that all other may join
with us herein; and that we may never rest wrestling with him and weeping,
until he have heard us, even in this behalf, for the pardoning and taking
away our sins, in what sort soever shall seem best to his heavenly Majesty
to answer us. And thus much for this Meditation.

The seventh particular Meditation, of the second general: how Satan
exercises all his power and tyranny against all the Churches spiritually.
Seventhly, we are withal L^ad us not into temptation b^t deliver us from
evil.
to betake our selves to a serious Meditation, and to bring our hearts likewise
to a right feeling hereof: That as To Meditate how Satan having gotten the
Church into the wilderness there exercises his tyrany on it.
the Lord has in his just and heavy displeasure left his poor afflicted
Churches and children to be thus pursued by Satan, and driven into the
wilderness; so Satan having gotten them thither, he there principally
exercises his power and tyranny against them, even spiritually against their
seules and consciences, so far as God permits him, as well as against their
bodies.

How he thereby bestirres himself to bring them into all Satan seeks to
cause all Gods people to fall away or to dissemble for fear^, by their miseries.
spiritual miseries, and to cause them either to fall away from the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the soundness and sincerity of his heavenly Gospel, which they
have received and professed, or to use dissembling, even to deny the Lord
Jesus, or other unlawful means for their relief and succor; thus to wound
their weak consciences and ^o get more advantage against them, both to accuse
them before the Lord, and so to provoke To provoke the Lord more against them.
his Majesty to leave them up into his hands; and even to drive many of them to
utter and endless despair of the Lords help and succor, which is the height
of miseries, and the very entrance into the lake.

Or at least (which is his usual Or to doubt of Gods favor and soundness of
their religion or faith.
manner with every one of us, and wherein he can, and does often prevail with
many of the dearest Saints and Children of the Lord) he settes on them day and
night to cause them to doubt of the Lords favor and love, and of the truth of
their Religion, the goodness of their cause, the soundness of their Faith and
repentance; or whether they have any Faith or no, seeing he so Or whether they
have any Faith.
leaves them to so many miseries, which if he loved them he would not do.
Then, he makes them possess the very sins of their youth, setting all of
them before their faces, which ever they fell into in their whole lives, so
much as he is able, and aggravating every least slip or failing, as if it were
the most heinous sin, that ever was committed.

Then, through melancholy passions and distempers into Thence to melancholy
distempers.
which he can drive thee best by long affliction, and by still urging his
temptations and terrors) he can, and uses to cause them to accuse themselves
To accuse themselves falesly.
falsely, and for those things wherein they are most innocent, or for ye best
things that ever they have done, and so can increase their miseryes both bodily
and spiritual. The right meditation of these and other like miseries which The
effect of the right Meditation of these.
he drives them into, m^st needs cause us to commiserate their poor and woeful
estate, and the due consideration of the present danger to our selves of the
like, will make us cry loud day and night, both for them and for ourselves.

Yea moreover, herein we How justly God may leave Satan to stand up against
us as against Israel.
are to strive to bring our hearts to a right and wise consideration; That as
the Lord being displeased against Israel, gave Satan liberty to stand up
against David, to move him to number his people, so to make a way to the just
execution of his displeasure for their sins, and thereby to awake them, and
bring them to repentance; so he might thus most justly for a long time have
given him liberty to stand up against all the Churches, for our coldness and
security, but against us especially of this sinful Even against all the
Churches, but us p^ially.
Nation, having so long greeved him by all our heinous prouocations, even these
threescore years and more; and much more may he do it now most righteously,
for our so unspeakeable impenitencie and senselesness at this day, and for that
nothing else has hitherto, or can yet awake us.

And withal, we are to labor to bring our hearts to a wise and right
consideration of the extreme rage and fury that Satan now exercises, How
Satan roares upon the Churches
roaring upon all the true Churches of Christ, as if he would devour us at
once, knowing he has but a short time: and how he has hereupon thus lately
begun to cast out this flood of bloody persecution out of his mouth, to carry
away all the Churches and Children of God at this once together, as he has
done See Statesmysteries of the Jesuits.
some already. How he and his bloody Instruments have decreed the certain
effecting hereof, as God has made it manifest even by themselves, and that to
all the world; I mean to every one whose eyes the God of this world has not
utterly shut up.

And to be ever thinking hereof: That only our blessed The earth hitherto
caused to help the Church.
God and tender Father* has caused the earth hitherto, to help his Churches
and all of us his Children, in ^o opening her mouth and swallowing up the
waters, albeit so very many of our Brethren abroad have bin already carried
away thereby. That our course is now (as we have just cause to fear) Just fear
left our course should be coming through Satan's wonderful prevailing.
coming amain like the raging Sea: Satan standing up day and night against
every one of us, to tempt us all, each according to our places, callings, and
occasions to provoke him by our sins more and more, especially by our
induration and security daily increased; that so the Lord may leave us likewise
into his hand, which we have just cause to fear; according to all his severe
denunciations and threats so nearly executed, and that to as great miseries,
as they or any other Churches or people ever endured before, as he had almost
done.

The right Meditation of all these will make us cry aloud: Lead us not into
temptation but The right Meditation hereof will make us to cry loud. Lead us
not etc.
deliver us from evil. Lord deliver us not over to the tempter for our sins,
to be thus indurate and prepared for destruction, but deliver us from him and
from the innumerable evils which he so furiously seeks to bring upon us and
upon all our Brethren, and which so many other Churches so groan under.

And yet more then all this, The fourih branch.
we are never to rest day nor night, till our hearts rightly understand and
conceive hereof, that as all the miseries now All the miser^es of the Church
chief ly from the Dragon.
upon or toward the Churches, are wholly or principally from the Dragon, who
has thus enraged all those whom he has deceived to fight against Pastors and
Watchmen ordained to preserve Gods Children to be stirred up here ^unto at
their cries.
them; so our God has also herein ordained Pastors and Watchmen both
spiritual and temporal to preserve his Children from him; and those his
Pastors and Watchmen to be awaked and made more vigilant heereunto, by the
instant Prayers and cries of his poor people committed to their charge. They
that cannot cry to be delivered from the tempter, to help to deliver their
brethren, must endure all misery with him.


We are ever likewise to be thinking hereof; that he that cannot cry for
himself, and for the Watchmen and Churches to be delivered from the tempter,
and from all these evils. Especially, from the evil of sin, that it reign
not over him, but suffers himself to be a servant, though it be but of any one
sin, and a slave of Satan therein, must endure eternal evils and miseries
with him in the Lake for ever and ever.

The eight particular Meditation of the second general: That the kindgome and
glory are Christ's, that Satan and Antichrist fight principally against him,
and against his Church; only for his cause, and therefore are sure to be
overthrowen.
8. ANd yet more still to awaken For thine is the Kingdom, etc.
us, and to prepare our hearts to this work, we are to f^iue to bring our
souls on further to a right To meditate.
and due consideration: that That the Kingdom is our Christ's.
our Lord Jesus Christ is absolute Lord and King; that all the kingdoms of the
world are our Lords, and his Christ's, Apoc. 11. 15.
and that he must reign for evermore. That *Satan and Antichrist his eldest
son, and all their Soldiers in all these bloody wars which they have so
dreadfully begun, and do so furiously pursue against all the Churches, do
fight Satan and Antichrist^ sight only against him.
only against his glorious Majesty, and even of hatred against him; howsoever
these whom Satan has so enchanted think not so much, but rather Apoc. 16.
23. 24.
imagine that they do God good service in it. That Satan and Antichrist have
sent How they have sent forth their croa^king frogs.
forth these croaking Frogs the Jesuits and Seminaries to stir up all the Kings
and great men of the earth, to give away To stir up all to battle against
Christ Jesus.
their power and authority from Christ Jesus, (to whom it is wholly due, and
whose they and all their power is) to take part and to fight on their side
against our Lord Jesus Christ.

That it is indeed our Lord To thrust him out of his throne.
Jesus Christ against whom they fight, even to thrust him out of his throne and
to destroy And to destroy all his people.
his people; and therefore that we have just cause to think, that this same
being thus eagerly pursued against him, and against all his true members in all
the Churches, is the very battle of the great We may just ly think this the
battle of the great day
day: for that it is so set as it was never in such sort before, all things
being rightly considered.

And therefore we are wisely to Meditate, that howsoever That though the Lord
thus permit them to prevail to harden them to pursue his people into the Sea,
to the end to harden them all, and all their Soldiers to their utter
destruction, he has permitted them to prevail thus far, and still raging to
pursue his Israel into the heart of the Sea, yet we may have good hope that
there is the very place and time, where and when he will get himself Yet there
he will get himself the victory.
the victory; even when once his own people and Children (seeing and feeling
their miseries upon them, and that there is nothing remaining in regard of any
help from man but present destruction) shall When his people shall cry unto
him.
cry aloud unto him as Israel at the Sea. That then he will cause his own
people to stand still and see what he will do. That then he will manifest his
power, and get himself glory upon his own and his Churches enemies, even upon
Pharaoh and his host, and that by his own right arm.

That howsoever there are Though there be mighty Kings against him, and for
Antichrist.
multitudes and nations, mighty Monarchs and Kings against him, and these have
all one mind to give their power and authority from him unto the Beast, until
the words of God be fulfilled; so that they shall thus fight with the Lamb;
yet the Lamb shall overcome Yet the Lamb s^all over come them.
them* for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are on his
side are called faithful and chosen. And then, even those same Kings, the
remainder of y^ ten horns, (which have so long before, and some of them do
still fight against the Lamb, some more furiously, others less) shall all in
the time appointed, hate That they shall give their power to the Lamb to make
the Whore desolate.
the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh and burn her
with fire: for that God will put into their hearts, thus to fulfill his will.
To provoke our selves to more instant crying for the full accomplishment of
this.


And yet more also for our further assurance of this, and to provoke our souls
to loud and instant crying unto the Lord in this behalf for the accomplishment
hereof; we are to bring our hearts to a joyful Meditation and remembrance, To
consider how the whore is discovered to all
how our blessed God has discovered that scarlet-colored Whore to all the
world, and more now then ever heretofore, both in all this bloody rage against
him, and against all his poor Churches and Children, and their cruel
intendments against all (...) mysteries of the Jesuits, Laid forth to be
visibly beholden of all, to be of Satan by his chief works, viz. lying and
murder.
the rest, even against every soul of us truly professing his name. And also
how he has laid her forth to be visibly beholden of all, in all her filthy
whoredoms and inticements, to wit, all those abominable doctrines, devices,
slanders, and blasphemies against him, and against his heavenly word; and above
all in the Powder Treason, wherein Satan showed himself in his cheifest
works both of lying and murder, in a special Received her deaths wound by
her own hands in the Powder treason.
manner to all the world, and above all former times; wherein we are to hope
that Antichrist received his deadly wound, which all the power And will fall
being spent by her own violent and bloody rage.
of hell shall never cure again; and that in Gods due time, he will fall
down of a sudden, as a Dear, or other like beast, deadly smitten, when he
has by his own violence spent himself. 4. branch. That our Savior has
clearly foreshewed her destruction, and of all who receive her mark.


That our Lord Jesus Christ has clearly foreshewed the destruction of that
Whore of Babylon, that child of perdition, than man of sin, and of all his
followers, yea of every one that receives his mark on his forehead, or in his
right hand, or that is any way on his side to fight against him. That he has
not only made all the host of heaven, even al his holy Angels and Saints both
Revel. 19. Made the host of heaven to rejoice thereat.
in heaven and earth, to rejoice and sing Hallelujah, for the condemning of the
great Whore, and the victory given unto the Saints, but also has made
proclamation with a loud voice (by the Angel in Made proclamation to all to
come to be enriched by her spoils
the Sun) and this to all the Fowls that fly through the midst of heaven,
viz. to all the Kings and Princes, Captains and Soldiers, that shall fight
under his glorious Majesty, and for him. That they should come and eat the
flesh of Kings, and of great Captains, and of all mighty men, and even of all
those both great and small that followed the Beast, that is, to be enriched
with their spoils.

That he will destroy every 5. branch.
one that has not his name enrolled That he will destroy every one that is not
on his side.
in his book, to be on his side, that is, every one who is not of his called,
chosen and faithful flock; yea every one that does not so strive to prepare
himself thus to fight for him, and under him, so as he may be sure to prevail
and overcome, and remain with him faithfully fighting unto the death; until
he have the crown of life.

The ninth particular Meditation of the second general, how our Lord Jesus
Christ is that everlasting Amen, and coming quickly.
FInally, we are never to rest Amen.
until we have brought To rejoice that Christ is that everlasting Amen.
our hearts to a comfortable rejoicing, that our Lord Jesus Christ is that
everlasting Amen, that faithful and true witness, who will perform Who will
perform every word which he has spoken.
every word that he has spoken* in his due time, and in such sort, as he has
revealed the same, though the particular manner be yet unknown to us. That
he is coming And is coming quickly.
quickly to render to every one according to his works. That we are not to
give our hearts any rest until we are able thus to cry in faithfulness with
all the Saints, and all the host of heaven; Amen, Amen. Our Lord Jesus Christ
only reigns for evermore,

Amen, Amen.
The third general Meditation.
Thirdly, what manner of ones we must be, whom the Lord so calls, and whom
he will admit and accept to be his helpers herein, and whose prayers shall be
available with him, according to the same heavenly direction in Lords prayer.
THus have we done with these first points for our preparation, by bringing
our hearts to a right consideration of the course which the Lord is wont to
take in saving his Church, and a true feeling of the necessity of our prayers
at this time. Now whe^by our due pondering of all these things and the like,
and never resting until by our deep Meditation of them, we can have them as
it were before our eyes continually, so to see lively the urgent necessity of
these our Prayers, and that we can thereby hear the Lord crying loud unto us
to help him and his Church herein; we are in the After our seeing the order
which the Lord takes in saving his Church and necessity of prayer: to be
careful we be such as the Lord calls to help him.
next place as carefully to see, that we be such as he calls, being qualified
in all things accordingly, if ever we will get sound assurance to our own
souls to prevail or to be accepted. And this we may learn likewise out of
our Saviors direction in that heavenly pattern for prayer Our certain
direction by the Lords prayer.
then which, all the wisdom of the world, can never give us a more sure and
plain rule. To which end also, as for all the other before mentioned, we ought
the more diligently to look unto it, and to Meditate of it: and that in this
manner.

The first particular Meditation of the third general, To make sure that we
be the true children of our heavenly Father.
Here we are to stir up Our Father.
our selves to this duty.

1. That having the former view ever before our faces as That having Christ's
call in our ears,
much as we are able, and this true feeling ever also in our hearts; and
withal this lively voice of Christ's loving call to help him and his Church
still, We make sure we be the true children of our heavenly Father, by the true
marks thereof. 2. Pet. 1. 4.
sounding shrill in our ears, we labor day and night, to make sure that we
be the true Children of our heavenly Father, full of Child-like and natural
affections to his heavenly Majesty. That we have thus put on the Image of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and are hereby (as holy Peter speaks) partakers of the
divine Nature, not earthly but heavenly minded, burning in the love of his
Majesty, of his word, ordinances, and Children, full of faith in Christ Jesus,
and of all duty and holy obedience, that in all fullness of assurance through
our Lord Jesus Christ, we can by the power and witness of his holy Spirit,
cry unto him Abba, O Father, and seek to be as instant for all our Brethren
as for our selves, laboring ever to grow herein, and in the acknowledgment of
our own vileness by nature, and of our unworthiness, either to be called
his children or to make any petition to his heavenly Majesty.

More particular Meditations hereof.
MOre particularly for the The first branch of this meditation more
particularly to make this sure.
better help and direction of every young and weak Christian (because this is
that whereupon all our hope for our prayers does principally rely) that we in
the first place meditate and ponder carefully of these things. That we may not
deceive our selves herein we are to think


To the end that we may be able to cry thus in Faith, ( O our Father which art
in heaven) we must make sure, that we be his children indeed, and that we do
not deceive our selves, as the greatest part do, even of those that live in the
bosom of the Church. And therefore,

1. We must seriously bethink our selves, what we What ones we are by nature.
were by our natural estate from our first Father Adam, 1. Cor. 15. 47.
not heavenly but all earthly, wholly corrupt, both in our Ephesians. 2. 2. John. 8.
44. Ephesians. 2. 3.
nature, and in all our thoughts, words, and deeds, Children of disobedience,
yea Children of Satan, and even of the wrath of God.

2. What we are already, 2. What ones we must be by grace.
or must be by grace, before we can have the favor of our heavenly Father, or
can help in this work; that we must be changed throughout, borne again,
made new Creatures, and so as was said, Children of our heavenly Father,
heavenly minded, that is, minding heavenly things, obedient Children,
endeavoring to walk in all holy obedience before him, so declaring our selves
hereby to be ordained not to wrath, but to the inheritance of the Saints in
light. 3. That we never rest in using the means until we be such.


3. If we do not fully and plainly find our selves in this happy estate of
Gods Children, but still remaining as we were borne, and therefore Children of
wrath, the Lord calls upon us loud, that we never rest day nor night, until we
find our selves certainly delivered out of that fearful and woeful estate;
and that we are made by grace the very Children of our heavenly Father, and are
received into his favor and love. And this chiefly he calls us to seek to
attain, by a deep and continual Meditation of the miserable estate in which
we In regard of our miserable estate we stand in till then.
stand, even for the present, until this time, as was said before; and
morespecially for that extreme horror and misery And more for the horror
which will come o^ us when our consciences shall be awaked.
which will certainly come upon us, when our consciences shall be thoroughly
and soundly awaked, which will be undoubtedly either in his life, or so soon
as ever we shall be taken hence.

And of the other side by a And our blessed estate of the contrary when can we
find our selves Gods Children.
due and serious Meditation and consideration of that blessed estate, wherein
every one is that finds himself indeed in this manner the true Child of his
heavenly Father, and can thereupon by the spirit of Adoption cry thus unto him,
Abba, O Father.

And to these ends that we never rest seeking to be in this happy estate, and
that we find we are in it undoubtedly; by using conscionably and constantly
all the means Means; chee^y the word and prayer.
which God has ordained thereunto; chee^y hearing of his blessed word, and
earnest prayer for obtaining these two general and principal For obtaining
the principal graces, Repentance, Faith.
graces and ^arkes of our regeneration, to wit: True repentance of all our
sins* and a lively Faith in Christ Jesus. In ou^ repentance to (...)* a (...)
(...) Change.
And in our repentance that we find a chang first in ou^ whole nature, and
after a change of all our courses and conversation from earthly to heavenly,
not walking thenceforth according to carnal reason, but by faith in the word
of the Lord.

4. If we find our selves 4. If such yet to labor to increase in our
assurance in walking before him in more hprightnes.
such, yet the Lord calls on us still to labor daily to increase our assurance,
by increasing in our conscionable walking before our heavenly Father, and as in
his presence; that so we may receive more favor in his eyes to be accepted
in our prayers for his Church, and to approach nearer and nearer unto him with
faithful Abraham. Two lessons to be ever in memory to this end.
Remembering ever these two lessons.

1. That there is but only one narrow way of life, by our 1. That there is but
one narrow way of life.
co^scionable walking wherein, we can only assure our selves of Gods favor
and love; but I^numerable leading to destruction.
almost ten thousand leading out of the same; all of them tending to hell and
destruction. The impenitent walking in any of which paths provokes his
displeasure, especially if we walk in it wittingly or carelessly, through lack
of examining and trying our ways.

2. That all this way is directed 2. That one directed only by Gods word. The
general whereof is comprised in the Catechism.
and chalked out for the general in the doctrine of our Catechism, both for
our Faith and for our repentance or obedience to be continually renewed and
increased; more particularly for every step as it were, in the whole body of
the Sacred Scriptures, the blessed word of the Lord.

1. For our Faith, by which For Faith.
we must live and walk, that it is briefly comprised in the Articles of our
Faith. 2. For Conversation
our life and conversation, and the ordering thereof in the Ten Commandments
written by the Lords own finger; in each of which and every part whereof, we
must walk on forward in performing all duties to his heavenly Majesty, and
also to our Brethren. 3. ^or other helps Helps in ou^ journey, the Sacraments.
in this our journey and stays to our Faith; the right use and knowledge of
the Sacraments. 4. to the end to obtain more strength so to For more strength
so to walk, earnest prayer.
walk in Faith and obedience that we are to use earnest prayer; the heavenly
pattern whereof is set before us in that most exact form, prescribed by our
Savior, called the Lords prayer. That we may all learn to pray as with one
heart and soul, according to that general direction being used and applied
particularly, as occasions, times, and seasons require.

5. The Lord would have us all to know, and ever to keep in fresh memory, that
5. To pray thus for our Brethren as well as our selves, that they may have the
same assurance, and so manifest themselves for their heavenly Father and for
the good of all their Brothren as we do.
he calls on us continually in the use of this prayer, to strive not only for
our selves so to walk, but for all our Brethren, even all the Children of our
heavenly Father, dispersed over the face of the whole earth, both already
called, and also all other of whom we may hope that they do belong to Gods
eternal election, whether of the Jew, or of the Gentile, Pagans, Turks, or
Indians. That these being gathered forth, he may speedily hasten the
accomplishment of our happiness by the glorious appearing of our Lord and
Savior.

And that we never test until we shall attain heereunto, to remember all
these To remember al jointly
jointly in all our prayers, in some good measure, as being of the same
mystical body of Christ with us, for that otherwise we cannot rightly pray. [
Our Father.]

And further also amongst them, he would have us to 6. To pray more specially
for all in authority.
pray in a more special manner for all those whom he has set in his own
place here in the earth, for our succor As in Gods own place,
and comfort, and the aid and the comfort of all the rest For the succor and
comfort of all the rest of their Brethen.
of these our Brethren, and for our joint enjoying of all these blessings which
he has promised to his Church and chosen flock, and which he has been wont
by them to perform unto it. To whom for this cause he has given his own
name, calling them Bearing his own name and ordained for this end.
Gods, and has promised that to this end; they shall be made foster Fathers and
nursing Mothers Esaias. 49.
to his poor Church, when he will be gracious unto it, in delivering,
restoring, and beautifying of it, like as he has done in all former Ages.

And therefore we are never to rest traveling with our own hearts in this;
until we can principally labor with the Lord for them, that they of all
other, and so all in their places may be endued with all excellent graces, not
only to That they may chiefly be endued with all excellent graces.
manifest themselves in the first rank according to their high dignities, the
true Children of our heavenly Father, thus shining As in the first rank.
before all the rest of their Brethren, for the better provoking Better to
provoke all the rest.
and encouraging of all the rest, and the greater glory of the Lord; but also
with And chiefly those peculiar to their places.
those gifts which are proper and peculiar unto their places and callings. And
that we That we may perform all duties to them of honor.
likewise may all of us be very careful to perform unto them the duties
belonging to them, in regard of those high places and callings, like as the
honor and obedience of Obedience.
right appertaining to them so with all true thankfulness for Thankfulness.
all the blessings which we enjoy by them.

And in our thankfulness, Therein those three.
we ^e never to rest until we can from our souls perform unto them these
three specially. Acknowledgment.
1. Acknowledgment of their authority from God, and that they are in his
place. 2. Hearty affections, as to Hearty affections.
Gods Lieutenants for his cause. 3. Above all instant Instant prayers.
prayers for them day and night. And in these our prayers, that we can cry for
them not only as for every common member That they may be able to walk in
their particular callings as before the Lord and as living Laws.
(as was said) to be able to walk before all their people as living Laws in
all holy duties of Christianity, but in those of their particular places and
callings, and be furnished Furnished with all gifts for managing the same
happily.
with all excellent gifts and endowments of Gods Spirit for their happy
managing of the same.

As first and principally, that they may be made able 1. For promoting Gods
religion.
and resolute to promote the Religion of the Lord alone, and all true
godliness, and that with all their power; defacing the contrary, and
destroying all ungodnesse in all their Dominions, as did those Worthyes; David,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Iosiab, and Nehemiah; being thereby so renowned and set
out for such blessed examples to all succeeding Ages.

And in the second place, that they may procure each 2. Procuring the wealth of
his people.
way the good of the people committed to them, as tender Foster-fathers,
repressing the wicked, being careful that all holy means be used every where,
for the reclaiming and saving every soul in their Dominions, and of bringing
them in their arms to the Sion and Sanctuary of the Lord, and all hindrances
thereof removed. And that to these ends, they may be all as (...) Exo. 18.
(...).
Magistrates, men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, hating
covetousness, no respecters of persons.

And next unto these, that Next unto Magistrates to pray for all in any
eminency.
we rest not till we be able to pray likewise for all excelling in any
eminency, either outward or inward, whereby Whereby they may do any special
service.
they may do any special service to our Lord Jesus Christ, to his
Vicegerents, or to his poor Church and people: As namely, That their hearts
be not lifted up by their That their hearts be not lift up.
gifts, favors, or places, as is ordinary in each estate, and so wrath come
upon them, as it 2. Chro. 32. 25. 26.
did on that good Hezekiah for this very sinn^; but that contrarily But
contrarily ^hore humbled.
they may both ever remember and acknowledge all their preferments to be from
his heavenly bounty, and so to be more humbled by them, as having more to
answer and be accountable for giving to his divine Majesty alone, all the
glory thereof. And secondly, that they may be enabled as thy dear Children to
employ all those gifts carefully That they may employ all carefully as their
talents committed to that end.
as their talents committed unto them by the Lord, to that end and purpose, as
may make most for his glory, the furtherance of his Gospel, with the greatest
benefit and good to our selve;, and to all the people of the Lord.

The second particular Meditation of the third general, That we can, and use to
seek his honor above all other things.
SEcondly, we must never Hallowed be thy name.
give the Lord over, until we have brought our hearts in order, not to seek
our own Never to rest until we can only seek Gods honor
honor or greatness: nor our selves, any way for our selves alone, but only
in all things to seek the honor of our heavenly Father, being zealous of his
glory. And that we can pray earnestly, that And be zealous for it to set it
forth.
our selves and all other, may study to set forth his glory before all the
sons of men, even the glory of his Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Justice, Power,
and Truth, shining bright in all his works: both in every creature, and also
in all his judgments and mercies, and chiefly in his heavenly word: admiring
and extolling his great name in every one of them.

That we can mourn with holy Moses, for all the dishonours And mourn for all
the dishonours done unto him, as Moses.
done unto him, and for all the provocations whereby he is provoked, choosing
rather to have our names put out of his book, then that his Exo. 32. 31. 32.
great name should be blasphemed by his malicious enemics, especially in their
triumphs for the destruction or Number. 14. 13. 17.
miseries of his people.

The third particular Meditation of the third general: That we seek his
honor chiefly in the advancement of the Scepter of Jesus Christ.
THirdly, we are never to Thy kingdom come.
rest until we can rejoice in the truth of our hearts, that we have se^ our
selves to seek by all our might, the advancement Not to rest till ^e can most
earnestly seek the coming of Christ's kingdom.
of the Scepter of his heavenly kingdom, even of the heavenly Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and so the coming of his kingdom thereby with power; first
the kingdom of Grace, and after 1. Of Grace. 2. Of Glory.
the kingdom of Glory: desiring earnestly to that end the propagating and
spreading Desiring the spreading of his Gospel, etc.
of his Gospel over all the world, the gathering forth of all his elect from al
parts, with the saving of all his people, and seeking all other things only
Only for his honor.
for him and for his honor, that he may reign as Lord and King. That we
never Not resting ^ll we feel him reigning in our hearts.
give him rest, until we feel him reigning in our hearts by his blessed Word
and Spirit: And can mourn for all the despite done to him.
making us to mourn withal for all the despite done unto his heavenly
Majesty in the contempt of that his glorious And Satan's prevailings.
Gospel, and chiefly for all the prevaylings of Satan and Antichrist, the
setting up again of their abominable Idolatry in any place, and so for all the
outrageous wickedness With all the wickedness committed against him.
committed against our Lord Jesus Christ, his crown and dignity, and also
against his poor people.

The fourth particular Meditation of the third general, That we seek to
honor him ever in the full accomplishment of all his heavenly will.
FOurthly, that our hearts bear us witness that we Thy will be done.
have attained to be such, as are wholly set not to seek the execution of our
own lusts That we are wholly set for the knowledge and execution of of God^
will.
or will, but that the whole will and good pleasure of our heavenly Father may
be fulfilled by us and all other his Children; especially in all things
wherein he has or shall reveal himself what his good pleasure is. And that we
have begun earnestly to endeavor our selves to be as cheerful in the right
execution and accomplishment thereof in all parts, as his holy Angels.
Moreover, that we can with And receiving thankfully whatsoever trial from his
hand.
all thankefulness receive from his hand, and yield unto whatsoever
chastisements or trials it shall please his heavenly wisdom to exercise us by;
Mourning to see his Commandments trampled under foot.
and that we can mourn with the holy Prophet David, to see his blessed will and
Commandments, both Law, and Gospel, so scorned and trampled under foot. That
we have atrayned thereto at the least in our inner man (to wit) in the full
desire and resolution of our souls, and are thereupon able thus to cry in
truth and in the uprightness of our hearts, Thy will be done in earth as it is
in heaven.

The fifth particular Meditation of the third general, That we be such as look
into, and depend only upon our heavenly Father for all good things.
Fifthly, we must travel with Give us this day our daily (...).
our own hearts, never resting until we be such as feel our selves in some
good Not to rest until we can in Faith whole ly depend upon our heavenly Father.
measure able in faith to look up unto him as to our pitiful, gracious, and
bountiful Father, and to depend wholly upon him with faithful Abraham, for
accomplishment of all our desires, and whatsoever else he has promised, and
for giving to us, and to the whole Church all things belonging heereunto, so
far as shall be best. To trust in him only for all, and to give him the glory
of al.

Also such as have attained in some good sort, a fellowfeeling with our
Brethren, of al their wants and afflictions And able to cry for our Brethren.
both bodily and spiritual: and so are thereby able to cry for them, as for
our selves, Give us this day our daily bread.

Such as are ready to communicate unto them in all Ready to communicate unto
them.
things according to their necessities, of what kind soever. And finally, such
as strive to walk painfully and faithfully in our places and callings, that we
may not be chargeable to the Church, but may better supply the wants of our
Brethren; and so show forth our right dependence on his fatherly goodness for
our selves and for them al, for bread and all other comfortes for bodies and
souls, appertaining both to this, and the better life.

The sixth particular Meditation of the third general, That we be such as feel
our sins and infirmities as a heavy burden, and traveling under them, do
fly ever unto Christ.
Sixthly, we are seriously to For give us our trespasses as etc.
stir up our souls that we never rest until we be such at least in the
longing desires of our hearts, as do see and That we feel our sins a burden
feel not only our own sins, infirmities, and corruptions, as a heavy
burden, making us To drive us to Christ.
daily to run to our Lord and Savior to be eased of them: but withal, that
we Having some true feeling of the sins of the Churches which have so provoked
the Lord.
have some true feeling of the sins of all sorts in the Church, which have so
far forth already provoked the Lord to execute his fierce wrath upon so many
of our Brethren, to leave them into their enemies hand* and so to threaten all
the Churches by the deadly malice and mischievous plots and prevailings of our
bloody enemies. And also that we can and do begin to cry, That the Lord would
To try for forgivness and so for unfeigned repentance to all the Churches.
forgive us our sins, our heinous crying sins, and grant unto us unfeigned
repentance for the ^ame, and hearts to do whatsoever he has commanded
belonging thereunto; and for the pacifying of his wrath both privately, and
publicly. We That we he such as have a continual heaviness in our hearts
for the sinne^ whereby our heavenly Father is so provoked.
are withal to bethink our selves, whether we be such as unfeignedly wish
with blessed Paul to have a continual heaviness in our hearts, for our own
sins, and for the sins of Gods people, whereby he has been so provoked
to so heavy a wrath, and so dreadful proceedings even against his own
Children, which are so dear unto him; and for that his anger is daily more and
more kindled and incensed. Such as can forgive and pray for our enemies.


Such as can freely forgive, and do use to pray for our very enemies; that
they, so many of them, as belong to the election of Grace, may likewise come to
repentance and escape his wrath and vengeance due unto their sins, and be
made with us partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

The seventh particular Meditation of the third general, That we endeavor to
pray continually. Lead us not into temptation.
SEventhly we are to meditate Lead us not in^o temptation.
seriously, that if we will be helpers unto our Lord and Savior in this
work, we Not to rest until we have brought our selves in awe.
are never to give rest unto our souls, until we have brought our selves to a
true understanding sense and practice of that counsel, yea that precept of our
Savior (with which so few Christians are indeed rightly acquainted) to wit, To
watch and pray continually that we fall not into temptation.
to watch and pray continually that we fall not into temptation.

That we be such as do not only see the danger, that we That we do not
only see our own danger:
our selves stand in of Satan's temptations every moment of time, and of the
many and fearful evils which by our sins he seeks without ceasing to
bring upon us; and thence do labor incessantly by watching and prayer to be
preserved and delivered from the same: but do also use to But also mourn for
the prevailing^ of Satan and Antichrist.
mourn and be in heaviness day and night for the prevailing of Satan and
Antichrist, and of all their limbs and instruments, not only against the
poor people and children of the Lord, but also against his blessed Gospel at
this day, by their craft and subtilties, and for the innumerable miseries
bodily and spiritual which they have and do daily more and more seek to
bring upon them, and therefore we do use daily to cry for them as for our
selves. Lord lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

The eighth particular Meditation of the third general, That we can and do
use to sing the song of the 24. Elders, Glory, etc.
SEventhly, we are never to For thin^ is the kingdom, etc.
give the Lord over, until we be such as ever acknowledging in our hearts
and consciences Such as have learned the song of the four and twenty Elders.
the Sovereignty of our Lord Jesus Christ have attained hereto, to bow the
knees of our souls, and fall down upon our faces before him, having learned
the Song of the four and twenty Elders, Glory, Honor, Praise, Dominion,
Might, Rev. 5. 13.
and Majesty, be to him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for
evermore; and do And sing the same in our souls
use to sing the same in our souls; and also do desire that it may be
sounded out by us, and by all the Church eternally; Or mourne] for our faylings.
at least such as can mourn for our continual wants and failings herein.

Finally, that we be such as Able to sound Amen in assurance of obtaining.
use to stir up our hearts in faith to sound Amen, both begging and believing
that through Jesus Christ, we shall obtain whatsoever we have or shall desire,
as our Lord and Savior has taught us, so far as shall be most for his
glory, our salvation, with the good of all his Church; and herein can joyfully
repose our souls. And not only that we have attained the beginnings, or as
Having not only the first fruits in all graces, but endeavoring to grow
continually.
it were the first fruits in all these graces: moreover, that we endeavor to
increase and grow in every one of them continually. And thus much also for the
second general meditation (to wit) what kind of persons we must be, if we will
be sure to be accepted, as saithfull Abraham and Moses, in regard of the high
favor in which we are in through Jesus Christ, and that we are so qualified
and fitted, as our Savior requires of them who are to help him in this work.

The fourth general Meditation.
Concerning the frame and order of our prayers, that they likewise may be well
pleasing, and so we may be more certain to prevail thereby: when we follow
in all things our Saviors direction.
FOr the frame and form of our prayers, that the want therein may not any
thing hinder our certain assurance, but To Meditate.
contrarily that our right manner, ordering and framing thereof may increase
our strength and confident crying. They That our prayers be framed according to
our Saviors direction so near as we can.
must be so framed as near as we can, at our great Master and Teacher our
Lord Jesus Christ has directed us; and then his Sovereign Majesty who has
said Pray thus, will Then he will make them powerful.
make them powerful according to his gracious promise. Ask and you shall
have, and will set to his seal, first in our hearts, and after manifestly
before the world.

The first particular Meditation of the fourth general, That we pray only to
our heavenly Father in the name of Christ.
FIrst we are carefully to 1. That we pray only to our heavenly Father in the
name of Jesus Christ.
see, that our prayers be directed only to our heavenly Father, and none
other, and that in the name and mediation of our blessed Savior; our hearts
being lifted up to heaven in confidence of faith through him, and in his name
and mediation alone, and not by the mediation of any Saint or Angel; and also
without the least looking at our selves, for any excellency Without the least
looking at our selves* or any other creature.
in our selves, or any matter of merit, worth or desert in our selves, or any
other creature, for which we should look any way to be heard, whereunto our
hearts are wonderfully prone; and wherein they are exceeding deceiptfull, and
very hard to be known, albeit we have taken long pains to bring them
thereunto.

The second particular Meditation of the fourth general, That above all and in
all we aim at Gods glory, and the advancement of Christ's scepter.
SEcondly, as he has That we aim only at Gods glory, not resting till our
hearts be inflamed with the zeal thereof.
taught us in the first place to pray, Hallowed be thy name; so in and above
all things we must aim at his glory, and never rest till we have a burning
zeal thereof, so to seek the advancement of his great name, and the coming
of his kingdom, even that Jesus That Christ only may reign in all the world.
Christ may reign in all the world, all sorts stooping unto him, that thus his
elect speedily be gathered forth and saved; Satan and Antichrist with all his
enemies being utterly overthrown and confounded. For seeking first his glory,
kingdom, and righteousness, that is; seeking them chiefly and in the first
For that then we have a certain assurance of all other things.
place, we have a certain assurance from his gracious and faithful promise;
That all other things shall be cast upon Mat. 6. 33.
us, as an over measure, concerning our selves or ours.

And herein specially we This is a chief failing of all Gods people.
are to be warned, for that in this is usually the chief failling of Gods
people, and for which he may justly send us empty away; even for looking In
looking more at our selves then his heavenly Majesty.
at our selves, more then at his Majesty and the things that concern his
kingdom and honor; preferring our selves and our own particulars, and the
care of them, before the things that concern his own glory, kingdom, and
people. Though Though he has directed us that this should be all in all.
his wisdom has in his goodness so plainly directed us herein, beginning
and ending with this. The seeking of the advancement of his glory and kingdom,
as being all in all, like as indeed it is, for that then (as was said) when we
can so seek him in order, he will undoubtedly give us our hearts desire, and
more then we can imagine; neitheir can we ever assure our selves of any thing
as a blessing until this time. For this purpose, and the certainty hereof,
read carefully the first of Haggai, and consider Hag. 1.
it well, how this self-love makes us forget the first and great Commandment,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul, Want of this
deprives of many blessings.
strength, and might, etc. and so to loose the obtaining of those things which
otherwise we might certainly enjoy.

The third particular Meditation of the fourth general, That we seek the
doing of his heavenly will, for his glory and kingdom chiefly. That we seek
the doing of his heavenly will chiefly for his glory and kingdom.

THirdly, we are to labor to bring our hearts hereunto, That the accomplishing
of his heavenly will* whatsoever he has determined, chiefly i^ things that
concern his glory and kingdom, and the good of his Church and Children be
sought by us in the first place, and afterward in all things That for these
ends we may do it as the Angels do^.
belonging to our selves. That to these ends, all his will and good pleasure,
which he has been, or shall be pleased to make known unto us, may be done by
us and all his people; and that as cheerfully, wisely, faithfully, and
courageously, as the Angels do it in heaven.

The fourth particular Meditation of the fourth general* That we seek all
good things from God alone, chiefly that we may have wherewith to honor him,
and advance his kingdom.
FOurthly, in the fourth To seek bread chiefly for these ends.
place we are to meditate how we are to travel with our own hearts to seek
our daily bread from him, not for our selves, but for these ends principally.

That he will be pleased to feed us and to minister unto us from heaven, all
things needful and behouefull hereunto, both for our selves and for all our
brethren, that we That we may live only to his heavenly Majesty.
may not live to our selves, but to his heavenly Majesty alone, who has
redeemed and saved us for this purpose.

The fifth particular Meditation of the fourth general, and so of the sixth and
seventh together.
Fifthly, we are seriously to 5
consider how we are to pray, That to these ends likewise To seek forgivness
of our sins to these ends, and that they may not hinder his mercies.
chiefly, and for these causes, he will forgive our sins, and the sins of
his people; that they may not hinder his mercy, nor these our prayers in any of
the things which we are taught to beg of his heavenly Majesty, nor yet provoke
his wrath against us, but having put them away by his Christ, he But he may
hear us in all things concerning his own glory and our good.
may for his sake tender us as his own Children, and hear us in all things
concerning his glory and kingdom, and also for our own necessity and
happiness, and the good of his people. 6


6. And finally, that for his glory sake, he will save And that he will save
us from Satan that we may live to honor him.
us from Satan and from all the evils which he intends, and seeks to bring
upon us for our sins, and whereby he seeks to dishonor the Lord and provoke
him against us, and to hinder all these mercies, and to bring all contrary
miseries and evils upon us, and upon the Church. 7


7. How in all these, still we are ever to seek for his All still for his
glory and for his Church.
own glory, and the merit of his dearly beloved Son, ever beginning and
ending here with. And that our Lord Jesus Christ, may show himself gloriously
both Lord and King, exercising all his Sovereignty, Dominion, and Power, for us
all; that so he may be glorified by us, and by all the Churches, and also
That he may be glorified in us, and we with him.
glorify us with himself for evermore. And thus much also for the order, that
we are ever, as near as we can, to keep in the desire of our hearts, and in
all the requests which we make unto his glorious Majesty.

The fifth general Meditation.
Fifthly the power and efficacy of our prayers made and performed in all things,
according to the heavenly pattern.
WE are in this Meditation, to have a due consideration and pondering hereof:
To Meditate how the four former performed aright, we shall be assured of this,
viz. to be heard.
that the four former things being performed according to the rule and
direction of our Savior, this fifth will follow of it self, that is to say;
that our blessed God will give us a strong assurance to be heard; and so, that
we shall see the power and efficacy of our prayers in all accordingly; which
we are seriously to meditate of, until we can feel our hearts to pray in
faith, and in confident boldness of his goodness to grant our requests.

The first particular Meditation of the fifth general, That when we can so
pray, he will manifest himself our tender Father.
FIrst, that when we shall So praying jointly he will give a witness to each
soul and set to his seal that he is our Father.
jointly thus cry unto him, he will not only give a witness to every one of
us in our souls, that he is our Father, and set the seal thereof in our
hearts (as was said) making us able to call him Romans 8.
Abba, O Father, which is ten thousand times more worth then all our labor
herein can be; but will moreover show himself to us so praying, not to each in
particular alone, Show him self to us all from heaven to be our Father.
but also to all the Churches in general, and that even from heaven; to be
our gracious and tender Father, yea that he will so show himself to us, as
ever he showed himself to Israel, or to any of his in former Ages, howsoever
he Though he more humble us first.
may first humble us, and dreadfully awaken us all, to make us more earnestly
and jointly to cry unto him.

The second particular Meditation of the fifth general, How he will from
heaven show us his glory, when we can so pray.
SEcondly, that then we 2. That he will also show us his glory for his Church
more then ever formerly in this last age.
may truly hope, that he will from heaven once again show his glory for his
Church, more then ever in this last Age of the world, now that his own
glorious Now that it is so opposed.
Majesty and Children are so furiously fought against, and that so directly and
manifestly, that all the world may take notice of it; chiefly by Satan and
Antichrist, and by all their forces. That he will then evidently declare the
glorious riches of his Love, Wisdom, Mercy, Power, Truth, Faithfulness, and
all his Goodness; both for the rescuing, the succouring, and saving of all his
poor Church from the great red Dragon, the Beast and the false Prophet; and
for maintaining For maintaining his own great name,
his own honor and great Name, which they do so oppugn; and also in getting
himself a glorious And getting himself a glorious victory.
victory and triumph upon them all, as he did upon Pharaoh, Senacherib, Haman,
or any other of his proud enemies, or of the enemies of his Church. Yea, we may
then expect that This we may expect he will do by themselves.
he will do this, in fighting against them by themselves, making their own
rage their ruin, their own counselles their own confusion, and the covering
of their faces, and in turning all to his own glory, To their confusion:
happiness of his.
with the greatest joy and happiness to his chosen flock and children for ever.

The third particular Meditation of the fifth general.
3. WE are withal to How he will then give us assurance of his kingdom to
come with power.
meditate infaith; How when he has prepared and set our hearts in order thus
to pray, he will then from heaven cause his own Kingdom to come with power:
how the^ our Lord Jesus Christ whose the kingdom is, to whom the Father has
specially committed the government of it, will then advance his own Scepter,
the true Scepter of righteousness, even his heavenly Gospel amongst his very
enemies; that then, his greatest enemies shall fall down before him and lick
the dust, in acknowledgement of their own natural wretchedness, and of their
willing submission to Jesus Christ, or perish for ever. How then our Ruinate
the kingdom of Satan and Antichrist.
Lord and Savior will once again cause Satan to fall down from heaven like
lightning, Luke 10, 18.
ruinating his kingdom, and specially the kingdom of Consume Antichrist.
Antichrist; how he will consume that great Antichrist by the breath of his
mouth, and utterly abolish him by the brightness of his coming. But the new
Jerusalem he Cause the new Jerusalem to come from heaven, as a Bride prepared
to meet her Husband. Apoc. 22.
will cause to descend from heaven as a Bride trimmed and prepared to meet her
Husband, and then will he set up and manifest before all the world the glory of
his Majesty, and of the glorious Kingdom of his Son our Savior, with the
felicity and glory of And all in such sort as he has foretold.
all his Saints, in that manner which he has foretold in his heavenly word;
and in all things which are not yet accomplished concerning the same, every
thing in their own due time and season.

The fourth particular Meditation of the fifth general.
FOurthly, we are wisely to Thy will be done. etc.
meditate in faith, How then he will accomplish and He will then fulfill
whatever not yet accomplished concerning his enemies, or his servants.
fulfill all his holy will and counsel, even whatsoever he has spoken by the
mouth* of any of his holy Prophets, which is not yet come to pass, executing
both all his judgments upon all his and his Churches enemies, and performing
whatsoever he has foretold and promised to his Saints. How then he will
certainly put into the hearts of all, and namely of the Kings, which had
formerly given their power unto the Beast, to give all their power and
authority to Jesus Christ, to fulfill his will, for the full execution And put
new cheerfulness into all the hearts of his, to do all his will.
and performance hereof, and that cheerfully, wisely, and faithfully, like as
i^ is done in heaven: and more specially to every one that can so call up on
his blessed name; according to the measure of Grace and Power given to each in
his place. Then he will effectually so incline our hearts as that this shall be
our meat and drink to do his will, and that we shall never depart from him
any more.

The fifth particular Meditation of the fifth general: How he will then deliver
and feed his people.
Fifthly, then we are withal G^ve us this day our dasly bread.
here to meditate in faith, and in all confident assurance, How he will
deliver his people from all their miseries.
how he will from heaven declare his fatherly and tender care for all his
children thus crying to him, to deliver them from all their bondage, Famine,
Sword, and other miseries, which they have endured by their merciless enemies,
whether bodily or spiritual: thus wiping away all tears from their eyes, so
far as shall be most for his own glory, and for their good. Then will he feed
them with bread, as Feed them from heaven.
from heaven, ministering abundantly al good things unto them, according to the
days wherein they suffered adversity, recompensing the^ double into their
bosoms in all joy and heavenly felicity, Recompensing them double.
here to be begun, and in an unspeakeable mannar to be accomplished in the
heavens.

The sixth particular Meditation of the fifth general: How then he will cleanse
his people from their sins, and write his law in their hearts. Forgive us our
trespasses as* etc.

Sixthly, we are likewise seriously and joyfully to be pondering hereof: How
then To meditate.
he will forgive all the sins of his children according to How then he will
forgive the sins of all his people
his gracious promise, and remember their iniquities no more, when they shall
cry unto him by a lively Faith, as to their heavenly Father, burning with the
zeal of his glory and kingdom, and that all his divine will may be so
accomplished. That then he will open all our blind eyes to see Make us see our
pollutions
our natural pollution and uncleanness, yea to behold all out filthy sins,
whereby we are defiled and loathsome in the eyes of our heavenly Father* and
will withal make us And the fountain open to u^ all. Zach. 13. ^.
to behold the fountain of his Sons blood open to all the house of Israel
for sin and for uncleanness. Then will he make all sorts that are his, even
all his elect, as much to And to long after it.
long after that Fountain, as ever any did after the poole of John 5, 3.
Bethesda: and most gladly to do whatsoever he has appointed for the purging
and clensing of themselves, and of all his Church from all her iniquities. How
he w^l then make our Repencance sound.


And how to the end that our turning and repentance may be no longer formal
(as it has been for the most part heretofore, when we have cried unto the
Lord in our troubles, to be delivered from our distress* and afterward have
returned to our iniquities again) but that it, and every part of it, may be
sound, and unfeigned, he will make every one of his own cry with persecuting
Saul, Acts. 9. 6.
Lord what will thou that I should do? Then he will put Put his Law in our
minds etc. Icr. 31. 33.
his Law into our minds, and write it in our hearts, according to his most
gracious and blessed promise, when he intendes to save his Church in such
sort, as we have just cause to hope he is about to do. He will cause us
tenderly Cause us to forgive and pity one another. Esaias. 11. 6.
to forgive and pity one another; the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb, and to
desire to make all our very enemies partakers of the same mercies, and will
keep us all that are his, that we may no more depart from him.

The seventh particular Meditation of the fifth general, How we shall see him
delivering his flock from Satan, and dissolving all his cursed works.
Seventhly, we are moreover Lea^ us not into temptation.
to Meditate in faith, how then he will restrain the rage and power of the
Tempter, To meditate how then he will restrain the tempter.
reseuing his poor Lambs out of the jaws of the roaring Lion. How he will
Dissolve his works.
then destroy and dissolve all the cursed works of Satan; discover his
depthes, and all Discover his depths of wickedness.
the wickedness of his Incha^ters, Sorce^ers, Charmers, Witches, and of all
the rest of his crafty, malicious, and accursed instruments; making their
madness manifest to all, and what practices they have used against all* even
against Christian Kings and Against all nations.
Princes, Nations and people, to harden and turn them from the faith, as
Iannes and Iambres 2. Tim. 3* ^.
did to harden Pharaoh, and as Elimas against the Deputy, and Simon Magus
against How the Kings of the earth who have given their power to the Beast have
been deluded. Apo. 9. 3. 4. etc. 16. 13. ^4.
Samaria. How these and the Locusts coming out of the bottomless pit, have
caused them to give their power to the Beast, and to fight against our Lord
Jesus Christ.

And furthermore how then How he (...) then cause their enchantments to (...).
he will cause all their witchcrafts and inchantme^ts to cease, as they began
so to cease at y^ first coming of our Savior in the flesh, and chiefly at the
coming down of the holy Ghost, and at that powerful and effectual*
spreading of the Gospel, in every country wheresoever it so came*

Yea, how then all such deceivers shall curse their Gods, and gnaw their
tougnes for How all deceivers shall curse their Gods, and g^aw their tongues.
sorrow, being enforced with that wretched Balaans, who loved the wages of
iniquity, to acknowledge, that there is no sorcerie against Jacob, nor any
divination against Numb. 23. 23.
Israel. How then we shall How Christ will be then wonderful in saving his
Church.
see him whose name is Wonderful, to show himself wonderful in the saving of
his poor Church and Children from the power and fury of the great red Dragon,
and in delivering us all in an admirable manner, from all these innumerable
evils, which he and all his instruments have so long practiced, and so
maliciously and dreadfully intended and do still intend against his poor
Church; whereupon he so castethout of his mouth all this huge flood of waters
after her, to cause her to be carried away of the same at once; and by which
the proud enemies, have so cast lots upon Hester. 3. 7.
all that truly love and believe in his name, and as certainly State mysteryes.
determined and set down our day, so soon as ever their opportunity shall
serve, as Haman had against the Jews.

The eight particular Meditation of the fifth general, How then he will
declare himself sole Monarke, and to whom all glory belongs.
Eighthly, we are yet further For thine is the kingdom, etc.
to Meditate according to this heavenly direction, how To meditate how Christ
will then declare his Soveraignety.
then he will declare himself before all the earth, to be the only absolute
Sovereign Lord and King, the sole and mighty Monarch of all the world, that
all power* is his, and to him alone belongs all glory and honor, when he
shall thus show himself so gloriously for his Church, in such a wonderful
deliverance, in such unexpected and even incredible mercies to her (I And get
himself glory upon his proudest enemies.
mean incredible to all humane reason) and when he shall so get himself glory
upon his proudest enemies, and make all the world to see, that he has
overturned all their wisdom, Making all their counsels and power to serve him.
power, and fury, making it to serve hereunto; and finally, that he has in
all things so far forth, accomplished whatsoever he has spoken ever since
the beginning.

And likewise we are earnestly How he will then maniseft that all the enemies
have fought against him.
to meditate, and to comfort our selves herein* That then he will make it
manifest, that the greatest enemies of the Church, have in all their ^age not
fought against his Children, poor worms, dust and ashes, for then they had
surely prevailed long ago, to have destroyed his whole Church out of the
earth; but that they have fought even against our Lord Jesus* Christ, this
great King of kings, and This will cause all to acknowledge his Sovereignty.
Romans 14*
Lord of lords. Thus will he cause all, both men and devils to acknowledge and
^say* For thine is the kingdom, power, and glory: and all the Children of God
to sing with all the holy Angels, and all the hosst of Heaven, Halleluj^h.
Praise ye His Angels and Sa^hts to sing Halle^. Apoc. 19, 6.
the Lord: for the Lord* God omnipotent reigns, ye^, to fall upon their faces
before the Throne, and to worship our God* saying Am^n. Blessing, glory,
wisdom, thanksgiving, honor, power* and Apo. 7, 11, (...).
might be unto our God for ever and ever.

The ninth particular Meditation of the fif^ general: How we are never to
rest, till we can rejoice and triumph in the assurance of Faith, crying
^oyntly, Amen.
AND to conclude this Amen.
point, we are ever to meditate seriously hereof, and Never to give over our
Meditations and prayers until we can by them (...) ^n Faith, Amen: rejoicing
and triumphing in our assurance to be heard in all.
never to give our hearts any rest, until we can through the (...) of our
Faith, rejoice and even triumph continually with the Holy Angels: That how
impossible soever these things may seem to flesh and blood, and how incredible
in the eyes of the world yet he will certainly accomplish the^ all, in what
time measure, and manner shall seem best to his wisdom, accordingly as he
has foretold. And that, even then, when so many of us, as have, or can but
unfeignedly begin to set our selves in all things to walk hvmbly with him,
shall likewise be stirred up by his blessed Spirit, thus jointly to cry unto
him: for that, he having taught and Reasons of our assurance from his 1.
Commandments. 2. Promises. 3. Inclining and preparing our hearts.
commanded us thus to pray, and having given us so many assurances, that being
such, and praying thus, he will hear us: and finally, he enclining and setting
our hearts as with one accord, thus to importune him herein, we can make no
doubt of gracious audience, and a happy answer from his heavenly Majesty, even
when we can jointly cry in Faith, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly,

Amen, Amen.
The Sixth general Meditation.
How all but those that are thus qualified are excluded from helping the Lord,
and do rather pull down his wrath upon his Church.
Sixthly, we are to bring our hearts yet further to a serious To meditate, How
al other are excluded
Meditation hereof likewise; That all other who are not so qualified, at least
in the earnest desire and constant resolution of their hearts: and much more
all who are contrarily affected in any of these things thus necessarily
required in our preparation: and so all that believe not the word of the Lord
in such manner, as to be fully persuaded of the truth of his promises and
threatenings, are excluded by the Lord himself, from being any meet helpers in
this work.

The First Meditation hereof, to be seriously pondered.
1 THat all such as live securely in their own First: As All living securely
excluded.
ways, without any due regard of the Lord, and of his poor Church, are
excluded hence; even all such, as who albeit the Lord show such manifest
token^ of his heavy displeasure against his own people and children for their
sins; and although they see his Glory, Gospel* and People, to be so
generally trampled under foot, our lord Jesus Christ to be ready utterly to be
thrust from his throne, and his members in such miserable distress, or imminent
peril* yet they care for none of these things, but only mind their own
courses, and seek to satisfy their own wills and desires, as all our
worldlings* and all the profane sort in general do.

Yea, all such are shut 2 All who do not in commiseration come to help him,
and his poor church.
out as unmeete, who are not now in a tender commiseration of the woeful estate
of all the Lords people, de^irous to obey our Lord Jesus Christ, coming to
help him and them all, in what thing soever he shall make known unto them,
that he stands in need of their help, and so calls for it at their hands; and
who endeavor not unfeignedly to do whatsoever he requires, tending
thereunto. And that this must needs be so for these reasons following, which
are therefore every one of them to be seriously meditated of, and pondered,
until we know our selves to have passed the danger of them.

The first reason to be seriously meditated of.
1 FOr that al such who regard Reasons.
him not in his poor and needy members, All such must be separated at the last
day.
must be separated from these whom our Savior calls, The blessed of his
Father, and must stand at his left hand among the Goats, and must then hear the
woeful doom at that last dreadful day; Go ye cursed into everlasting f^re
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, when I was an hungry you gave me no
meat: when I was thirsty you gave me no drink; when I was s^ke and in prison,
you visited me not; when I was naked, you clothed me not; when I was a
stranger and harbourlesse, you took me not in, etc. And therefore if it shall
be so with these at that day, then certainly they must needs be rejected by
him, as utterly unmeet for this service; who now that he calls for these
duties at their hands, and that so loud, as all the world does ring thereof;
yet are deaf in all, in regard of any commiseration. For what King* General,
or Commander, will ever willingly have any admitted into pay to fight under
them, but only such as they know to be loyally and faithfully affected toward
them; and which do lay to heart, their honors, causes, and quarrels, as if
they were their own: much less then can we think, that the Lord of heaven
and earth (who needs none of our help, but can get himself the victory over
his enemies by the breath of his nostrils when it pleases him) will admit of
any other to be with him, and to help him in this great work, wherein he will
so highly honor them; but only so many as shall be loyally and heartily
affected toward his Majesty, his causes, and children.

The second reason to be seriously thought of.
SEcondly, we are seriously to lay to heart, and to bethink 2. All excluded
living in any one gross sin impenitently, for that they are both blind and
deaf.
our selves in time if we would be helpers herein, That all such who live in
any one gross sin impenitently, and much more in any one of those notorious
abominations which brought that dreadful Captivity upon Judah; and which the
Lord has caused to be set so lively before the face of all by y^ holy Prophets
themselves, together with the vengeance denounced for them, are also utterly
excluded; especially, if they live therein scandalously, to the slander of the
Gospel, or the offense of others, to harden them in their courses; for that
all such are both blind and deaf, and make others so.

Such cannot see the wrath They see not Gods wrath rushing on themselves, much
less can they see it rushing on others.
and vengeance of GOD, certainly rushing upon themselves for their own sins
wherein they lie, much less can they see that which is rushing upon all the
Churches for their security, and abuse of the gospel; and least of all can
they discern of any wrath conceived against our selves: for They perceyve not
our sins.
that they consider only, that we yet live in peace, but perceyve not at all
the multitude and heynousness of our most odious and lowd-crying sins, against
which the Prophets so thunder out the vengeance of the Lord, and for which all
who are wise-hearted indeed and whose eyes GOD has rightly opened, do fear
and tremble.

They can neither see any Nor any tokens of Gods displeasure. Nor the fury of
the Churches Enemies.
tokens of the Lords displeasure, nor yet discern the enemies raging so
furiously against all the Churches abroad, as by their most deep and bloody
practices, threats, and intendments they daily manifest to all the world; no
not those enemies which be in our very bosoms, such as all those are, who
bear evil will against Sion. They perceive Nor the multitude of Locusts sent
out of the bottomless pit.
not the multitude of Locusts with such stinges in their tails, sent out of the
bottomless pit to all the Kings of the earth, to draw them all if it were
possible, and certainly every one of them, so far as ever the Lord shall
permit them) to take up arms against our Lord Jesus Christ, and his poor
Church.

They are deaf, and cannot hear the cry of their poor Nor hear the cries of
Gods poor children, much less his call to repentance.
brethren, though sounding daily in their ears, so as to take any true pity
of them; how then should they hear the cry of the Lord, calling to themselves
and all other to repent, so to prevent and pacify his wrath.

Concerning these so continuing, Gods wrath upon all such in blinding their
eyes, and hardening their hearts.
the holy Ghost often declares the heavy wrath of God that is upon them. That he
has blinded their eyes, and made their ears dull of hearing, Esaias. 6. 9. 10.
he has hardened their hearts; least they should see Romans 11. 8.
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and convert and be saved. And yet
more, for a further execution of his just and most heavy displeasure upon such
as so harden and fat themselves against his most terrible threats, thus
dreadfully does the holy Ghost bring in the Prophet David, denouncing Gods
vengeance against them, saying, Let their table be a snare Romans 11. 9.
and a net* and a stumbling block for a recompense unto them.

These therefore, especially Esaias. 56. Esaias. 22.
all blind watchmen, crying Peace, Peace, and all is well, Especially upon all
blind watchmen calling for all the beasts to destroy.
and so lulling themselves and all others asleep, call for all the Beasts of
the forest to destroy; even for all the cruel enemies of Christ, and his true
Church, to invade and make havocke of all the rest of the Churches, as of some
others they have done before. How then should these pray for the Churches, when
they cannot either see or hear any token of Gods wrath, so as to cause them to
seek to appease it, or pray for themselves; how should they then pray for
others, especially for those whom in their hearts they scorn, only because
they Psalm. 14. 6.
fear and put their trust in the Lord alone.

The third particular reason hereof to be thoroughly meditated of.
THirdly, we are in fear All the threatenings in the book of God against such
sins and sinners are against them.
and trembling to Meditate, How all the threatenings in the book of God, which
are against those sins, wherein they live impenitently against the light of
their own hearts, and against such sinners, are against them; and particularly
those which are against such, as will not submit themselves to walk in
obedience to all the Commandments and ordinances of the Lord, but will walk
stubbornely against him, though it be but in any one sin; That he will walk
stubbornly against them, and the like denuntiations; a^ those, Levit. 26. 14.
15. 23. 24. Deuteronomy. 28. 15. 21. etc. 47. 48. Deuteronomy. 29. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. etc.
But not so Not any one promise until they repent.
much as any one promise from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the
Revelation, which they can take hold of, as belonging to themselves, so long as
they continue so to walk. They are manifestly excluded from meddling with the
Covenant of God. Psalm. 50. from verse 16. to the end of it. But unto the
wicked, said God, what have thou to do to take my Covenant into thy mouth,
seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my Covenant behind thee? When
thou saw a thief, thou did run with him, and thou have been partaker
with the Adulterers, etc. Where he reckoning up some particular sins, shows
plainly, that every such sin lived in obstinately, and with delight, utterly
excludes from all comfort in the Covenant of Grace and mercy in Christ. And
that they only who offer to God praise, and unfeignedly endeavor to pay their
vows unto him, that is, to yield to him a perfect and entire obedience, have
the promise and comfort of the Covenant.

These may call upon him in the day of trouble, coming Psalm. 50, 14. 15
with confidence to the Throne of Grace, and lifting up pure hands without
staggering or doubting; and he will hear them, that they may glorify him
accordingly. But otherwise, be they never so forward in profession, and let
them never so much thereupon flatter themselves, yet they shall hear this
instead of any comfort, I know you not, depart from me ye that work iniquity.
How then can they imagine to be accepted in this work, or that God should
vouchsafe so much as to hear others praying for them, that they may be saved,
until they turn and submit themselves wholly unto him. We ought therefore to
labor to bring our hearts, to be able with fear and trembling, to hear and
receive that sweet counsel of the Lords, Psalm. 50. 22. Oh consider this; ye
that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none that can deliver
you. He that offers me praise, shall glorify me, and to him that disposes
his way aright, will I show the salvation of God: That is, only to such a one.

The 4. particular Reason hereof, to be thoroughly laid to heart.
FOurthly, we are in fear 4. Reason.
and trembling to lay this further to heart, How every notorious sinner,
though it be Every notorious sinner helps to pull down the vengeance on all.
but in one only sin, helps to pull down the vengeance of God upon all,
and to hinder the prayers of all the rest, so much as the sin of one man can
do, as was noted before. Like as Achan did by his Sacrilege: yea, if it be
but in flying for fear, from his office enjoined by the Lord, for the saving
of his people, or neglecting it, as Jonah: for whose sin the storm could not
be stayed, until he was cast into the Sea. And much more all they who
wallowing in their wickedness, do call Esaias 5.
good evil, and evil good; light darkness, and darkness light. For that
these, as they hale on iniquity as with cartropes, so they violently draw down
the vengeance of God upon all, as much as such sinners can. Either the Waters
of the old world, as did the Giants before the Flood, if they be such, or fire
and brimstone, as did the filthy Sodomites, if they live in those sins of
theyrs; as namely, in Pride, fullness of Bread, abundance of Idleness, not
regarding to strengthen the hands of the poor. Or finally, if they be but any
way Oppressors or Spoylers of Gods people and Children, their sins cry for
other Oppressors and Spoylers in Gods just vengeance to be sent to oppress and
spoil them and theirs, as it came fearfully to pass in the Captivity. And
therefore thus haling down vengeance, how can they pray to turn it away.

The Fifth reason hereof to be seriously meditated of.
Fifthly, we are to strive to be thoroughly touched with the right
understanding 5. All excluded who have no compassion of their Brethren in
their miseryes.
and lively feeling hereof, That they who have no mercy nor compassion on
their Brethren in their miseries bodily or spiritual, can look for no mercy
nor compassion. And much more, they who add affliction to the affliction of
them whom God has wounded, whereas they should afford comfort to them as
lively feeling members of ye same true mystical body of our Lord Jesus Christ:
yea all who do but stand on the other side in the day of their Brethrens
miseries, and do not at least with faithful Abraham, pray earnestly for them,
as he for them of Sodom. Yea, which is more dreadful, if they do not to the
uttermost of their power, as God calls them, and offers them opportunity and If
they do not adventure themselve* for their brethren
means) adventure themselves for their Brethren carried away captives, to the
dishonor of the Lord, and the shame of his whole Church and Gospel, they can
look for no commiseration, no not in their own extremest calamities; though
they howl upon their beds in the fear or feeling of their miseryes; or roar
and tumble as wild Bulls taken in nets; much less can they hope to be
admitted to this holy work thus to help the Lord, before they have been truly
humbled for this sin, and have brought their hearts to such a lively sense
and feeling of the miseryes of their Brethren, as that their bowels can earne
over them for the same.

The sixth Reason to be rightly considered of.
Sixthly, we are seriously to ^. Reason.
think hereof, and not to rest before we have brought 6. None can be right
helpers but only those who can more lay to heart the causes of God and his
people, then their own.
our hearts to a right consideration of it, That none but only those who can
so lay to heart the dishonors done unto his Majesty, in the blaspheming of his
great and glorious name; the trampling under foot his Gospel and people, as
that they can at least unfeignedly desire and labor to be more troubled for
the same, and more humbled in themselves for them, then for any private evil
that can betide themselves or friends, can possibly be meet for this work. For
that if we do not so highly esteem and prefer his glory and Gospel, as that
in regard thereof, we can even neglect and despise our selves we do exceedingly
dishonor and despise him, and therefore must look to be despised of him, and
so have all our prayers, and all service in this behalf until that time
utterly rejected.

The senenth reason to be seriously Meditated of, That none can be admitted,
who will not cest away their sin, though as dear as their right eye. None
m^ete but they who endeavor to turn from every evil way.

THis is above all (though touched in part before) to be deeply and duly
pondered, to bring our hearts to a true believing and feeling of it: that not
any but such as now harken to his loud cry to repent and turn from all their
evil ways, even in every particular can be meet for this, though their
sin be as dear unto them as their right eye, if they love i^ more then the
Lord Jesus, they cannot be worthy of him. Mat. 5. 29.
Therefore since God has threatened all such, that they must be cast into hell
fire, and so perish eternally from his presence; how can they ever imagine to
be admitted to this work, seeing they cannot stand before him. Or if And to
receive the love of every part of Gods truth. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
they be such as have not, no^ yet will receive the love of the truth, so as to
obey it in what they know, that they may be saved; or such as when Romans 1. 21.
they know God, they will not set themselves to glorify him as God; but
contrarily will more and more dishonor him by going on obstinately in their
sins; or such as have Ezekiel. 14. 3.
set up any stumbling block of their own wicked imagination to worshipe it;
how can they think to be helpers herein unto the Lord for all others. Though
they flatter themselves God will not be merciful to them. Deuteronomy. 29. 19.


Howsoever they flatter themselves that they shall do well enough, though they
live in that sin for a time, or at least a little, and that they shall have
peace, that God will be merciful unto them, notwithstanding all that he has
denounced to the contrary: yet the Lord has told Deuteronomy. 19. 20.
us plainly, that he will not be merciful to any such but will make his wrath
smoke against then, until they be consumed. He has declared But will give
them up to be deluded. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
to all the world, that such shall be either given up to be strongly deluded by
Antichrist, or by some other like delusion; that they shall be And in the end
to a reprobate sense. Romans 1. 28.
given up in the end to a reprobate sense* as he gave up the very Gentiles for
abusing but the light of Nature; yea Ezekiel. 14. 14. That Gods own Prophets
shall help to deceive such.
that Gods own Prophets shall help to deceive such, to sooth them in their
evil way; answering them according to their own evil heart. That thus the
stumbling block which any one has set up to worship, and wherein he has
preferred the obeying and serving of his own lusts before his obeying and
serving of the Lord Jesus, shall be his ruin and destruction. And therefore no
such man so long as he continues obstinately in his sin can hope to be
admitted, or to have any hand or part in this holy work.

The eighth reason hereof, That but inclining to any fin, God will not hear us.
ANd more then all this to awake our consciences yet more fully, the Lord John.
9. 31.
would have us further to think of this deeply, that he which inclines to
any wickedness in his heart; but to any one sin, desiring to have his Prove.
28. 9.
corrupt lust satisfied in it, contrary to the light of his conscience, his
prayer even for that is a bhominable, so Psalm. 66. 18.
that God will not hear him, as David professes of himself.

The ninth reason hereof to be ever in our hearts, That whosoever is not with
our Savior is against him.
TO shut up all briefly, None but they who in all things endeavor to be with
our Savior are true disciples
this is never to be out of our hearts. That whosoever is not with our Savior,
is against him; whosoever indeavoureth not to be so with him, so to follow and
help Mat. 12. 30
him, as a true Disciple and soldier, to be furnished with every of the former
qualities; to be armed with every part of the complete Armor of a
Christiain; to be in all things such a one as he has so prescribed; yea, who
will not bind and set himself constantly to keep his watch, but sometimes
give liberty to his own evil heart, he cannot have any true hope to be
admitted to this work, but in Our danger in approaching near to our God with
out a warrant. 2 Samuel 6, 7.
pressing in, to help without a warrant, as Vzzah did to stay the
Arke-tottering, is in danger of Gods heavy displeasure, and to have his prayer
turned into sin. That it shall so come to pass unto him, as unto those who
would go to Numb. 24, 40, 41, etc. Deuteronomy. 1, 41, 45.
fight without y^ Lord. He may look for a curse in stead of a blessing, and to
have the Lords hand stretched out against him, to fall and fly before his
enemies. Till this time, every such a one may be afraid of Exodus 19, 24.
coming near the Mountain, of putting his hand to the Arc; of rushing into
the battle without Armor, and may look to speed as he that came to the
marriage, without his Math: 22, 11, 12, 13.
wedding Garment.

The second particular Meditation of this sixth general, Who may with hope and
confidence offer themselves.
NOW upon all these and the like grounds, we are to labor yet further to bring
our hearts to a right understanding, and a more thorovv apprehension of that
second general Meditation, together with this which follows: Only they who
are so qualified as the Lord requires, are the men who^ he calls.
to wit, That those and they alone who are so qualified, and every way so
fitted as are before described, are the men whom indeed the Lord at this day
looks for: and which can say with the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 6, 8.
Lord here I am, admit me for one of those whose help thou will accept. For
Lord, thou know, that to my poor power, and that measure of grace which
thou have vouchsafed me, I have in all things unfeignedly desired to be
prepared and fitted to help thee and thy poor Church. Accept of my feeble
desires, and supply that which is wanting. Thy grace is sufficient for me. ^.
Cor. 1^, 9.
Thy power is seen in the greatest weakness. Lord thou that see all hearts,
have tried my heart and my ^eynes, how unseignedly I have sought thee herein,
contending to walk before thee, and as in thy presence continually, and to be
kept undefiled, from whatsoever might any way offend thy most holy eyes.
Though I be weak and unworthy, and have had exceeding many slips, wants, and
faylings, yet for the worthyness of thy Christ, admit of those (though so
feeble) desires which thou have vouchsafed me. Give me my pressmoney, the
earnest and seal of thy holy Spirit. My heart is prepared to do thee the
faithfullest service that ever thou shall enable me. Lord, by such poor weak
Wretches, and at their prayers, thou have bin wont to get thy self the
victory, that no flesh should rejoice in thy presence, but that all glory,
honor, and praise may be given to thee alone for evermore.

Reasons to be seriously weighed; that only such can look, or hope to have
acceptance here.
1. THat these only are in a true League and Covenant with God; and thereupon
These only in a true league with God. Deuteronomy. 16, 17, 18, 19.
are such as his heavenly Majesty does not disdain to call his Friends, as
Abraham was called the Friend of God. And therefore they (though they be but
dust and ashes) may presume through the merit of the Lord Jesus to entreat even
for filthy Sodom; yea, to importune his heavenly Majesty, and expect to obtain
of him, that if there be but ten righteous persons in five wicked cities, he
will spare all for ten sake.

These only are fit men to These fit to help to rescue their Brethren from
Satan.
help by their prayers, to rescue their Brethren out of the hands of Satan,
and of all their cruel enemies, which have carried them away Captives, and
who do so insult and triumph over all, and over the Lord himself, as thinking
that they have already made a conquest of all. These are the To stay the Lords
hands. Exodus 32. 20. ^4.
men, and these alone which can with Moses stay the lords hands, that he
should not destroy his people. These are To whom he can deny nothing.
they, to whom God can deny nothing. Only these, who having thus put their
shoes off their feet* are fit with that holy Moses to stand before the Lord*
to be sent to fetch These fit to fetch Gods people out of Egypt.
his people their brethren out of Egypt from the Tile-killes, and to pull them
out of the midst of the fire.

These are with Aaron, through Thesemeet to pacific the Lord and to stand
between the living and dead.
the continual intercession of our great High Priest, meet to help to
pacify the Lords displeasure toward the remnant of his people, to stand
between the living and the dead. These being supported To hold up their hands
against Amalek.
by Aaron and Hur can hold up their hands, till God have got himself a
glorious victory against Amalek.

These, and these alone, are To make all creatures to be for his people until
he have got himself the victory.
able with Iosuah to cause the Sun to stand still (so far as the Lord shall
see it best for his own glory) until he shall be avenged of all his enemies;
and therefore much more may they be confident in matters of less moment. For,
what cannot the prayer of Faith Heb. 11.
bring to pass? These men are able with Eliah, to moove the Lord (so far as
in his divine wisdom he shall see it best) 1. King. 18, 38, 39.
to send fire from Heaven to consume their Sacrifices, and to make known to
all, that he has accepted them. And moreover to move the Lord, To move the
Lord to manifest the truth of his religion.
to manifest to all the World (and that as clearly as if he spoke from
Heaven) who is the Lord, which is his true religion, and which the false: 1.
King. 18, 36, 37, 38, 39. Dan 3, and 6.
who they are that are the true children of Jesus Christ, and who they are of
the otherside that are the Servants of Satan and Antichrist: who are with him,
who against him.

These are they* who with Mordokey and Hester, and the rest of the faithful
amongst To reuerse Hamans dedecree.
the Jews, are able to obtain the reversing of that most bloody decree
procured by wicked Haman against Gods Hest. 8, 5, 6.
people, although it be to do all the decrees of the Medes and Persians, such
as to man seems impossible ever to be Hest. 7, 8.
reversed; and to cause Haman to be hanged upon his own Gallows. To turn the
plot devised against Gods people to their joyfullest day, a day to be remembered
for ever; a day of shame and confusion Hest. 8, 18.
to all Gods enemies.

These are they whose prayers The prayers of these ever come up before the Lord
and they may surely expect an answer in his due time. Acts. 10, 10, 11, 12,
etc, 30. Dan. 9, 20, 23, 24.
come up before the Lord, as the prayers of holy Daniel, Cornelius, and Peter,
and who may look for an answer from heaven at the evening Sacrifice, above all
that they can imagine; even by the ministry of Gods blessed Angels so far as
shall be best. These may hope with Paul to save themselves and all in the ship.


These are they that in the greatest perils of the Church, may hope through
their prayers, with holy Paul to save Acts. 27, 24.
themselves and all in the Ship with them, in such sort as the heavenly
Wisdom shall see it best, that at least they may swim out, though for not
harkening unto the Lord in time, they may all first suffer shipwreck, and be
(...) into the Sea.

These are they, with whom With these will Christ Jesus be in the fiery
Furnace, and the Lions den.
at their cries, our Lord Jesus will be, as he was with those three Worthies of
the Captivity, in the middst of the hot fiery Furnace, and in the very Dan.
3, 24, 25. Dan. 6. 22, 23.
Lions den with holy Daniel, to stop the mouths of those hunger-bitten Lions,
that the least hurt shall not come unto them, more then shall be for his
eternal glory, with the And in their greatest trials make their innocence, and
his religion known. Dan. 3, 29, 30, 31, etc. Dan. 4, 33, 34 Dan, 6, 22, 23.
greater good of his Church and People; and by whose trialles our blessed God
and tender Father, has made known the truth of his Religion, and of his
causes, with the innocence of his people, to Kings, Princes and Rulers, and to
cause it by them to be published, as it were to the world, like as he did when
it was commanded by them to be spread and divulged in all the Dominions of the
mighty Monarchs, and so from them to go to all other Nations with whom any of
them had any traffic or familiarity. And by whom he has been wont to
effect and accomplish his own glorious works as he has foretold, above all
that any of his own dearest Servants could ever imagine, o^ could have been
persuaded of by any humane reason, that they could ever have bin brought to
pass.

And thus much for this general Conclusion of this general Meditation.
Meditation; viz: who they be that exclude themselves; and also who they are,
and who alone, that can ever Who meet.
look to be committed as approved of the Lord for this blessed and glorious
work. And how we must strive to How we must strives heereto.
pass through all the difficulties, before we can approach with any true
confidence and assurance to put our hand hereto, and much more so as to be
able to prevail with our God to be made as his Israel: and what confident
boldness we may houe herein; And what confident boldness we may then have.
for that if we be such as these, our God is still the same, he is not
changed, neither is there with him any variableness Iam. 1, 7.
or shadowing by turning.

The seventh general Meditation.
That the Lord notwithstanding graciously calls all sorts to be his helpers
herein, and therefore every one who will not strive to be of this number, and
come to be on his side must perish, and does justly bring upon himself swift
damnation.
IN this seventh place, the The blessed estate and honor of all admitted to
this work and contrarily.
Lord would have us seriously to lay to heart out of all these Meditations, the
blessed estate and honor of them, who are called and admitted to this great
employment; and of the contrary, the miserable and woeful condition of all who
any way exclude themselves; yea of all who do not seek to help herein. And
withal, how notwithstanding all these things, the Lord excludes none, save
only God excludes none but who exclude themselvess. But calls all.
those who (as was said) exclude themselves; but that he calls to all, and
would have all to address themselves, and to be meet and ready to assist and
join with him herein* and that therefore all those who will not do their
uttermost endeavor to prepare and fit themselves, are justly That all are
justly damned who come not to help.
damned even for this, for refusing to come to help him and his poor people
in their distress, when he so calls on them to come; and for joining with
Satan and Antichrist his sworn enemy, even against his heavenly Majesty. To
make it plain to every soul, that he calls every one hereunto, ^ach is to
consider well these reasons following.

That he calls all to every Some reasons showing that he calls all to help if
ever they will see his face with joy.
one of these duties mentioned, in all these Meditations before, and especially
to these which now follow.

1. That he calls all to be He calls all to be with him.
on his part in the earth, that ever will be with him in glory. He calls all to
regard him in his members.


2. That he calls all to regard him in his poor members to the end of the
world, Mat. 25.
as when he is hungry to feed him, etc. To show mercy, if ever they will find
mercy.

3. He calls all to repentance, To repent and turn from all their evil ways
that they may live
every one to turn from his evil way in every kind, and much more from all
those notorious abominations, which brought the wrath of God upon Judah, and
upon other impenitent sinners in former Ages. and for which he denounces his
vengeance; and likewise he calls all to awake forth of all their security
wherein they sleep; if ever they hope to escape his heavy indignation, and so
to meet him with entreaty of peace, y^ they may be fit to help to stand in ye
breach. That he calls to this end, even Publicans, Harlots, Scorners of all
sorts; he stretches out his hands, to gaine-sayers and Romans 10. 20. 21.
rebels, yea to the most notorious sinners that live upon the earth, thus
protesting to every particular soul. As I Ezekiel* 18. 21, 22, 30, 31, 32, etc.
33, 11. The Lords protestation.
live I delight not in the death of a sinnor, but rather that he repent and
live.

4. He calls all to walk He calls all to his Covenant. Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
humbly in his Covenant, that he may perform all hts promises unto them, and
turn away all his heavy denuntiations. Of which Covenant these are the very
principal parts, to love him above all, and our neighbor as (...) self.

3. He calls every one so He calls all to pray as he has directed
to pray as he has directed and commanded, and that for all his own causes
chiefly, as namely, the causes which concern his glory, kingdom, and people;
and therefore every one should labor to be such a one as can so pray, whereby
he makes it manifest to all, that he (...) none at all, but would have all
learn so to pray and to be fitted thereunto.

6. That every general God calls all to lay hold of all the promises of mercy.
promise of mercy in all the book of God calls us hereto: as the promises of
forgetting our sins, and not remembering our iniquities any more and this
without limitation Without limitation of time. Ezekiel. 18. 21. 22. Psalm. 95, 7.
of time, but at what time soever it be, that a sinner converts, or without any
exceptiof any sin (save only of that unpardonable sin, the malicious Or
exception of sin. Ezekiel. ^8.
oppugning, and persecuting of all the known truth Esaias. 55. 3. Or person.
Numb. 21. 8. 9.
of God) and without exception of any person; and bids all but harken, and
their soul John. 3. 14. 15. 18.
shall live; if they can but see ye brazen Serpent, believe in our Savior,
hunger, thirst, and cry after him.

7. So does every example And calls all to behold all the examples in his book
of receiving poor sinners Luke 15. 10.
of Gods mercy in receiving repentant sinners, as of Manasses, Saul, Mary
Magdalen, the repentant Thief upon the Cross; the joy that is in heaven for
the conversion of a poor sinner; the high favor The favor such are in upon
their repentance. Luke. 7. 47.
that upon their unfeigned repentance such poor wretches may know themselves
to be in with God. Never any such a one rejected. Romans 5. 20.
That where sin has abounded, there grace abounds much more: and never any
so coming rejected.

Three more special Meditations to this end. That the wise consideration of
them may never go forth of our hearts until we be of this number.
ABove all the former, the Three things to be thought of ever until we be of
this number.
Lord would have every poor soul to meditate most seriously, and in their
most secret thoughts, of these three things following, that ye wise
consideration of them may never be from before their eyes, nor the sound of
them out of their ears, until they be of this number.

The first Meditation to this end to be seriously pondered That our Lord Jesus
stands continually at the heart of every impenitent sinner to enter in.
1 HOw our Lord Jesus That the Lord has ever stood and still stands knocking
at the heart of every impenitent sinner.
Christ, has stood at the door of their hearts all the days of their life,
calling them to repentance, to know, fear, love, obey, and believe in him; and
that by the loud voice, both of every one of his Creatures, of his mercies, and
judgments. And more specially, at the hearts of all Chiefly of all in his
Church.
in his Church by his heavenly word, which he has sent unto them; by all the
admonitions, By his word*
exhortations, reproves, threatenings, promises, and the like; that ever he
has vouchsafed unto them by the ministry of his Servants, grounded upon the
same word, and also And Sacraments.
by the holy Sacraments, as namely by their Baptism, by As Baptism.
which he has been still teaching and calling upon them even from their
cradles, to believe in him and to serve him only, according to his blessed
Commandment: to fight under his banner, for that they are such as he has
Redeemed with a great price And the Lords supper
and are not their own: and also by the holy Communion of his body and blood;
wherein as our Savior gives, or at least offers himself wholly to them, so
they give again themselves wholly unto And by the good motions of his Spirit.
him. And not only so, but by the good motions of his blessed Spirit, and that
so often as they have felt in themselves holy purposes of amendment and turning
unto the Lord. And now at this time louder then ever.


How now at this very time he still stands and knocks louder and louder then
ever heretofore, by all the tokens By all the tokens of his displeasure.
of his heavy displeasure against ye several Churches; and Rage of the enemy.
all the rage and malice, which is against the whole true Church of Christ;
yea, against every soul professing his name sincerely as they ought. And so by
every of those special Our favors.
favors which we enjoy, or which we hereafter look for from him; and even
by this very help, and all others This help.
which he offers unto us for our right and unfeigned meeting him, before his
wrath be wholly powerd out upon us, and for our true humiliation under his
hand, and stooping to him in all things.

More particularly. More particularly.

THat he stands at thy ^e stands at the heart of every one reading this or the
like admonition.
heart whosoever thou art, that read or hear this or the like admonition,
crying unto thee that thou would now repent unfeignedly of each thy
fearful sins, and namely of thy hardness of heart and impenitency That
they would repent of their impenitencie.
in them, whereby thou have so long kept out thy Lord and Savior, and only
made thy heart an habitation for Satan, and as a den of Dragons. And that thou
To have their souls cleansed.
would seek now to have thy soul and conscience wholly cleansed and purged
in the blood of the Lamb, and to wash the feet of thy dear Savior with Mary
Magdalen, by the tears of thy unfeigned sorrow, for all thy former unkindness,
and for thy ungraciousness, in keeping Chiefly of ungraciousnesse in keeping
out the Lord Jesus.
out thy Lord and Savior so long; giving unto Satan the whole possession of
thy heart, and so the very chief rooms thereof, and not vouchsafing unto
Christ Jesus so much as entertainment within thy threshold. Then will he Christ
will come to such a one. Rev. 3. 20.
come in to thee, how unworthy soever thou art, and Sup with thee, and thou
with him.

This shall be the joy fullest day that ever shone upon thee; for he being in
thy heart, will by his blessed Spirit not only teach thee thus to pray, but
will certainly make thy prayers to pi^rce the very heavens, and find happy
audience at the throne of Grace, chiefly in all these causes which so highly
concern his Majesty, his poor Church and people. He will then bring unto thee
that joy with him, that goes beyond all the joy of all worldly men, and far
beyond that which all things here below can ever bring unto thee: That 2. Cor.
3. 9.
which eye never saw, nor ear heard, nor entered into man's heart to consider
of. Yea, that which shall never be taken away from thee, but be a continual
feast for evermore.

And contrarily, if yet thou will not harken unto him, but And contrarily to
them who harden their hearts against Christ Jesus.
still harden thy heart against him, the time shall come, that every call of
his which ever thou heardest before, and have The sound of his calls shall ever
be in their ears affrighting them.
contemned, shall sound so shrill in thy ears, when it will be too late, as
thou shall have it affrighting thee perpetually. That thou never shall have
rest day nor night, for the dreadful noise of these many calls, because thou
would not harken in time, but did put off ye day of thy repentance; and so
of harkening to his sweet voice of mercy, thus calling thee stilto be
partakers of his mercy, and even of this high favor, and now at day in these
dangers of the Church in a special manner above all other.

Wherefore let the counsel Exhortation to all to hear now. Dan. 4. 24.
of the holy Ghost be now acceptable unto thee, break off thy sins by
repentance: be not as the deaf Adder any Psalm. 95. 7.
longer; But whilst it is now called to day, hear his voy^. Contemn it not
now; little know thou, whether ever thou shall hear it any more thus in
mercy, but only in wrath and vengeance for despising his long suffering, and
all the riches of his compassion.

The second Meditation, To think what it is for a man to forsake his own
happiness* in refusing Christ's gracious call, and to join with Satan against
him, to his endless perdition.
SEcondly, the Lord calls To think what it is to refuse Christ's call, to join
with Satan and the damned.
loud to every soul to bethink him seriously in time, what it is for a man,
not only to refuse and contemn the gracious call and service of our Lord
Jesus Christ, yea all his favors, all his sweet promises and mercies
concerning both this and a better life; all the glory and happiness of the
Celestial Canaan, the heavenly Jerusalem, where is fulness of joy in the
presence of the Lamb and at the right hand of our heavenly Father, pleasures
for evermore; but of the contrary, to choose to join himself with Satan and
with all the damned, to serve under him against our Lord and Savior. Such to
bethink themselves what they will do when Christ comes.


Likewise to think aforehand what such a men will do, when he must appear
before his glorious Majesty, when all the greatest and proudest of the earth,
that have so set themselves against him, shall cry to the Hills and Mountains
to fall upon them and cover them from the presence of the Lamb: so terrible
shall his very presence be unto them then (though a Lamb to all believers who
Apoc. 14, 4.
have here followed him in true obedience, and to all who yet shall harken to
his voice) yea, so dreadful shall it be, when whatsoever torment When all
threatened against them shall be fully executed.
and misery is denounced against them in the book of God, to be inflicted
upon them hereafter, shall be most certainly, and fully executed, in that lake
burning with fire and brimstone.

For the unfallible truth and For the evidence hereof
undoubted certainty hereof, the Lord calls every soul always To behold the
fearful spectacles.
to behold with the eyes of their minds, not only those fearful spectacles
mentioned Of men tormented with horror of conscience in the Scriptures.
in his word, of that woeful horror of conscience, which has so surprised and
overwhelmed so many of the wicked, whom God has left for ensamples to all
posterity, even for their malicious wickedness, though but against some one of
his Servants, as namely, in Caine, Saul, Achitophel, Judas, and others; when
they did but only consider the wrath of the Lord, and his vengeance due unto
them, and which would overtake them, or felt it beginning to seize upon them
for this sin; but moreover he In daily examples.
calls them to think aright of the continual examples that he daily seteth
before their faces in the miseries of so many of his dearest Children.

How they are tormented How they are tormented in conscience for particular
slips or failings.
when their consciences are awakened with a right apprehension and fear of the
wrath of the Lord for their sins, wherein they have served Satan; though not
taking part against his Majesty and Children; no nor so much* as in forsaking
him, or them, or any his causes; but only for some particular sl^ps, failings
and infirmities, as either for some spiritual pride, or timerousnesse in
fearing men more then God; and thereupon omitting some necessary confession, or
other good duty; or for doing some small thing against their conscience; or for
some unbeleefe, in not being able to rest upon the Lord his love and care in
the failing of outward means, as it was with Moses at the waters of strif^; or
for spiritual security, for decaying in their first love, neglecting the
conscionable use of means of grace and salvation, or the like.

How even these, I say, How these (...) endure the flashings of hell fire.
when their consciences are thoroughly awaked, do endure, as it were, the very
slashings of hell fire; and this so dreadfully, as their miseries astonish all
that behold them, and that they themselves do account all outward tortures
nothing in regard thereof: so that many a time with holy Job, they wish an end
were Job. 7. 15.
made of them; being often ready through Satan's malice, to lay violent hands
upon themselves. Also for that they endure this so long, as that Gods hand
pursues some of them, throughout their whole life: that they are usually
incapable of any comfort (though the same be sent by a messenger of God even
one of a thousand) except it be a little before their death, wherein the Lord
commonly vouchsafes unto them much heavenly assurance and consolation.

And if it be so with these If it be so with these here.
here, while yet the day of salvation remains, and the accepted time, and also
whilst they have the most excellent means to comfort them, yea, though they
be such as have felt formerly the assurance of Gods love and favor in Christ,
and many lively* evidences thereof; and which is the chiefest Though they be
most deer unto the Lord.
of all, though they* be such as are dear and precious unto the Lord, and who
have his holy Spirit for their earnest, (albeit only for a time they want the
sense and feeling of it, as it has been in many a soul in our memory, and is
at this day: whereupon they have been, and are so usually prayed for in many of
our best Congregations, from whence they look for some help and comfort by
the prayers of Gods people:) if I say it be so with them, what can What shall
become of all impenitent sinners.
we think shall become of the ungodly and impenitent sinners; and especially,
of those And chiefly of all Christ's enemies*
enemies of Christ and his Servants* when their consciences shall be thoroughly
awaked, and much more after this life, when their case in regard of any
comfort, shall be contrary to the estate of these poor Servants of the Lord.
If the 1. Peter. 4. 18. 19. If the righteous be scarsly saved how they.
righteous shall scarsly be saved (as Peter speaks, and as we see how
hardly it goes with these last mentioned) where shall the wicked and ungodly
appear? If the pain If pain of a tooth be so great, what shall their total
torment be.
of one tooth (alone) be often so extreme, that it permits no sleep nor rest
day nor night, when we have all kind of other comforts to mitigate and ease
it, what can we think the torments of all the parts both of soul and body
must needs be, in the Lake burning with fire and brimstone for ever, where the
very hope of all other comforts shall be utterly taken away, which
notwithstanding we are certainly assured must come upon all impenitent and
ungodly sinners, because the word of the Lord does tell us so most plainly, and
so often warnes us of it. The Lord calls from heaven continually upon all who do
not repent them of their sins, and come to help him, to think seriously
hereof, as which alone shall be These sufficient to convince all.
sufficiently able to convince and condemme all that ever have heard the holy
Scriptures, or but these fearful examples alone.

The third Meditation, How God herein sets before us all, life and death,
blessing and cursing.
FInally, we are to bethink Deuteronomy. 30. 19. 20. How God sets before us life and
death, blessing and cursing.
our selves, in our deepest and best Meditations, how the Lord here sets before
every soul, life and death, blessing and cursing. Life if we will but now set
our selves Life if we will harken to his call.
seriously with all our hearts to seek to pass all these difficulties; never
giving rest to our souls, until by our Meditations and prayers, and the right
use of all other holy means, which in his word he has prescribed us, we have
attained so to believe, and so to obey, yea in all things so to do as he
requires at our hands, that we may be fit to help him and his poor Church.
Then we shall have boldness whatsoever come That we shall not need to fear
to pass; we shall not need to fear, though all our enemies were so many
Devils; we Nor be dismayed for loosing all. Mat. 19. 27. Mat. 10. 37. 38.
Luke. 14. 26. But contrarily have boldness. Prove. 28. 1. Romans 8, 35. 36.
shall not be dismayed, for the adventuring and loosing of all, Houses, Goods,
Friends, Parents, Children, no nor Life it self: but contrarily, in the
midst of death, we shall be bold and courageous as Lions for our Lord and
Savior, knowing that nothing Romans 8. 35. 36.
can separate us from Gods favor; and in the loss of all, we shall gain all,
be in all, even in the midst of Be more then Conquerours. Ron. ^, 37.
death more then Conquerors, through him who has so loved us, and has given
himself for us, and shall with him triumph over all our enemies eternally*

Death and cursing he likewise Death and cursing in not yielding to him.
sets before us, and threatens them unto us undoubtedly, without unfeigned
repentance, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. 20.
whereof we can have little hope, if he now calling upon us thus earnestly to
help him, by the offer of so many mercies, and such blessedness on the one
side, we will not show our true obedience and uttermost endeavor thereunto; and
if he denouncing so many miseries on the other side; we still refuse to
harken, living securely and do not regard this gracious Our estate when fear*
shall come on ^s of a sudden. Prou: 1, 27. Prou: 28, 1. Job 15, 20, 21, 22.
Deuteronomy: 28, 63, etc.
offer of mercy. That when our fear shall come upon us like a whirlewind, we
shall fly at the shaking of a sword, even at the very report of our enemies
prevailing, and much more of their approaching so near unto us. Our hearts shall
be then as Nabals, 1 Samuel: 25, 37, 38.
as dead as a stone, and so we shall live in a perpetual expectation of the
just wrath and vengeance of God, to seize upon us everlastingly, so that we can
never expect any comfort after.

Yea, withal we are wisely God bids us choose life. Deu: 30, 25. 20
and deeply to meditate hereof, how he bids us to choose life, that we and
ours may live, by loving him, obeying his voice, and cleaving fast unto him,
because he is our life, and the length of our days. And also how he bidding
us, will also thereby give us strength to do it, so far as we shall be
accepted. If we but believe his blessed Commandment, and his Covenant of
grace, shall set our selves in the name, and by the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ to do what we can, in and by the use of all the means which he has
ordained, for obtaining this strength and grace so to help him: and if we will
be as earnest* as vigilant and industrious for attaining of this honor, as we
would be for the attaining of any earthly honor or riches.

For we cannot think, that ever any man who sought this after this manner was
rejected, We cannot think that any one was ever rejected who sought life as
they ought.
to wit, if he sought it as for treasure, that is early, earnestly, and
constantly. And therefore all who will not thus set themselves to obey and help
the Lord, have their mouths for ever most justly stopped, being left altogether
without excuse.

And thus much also for How we may all be prepared in some good measure to
help the Lord and his Church.
this last general Meditation, and how we may in all things be in some good
measure rightly and fitly prepared to help in instant and powerful prayer for
the poor Churches of Christ, according to all whereunto the Lord now calls
us, thereby to have good hope to prevayle with him. To wit, when we shall
find our hearts so affected toward his heavenly Majesty, as to prefer him,
his glory and causes before our selves, so truly showing that we love him with
all our heart, soul, strength, and might, and our neighbor as our self, as
he commands; being so affected likewise toward them, and doing so to them,
as we would have them do to us, if we were in their estate and case.

All which, we must every one strive unto, or perish; if All must perish if
they but stand on the other side Obed. 10. 11.
we but only as we saw before, stand on the other side in the day of our
Brethrens affliction: and much more, if we will not be moved by any one
means, nor all the means together, whereby the Lord calls us, Judge. 5. 23.
thus to come to help him; now I say that he, even our Lord and Savior
proclaims to all our consciences, before all the world, that he stands in
such need of our help, and so expects it hourly at our hands.

And this may suffice to Conclusion, to be thoroughly laid to heart, to put some
more life into every soul, and to each of these meditations.
prepare us all, to this happy work of true humiliation, and of instant prayer
for the Churches: only let me put you in mind, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
to the end that he may yet put some more life into all these Meditations, and
quicken us in our crying to him according to all the prayers following; he
calls upon us all, to have this specially ever in our hearts; and his voice in
it sounding incess^tly in our ears; which was in part touched before. That as
the Spirit, and the How all the distressed Parts of Gods Church cry to us to
come and help them.
Bride, do call to our blessed Savior to come; so first, all the distressed
Churches; yea, all the members of Christ, and all the elect of God, which are
under the power of Satan, or of any cruel Tyrants, or under other miseries,
do call and cry to every one Acts. 16. 9, 10.
of us, as the man of Macedonia did to Paul, come and help us. Come help us
by your prayers, help us by your tears.

And secondly, as the Angel And all accursed who come not. Judge. 5. 23.
of the Lord said, Curse ye Meroz, because he came not to help the Lord; so
now he says, Curse ye all and every one of them, who come not to help our
Lord Jesus Christ; who come not to help him in his poor members. And tell
every one who will not set himself at least in the full purpose of his heart to
come; that he has no Excluded from the priv^idges of God^ poeple.
part in that heavenly prayer of our blessed Savior; nor of the glorious
privileges and promises contained in it; that he has no part or portion in
the Brotherhood, Inheritance, Glory, Kingdom, Rewards, Promises of this and
the better life, Remission of sins, Deliverance from Satan, and from the
evils which he seeks to bring on all* that he can have no comfort in that
everlasting and everliving Amen; to whom all Kingdom* Power, and Glory, do
only appertain; but that he is contrarily stripped of each of these, and that
our Lord Jesus is coming quickly in How Christ is coming to reward every one
according to his works*
all Majesty and Glory, to give to every one according to his works; to all
that come, the happiness of all these blessings; to all now refusing to come
when he calls, the misery of all contrary curses.

Wherefore he says to all How our Savior calls to all to come,
notwithstanding all objections of unfitness.
Come. Come every one, thou though be in thy filth and loathsome rags, and
all Leprous, worthy to be thrust out of y^ camp of Israel* and excluded for
evermore, yet come; strip off those rags by repen^ance; wash in ye fountain of
my blood, which is opened to all the house of Israel, and be thou clean. Put
on the garment Ephesians. 6. 13.
of the righteousness of thy Savior, and be glorious; put on all the complete
Arm our of my Spirit, in the full resolution of thy soul and be valiant, and
come and help me.

Though thou have no strength but mere desires, yet come, and thou shall be
accepted; I will not quench the smoking flax, therefore come. Though thy
desires be never so weak, yet come; my power shall be manifested and
perfected in thy weakness. Therefore come, yea, though thou have no grace at
all, yet come; he tells thee from heaven, his Grace is, and shall be sufficient
for thee. And finally, though thou have no faith to apprehend this Grace of
his, but art full of unbeleefe, yet ever remember him that said, I believe
Lord, Lord help my unbeleefe, and how he sped, and then thou will come. Yea,
though thou get others to carry thee, thou will certainly do it, if thou can
but Mar. 2. 3. Luke, ^. 18.
set before thy face, the Palsyman, thou will be glad th^s to come.

Finally, be think thy self, if ever thou can name but one, who thus
desired to come to our Savior, in the uprightness of his heart, neglecting no
means thereunto, who was rejected of him; but contrarily, how every one so
coming has been graciously accepted and embraced of him: as the Prodigal
Son was of his Father; and then try, whether his blessed Spirit will not give
thee David's Psalm. 27. 8. Psalm. 40. 8. Zac. 13. 9.
Echo to answer to him in thy soul, Lord I come, I come, I come to do thy
will; Thy will is within my heart. Accept the work of thine ownegrace, Amen,
enen so Lord Jesus, I come, I come.

Prayers according to our Saviors direction, chiefly for maintaining and
advancing of his glory and kingdom, against the r^ge of Satan and Antichrist,
and for helping his poor distressed Churches, with all the members of Jesus
Christ, scattered over the face of the whole earth; and that the whole number
of Gods elect may be speedily gathered forth.
I. A prayer for our preparation, that we may be made meet to be admitted,
and may be accepted as helpers, in this so great a work.
AH Lord, our most To pray.
gracious and tender Father in Christ Jesus, we thy unworthy children here
prostrate, beholding how thy heavenly That beholding the evils against the Lord
and his people.
Majesty is foughten against, thy honor trampled under foot, thy kingdom and
people sought to be destroyed out of the earth, and that by Satan and
Antichrist, and other thy cruel enemies; who carrying a mortal hate against
thee, and against thy Son Jesus Christ, and so against thy Gospel, and
people for thy cause alone, do seek that they alone may reign over us, and
over all the world in thy place; and seeing also how The prevailing of the
enemy.
thou have suffered them fearfully to prevail, and still to proceed because of
our sins, and the sins of all other that profess thy name; and And hearing
the Lord calling as to h^lpe him.
hearing withal, how thou now call us all who are thine, and in any favor
with thy Majesty, to help thee, and the rest of our Brethren and Sisters, thy
poor children, in these their extreme miseries, by our prayers and tears,
do humbly entreat We may be prepared and be admitted to this service.
thee, so to prepare and fit us, that through our Lord and Savior, we may be
accounted meet to be admitted to this so great a service.

Lord open our blind eyes, To pray to be rightly touched and affected with all
these things.
that we may have a right view of all these things; open likewise our dease
ears, that we may hear thee calling us unto this duty; and touch our dead
hearts, that they may be truly affected herewith: enable us, that thus seeing,
hearing, and seeling, we may cry That we may be able to cry uncessantly, until
the Lord shall show himself from heaven for his great name, kingdom, and
people.
unto thee uncessantly, until thou shall show thy self from heaven to come
down* maintain, and defend thine own causes and children to rescue all thine
every where both from that bodily and spiritual tyranny, and from all other
dreadful miseries, under which they groan; and so to judge between them, and
between thine and their enemies, and to get thy self a glorious name and
victory in thy due time, to thine own everlasting praise and glory.

Oh dear Father, persuade To be persuaded how the Lord seeks out a man.
our hearts effectually, how now at this very day, in these fearful times and
extremities of thy poor Church (as thou have been wont in all former Ages)
thou seek out a man, that may stand in the breach, and how thou look for
some, that may specially be singled out hereunto; to help thee and thy poor
people.

Vouchsafe (good Lord) To strive to be if not that one man, yet as one of
Gedeons three-hundred.
that every one of us may strive to be, if not that one man, yet as some one
of Gedeons three hundredth. And to this end, that all these holy Meditations
following, and the like, may be in our hearts To have these meditations in our
hearts.
continually. That we may never rest until, hereby we may know assuredly,
that thou have called us hereunto: that thou acceptest us and our service; and
that we may never give thee over, until we see the deliverance and felicity
of thy Sion. Grant, that so many of us as unfeignedly desire to be with thy
Majesty, may never give any rest unto thee, nor unto our own souls, until
we find our To be so qualified as Christ requires in his prayer.
selves so qualified in all things, as thou requirest of all such, in taking to
heart the dishonours done unto thy heavenly Majesty, and the oppositions
against thy most glorious Gospel, and also in feeling the necessities of thy
Church and people; more specially in considering aright, and sensibly feeling,
the miserable estate of all them that are under the spiritual bondage and
Captivity of Satan, worse ten thousand times then the Captivity and slavery
of the Turk, or under the cruellest Tyrants in all the earth.

Grant likewise, that we may be such, in all holy faith and obedience, and so
frame our prayers, that herein we may thus far prevail with thy holiness,
that thou may That we may prevail that God may raise up some Joseph's or
Daniels.
raise up for thy poor Church and Children, in every part of the world, some
Joseph's, or some that may be as Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, or Hester, which may
obtain favor By whom the hearts of all Kings and Princes may be inclined to
become nursing Fathers to his Church.
with the Kings and Princes of the earth, and by whom thou may prepare and
incline the hearts, of all Monarks, Kings, and Princes, that they may all
become Nursing-Fathers, and Nursing-Mothers, to thy religion and people; and
that all those of them, who in thy mercy are such already, by the power of thy
heavenly Spirit, may be wholly delivered from all the power and delusions of
Satan and Antichrist; and daily more and more inflamed with all holy zeal for
thy glory and kingdom, and all tender affection toward thy children and
chosen flock: as the rage and malice of the Dragon is greater against them,
knowing he has but a short time.

Vouchsafe (Oh grecious That these all considering how God has set them up.
Father) that these all considering aright, how thou have set them up, and
given them all their dominions, authority and power, chiefly to this end; and
the great and dreadful account they must all certainly make for the same, they
know not how soon: may forthwith se^ themselves as thy faithful Servants,
Moses, Iosuah, David, Iehosaphat, May set themselves as all worthy rulers have
do^e, for his glory and kingdom.
Hezekiah, and holy Josiah, for thy glorious Majesty, Gospel, and people,
only according to thy heavenly word and will.

Grant (good Lord) that That thus his great name may be magnified.
thus thy great name may be magnified, by the powerful coming of thy
kingdom in all the world, and by the full accomplishing of all thy heavenly
will, and good pleasure, which in thine eternal counsel thou have decreed,
for the speedy gathering forth of all thine elect, and finishing of these days
of sin, and so for preparing the way to thy glorious coming.

Good Lord persuade my That every one may be persuaded of the present necessity
of this work.
poor heart, and the hearts of every one of thine own faithful people, of
the present necessity of this work; because of the danger of the sudden
approaching of thy vengeance, ready each hour to rush upon u^, (like as it has
done upon others which have so professed thy name as we^ do) for all our
fearful sins: and above all, for our hai^ous contempt of thy heavenly
Gospel; and that, notwithstanding all thy Fatherly warnings and mercies, we
have been worse and worse unto this day. And therefore vouchsafe me this
grace, that I may not defer it one day, Not to de^er it one day.
nor hour, but now presently whilst thou my Lord and Savior do so
graciously call me, and offer me this mercy, I may seek to be every way
prepared and fitted for it, like as thou have so plainly ^aught me, and so
lively se^ it before my face in y^ heavenly prayer of thine, so as the simplest
may read and understand.

Oh Lord Jesus, persuade my heart, that refusing or deferring now to come to
help To fear the curse upon Meroz. Judge. 5.
thee, I cannot escape the curse of Meroz, howsoever I may escape the present
and temporal vengeance, at the That otherwise escaping the temporal, yet we
cannot the eternal vengeance.
instant cries of all other of thy dearest servants and children, yet I can
never escape the spiritual and eternal wrath. Open mine eyes that I To have
our eyes open to see against whom we are to wrestle.
may see, y^ I am not herein to wrestle against flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers, and the Princes of darkness of this world, which
have wrought all these evils chiefly, and do seek the utter destruction of
all thy people; and that I am not now Not for our selves only, but for all the
Church.
to enter the lists with Satan for my self alone, but for all the Church:
that so I may put To put on all the complete Armor of God and f^and fast.
on all thy complete Armor, to quit my self valiantly as one of thy worthyes,
and ever be careful to look to my watch and stand fast, expecting Satan's
extremest rage and fury against me, especially if he get never so little
advantage.

Grant unto me to know To know our honor setting our selves aright to this
service, and our safety.
undoubtedly, that being thus armed, and setting my self with all speed and
cheerfulness unto this work, to be rightly fitted to help thee in this
greatest service; I shall have this high honor to be of their number, of whom
thou have spoken, and to whom thou have promised. That the innocent shall
deliver the land; or at least, that thou will be to me a Sanctuary whatsoever
come to pass; and though I should neither save Son nor Daughter, yet I shall
be sure to save my own soul. Hear me therefore (Oh gracious Father) and all
thy poor children, in this our humble suite, and in all other things needful
for us, or for any member of thy whole Church, for the Lord Jesus Christ, whom
thou have given for our grand Captain, our only Mediator and Advocate,

Amen.
II. A prayer for increase of our love to all the Children of the Lord, and for
keeping a continual fresh remembrance and feeling of their estate. Prayer to
be humbled that we have not learned our first les son, to have a true feeling
of the estate of our brethren.

[ Our] HVmble us (Oh gracious Father) that whereas thou have long taught us
this, as one of our first lessons in our prayers, to cry [ Oh our Father] to
keep thereby a continual and everfresh remembrance and feeling of the estate
and necessities of all thy children, our Brethren and Sisters, wheresoever
dispersed and distressed in all the world; and so to bind our hearts together
in the bond of love, to rejoice with them that rejoice, and mourn with them
that mourn, and in all things to seek the same good unto them, which we do
unto our selves; yet so many of us notwithstanding, do never or very seldom,
think of them or of their miseries: and the best of us, have so little true
feeling and commiseration of their estate, how woeful soever it be, to cry
unto thee for them as we ought, so long as we our selves are at ease, and in
prosperity.

Good Lord persuade our To be persuaded that if we love our heavenly Father, we
must needs love his children.
hearts, that if we truly love thee our heavenly Father, we must needs love
thy children for thy cause, being as dear and precious unto thee as ourselves
are, even all those that appertain to thy eternal election, wheresoever they
be in all the earth. Lord Jesus If we love Christ we must needs love his
members.
make us know, that if we unfeignedly love thee, we must of necessity
likewise love thy members, even every one of that mystical body whereof thou
art the head: and whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, as well
as o^r selves.

Make us to conceive aright, That without this we can never assure our hearts
that we are true children and members of Christ.
that without this love, which is the badge of thy Disciples and Children, we
can never assure our own hearts, that we are either the true and natural
children of our heavenly Father: or lively members of thy mystical body, and
thy very Disciples indeed, and that we deceive But deceive ourselves.
our own hearts, until we become thus truly affected, at least in the inward
longing of our souls, and that we can unfeignedly mourn for the want of the
lively feeling hereof. To know that their sins are ours in some sort, and so
their whole estate.


Lord cause us to know, that their sins are in some sort, our sins; their
miseries, our miseries; as being of the same mystical body of our Lord Jesus
Christ: that both their sins, their calamityes, and their afflictions, may
be matter of heaviness and mourning unto us: and their prosperity, both
bodily and spiritual, may be our continual rejoicing. To have this
fellow-feeling of their estate wheresoever they are.


Cause us to have this fellow-feeling of their estate, wheresoever they be;
though amongst the Indians, or in any of the remotest and barbarousest places
in all the earth, and much more as thou have united them unto us by nearer
bonds, of profession, place, kindred, and the like: and have made their estates
more known unto us. More specially, make us to have a And as they are more
nearly (...) unto us.
more sensible feeling of the estate of those who are of our own nation and
stock, and as they are yet linked unto us by nearer bonds.

Above all (good Father) And above all a^ they are more specially ordained to
be nursing Fathers and Mothers to Gods Church.
make us to be most loyally, and heartily affected, toward those in all
quarters and countries, whom thou have ordained in thine own place, to be
Nursing-Fathers and Nursing-Mothers to thy Church, either presently, or in
their due times, to succor and provide for all thy children committed to them,
as the faithful Nurse for her tender Babes. And amongst them, for all Chiefly
who are such already.
those of them, yet in a more special manner* whom thou have already
vouchsafed this high favor, to be such unto them* and to whom thou have made
known thy heavenly will in this behalf, what thou look for at their hands;
and And bound thereto by most bonds.
whom thou have bound unto thee by so many bonds of thy heavenly and earthly
favors. That their hearts may be inclined to all Gods Children, chiefly to all
committed to their charge.


Oh grant, that at our instant cries, their hearts may be inclined accordingly
toward all thy Children, especially to all those whom thou have to this end
specially committed to their trust, that they may show forth before men and
Angels, their tender affection toward all of them, chiefly all those of them,
who in all unfeigned study of true holiness and righteousness do most lively
And that as they more resemble their heavenly Father.
resemble thee their heavenly Father, and most visibly carry upon them* the
true Image of our Lord Jesus Christ. To have like affections to the Lord.


Oh give them like affections, to thy heavenly Majesty in this behalf, that
thy people and children may be so To give that which is dearest unto them for
Gods people.
precious unto them, that like as in thy tender love, thou gave thine own
dear Son, and with him all good things also; yea, thine own self for the
saving and happiness of thy Church; and namely of all blessed Kings, Princes,
and Governors: so they again, may not only be willing to employ all their
thoughts and endeavors, but also be ready to spend and offer themselves, and
also to be offered up; so to give themselves, and all theirs most willingly
for the saving and happiness of thy people.

Lord persuade their and To have all theirs and our hearts persuaded of the
happiness hereof, and contrarily.
our hearts, that the lively evidence hereof, will upon our deathbeds (if our
consciences shall thoroughly be awaked) and so ever after be more worth unto
us, then ten thousand worlds, and the contrary more bitter and dreadful then
all the evils of this present life can possibly be unto us. These things we
humbly entreat thee to grant for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, our
alone Savior and Advocate.

III. A prayer that we may be able to seek and find this first, that God is
our gracious and tender Father in Christ, and that we may grow in this
assurance daily.
[ Father] OH dear Father, To pray to be persuaded, that the assurance that
God is our Father, is first to be sought, next his glory.
and most blessed Lord God, persuade all thy people, that this is that which is
first to be sought of every one of us next thy glory, and above all other
things; to be assured that thou art our gracious and tender Father, that so
each of us may in faith call upon thee, saying truly as our Savior has taught
us, Abba, Oh Father. That this assurance alone being rightly considered of,
that thou art our heavenly and loving Father, will quiet our That assurance
alone will quiet the heart, and fill it with joy unspeakable.
heart, or the heart of any believer in all the world, and will fill it with
unspeakeable joy in the midst of the greatest troubles and temptations, that
can possibly befall us.

And contrarily, make every And the contrary will fill it with extreme horror.
one of thy people to know for certain, that the very doubting and want of
assurance, whether we be in thy favor and love or no, and much more, whether
we be thy Children, will work extreme disquietnesse and horror in our
souls, when once our consciences shall be awaked, and will be unto us as the
unspeakeable torments of hell fire: and that this will And be a^ the beginnings
of the flashings of hell.
fall upon all the ungodly, most of all when their consciences shall tell them
(as one day the conscience of every wicked and impenitent sinner will do) that
they are not thy Children, but thine enemies, and the Children of wrath, yea,
of Satan himself: John. 8. 4^.
and therefore that they are hated of thee, as Satan their Father is, whose
Image they have borne, and whose work they have done.

To this end, good Lord, work upon our hearts, and the hearts of all that
belong to thy eternal election, whosoever, and wheresoever they be in all the
earth, that we all may truly understand, and rightly know, our own miserable
To this end to know first our own miserable condition by nature.
condition by nature; that we are through the first Adam. by natural
generation, and by the whole course of our lives, none other but the Children
of disobedience, and so vessels of wrath, and Thus we are but firebrandes of
hell until we be true members of Christ.
fire -- brands of hell, until such time as we are, or shall be regenerated
and borne again, and by a lively faith ingrafted into Jesus Christ the second
Adam, and so made thy Children, and heirs of thy kingdom, by thy grace in him.

Cause us all to know That we cannot attain to this assurance until we feel
these two graces, repentance and faith.
moreover, that we can never attain heereunto to be thy Children, much less
to any certain knowledge or assurance hereof until we feel these two
graces of thine, wrought in our hearts by thy blessed Spirit, and the preaching
of thy heavenly Gospel unto us; to wit, an unfeigned repentance for all our
sins, and a lively faith in Jesus Christ: and likewise that we have the same
daily increased, or at least continued with a true and earnest desire and
endeavor of the increase thereof; for that these two are For that these are
lively evidences of our being in Christ.
lively evidences to any man that he is regenerate and in the state of grace,
and that of a Child of wrath he is made thine own dear Child, ^cceptable to
thee his heavenly Father by Jesus Christ alone. Grant to us therefore, and to
all thy Children, these lively evidences of thy favor, in our unfeigned
repentance, and also our effectual faith increasing daily, for Jesus Christ
our only Lord and Savior.

IIII. A prayer that we may not deceive our selves in vain conceit, that we
are Gods Children, when we are nothing less, as the greatest part do, but
that we may come to strong assurance hereof* by feeling a total change in
our lives and conversations.
OH most holy, and most gracious Father, we entreat yet further of thy divine
Majesty, that neither we nor any other of thy people and Children, may deceive
That we may not deceive our selves in a vain imagination of faith and
repentance.
our selves in a vain and counterfeit show and imagination of repentance and
faith, as the greatest part of those do, who living under the sound, and in the
light of the Gospel, do imagine therefore that they have repentance and
faith, and are well enough; when as aalas they have nothing less, then any
part of true, sound, and unfeigned repentance, or any power of a lively faith.
Grant to this end, that neither we nor they, may rest until That we may never
rest until we find the new birth in our whole man and in all our conversation.
we find in our selves, the new birth begun, and increasing daily, by a
total change wrought in us, since the time that we believed in Christ, as a
special fruit thereof, and that in every part both of our souls and bodies,
and also in the whole course of our life and conversation.

Stir up all our hearts (Oh holy Father) to this purpose, that we may never
give thee rest, until we find this through change and alteration, both in our
minds and In our minds
understandings, from ignorance and blindness, to the true knowledge not only
of our selves, but also of thy heavenly Majesty, and so of thy Son Jesus
Christ; likewise in our memories, that instead Memories.
of remembering vanities, we may be able to keep a holy remembrance of the
things which concern thy glory, and our own salvation, with the good of our
Brethren. Good Lord work Wills.
the like change in our wills, from following and obeying the will and lusts of
our flesh, to be ever pliant and obedient to thy heavenly will.

Persuade our hearts that we may never give thee over, until we likewise
find the same change in our affections, Affections.
that therein we are conformed daily more and more to the holiness of Christ,
both in our love and hatred, our joy and our grief; in child-like fear and
holy security, resting on^ selves only in thy love and favor.

Make us to labor to find also the same in our Consciences, Consciences.
that we may never give any rest to our souls, until we find our
consciences quieted in this assurance, that we are washed from our sins, in
the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that our own hearts and consciences
do bear a continual witness unto us of our upright conversation, at least
begun in us; with a settled resolution ever to walk with thee our God, all our
days.

Good Father, never suffer us to be at quiet, until we truly find the same
alteration, wrought by thy holy Spirit in like manner in our whole body; making
every In our whole bodies.
sense and member thereof instead of the service of sin, to become servants
of righteousness, even thine own servants.

Lord persuade us all, that all these parts being thine, Created, and Redeemed
to these ends, thou do not only require this holiness in every To be
persuaded that God both requires and works this holiness in all his elect in
some measure.
one of them, but that thou likewise workest it effectually in all thine, whom
thou have ordained to life and salvation, according to that measure of grace,
which thou ar^ pleased to bestow upon every one, causing every one of them to
strive forwards toward perfection; and that until That until this change in
some measure never can any attain this assurance.
such a change be begun in us in some measure, never any one of us, can have
any true comfort that we are thy Children, or in thy favor and love; and that
only as this change and comformitie to Christ Jesus our head increases, As
this increases, so our assurance
so does our comfort likewise increase in thee: and contrarily, as it
decreaseth, so do we decay in our comfort and assurance. Hearken unto us
therefore (Oh tender Father) and work mightily by thy holy Spirit in us, and
in all thy Children, that we may never give thee any rest in our prayers,
until we shall attain this full assurance, for our Lord Jesus Christ his
sake, our only Mediator and Advocate.

V. A prayer that we may find in our selves, not only the general, but even
all the particular marks of Gods Children, namely, those which our Savior
has taught us to beg in his prayer.
OH Lord, who art the only true perswader and se^ler of the hearts and
consciences of all thine elect, persuade effectually both us and all other thy
people, that besides a whole change in our To pray to find in our selves, not
only this change, but the peculiar marks of Gods children.
selves, in all the qualities and faculties of our souls and bodies, thou have
given sundry peculiar marks and properties, whereby thy Children may both
certainly know themselves to be thy Children, and also by which they may be so
known, and ought so to be esteemed amongst all thy people; and that so much
the more, as they more lively and evidently have these marks upon them.

And namely (good Lord) persuade us of those which thou in this prayer have
taught Chiefly those which our Savior has taught us to cry for daily, and
whereby we most lively bear his Image.
all thine to pray, and to cry for daily, whereby we carry most lively the
Image of our Lord Jesus our elder Brother. Vouchsafe that we may be most
zealous of the glory To be most zealous for Gods glory.
of thee our heavenly Father, and that with a holy zeal, having the Spirit of
burning, and the Spirit of judgment joined together, which worldlings regard
not, being little or nothing at all acquainted with it.

Grant that we all may 2. To seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness
first.
seek thy kingdom and righteousness first, before all the things of this
life; whereas they that are of this world, seek only, or at least in the
first place, the things of this world.

Help and enable us (good 3. To seek only knowing and doing the will of our
heavenly Father, and not our own.
Father) herein, to these ends, that, whereas carnal and unregenerate men,
seek only the satisfying of their own lusts and pleasures, and by all means
to have their own wills fulfilled, little or nothing regarding to know, or to
do thy heavenly will; we contrarily may seek to know and fulfill the will of
thee our heavenly Father, as thou have expressed it in thy holy and sacred
word; and that this we may make our very meat and drink, preferring it (as
did our Savior) before his daily food.

Vouchsafe us thy holy Spirit, that whereas carnal and worldly men are wont
commonly for whatsoever they desire, only to use and To use only such means
for obtaining all good things, as God himself has ordained.
seek worldly means; such as like themselves best, whether warrantable from
thee or no, they make no matter, seldom or never using to seek and beg them,
as they ought, from thy heavenly bounty* only in and by the means which thou
have appointed: and do as seldom unfeignedly return thee thanks and praise,
when they have received their desires, but are like the swine under the Acorne
trees, never looking up from whence the Mast falls, sacrifising unto their
nets, ascribing all to their own wits and strength; we contrarily may look
up unto thee our heavenly Father. Lord grant that we may Begging and returning
all thanks to him for all.
first beg all from thy heavenly bounty, using only the means that thou
have appointed to accomplish our ends, and after returning praise and thanks
for all unto thy divine and sacred Majesty.

Teach and persuade us, To be ever mindful of the rest of our brethren as of
our selves.
and all thy people, that we may be truly mindful of the rest of our
Brethren thy dear Children* wheresoever dispersed, and that we may be
rightly touched with a true and lively feeling both of And as well touched with
their estate as our own.
their bodily and spiritual estate, and therefore like as thou ha^t taught and
commanded us to pray for all other thy Children as for our selves, O our
Father: And, give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses.
Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, etc. Grant that we may
not only thus pray for them, with the lips alone, but sigh and groan unto thy
Majesty for them in all these respects, and desire earnestly to seek and to
use all means for them in every one of these kinds, as lively feeling members
of the same mystical body of Jesus Christ with them. Make us to consider, To
consider how the carnal worldling has little or no sense of any of these
things,
how the carnal worldling, has little or no sense or feeling of any of these
things, nay almost no understanding at all, as appears daily by all his
carriage and affections toward thy dearest servants; whom for this cause he
principally hates, and makes a mock of, even for their piety, their care, and
conscience, to fear and please thy heavenly Majesty.

Make us all to have a true To have a lively sense of our sins.
sense and feeling of our sins, and of the vileness of them, in regard of the
nature of sin it self, and that it is so displeasing, and so odious to thy
holiness. Enable us therefore by thy holy Spirit* to groan To groan under
the burden of them.
under ou^ sins, as a burden heavier then the earth: yea, to be oft-times
grieved inwardly and ^ejected, in regard of our new and many slips and
failings, and for them all to cry, Forgive us our trespasses: and that we may
never Never to rest until we be assured of the remission of our sins.
give any rest unto our souls, until we be fully assured of the pardon of
them all, and that thou our heavenly Father ar^ fully reconciled unto us in
Jesus Christ, and thy displeasure wholly appeased toward us. Whereas the
unregenerate and carnal man has usually no feeling of his sins at all,
whereupon he commonly makes but a sport of sin, and drink in iniquity as
water, so heaping uppe Which the carnal man makes bu^ a sport of.
wrath against the day of wrath, making a scoff at all the godly who are
troubled with their sins, as at fantastical and melancholy fools.

Teach and persuade our hearts, that whereas carnal men can hardly or never
forgive That we may be able to forgive wrongs, and to pray for our enemies.
wrong: done unto them, until they be revenged, or their corrupt minds some
way fully satisfied; we contrarily may labor to be so far off from
revenge, as we may be able to pray with our Savior, and with Stephen, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do; and that if our That if our enemies
hunger, we may feed them.
enemies hunger, we may feed them as thou ^hast commanded, yea, persuade our
hearts, that we may by all And seek their conversion and salvation.
means seek the conversion and salvation of our greatest enemies. And if thou
shall be pleased to convert any of them soundly, that we may rejoice therein,
even as the heavenly Angels, and delight in such, above our own natural
brethren or sisters.

Lord work so upon us, 6. To be always afraid of Satan's temptations.
that whereas the Worldling is seldom or never afraid of Satan, and of his
temptations, or of sinning against, and provoking thy holiness, and therefore
does continvally or most commonly whatsoever Satan and his own sinful
heart moves him unto, without any check or controulement, or looking at thee,
or without any fear or regard of the evil which will follow upon that which
he does: we contrarily may desire to fear thee evermore. To stand always in
awe of the Lord, least for our security, he leave us up to him.


Make us always to stand in awe of thy Majesty with a holy reverence, least
for our security, or for other our sins thou should leave us to be tempted
by Satan and overcome; and therefore in the sense and privity of ^ur ^eserts
by all our sins, our ^aylings, weaknesses, and for the corruption of our
sinful natures, with our inclination to hearken to the Serpent, ^o be
overtaken and circumvented by him, and in regard of the danger which thereby
we stand in continually, we may cry day and night, Lead u^ not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil; yea, that we may strive, as our Savior
To strive to watch and pray that we fall not into temptation.
has taught us, To watch and pray continually, that we may not fall into
temptation.

Good Father grant, that 7. To look ever ^o the Lords absolute Sovereignty.
whereas the carnal and unregenerate man in his actions looks only at the
command and authority of man, and at his countenance and power, and what he can
do; and so gives to men the glory due unto thy Sovereign Majesty, or
secretly takes it to himself; we contrarily may look higher, even unto thy
Highness* and to thy absolute Sovereignty over all Kings and Princes, and at
thy divine power, and so give unto thee And to give him the glory of all.
the glory of all abhorring all imagination of any excellency, that we may any
way conceive to be in our selves; and therefore that we may in all things
desire ever with all thy holy Angels thus to acknowledge thee and thy
Sovereignty alone, and to give thee all the glory, and to cry evermore, For
thine is the kingdom, power, and glory. 8. To be ever and chiefly thinking of
eternity.


And whereas the worldling looks commonly, and thinks only of this present
life, and seldom or never thinks of eternity, but rather labors to put the
remembrance thereof out of his heart, having his portion and so his meditations
only here below; grant that we contrarily may be always thinking and
meditating of eternity, even of that life which is eternal, that so we may
live with thee, and fully behold and enjoy thy kingdom, power, and glory for
evermore.

Finally, persuade us and all 9. That we may not pray looking at any thing in
our selves, or any other creatures.
thine, that whereas the unregenerate and carnal Worldling has usually in all
his prayers and dealings with thee, some eye unto himself, and his worthiness,
for his de^otion and service, or for some other matter in himself, being little
or nothing at all acquainted with thy Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ and
his intercession, and how to come and appear before thy holiness, who art
only our father, in, and thorough him, and how to make his requests only
through him, and in his name alone, we may come clea^ other wise. Grant that we
contrarily may in all But stripping our selves, may come only in Jesus Christ.
our supplications, prayers, and our giving of thanks, strip our selves of all
such opinion of our own merit or worthiness: and as we account all but loss
and dung, so that we may be found in Christ, not having our own righteousness,
but that which is of Christ; so likewise we may make all our prayers and
supplications with giving of thanks only in and through Our everlasting Amen.
him, who is that everlasting Amen* and through whom alone all thy promises are
Yea and Amen; who alone has deserved this honor, and has this office to make
us and our prayers to be accepted; and therefore that we may in faith cry unto
thee evermo^e through That we may in Faith, cry Amen.
him, Amen, Amen*

Good Lord help us and all thy people, that by all these That we may never
give the Lord over till we find all these in our selves.
marks and the like, we may thoroughly try and examine our selves whether we
be thy children, or no; and that we may never give over crying unto thee,
until we find every one of these lively and sensibly in us. Cause us rightly
That we may know our selves hereby to be thine, and in thy favor as we find
them.
to understand, and to be fully persuaded hereof, that in what measure we
find the former change wrought in us and every one of these marks, in the same
we may know our selves like wise to be in thy favor, and accepted of thee,
and that contrarily without And contrarily,
every one of these at least begun in us in some measure, and a sound
resolution with an earnest desire and longing of our souls to increase and
grow herein, we cannot assure our selves to be any better then Hypocrites;
and That we can never find sound comfort.
that we shall never find sound comfort, that thou will acknowledge us for
thine, until we find these evident marks upon us. Grant unto us therefore,
Oh tender Father, all the peculiar marks of thy Children, and all other, that
hereby, we and all thine, may know our selves infallibly, to be thine own
dear Children, for thy beloved Son our blessed Lord and Savior,

Amen.
VI. A prayer for knowledge and right use of the means, whereby we may be
made Gods Children, and grow up in the assurance thereof* and so b^ established
in grace continually.
OH most gracious God, To pray to know the right means of getting Gods favor
and growing therein.
and merciful Father, the only fountain of wisdom and grace, for so much as
every one who has any spark of grace or true wisdom, desires to be in the
blessed estate of thy Children, to have thy love and favor, to grow up in the
assurance thereof, as the chiefest happiness in this world; persuade us and
all thy people aright, what are the ordinary means whereby thou begettest thy
Children to a lively hope: That thou do it ordinarily As in the days of our
Savior and the Primitive Church.
and usually, even by the same means, whereby thou did first gather thy
Church in the days of our Savior: and after that, so wonderfully and speedily
spread By the sincere preaching of his Gospel.
it over the face of the earth, even by the sincere preaching of thy heavenly
word, and namely of thy sacred Gospel.

That howsoever the world Though the world count it foolishne^*
accounts that foolishness, yet thou have ordained it to be the immortal
seed, whereby The immortal seed.
thine are begotten anew, and thus made thy Children by grace, and to be thy
mighty Gods mighty power to salvation.
power unto salvation, to make all thine to believe, and in believing, to make
them partakers of thy favor and love, and so to give them eternal life. And
that this That this stands not in the enticing speech of man's wisdom, but in
the plain evidence of Gods Spirit.
saving kind of preaching stands, as the preaching of Paul did, not in the
intising speech of man's wisdom, but in the plain evidence of thy Spirit, and
of power. That And why.
so our faith may be apparent to be wrought, not by the wisdom of men, but
only by thy divine and mighty power alone.

Persuade all thy people moreover, that as thou do beget all thine a-newe by
this thy heavenly voice, That God nourishes his children by the same means of
the word.
the sincere preaching of thy Gospel, and in calling them make them thy
Children; so thou feedest and nourishest them, and all thy Graces in them by
the same principally; and next thereunto by the right use of thy holy
Sacraments, Sacraments.
the reverent reading Good books.
of the same blessed word, and other holy books grounded Meditations.
thereupon, with sacred Meditations, Prayers.
conference with the godly, practice of all holy duties, carnest supplications
and prayers, for a right and sanctified use, and for thy blessing upon every
one of these means, and the like, to make them all effectual heereunto.

Good Father, persuade ^ll who thus desire to be thy Children, and in thy
favor; and to have all others likewise, To seek to this end the establishing
and advancement of thy sacred Ministry, and to depend thereon.
partakers with them of the same mercy, to seek by all holy means the
establishing and advancement of thy sacred Ministry, and that them selves, and
all others may depend upon the conscionable, faithful, and sincere Ministers,
Pastors, and Teachers, whom thou have ordained in this respect, to succeed in
the place of holy Paul, and the other Apostles for the gathering together of
the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 11.
for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ,
and be wholly afraid of all Anaba ptisticall fancies or separations, or of
any way vvithdrawing themselves from under the means ordained by thee for
their salvation, to lie open to Satan, and his delusions.

Oh gracious Father, who so tenderest thy Children and chosen flock, as thou
have set To stir up the hearts of Kings and Princes to this holy care.
Kings and Princes in thy place for the care and comfort of them above all
other of the earth; persuade, and move effectually the hearts of all those
whom thou have appointed to be thus as Fathers to thy children; as namely, all
Governors, and principally the chief whom thou have specially ordained to be
the prime foster-Fathers unto those thy dear Children, in all the parts of the
world. That they by all the means and power that thou shall ever vouchsafe to
put into their hands, may look to see thy To see their people furnished with
holy and conscionable Ministers.
people committed to their charge, to be furnished with such conscionable,
sincere, and faithful Pastors and teachers, as by whom they may be first
begotten, and after nourished and fed, so as they may grow up to the measure of
the age of the fullness in Christ, and be provided likewise for all other
gracious means and helps belonging hereunto.

Thus in like manner, we That the Ministers may study to make all the people
the Children of God.
humbly entreat thee most merciful God, and tender father, that by the mighty
operation of thy heavenly Spirit, thou will thoroughly persuade and move all
those, whom thou have in a peculiar manner separated unto this work of
winning of souls unto thee, or who have or shall any way enter hereupon; that
they may wisely consider, that principal part of their Vocation and Function,
namely, to endeavor to make al their. Congregations to be thine own
Children, carrying lively thy image, and bearing upon them the marks of thy
Children.

Cause them to seek tenderly To nourish them as in his place.
to nourish and comfort them as in thy place and presence, and ever to preserve
and To keep them from Satan and all his agents
keep them from Satan, and all his cursed agents and instruments; as from all
seducing Jesuits and Seminaryes, who compass sea and land to make all sorts
the children of the devil, worse then themselves; and so from all other
deceyvers, and all the delusions of this evil world. Grant that thus they may
study to be able, each according to their places, at all times whenever thou
shall call them to an account, and chiefly To be able to present them with all
confident boldness before his Majesty.
at the great day, to present them with all confident boldness and joy before
thy heavenly Majesty, saying with the Prophet, Lord here am I, and the
children thou have given me, by my Ministry, or any way committed to my charge.
Hearken unto us, Oh gracious Father in these our humble supplications, and all
other things which thou know to be needful for us, or thy whole Church, or
any part thereof, for Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior.

VII. A Prayer, that all may understand how dear Gods Children are unto him,
that they may be so to us likewise.
OH Lord, most merciful, most wise, and tender To pray that God would make all
to know how dear his children are unto him.
Father, make all sorts to understand and know in time, especially all those
who so furiously rage against thy Church and people at this day, how dear and
precious every one of thy Children is unto thy heavenly Majesty, that they are
unto thee as the apple of thine own eye, and that therefore their blood is
precious in thy sight: That they perishing for lack of That their blood will
cry for vengeance as the blood of Abel.
care to save and succor them, and much more being destroyed by them to whom
thou have committed them, as to their nursing Fathers in thy place, their blood
will cry for vengeance, like as the blood of Abel did, and will cause the
murderers one day (without unfeigned repentance) to cry out when it is too
late, My sin That God can no more bear with wrongs done to them then to
Abraham.
is greater then I can bear. Yea, cause all to know, that thou can no more
bear with wrongs done unto these thy Children (and especially to those of
them, whom thou have manifested by their child like obedience, and by the
glorious image of our Lord Jesus thy dear Son, printed visibly upon them, to
be so dear and precious unto thee) then thou could bear with the wrongs
done unto thy servants, Abraham, Moses, David, or any other of thine. That if
for Abraham's cause, thou wast so severe against Abimelech and his That if God
was so ever against Abimelech, he will be more against them all, who shall
hurt them, cheefely for his names sake.
house (though he was but a Heathen King, and that which he did against
Abraham he did ignorantly, and with an upright heart as he says; yea and
through Abraham's weakness, in saying of his wife, she was his sister) thou will
then be much more severe against all those, who being convinced in their
consciences of the innocence of thy poor children (as all must needs be in a
very great measure, in this most glorious shining light of thy heavenly
Gospel) and ye^ do so vex and mollest them, yea, and seek to destroy them
out of the earth, only for thy names sake, for cleaving fast unto thee, and to
thy sacred truth.

Lord persuade the hearts To persuade all that these are as Noah's to the places
where they are.
of all sorts, that these, while they are in any place, are in some sort as
Noah was to the old world, and as Lot to Sodom for keeping off the vengeance
from all the rest. Yea (good Lord) make all sorts understand and know, and
especially set this ever before our eyes, and the eyes of all thy people every
where, that thou made poor Joseph who was As Joseph to his brethren.
scorned and hated of his Brethren, for his religion and piety, and for
seeking to reform their evil behavior, to be yet the preserver of his
Brethren; yea, of all his Fathers house, and of the whole Church; and causedst
his Brethren in their greatest extremity, and in the very anguish of their
souls, to acknowledge how they had sinned against the Lad, chiefly in their
lack of commiseration, and moreover to come and to stoop unto Joseph, and
humbly to seek unto him that he would not remember the wrongs and evils that
they had done to him.

Cause us all to consider well, how thou made him Gods instruments to save
all from many temporal judgments.
to save them all, even him whom (for his dislike of their evil manners, for
his care for their good, and for thy special favor manifested toward him)
they accounted the dreamer, plotted against, cast into the pit, sold to the
Ismalites, thinking thereby they should never have been troubled with him, no^
have heard of him any more.

Grant good Lord, seeing That he brings plagues for the wrongs done unto them.
thy Children are so dear unto thee, that for their causes, and the wrongs
done unto them, thon call for a dearth upon the lands where they are, thou
plaguest even Kings Psalm.
for their sakes; that thou will And will not spare any who hurt them, no not
Miriam.
not spare their own Brethren or Sisters, if they wrong them, no not Miriam
her self, though she be beloved of thee, a Prophetess, and Sister of Moses,
but wilt make her feel her sin, and her shame, if she dare but speak
against thy servant Moses, especially for doing as thou have commanded him;
that they may be likewise, as That they may be so dear to all as they are to
the Lord.
dear and precious unto all thy people.

Grant (Oh tender Father) that all sorts thus esteeming of them for thy cause,
as thine own dear Children, and so highly beloved of thee, may That all may
acknowledge their si^nes concerning them.
all jointly acknowldge their wrongs against them, and their heinous sin
against thy Majesty for them, in all the rebukes, scorns, and taunts, cast
upon thee, and thy sacred religion, through the evils done unto them. Vouchsafe
that hereby all these may with faithful Abraham, Moses, and Samuel, pray for
all That they may help to make the atonement for Israel.
thy people, and so help to make the atonement for them by the blood of the
Lord Jesus, that all their sins may be pardoned, thy anger appeased, thy
people turned All the people of the Lord may be turned to him again,
to thee again, thy hand may be turned against thine obstinate and implacable
enemies, and the enemy may And the enemy given for their ransom.
once again be given for the ransom of thy Children and people, as thou
did sometimes give Egypt for thine Israel. To persuade this chiefly to all
his Vicegerents that these being so dear unto the Lord, may be so unto them.


Lord, persuade this principally, to all thy Deputies, and Vicegerents,
wheresoever in the earth, that even for this cause alone, for that these are so
beleved of thee, they likewise may in all tender affection, set themselves, as
in thy place, to rescue, succor, To rescue and succor them
and protect them, from the rage of all thine and their cruel enemies; and
that they may seek withal, the uniting Seek the uniting of them in Christ.
of the hearts of all thy Children, in that firm bond of brotherly love, which
is in Christ Jesus: that those of them, who most excel in virtue, And may be
more de de^re to them as they more excel in virtue.
as they are most de^re unto thy heavenly Majesty, may be so likewise unto
them, that they may respect and tender them, their welfare and prosperity,
above all others.

That they may seek to To prevent whatsoever may dissolve this brotherly knet.
keep all thine in this bond of holy love, and wisely to prevent whatsoever
may dissolve this brotherly knot: or but breed any hatred, envy, grudgings,
heart-burnnings, or unbrotherly censurings amongst them; or whatsoever may hurt
or annoy them any way. That hereby all such That so they may get this seal to
their consciences,
thy Vicegerents may get this testimony and seal to their Consciences, that
they themselves are as thy first borne, and amongst the dearest of thy
Children, and of all other That they are unto him as his first borne, and that
he will be a Father and protector to them and theirs.
of the earth most precious unto thee, and that thou will show thy self a
Father and Protector unto them and theirs for evermore; when as thou will
declare thy self full of vengeance against all of them who have any way
wittinglie wronged or intended evil against them.

Oh unite all the hearts of To unite the hearts of all Gods Children to them
and theyrs.
thine own children unto them and theyrs in all loyal affection, as to their
foster-fathers and mothers, whom thou have in so much mercy to this end
raised up for them, and committed them unto: as the hearts of all thine own
servants were united into thy faithful servant David, whom for this cause they
accounted better then ten thousand of themselves, as the Candle of Israel; and
as they were knit to that holy and melting hearted King Josiah, whose death they
so lamented, as for the taking away of their shelter, and even the very breath
of their nostrils.

Hear us (Oh tender Father) and let the bowelles of thy fatherly compassion
earn over thy dear children, in thus inclining the hearts of all unto them to
favor and succor them, especially those of them who have already suffered so
much adversity, and been so long humbled under thy hand, for thy dear Son our
Lord Jesus Christ his sake our only Mediator and Advocate,

Amen.
VIII. A Prayer that we may all be able to lift uppe our eyes and hearts unto
our heavenly Father alone, and to look beyond all earthly means in all the
troubles and perilles of the Churches.
OH heavenly Father, who Which art in heaven.
over ruledst the counsels of Herod, Pontius Pilate, and That God who overrules
al counsels to bring to pass his own decrees,
all the people of the Jews, and madst them all to serve for bringing to pass
thine own eternal decree, for thine own everlasting praise and the comfort
of thine own chosen flock. Lift up the Would lift up the eyes and hearts of
all his faithful people to him.
eyes and hearts of all thy Children now in this extreme rage and fury which is
against us, and especially the eyes and hearts of all those of us, who have
endeavored to be faithful with thee in these sinful times, and to walk
humbly before thee, as Enocke, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Daniel.

Grant that we may look That we may look to him only.
up to thee only, who though thou art so gloriously exalted in the highest
heavens, yet look upon all the Sons of men, and see all the Who sees
all the wrongs done to his Children.
wrongs that are done unto thy Children, and hear every of their sighs and
groans, writest them in thy book, and put their tears in thy bottle, and
in thy due And will one day make it manifest.
time wilt make this known before all the world; howsoever the wicked and
ungodly think not so, but have removed thee far out of their To beg pardon
for this sin specially that we have all made flesh our arm, and with drawn
our hearts from the Lord.
sight.

Good Father, pardon this sin unto all thy Children, that in the days of our
peace we and all thy Churches have amongst other sins, made flesh our arm,
and withdrawn our hearts from thee the living God; we have so much looked at
our earthly fathers of all sorts, and to earthly means, as that we have said
as they did of Josiah, that under the shelter of those great trees, we should
be safe from all the violent storms which could be raised up by Satan, and
from all scorching heat of persecution; so that in regard of them, we have
thought we should never be removed, thou Lord had of thy goodness by them,
made us to stand so strong. Lord make us to To see how justly for this sin
some are taken 2* way from the Churches, others weakened.
see, how justly for this sin thou have taken away these earthly Fathers from
some of the Churches, weakened them in others; and may now most justly even
for this very sin alone, so infeeble the arms of all the rest, as that they
cannot help thy Children: yea, that thou may contrarily so turn their
hearts against thy dearest Children Until we shall all see* our sin, and
turn our eyes only to our heavenly Father.
for it, that instead of helping them, they may rather join hands against
them, until such time as we shall see our sin even in this behalf, amongst
all other our heinous transgressions, and turn our eyes again only to thee
our heavenly Father, and chief Protector.

Oh grant unto us, that we That we may not rest il by our prayers and tears,
we have caused him to relent toward us.
may never rest before that time, that by our unfeigned repentance for this and
all other our sins, and by our Prayers and tears, crying all about thy
feet, we have caused thee to relent toward us, and thy bowels of compassion
to earne over us, in hearing our sighs and cries, and in seeing so many of us
so lef^e unto the hands of all thine, and our bloody and merciless enemies.

Lord make us all able to That by faith we may see him sitting at the great
wheel
look up thus to thee, and by faith to behold thee sitting in heaven, laughing
to scorn all the devises of thine enemies, guiding there the great wheel, and
by it, ordering, turning, and overruling, all these inferior and less wheels
here below; that though they seem to be carried violently in a contrary
motion, yet we may see all of them Making all to serve to the accom plishing
of his own eternal decree, for the saving of his Church.
serve, and by thy infinite wisdom and power, made to help to accomplish
thine eternal decree, in whatsoever thou have appointed, concern^ing the
gathering in of all the remainder of thine elect, both Jews and Gentiles; the
coming down of the new Jerusalem, the present and eternal glory of thy Sion;
The destructi on of his enemies to his eternal glory.
with the utter ruin and downfall of Babel; the endless condemnation and
destruction of that Whore of Babylon, and of all thine enemies for evermore.

Lord, make us rightly to understand* and fully to know, that as Herod, and
Ponti^s Pilate, and all the people of the Jews, did not, nor could Like as all
was which the enemies did against our Lord and Savior.
do any other thing, against our eldest Brother, thy dear Son our only
Lord and Savior, then that which thine own counsel had determined; The
benefits and blessings thereby.
for his highest advancement at thy right hand, for thine own eternal praise,
the sending down of thy holy Spirit in that wonderful manner, the publishing
of thine heavenly Gospel, the calling of the Gentiles, the enlargement of the
Church, and spreading it over the whole So now at this present.
earth; so at this present time, neither Satan, nor Antichrist, Mahomet, nor
all the mighty and subtilest enemies of the world can do any other thing
against thy Church or Children, then that which long before, even from before
the foundation of the world was laid, thou have ordained; and that for For the
full accomplishment of all things foretold.
the full accomplishment of whatsoever thou have foretold, concerning both thy
Church and Children, and also For preparing the ^ay to Christ's glorious coming.
concerning thine enemies, and for preparing the way to thy glorious appearing.

Lord help us in this, that looking over all things here below, we may not
only stand still to see what thou will do, but that we may rejoice That we
may by faith be able to rejoice herein.
in faith, beholding thee thus ordering and disposing all things to these
blessed ends; and that thou art making, all Angels, Principalities, Powers,
yea, Satan, and all his instruments; with all their rage, malice, might, and
subtilty, in the very extremest butchering and slaughtering of thy Saints, to
work together for the effecting hereof; that so we may rejoice even herein
with joy unspeakable and glorious, and in this our blessed estate.

Lord make us to glorify That in all we are more then Conquerours.
thee in this confident assurance, that though we should be killed all the day
long, as many of our Brethren thy dear Children lately have been, for thy name
sake, and as we are indeed in the designs of thine and our enemies, accounted
as sheep for the slaughter, yet that in all we shall ever be more then
Conquerors through that blessed one in whom thou have loved us.

Yea (dear Father) make That no thing can separate us from his love. Romans 8.
35.
us to triumph in this, that whatsoever we shall, or can suffer in the mean
time, for thy names sake, as other our Brethren do at this day, and Satan
threatens us; that yet neither tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine,
nakedness, bonds, imprisonment, peril, or sword, can ever separate us from
thy love in Christ Jesus our Lord, if once we have the full evidences in our
souls, that we are thy Children in him, being so begotten by that lively
word, and having upon us all the evident marks of thy Children.

Grant us therefore (Oh gracious To this end to make this sure that we are his
Children.
Father) now in these our days of peace, and whilst thou vouchsafest us the
means of thy heavenly Gospel, to give all diligence to make it sure, that we
are thy Children, thy dear Children, yea, thy Children to whom thy heavenly
kingdom appertains, having and bearing upon us, all the lively marks and
badges of thy Children.

Above all, grant us this To have this* heavenly mindedness.
heavenly mindedness, that our chief thoughts may be upon thee our heavenly
Father, our care may be above all things how to please thee, doing in the
mean while only the things which thou requirest, casting all our cares, for
those days, and for whatsoever the enemy can do, upon thy Majesty alone, and
into thy bosom; learning every day more and more to waine our affections from
this world, and the things of this world, and to set them wholly above, where
thy Son sits at thy right hand.

Lord persuade our hearts, To persuade us, that in all the troubles of the
church, God (...) preparing ^is (...) meet him, as obedient children, with
entreaty of peace.
and make us able to persuade one another, that by all the power and liberty
that thou have permitted unto Satan, and to all his instruments, and by all
the persecutions, and afflictions, that are upon all the Churches; and also by
whatsoever threatenings of thine against thy Children, yea, whatsoever
mischievous designs are intended against thy poor Church, or what danger
soever it is in, through that extreme fury of Satan and Antichrist, and all
their instruments, thou art yet still preparing all thy Children to meet thee,
in a sound humiliation, with strong cries and tears, for all our offending
thee, and for grieving thy holy Spirit, by all our former security, and neglect
of thee, and of the riches of thy favors vouchsafed unto us.

Grant us all this grace therefore, as thine obedient and loving Children in
all things, to submit our selves under thy Fatherly hand, to turn jointly to
thy Covenant Submitting our selves jointly to his Covenant.
and renew the same in all faithfulness, to take away all the divisions that
have And having our hearts united in brotherly* love.
been amongst us; which through our long peace and wantonness, Satan has
wrought to the destroying of us all, if it were possible.

Vouchsafe (good Father) That God may be as much pleased herein as ever
displeased in our divisions.
that we may do this so effectually, that thou may be as much pleased, in
reuniting us again, and in our Brotherly love and agreement, as ever thou have
been displeased, in our divisions, and dissentions: and Satan and his
instruments, And Satan and his instruments as much dismayed hereby.
in seeing our holy unity and agreement, may be as much dismayed, and put out
of heart, for ever prevailing against us: as by the contrary, and by all their
prosperous success (as they imagine) they have been animated and encouraged,
to our ruin and destruction. That so we That we may all sing, Behold how good
etc. Psalm. 133.
may all sing, with one heart and voice, Behold how good and happy a thing it
is, Brethren, to dwell together in unity. Lord manifest thy glory, even the
glory of thy* wisdom, power, mercy, and truth herein, in making us jointly
to look and cry to thee, for all these things, and whatsoever thou in thy
infinite wisdom know necessary for us in this behalf, or for any member
of thy whole Church, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Savior.

IX. A thanksgiving for our deliverance from Babylon.
A Thanksgiving to God, according to the first petition of the Lords prayer,
for causing his glory to break forth so wonderfully now in this last Age of
the world, in delivering his Churches, thus far out of Egypt and Babylon,
with a confession of our unworthiness; and an earnest prayer, that we may
never dishonor him, by locking thither again; nor provoke him by our sins
to give us up to that heavy judgment: and likewise for the diliverie of all
the rest of his Israel in his due time, and that he may never leave us until
he have brought us all into his heavenly Canaan.
OH Lord, most holy and Hallowed be thy name.
most glorious, open our blind eyes, and touch our hard and stony hearts, and
the To pray to see our honor to be called forth to be Gods peculiar people.
hearts of all thy true Churches and people in all the world, whom thou have
called forth to be thy people, that we may be able to see and consider
aright the exceeding honor and dignity, which thou have laid upon us, and to
show forth our thankfulness to thy heavenly Majesty accordingly.

Make us able to consider, show thou have vouchsafed to take us so nere unto
thy self, as to make us thine own peculiar people of all the people of the
earth, to set and To set and confirm his Covenant with us.
confirm the Covenant with us of life and glory; and how to this end thou have
brought How he has brought us out of Egypt and Babylon.
us out of that spiritual Egypt and Babylon, from that bondage and tyranny of
Satan and Antichrist.

Make us to consider, and rightly to understand, how by great deliverances and
judgments, thou have carried How he has carried through the sea and wilderness.
us through the sea and through the* wilderness, and showed thy self unto us in
thy glorious Leading us by his statutes.
ordinances, leading us by thy statutes and commandments, and by the works of
thy providence, protection, direction, chastisement* blessings, as thou did
thy As he did Israel by the pillar of fire and the cloud.
people Israel, by the pillar of the fire, and the pillar of the cloud.

Give us hearts ever to remember, How he has sought for us from heaven.
how thou have sought for us from heaven; so as all the earth has s^ene and
heard of thy glory; and have carried us as upon Eagles Brought us to the
frontiers of the heavenly Canaan.
wings, and now brought us to the very frontiers of thy heavenly Canaan, and
made us to see and taste of the riches, happiness, and glory of it in thy
sacred Gospel.

Oh our blessed God, most gracious, and most dreadful, To be a fraid of having
a thought of looking back toward Egypt, toward Popery or Popish superstition.
make us and all thy people, to be afraid of ever having any thought of
turning back, so much as in our hearts, or of ever having a look toward
Egypt, or Sodom again, toward any part of that Popery or Popish
superstition and Idolatry, that abominable drudgery, under Satan and
Antichrist, from which thou have so graciously delivered us.

Oh never suffer us to admit That we may never admit of any comparison of their
leekes with our Manna*
of any imagination, or so much as one motion, of comparing the Leekes, Onions,
and Garlic of Egypt, with the hid Manna, of thy sacred Law, and heavenly
Gospel. Albeit we hear and see their That notwithstanding all their rage we
may never distrust the Lords presence or power.
^age and fury, and the power of all their armies, banding themselves against
us, either to swallow us up at once, or else to pursue us into the heart of the
sea; yet keep us that we never rebel against thee, thinking to turn back
from thee, to go into Egypt again, distrusting thy truth, thy presence, and
power.

Cause us, Oh gracious Father, That God can least endure this sin.
wisely to consider of, and ever to have this as before our eyes, that of all
dishonors done unto thy heavenly Majesty, thou can least endure this, chiefly
after so long trial and experience, which thou have given us of thy power,
goodness and mercy toward That this may make him swear in his wrath we shall
never enter into his rest.
us. That this sin alone, may justly make thee swear in thy wrath, that we
shall never enter into thy rest.

Make all them that have To make all such to know that this sin without
repentance will cut them off from ever entering the heavenly Canaan.
dishonored thee in this high kind, sinning thus against thy glorious
Majesty, to know for certain, that without speedy and unfeigned repentance
thou will cut them off^ from ever seeing thy celestial Canaan; and much more,
Chiefly them who as the ten spies have brought an evil report upon this good
land.
make all them to know this specially, who with the ten spies, after they
have not only searched out the good land, tasted, and brought to others, the
fruit of it, but filled them selves, at least with the outward blessings, and
daynties thereof, have yet either turned back, or brought an evil report upon
it, even upon thy sacred religion and Gospel, to discourage their Brethren
thereby, to cause them to be faint-hearted, and as much as ^veth in them, to
turn into Egypt again.

Oh Lord most holy, most To remember that of all who tempted the Lord by their
unbeleefe never any could enter into Canaan.
dreadful, and most terrible, make us all ever to remember, that of all those
hundredth thousands, who so tempted and dishonored thee, by their unbeleefe, in
the way toward the earthly Canaan, never any one could enter in, but thou
causedst their catkasses to fall in the wilderness, until they were utterly
consumed; and for those that And those who brought that slander died by a
fearful plague.
brought that vile slander upon the good land, thou causedst them to die by a
terrible plague, and that therefore these may justly expect a That these^ may
expect a more heavy vengeance.
more heavy wrath and vengeance from thy Majesty.

Oh gracious Father, give all thine own faithful people To have the sound
hearts of Caleb and Iosuah.
and children, the same hearts of Caleb and Joshua, especially all them, who as
those thy two worthy servants, have unto this day constantly stuck unto thy
sacred Majesty, in the conscionable profession of thy heavenly truth, To give
constant testimony to the holiness of his religion.
that we may all courageously and boldly give testimony, unto the happiness of
this good land, into which thou have brought us, and this good way of life,
wherein thou have set us: that this indeed, to wit, the sincere profession of
thy name, according to thy sacred word, and as it is confirmed by our good
Laws, is a land that flows with milk and honey: and the Lord, if he love us,
will continue it unto us, and increase the glory and happiness of it, until
he have brought us into his heavenly Canaan.

Enable us (good Father) To encourage our hearts and persuade our brethren that
none of us ever rebel against the Lord, nor fear the proud enemy.
thus to encourage our own hearts, and the hearts of all our faithful
Brethren; and for all other to persuade them by all means out of thy blessed
word, that they rebel not against thee, the Lord of hoasts, neither fear the
proud enemies of the Church; but But only be humbled before him for all our
sins.
only that we may jointly be truly humbled before thy glorious Majesty for all
our sins, whereby we have thus provoked thy greatness, and holiness, and
thus caused thee to muster thine armies, and to strengthen thine and our
enemies against us, to cause thine own people in so many places to fly before
them.

Oh Lord enable us by thy To pray that we may never leave wrestling with the
Lord, until he have inclined all our hearts, chiefly of all in authority for
saving his Church and appeasing his wrath.
holy Spirit, that we may never leave wrestling with thee, until we have
prevailed with thy Majesty thus far, that thou shall incline the hearts of
all, especially all those, whom thou have set in thy place, for the saving of
thy people, that they and all their dominions, even all the Churches, and every
soul of thine, may seek thee, in sack cloth and ashes, in fasting, weeping,
and mourning, never giving over crying to thee, through thy Christ, until
thine anger be appeased, and thou be reconciled to thy people again; for that
then undoubtedly (as thou have been wont to do in former Ages) thou will make
thine, and thy For that then his enemies shall be but bread for his people.
Numb. 14. 9,
Churches enemies, to be but bread for thy people, that all the world shall
see, that their shield is departed from them, and that thou the Lord of That we
shall not need to ^eare them any more.
hoasts art with us, and that we shall not need to fear them any more. That
we may know that God has spared us hitherto of his rich mercy. Numb. 14. 13.
19.


Oh gracious God, and most tender Father, cause all the Churches to know, and
especially us of this sinful nation, that hitherto we, and so many as have
been preserved, thou alone have spared and saved us, of thy rich mercy, and at
the instant requests and importunings And at the cries of his faithful
servants.
of thy Moseses, which have been amongst us.

And more specially, cause all unbeleevers to know, that thou now speak to
them, as thou did to thy people in the wilderness. That notwithstanding
thy great mercies, and the sparing of us at the cries of thy faithful ones,
yet all the earth shall be filled Psalm. 21.
with the glory of the Lord. That none who still tempt him shall ever see the
heavenly Canaan.
that all those who have seen thy glory, the good land, and great
deliverances, which thou have given to thy people, and yet have so often, and do
still tempt thee, not obeying thy voice, shall never see that thy heavenly
Canaan, which thou had so promised and offered unto them, nor any other that
so provoked thee by their unbeleefe. That Only those who remain constant with
the Lord shall enter in.
only thy faithful servants, who as Caleb and Iosuah, having another Spirit,
do follow thee still, remaining still more constant and faithful, even in the
greatest timerousnesse and backsliding of the multitude, these only thou will
bring into the heavenly Canaan, and they alone shall inherit it for evermore.

Hear us, Oh most gracious To pray that remembering Gods mercies and our
estates, we may strive fast forward toward the heavenly Canaan.
God. and loving Father, and keep us by the mighty power of thy blessed
Spirit, that always remembering what thou have done for us, and considering
aright of the miserable estate of all under Satan and Antichrists tyranny, and
our own happy estate and condition, under our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
we may all jointly strive fast forward toward the full fruition of thine own
glorious Majesty in the heavenly Canaan; and in the new Jerusalem eternally.

Grant, that in the mean That the unfeigned repentance of all the true
Churches.
time, the unfeigned repentance of all thy true Churches and people, for all
our sins, may be one of thy effectual and principal instruments, for the
pulling of the remainder of thy people forth May help to pull all out of
Sodom and Egypt and to cause them to fly speedyly out of Babylon.
of Sodom, and of Egypt, and to cause all thine, to fly speedily and get
themselves out of Babylon, that by escaping her sins, they may likewise escape
her plagues: and finally, that it may thus prepare the way to the calling and
conversion of the Jews, And to prepare the way to Christ's glorious coming.
the gathering in of all thy Israel, the speedy coming of our Lord and Savior
for our eternal deliverance, the everlasting glory of thy Sion, and of us all
for evermore. Hear us, Oh most gracious Father, in these our requests, and
accept of this our poor thanksgiving, for this inestimable favor, even for
Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Savior.

X. A prayer, that we and all the A prayer that we may glorify God by walking
more conscionably in all his Laws and Commandments.
Churches in token of our thankfulness to our blessed God, for our
deliverance from Babylon, and for making us his people and Children, and his
Covenant with us, may set our selves to honor him more then ever we have
done, especially in a more conscionable and cheerful walking in all his holy
Laws and Commandments, that he may always keep us from that bloody tyranny.
OH Lord, most holy, most Hallowed be etc.
great and glorious, who have made all things for thine own sake, even the
wicked Prove. 16. 4.
for the day of evil. Persuade the hearts of all thine own That God would
persuade all that he has created all for his own glory.
people, that thou have thus created and formed all things, for thine own
honor, that thy great name might ever be magnifyed in all the world: and
especially by thine own children; and to this end, thou have caused the glory
of thy Caused his glory to ^ s^ine in every creature.
wisdom, power, and goodness to shine in all thy works, even in every
creature of the world, to convince all the That all may give him his glory, or
be left utterly without excuse.
earth, that every soul that will not give thee thy glory, may be left
utterly without excuse, and all the disobedient may have their mouths stopped,
and be forever confounded before thy Tribunal.

Above all, make all thy That this glory is more visibly upon the Churches
rescued and delivered from Satan and Antichrist.
people to understand and know, that thou have caused this thy glory to be
more visibly upon the Churches, (which thou have so mightily rescued and
delivered from the power of Satan and Antichrist, and whom thou have taken
into so near a Covenant, as to be thy only people, to whom thou have
committed thy heavenly word and ordinances) then it is upon all other people
and That we may set forth his glory by keeping his S^atutes.
places of the world besides; and that this thou have done chiefly to this end,
that we might set forth thy glory in this, by keeping all thy Statutes, and
observing all thy Laws.

Lord cause all to know moreover, that to this end, To this end he has set
before us life and death.
thou* have not delivered us, and set us out of that bondage, to serve thee in
holiness, but have set before us also life and death, blessing and cursing, and
have Deuteronomy. 30, 19.
bidden us to choose life, that Bidden us to choose life.
we and ours may live, and have assured us hereof, and that only by loving
thee, the Lord our God, by obeying thy voice, by cleaving fast unto thee,
because thou (through thy Christ) art unto us our life, and the length of our
How we may do it.
days, and whatsoever thou bidst us, thou will enable us to do, we only
believing in thy beloved Son, and using Ios. 1. 8.
the holy means which thou have appointed.

Make us all to this purpose, ever to remember, how thou have charged us all,
that Charged us that the book of the Law shall never depart out of our hearts.
the book of thy Law, thy sacred word should never depart out of our mouths,
but that we should meditate in it day and night; that we may all observe and
do, according to all that is written in that book: for that then thou will
make all our ways (in this our journey) prosperous; no enemy shall be able
Then no enemy shall be able to withstand us. Ios. 1. 5.
to withstand us, much less to surprise us of a sudden, but thou will be with
us, and We shall in all have good success.
thou will then give us good success.

Yea good Lord, let this ever be before our faces, how to incorage^s better h^
(...) to, thou have assured us, that if we will thus think and meditate of
thy Laws and Commandments day and night, to observe and do them, and honor
thee thereby; thou will honor us herein, that we shall be a blessed Be a
blessed people. Psalm. 1. 2. 3.
people, and like the trees plainted by the rivers of water; that we shall
bring forth our fruit in due season, and that so, as our leaf shall not fade,
but look whatsoever Prosper in all
we do, shall prosper. How then Be wiser then our enemies.
we shall be wiser then our enemies; yea we shall have Psalm. 119. 98. 99. 100.
more understanding then our teachers, and then all the ancient; when we can
set our selves thus to honor thee, by keeping all thy Commandments, like as
thou did veryfie thy gracious promises in this ^alfe, to thy faithful
servant David, to Daniell, Like as David, Daniell, and others. Dan. 1. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6.
to those worthyes of the Captivity, whom thou did so highly honor, for
that they so honored thee, as that they would rather choose to be cast upon
all miseries, yea* the cruellest death, then voluntarily to defile themselves,
by transgressing but the very least of all thy holy Commandments. God will be
with us as we are with him. 2. Chro. 15. 2.


Make us all therefore that are thi^e, rightly to understand, that whilst we
thus honor thee, in being thus Ezra. 8. 22.
with thee (in faith and all holy obedience to these thy blessed Commandments)
thou will likewise honor us (in being with us in mercy Heb. 10. 38.
and truth) thy good hand shall be so sensibly upon us, that we shall live by
faith, in assurance We shall be able to live by faith
and experience, that thou will accomplish unto ^s every one of thy (...)
promises, and that thus persevering in faith and obedience, we shall be saved
eternally.

Make us to know for certain, that so long, and so long only as we watch and
strive heereunto, seeking cheerfully to receive the Law of thy mouth, and to
lay uppe thy Job 22. 21. 22, 23, etc.
words in our souls, we shall be able to lift up our hearts To lift up hearts
and hands in assurance to be heard. L^m. 3, 39, 40, 41, 42.
with our hands, in undoubted assurance, that we shall be heard, in whatsoever
shall be best for us, and for thy Church.

Cause us to know and believe Only such as wholly endeavor to walk with God,
are the innocent that shall deliver the Island.
for certain, that so many of us, and so many only as thus seek to make and
keep peace with thy Majesty, in turning and submitting ourselves thus wholly to
thy Covenant, as holy Noah, Moses, and Abraham did, are those whom thou
accountest the innocent, and to whom thou have promised that they shall deliver
the Island. Job 22, 30.


Lord at length persuade To be persuaded that all Gods promises are made to an
endeavor of an entire obedience.
us all that are thine, and make every one of us to seek to persuade all
others, that unto this entire endeavor of obedience to all thy Commandments
both of thy Law and Gospel, are all thy promises made: and that contrarily
against all contempt and despising And contrarily.
of the heavenly Commandments, yea against every wilful disobedience, though it
be but to one Commandment, thy cursings and th^e t^ings are denounced, which
thou do dreadfully execute accordingly, because men will not thus give thee
thy glory.

Good Lord awaken all the Churches, and open the eyes of all thine own people
rightly to conceive and understand these things, and how Satan How Satan
knowing this,
that old Serpent, that arch and bloody enemy of thy Church knowing all this
well enough, has sought in all the prosperity Has labored to make all to
content themselves only with a bare outward profession, destroying all the
power of godliness, to the Lords dishonor.
of thy Churches, to cause thine own people to dishonor thee, by making only
a bare outward profession of honoring thee, by receiving and setting up thy
heavenly Religion and Commandments to obey them in word, but trampling them
all under foot generally, according to the evil customs and manners of the
Countries and places where they live; that thou That he might leave all into
his hand.
might leave thy people into his hand, and into the hands of all his cruel
instruments, as thou have most righteously done in so many parts of thy Church
already, and threatnest all the rest of thy people for the same.

Oh dear Father, how many of thy faithful servants; who have lived in those
parts The acknowledgement of Gods righteousness herein, by many of his
faithful servants.
of thy Church, which are now left into the enemies hands, do herein justify
thy proceedings, acknowledging thy righteousness in all that thou have brought
upon them, even for this very cause of carnal Gospelling, and loose profession.

Oh tender Father, make us To pray, that we may be able likewise to justify the
Lord, and never to rest until he give thee all unfeigned repentance for it.
all able likewise to justify thee in this behalf; and never to rest crying
unto thee for them, until thou shall open their eyes to see and acknowledge
thy righteousness, and that they shall unseinedly repent of their most heinous
dishonor done to thy sacred Majesty herein, in causing thy name hereby to be
blasphemed amongst thine enemies.

Yea cause us (good Lord) That we may be warned by their ensample.
by their fearful ensample, even us specially of this sinful Nation, to meet
thee speedily by our unfeigned repentance for this dreadful sin, whereof we
are generally no less guilty then any of them, co^dering the gracious means
which we have so long time enjoyed above all. Oh make us to do it forthwith,
To do it forthwith.
before it be too late, and that thy wrath be powered on us as upon them, and
that there be no remedy. Cause To be warned hereof by the very Heathen. 1 Samuel 6, 5, ^.
us at least to be warned by the very Heathen, who acknowledged this giving
glory thus to thee the God of Israel, to be the only means to appease thy
wrath, and prevent thy further judgments.

Lord smi^e the hearts of all thy Lieutenants, and of all to To smite the
hearts of all Gods Lieutenants with a true sense hereof.
whom the charge of thy honor, the saving of thy people, are specially
committed, that they may be thoroughly awaked and touched with a right Meditation
and sense hereof, and of their account to be given even for this dishonor
before thy heavenly Majesty, that thy people should thus fall away, or thus
fly before thine enemies. And for all To persuade us that our Adversaries are
raised up to humble us to walk with our God.
thine and our proud adversaries persuade our hearts, that thou have raised
them up thus against us all, as thou did Pharao against Israel, that when
thou have humbled us by them, so as to turn us to thee again, by causing us
to submit and humble our souls to walk lowlily with thee* in all these thy
blessed Commandments, and so to honor How then he will get himself glory on
them.
thee, thou will then get thy self glory upon their pride and fury, and in
our final deliverance from them, giving them for our ransom.

Yea (good Father) for every particular soul of us, make us to know in our
very hearts, that thou as thou have To know, as we are made for his glory, so
he will be glorified in each of us.
made us for thine own glory; so thou will be glorified in us and by us, and
that in endless mercy and eternal In mercy,
compassion upon so many of us, as thou having ordained to be vessels of
glory, give hearts unto, thus to humble our selves, to seek to walk
obediently in all thy blessed Laws and commandments: and of the other side,
that thou will be glorified in declaring thy wrath and everlasting Or
vengeance.
vengeance, which thou will in thy due time execute upon all thy disobedient
and stubborn enemies, who shall declare themselves manifestly by rebelling
against thee, to be vessels of wrath prepared for destruction.

Lord; by the due meditation and consideration hereof, awaken and rowze up all
thy people to learn to make more true conscience of all thy blessed*
Commandments, then ever we have done heretofore, for the appeasing of thy
Majesty; that thy glory That his glory may shine in our deliverance.
may shine in all the world, in pardoning the sins of thy people, delivering
us from our cruel enemies, and getting thy self honor upon Babylon, And
getting himself honor upon Babylon.
who has chiefly for this been, and is, the staff of thy wrath and
indignation.

Hear us therefore herein, and cause us at length, even in token of our
thankfulness, and in the zeal we have for thy glory, yea in a vehement desire,
that thy glory may be set uppe, and thy great name may by us be magnified in
all the world, thus to seek to renew and perform all our vows, to walk more
obediently in all thy blessed Commandments then ever heretofore, even for our
Lord Jesus Christ his sake, our only Redeemer and Savior,

Amen,
XI A Prayer that Gods glory may A prayer that we may give God the glory of
his inward worship according to the 1. Commandment, and so help to pacify
his Majesty toward the Churches.
break forth more and more, then ever heretofore, in causing us and all his
people in all the Churches, to set him up alone as our God, and make him great
in our hearts, by having our hearts first soundly replenished with all the
parts of his inward worship, commanded in the first Commandment, without
which, we and all our outward worship, and whatsoever we do in his service are
utterly in vain That thus all the Churches, and every soul, may seek to
pacify his Majesty, by giving unto him his due glory.
OH Lord God, who art most glorious in thy (...) Majesty (...) To pray that we
may set up God in our hearts, giving him there his inward worship.
in all thy Attributes, and have made this glory of thine to shine bright in
every one of thy works, and chiefly in thy heavenly word, that thou might
be glorified accordingly by all thy people, and chiefly by them, whom thou
have redeemed from Egypt and Babylon to this end and purpose; set up this thy
glory in the hearts and consciences of every one of thine elect, that all of
us may know and acknowledge thee In knowing and acknowledging him.
such a one as thou have revealed thy self in thy most blessed word.

Lord grant, that all of us may be known hereby, to John 6, 45.
be taught by thee, and that the earth may be filled with the Heb. 2, ^4.
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, according to
thy gra^cious promises made unto thy Church in the flourishing estate thereof:
yea, persuade us good Lord, that without the true knowledge of thee, and thy
heavenly will, our hearts cannot be good, howsoever we may deceive our selves,
as the world does generally.

More specially, enable us to set thee up in our hearts, not only by knowing
thee in a general manner, but by believing that thou art our God; that we may
be able In faith believing him to be our God. John. 20. 28.
in faith each of us with Thomas* to call thee* My God, and my Lord, and so to
believe every thing, contained in thy heavenly word, as that this power of our
faith in thee* may show it self, in each part and action of our whole life,
both in readily obeying every one of thy blessed Commandments, as thy
servants, Abraham and Noah did, and also in fearing every one of thy
threatenings and jvdgements, and finally in laying lively hold of every one of
thy gracious promises made unto us in the same word; that so we may always
cheer up our hearts, and encourage our selves, and also one another, to run
out more joyfully in all the narrow way of life.

Lord persuade all our To be persuaded that this peculiar faith was the faith
of Abraham and all the faithful. Romans ^3.
hearts, that this particular and powerful faith (howsoever it be scoffed at
by all thine and thy Churches enemies) was the very faith of our Father
Abraham, and of all the faithful recorded, in thy book, even that whereby all
Heb. 11. 2.
the Fathers, received good report; and that without this lively working faith,
it is Heb. (...). 6.
impossible for any one ever to be pleasing, or ever to do Romans 14. 23.
any thing acceptable to thy heavenly Majesty.

Good Lord, make us all able upon the our right and saving knowledge of thee,
that thou Upon this our faith to hold fast the Anchor of our hope.
art faithful and true, and this our faith in thee, that thou art our God, to
hold fast the Anchor of our hope, and to manifest it, by our waiting and
looking steadfastly, for the full accomplishment of every promise that thou have
made, either concerning thy Church in general, or else any of us particularly:
and also of whatsoever thou have denounced, concerning thine and thy Churches
enemies, and that thou will do every thing in thy due time, for thy Church,
and against thy enemies, howsoever for the present, all things may seem to go
against thy Church and people.

Yea, enable us withal (good Father) ever to honor thee, by showing forth
this To honor the Lord by manifesting our faith by our confidence.
our faith, by the confidence which we have in thee, even then when we may
seem to be most forgotten, and forsaken of thee, both by casting all our
burdens upon thee at all times, and also by our rejoicing always in thee as in
our good God, that thou take care for us; and by being hereby full of
Christian chearfulnes and courage, against all the oppositions and fears, that
ever we shall, or can mee^e with, in this our journey toward Can^an, as thy
worthiest servants have been wont to be.

Oh magnify thy power To manifest our faith by our love to the Lord, his
Commandments and ordinances.
and goodness, in shedding out thy love so abundantly upon all thy Churches,
and every member thereof, and so manifesting it before the world, that in the
true sense and feeling of it in our hearts, and our lively faith in thee, we
may all jointly manifest the fervent love we return unto thy Majesty, by our
unfeigned love of every one of thy blessed Commandments, and our fervent
desire to thy statutes, to walk in them all without reproof, yea, by our
ardent affection toward all thy ordinances and servants, only for thy cause.

Good Lord, cause the fervent By our zeal for his glory.
zeal that we have toward thy name, to appear before the world, in the
vehement grief and indignation, that we have for all y^ dishonors done unto
thy heavenly Majesty, by trampling under feet thy blessed Commandments, thy
religion, and servants, and the injuryes and contumelyes done against any of
them; and so likewise by our study and holy endeavor, by all means to,
promote thy true religion and causes, and by our vehement hatred, of whatsoever
is offensive to thy holiness; that we may set up nothing in our hearts but
thy Majesty, and those things which thou love, accounting all other as dross
and dung, in regard of thy holiness, yea, even life it self, if it hinder us
from enjoying or obeying thee.

Cause thy glory to rest herein, upon all the Churches, That we may honor him
showing forth all holy patience.
and upon all thy poor afflicted servants, that upon the assurance of thy
love, and that thou art our gracious God, we may honor thee in showing forth
all holy patience, with all cheerfullnesse, even in the midst of all our
trials; that howsoever* thou may seem to be displeased with us, and to
frown upon us, yea, to favor our enemies in all their proceedings, and to
give us up into their hands, to let them to be lords over us, and make us a
prey to their teeth; yet our eye may be still at thee, at thy love, wisdom,
and faythfulness knowing that whatsoever thou do to us, thou do it but to
humble us for our security, and for all other our greevous sins, and to prove
us, that thou art certainly disposing all to our greatest comfort in the end:
and thus to prepare our way unto thy heavenly Jerusalem.

That thus we all may ever possess our souls in patience, and wait for the
happy issue, That we may possess our souls in patience, waiting for the happy
issue. Job 13, 15.
both of all our own trialles, and of all the trialles of thy Church and
people, and be always able to say with holy Job, though thou should kill
us, or leave us utterly and wholly unto the pleasures and lusts of our
enemies; yet we will still trust in thee, approoving our ways in thy sight,
that hereby we may make it manifest to the faces of all our enemies, that we
are certainly assured, that nothing can separate us from thy love, and that
thou can not forsake, fail, or forget us, whatsoever (...) the present thou
do unto us.

Ye^, oh most blessed God, That we may give him glory in our childlike fear
cause thy glory yet to shine more clearly upon all the Churches, and upon
everyone of us that are thy true servants and children indeed, in this behalf,
that though the wicked fear thee not, but seek to drive all the true fear of
thy Majesty even out of our hearts likewise, as out of their own, and do
therefore hate and persecute us, so far as thou permits them, only because
we fear thee, and put our tru^t in thy mercy: yet we may fear thee so much
more with a true, holy, childe-like fear; that we may ever, and especially now
in these evil days, labor to live always as in thy presence, and as in the
very eye of thy all-seeing Majesty.

Grant good Lord, that we Walking constantly without God in holy fear.
may be able thus to walk with thee constantly, until we shall be translated
hence, and with holy Noah, to endeavor to be still more righteous in our
generation, and to be daily building our Arkes to save our selves and Families,
and all other that we can get into the same, from the flood of thy vengeance,
that is rushing upon all the world of the wicked.

And albeit the world scorn Albeit the world scorn and hate us for it.
and deride us daily for it, and though we be the only talk and hatred of the
wicked, and as men appointed and designed to death only for this our fear of
thee, in the bloody hopes of thine and our proud enemies, yet cause us herein
to honor thee, that we may not fear the faces of them while we walk in thy
blessed Commandments, and do only as thou requirest of us, but that by the
might and power of thy heavenly Spirit, we may be more full of all Christian
courage, as the three worthy Children of the Captivity, and as good Daniel and
holy Nehemiah.

And yet more also enable us herein likewise to honor To shewforth our honor
toward the Lord by our Humility.
thee before the world, and to show openly before men and Angels, that we have
set thee uppe in our hearts to be our God, even by walking humbly with thee,
that though the world regard thee not, but thou art far above out of their
sight, and though they do band themselves against thee, against thy heavenly
word and servants; yea though they scorn al thy judgments and threatenings, as
the Giants before the flood, and as proud Pharao and Herod did, yet we may all
walk ever in all humility and lowliness of Spirit before thee.

Make us ever to have before To this end, to have ever before our eyes Gods
excellency and our own vileness and danger by Nature, and Satan's malice.
our faces thy glorious excellency, and our own vileness; thy holiness, and
our sinnefulnesse, and that not only by the fall of our first Parents, and by
the whole course of our sinful lives, and also the power, subtilty, and malice
of Satan against us to destroy us each moment, without thy special
preservation and mercy; but even for the very corruption of our sinful
natures which still dwell in us; that body of death which would carry us to
destruction* yea* even to hell it self every minute, if thou in the riches of
thy mercy should not restrain it, and should not cover all our sins,
yea, keep and uphold us.

Oh give us hearts, that That we may give to the Lord all the glory of our
standing and perseverance in grace and of each good thing.
herein we may all magnify thy great name, in giving unto thee, as is thy
due, all the glory of our standing and perseverance in grace, and of every good
thing that ever we enjoy, acknowledging from our souls, that they are all the
free gifts of thy rich mercy, and that we are not worthy any of them, nay that
we are much less then the least of them, as thy dearest servants That we may
withal give him his glory mourning continually for all the dishonours done
unto his name, and all provocations against the Churches.
have been wont to do.

And good Lord, herein make us specially able to give thee thy glory, in being
thoroughly humbled, and in mourning continually for all the heinous sins,
whereby thou have been, and art still, daily more and more provoked against the
Churches, for all the dishonours done unto thy great name; that we may be
every one as righteous Lot in Sodom, and as the mourners before the
Captivity, and as those worthy servants of thine, both Ezra, Nehemiah, and
Daniel, until we shall see again the setting up of thy glory and Gospel* thy
gracious countenance shining upon all the Churches, and the full delivery of
thy dear Children, out of the hands of their most merciless and bloody
enemies.

Oh grant, that hereby our To pray to be able to see hereby who they are that
truly honor the Lord* and have set him up for their God.
eyes may be open, to see aright both who they are, that truly honor thee, by
having thee their God, as they ought, in setting thee thus up in their hearts,
in every one of these respects, and who are hereby truly thankful for their
great deliverance from Egypt and Babylon; yea, from Satan and eternal
damnation. Hear us for Jesus Christ his sake our only Lord and Savior.

Another Prayer, according to the first Commandment.
OH Lord, most glorious, To discern of the greatness of the sin of all the
Churches, whereby he is dishonored and provoked.
and most blessed, as we entreat thee to manifest who they are which truly
honor thee, having set thee uppe in their hearts as their God: make us able by
these likewise, to discern of the greatness of the sin of all the Churches,
when after so long a time, there yet appears so little true saving knowledge
of thy Majesty; but that such a By palpable ignorance and blindness in them.
gross and palpable darkness is upon the most congregations and places, that
the people are ready to receive any errors broached amongst them, and that so
great a part of thy people seem now much more ready to receyve Popery and
superstition again, then to stand forth for the maintayning thy heavenly
Gospel, with the loss of any thing for it; and so very many thereby so
forward, to put their necks under the yoke of Antichrist again, rejecting
the sweet yoke of Jesus Christ.

When there is also such a By Atheism
world of Atheism, as that so many both in Court and Country live as if there
were no God, no heaven, no judgment, no place of torment. Such multitudes
perishing daily for lack of this knowledge, living as without Christ, being
ignorant of all saving knowledge of him, and so go hoodwinked to hell: worse
then the Ox that knows his owner.

Make us able hereby, to Unbelief.
consider aright, how justly thou may be provoked against the Churches for
our wonderful unbeleefe, and may even give us up into our enemies hands for
the same, when there are so marvelous few to be found in all the Churches, who
show forth their saving knowledge of thy Majesty, and faith in thee, by their
conversations, by making a right conscience of every one of thy blessed
Commandments to obey them; or of thy judgments or threats to restrain them
from sin; or of thy sweet promises and mercyes to be encouraged thereby to
run more cheerfully in the narrow way of life; but all sorts, except the
small remnant, full of profaneness, or extreme licentiousness.

Oh make us to behold, that carnal confidence, which so Carnal confidence.
possesses all almost generally that (in steed of honoring thee, by having
set thee up to be our only confidence and strength) we do trust in vanity,
making flesh our arm; either relying upon our wit, our policy and counsel, or
other like means; by all which, as our hearts are withdrawn from thee, so we
have and do bring a fearful curse upon our selves, making these our gods.

Lord make us able to consider of this more seriously, and of the truth hereof
by this one thing, that in all our straites and fears, we so little run unto
thy Majesty to seek thy face and help in the first place, by humbling our
souls before thee, and seeking to pacify thy wrath as we ought; but only
look to the outward means, as relying upon them alone or principally.

And Lord we entreat thee to show us in our hearts, and to set plainly before
our faces, how in all the rest of these holy duties, we have provoked thee
alike; how in steed of taking to heart the dishonors done unto thy heavenly
Majesty, and being zealous for thy glory, we have been, and are so generally,
either stark cold, or lukewarm as the Lukewarmnesse.
^odicean, that thou may justly spewe us out of thy mouth, or at least, that
we are so mervailously decayed and fallen from our first love.

Lord give us hearts to consider of our most heinous sin in this behalf, that
in steed of so loving thee, thy truth, and servants as we should do, if we had
set thee up truly in our souls and consciences, as our God; we have almost
every Loving other things more then Gods Majesty.
one set up some other thing, which we manifest plainly, that we have, and do
love, and prefer before thy glorious holiness, as having our affections set
thereon much more, then on thy heavenly Majesty, and for obtaining or enjoying
whereof, we are not afraid to endanger our selves to loose thy favor, as some
of us our children and friends to make them great; others, our pleasures to
take our delight, and satiate our selves in them; others of us, and that very
generally, the riches, pomp, honor, and wealth of the world; and all of us,
except some little remnant, preferring our own selves, our own honor, ^ase,
peace, and safety, and whatsoever is most pleasing unto us, before thy glorious
Majesty, and thy heavenly Commandments.

Lord make us able to see, how we have and do provoke thee generally, to power
out thy wrath upon us all: some of us by gross disobedience Disobedience
and obstinacy against some one or other of these thy Sacred Commandments, if
not all of them (wherein soever they cross the corruption of ou^ own hearts)
and that against the very light of our own consciences; although thou have
told us plainly, that this has been, and is, nothing else but rebellion against
thee, 1 (...)* 15, 22, 23
and as the sin of witch craft in thy eyes.

How others of us, dishonor thee by our timerousnes, T^ousnes.
fearing the faces of men more then thy glorious face; and thereuppon doing or
forbearing good or evil only, for fear of man; wherein we have and do
commit manifest Idolatry, making Gods of men, and setting them up in thy place.
How others of us tempt thee by presuming upon Presumption.
thy mercy, to be bold to sin, because thou art so merciful; though thou have
told us directly, that thou will not Deuteronomy. 29, 19, 20, 21.
be merciful to such.

Yea, which is yet a higher degree (good Lord:) Make us to see how many amongst
us, in ^teed of having so set thee up as our God in our hearts, and of being
continually humbled before thy glorious Majesty, for all our sins and
provocations, have added fuel to the kindling and inflaming thy wrath against
us; as Pride against God.
all amongst us, who have set our selves against thy Word, thy judgments, or
servants, even with an high hand, as if it were in despite of thy Majesty, and
even in defiance of thee.

O^ make us to see and acknowledge To see that as the Popish sort have set up
their false Gods outwardly*
all our sins, and withal, that as the Popish sort in every place, have set
up other Gods to anger thee, as chiefly their holy Father the Pope (whose word
and ordinances they reverence above thine; rejecting thy word utterly in regard
of their Popes decrees and traditions) and with him have set up all their
Saints and Idols, to whom by their invocation of them, they give his glory; so
every one of us, who albeit in words we profess thee our God, have yet in our
So we in our hearts.
hearts set up other things, which we prefer before thee, and on which we
spend more of our thoughts, and more of our love and care to enjoy them, then on
thy Majesty; even we likewise have set up so many false Gods in our hearts, to
provoke thee to the uttermost.

And finally, good Lord, To see even by this first Commandment how few do
truly honor the Lord.
make us all able to see by this first commandment of thine, how wonderful
few they are, so far as we are able to conceive, who by the light of their
good works, do indeed and truth glorify thee their heavenly Father, by
showing forth before men and Angels, that they have so set thee up in their
(...) as their God: and those few that All wicked men maligning all who have so
set him up, so to glorify his great name.
do so indeed, are the men principally maligned of all the people of the
world, even for this cause principally, because they show in their lives, that
they have thus in their hearts set thee up to be their God, although that they
be ye only blessed people, having thee their God, all other being in a most
miserable estate; and that they are therefore the only men in honor and
favor with thee, and by whom chiefly, as by Abraham, Noah, and Moses, thou
saves^ and preservest* all the rest of us.

Make us Lord to understand To be able to conceive aright hereo:
and conceive aright hereof, and that for this very (...) alone, whereby we
have That we may wonder how even for this sin God has spared us so long.
so generally se^ our selves, not only to malign and dishonor the^, but even
to fight against thy heavenly Majesty; we may wonder how thou have spared us
of this nation hither to, and not left us up as the other Churches, until we
shall see and acknowledge what we h^e done against the^, our most gracious and
out most blessed God in this behalf. That we may never ^est until we have so
set up the Lord in our hearts.


Hear us, Oh tender Father, and suffer us never to ^est, until we have
repented particularly, of this our most heinous and crying sin; and that all
of us, that ever look* to have a strong assurance that we belong to thy
eternal ^lection, have thus truly se^ the^ up in our hearts, as our Lord and
God. That so by our unfeigned repentance, thou may once again manifest thy
self in the deliverance of all thy Churches and people, in a more glorious
manner, to be still our God graciously reconciled to us again in Jesus Chrst,
and may so renew thy Covenant to remain our God, and the God of our
posterity, through him, and for his sake alone, for evermore,

Amen, Amen*
XII. A humble confession of the sins of the Churches, and an acknowledgment
of Gods righteous proceeding for our unthank fullness and transgression of his
Laws: and for that though we have heard of all their miseries, and known our
own dangers* yet we have not been humbled, nor made our supplications as we
ought, according to the 1. of Nehemiah.
OH Lord God of heaven An importuning of the Lord by his justice and mercy.
and earth, who art the great and terrible God, proceeding most fearfully in
thy dreadful judgments, even against thine own dear people and children, as
thou did against thy people of Israel, for their unthankfuluesse, and for
their despising, and transgressing thy blessed Laws and Commandments: and yet
art withal full of mercy and tender compassion to thy people, repenting of
their sins, and truly humbled for their provocations; thou, who keep,
Covenant and mercy for ever, for all that truly love thee, and who desire
unfeignedly to observe all thy Commandments: hear us and al To hear his
people crying jointly to him.
thy poor Churches and people in all the earth, at this day looking up to thee
alone and crying loud unto thee.

We pray thee (Oh tender To behold the miseries and dangers of all his poor
people
Father) that thine eyes may be open, and thine ears may be attent, both to
behold the miseries and dangers, and to hear the prayers of thy poor servants
which we all jointly pour out before thee day and night, for our brethren thy
servants and children which are in such great affliction; and do now
uncessantly confess all our sins, and the sins of all thy people, which we
have sinned against thee. Both we, and our Fathers, all of us have grievously
provoked thee now this threescore years and above, even since thou first took
us by the hand to bring us forth of Egypt and Babylon; and diddst also carry us
out as upon Eagles wings by thy* mig hty hand and o^t-stretched arm.

Oh Lord, we have heard A humble confession, how hearing the miseries of our
brethren and, their perils, yet we have not been humbled for them.
long, and do daily hear more and more, of the innumerable miseries which thou
broughtest upon our brethren and sisters in the Palatinate, it being a
principal member even of our own selves; And so in Bohemia and the Countries
adjoining to it, though further remote from us, yet our dear brethren and
sisters in Christ Jesus; and so likewise in the Churches of France, hard at our
doors, in all the direful slaughters, and butcherly cruelties, which thine
and our merciles enemies have executed upon them in their bloody rage, without
any pity. We have also heard, and do still daily hear ringing in our ears,
the miserable state and condition of the residue of them that have escaped the
bloody sword: some of them enduring all kind of violence and calamities of all
sorts, living in all reproach, the wall of their Jerusalem being broken down,
the gates there of being burnt with fire, all the rest of them living in
continual fear, because of the deadly fury, and hellish plots against them to
destroy them all. And yet though we have long heard, and do daily heave of
these things, and of the rage of thine and our enemies still increased against
them all and against our selves, have we not with thy holy servant Nehemiah,
Neh. 1. 4.
sit down, wept, and mourned for them; muchlesse fasted and prayed before thee
the God of heaven in their behalf, in any such manner as we ought.

Oh thou our most holy A further confession how we have all sinned in our
extreme unthankfulnes and breach of our Covenant with the Lord.
God, and pittyfull Father, we humbly confess and acknowledge, that we have
all grievously sinned against thee, we have not kept thy great goodness in
remembrance, which thou shewedst unto us in delivering our fathers and us so
wonderfully from Egypt and Babylon by so mighty a hand; nor the many great
preservations and deliverances, which since that time our ears have heard, and
our eyes have seen; how thou have rescued us from their jaws, nor yet have we
kept in memory how thou tookest us to be thine own peculiar people of all the
people of the earth; made thy Covenant with us to be our God, and that we
should be thy people, so that we would but walk in this thy Covenant.

But this our Covenant with thy Majesty, though all of us who profess thy
Gospel, have solemnly entered into, for our selves, our children, and
posterity, and every one bound our selves by thy holy Sacraments, chiefly by
our Baptism vow; yet we have all heynously transgressed, we have cast it
behind o^r backs, trampling under foot thy blessed Commandments, thy
statutes and judgments.

Hereby (good Lord) have we most justly brought all this thy fierce wrath upon
so many parts of thy Church, and also provoked thee to threaten most
righteously the like, or more heavy, to come upon us all, until we all see
our unthankfulness and our breach of Covenant: and that we do all jointly
humble our selves under thy most mighty and most fatherly hand, to give thee
thy glory, by renewing and confirming this our Covenant in our true and our
unfeigned repentance.

We therefore do most freely acknowledge, that we have all most grievously
and fearfully transgressed, even in all the Churches, against that first and
great Commandment; yea indeed, against every one of thy most sacred
Commandments, in a high degree, in one kind or other, and that in a special
manner, and (as it were) with a high hand.

For concerning thy inward worship, and giving How concerning Gods inward
worship, multitudes amongst us have set up Satan to adore.
thee thy due glory, by setting thee up as chief in our hearts, to adore and
worship thee as our glorious God. We humbly confess for our selves and
brethren, even against us all, that all of us who in the midst As all living
in blindness or any heinous sin.
of this shining light of thy heavenly word, do still content our selves to
live in ignorance and blindness, or in any heinous sin, and especially in
Athiesme or prophannesse, have set up Satan the God of this world, in our
hearts to be our God; and that he it is that ruling there, so blindes the eyes
of all such, least the light of thy heavenly truth should shine unto them, and
they should be converted and saved thereby.

Multitudes of us (O Lord All who have set up the world in any kind.
thou know) have set up the world as our God, very many of us the riches,
other the pleasures, and others of us the honor and pomp of it to adore; many
other, that Antichrist the Pope of Rome, as al who are Popishly affected in all
the Churches, who all prefer his decrees and ordinances before thy heavenly
word; for that all these, and likewise all others, who adore or honor any
creature with that honor which is due to thy heavenly Majesty alone, or above
thee, have and do prefer all these before thee, and set them up in thy place.
Very few who have set up the Lord as we ought.


But very few there are amongst us (Oh most holy Father) who have so set thee
up as we ought to do our most glorious Lord and God; that is, so as to set
our whole heart upon thee, and to put our whole affiance and confidence in
thee, to love thee with all our heart, soul, strength, and might; to be
zealous for thee, for thy sincere worship and truth; but we are rather (good
Lord) very generally as the Laodicean lukewarm, worthy to be spewed out of
thy mouth. Yea Lord, we have in very many of us increased our sin in this, in
hating and scorning all such, as have been more zealous for thee and for thy
truth, then our selves are: and in that so many of us have sought utterly to
destroy all power of true godliness, in whomsoever it has appeared, yea that
so very many of us have opposed our selves, as it were fighting even against
thine own sacred Majesty, like the Giants before the Flood. For his outward
worship in the second Commandment, how we have ^inned.


And for thy outward worship, the sin of multitudes of us (Oh Lord) has
been, and is no less to provoke thy holiness, as in all those in each of the
Churches, who insted of worshipping thee only, according to thy blessed word
in Spirit and truth, have and do worship and do adore thee by Images,
Crucifixes, and the like Idolatrous or superstitious devises, or by any
willworship whatsoever, devised by man, without ye warrant of thy sacred word:
although those worships have been most goodly in show, and pretended to most
fair and holy ends. And much more, in and by all those who have or do worship
Satan, thy sworn enemy in thy place, using divellish Arts, to effect their
desires, and to bring to pass strange things by his help. This we confess
likewise, what multitudes there are in the Churches, who have and do worship
thee hypocritically, merely in outward ceremonies and bare shows of religion,
and also of those who halt between thy pure and sincere religion, and the
religion of Antichrist.

And so likewise of such as worship mereely as the Pharifes, being forward in
small matters, in tithing Mint and Cummin, omitting in the mean time, the most
weighty; and namely, all true faith, and unseigned repentance, and true turning
unto thy Covenant.

But for those (Oh gracious Father) who by their conscionable walking, do
manifest to the world, that they sincerely worship thee in spirit and truth,
when we consider of them aright how few they are, we may wonder at thy
goodness in sparing us for their sakes; seeing they have been not only so
few, but also so hated, scorned, and abused, for thy sake alone.

Moreover, for taking thy Confession how we have increased our guiltines by
taking Gods name in vain.
glorious name in vain (Oh holy Father) we acknowledge again to our own
shame, that we have made our selves extremely guilty, and worthy of all thy
plagues, for that besides all the fearful oaths and blasphemies, daily
belched out against thy greatness, thou have so sensibly spoken unto us by thy
blessed word, and by all thy glorious works, chiefly by threatenings and
judgments, upon our selves more mildly, and upon our brethren in a more
fearful manner, and yet we have not hearkened unto thee. And moreover for that
besides all these, thou have spoken unto us, by the voice of thy mercies in all
thy great deliverances and miraculous preservations of us in this Nation
specially, and through the incredible continuance of all thy blessings; still
by them all calling us all to know thee and to meet thee, by an unfeigned
humiliation, before thy vengeance be poured out upon us for all our sins. And
for that yet we have not heard to tremble before this glorious name, The Lord
our GOD, and unfeignedly to turn unto thee by our unfeigned repentance, but
have hardened our hearts, to increase and hasten thy wrath by all our
blasphemies and sins, whereby we have caused thy great name to be
blasphemed amongst the enemies unto this very day. And principally for
profaning his Sabbath, which might justly make all our countries to rest and
keep Sabbaths to him in that doleful manner, that some do already.


And finally, for our Sabbaths, Lord we have and do^ confess again to the
covering of our faces, that we have so polluted them in all the Churches* as
that all of us do^ and must needs acknowledge, that even for this sin alone,
had we no other, we have most righteously deserved, that thou should so
begin to kindle such a fire of thy vengeance in the gates of all our chief
Cities, as should not be quenched; like as thou have so fearfully done in
foreign parts, and so often threatened us our selves here at home. Yea (holy
Father) we have made our selves worthy, that thou should thus proceed in thy
fierce wrath, to cause all our lands to keep such dreadful Sabbaths, being
possessed by thine and our enemies, as so many of them do already, and seeing
we would not serve thee in our own good lands, under thine own servants with
cheerful and glad hearts, that we should serve thine and our enemies, not
only in our own, but even in foreign Countrye^ with heaviness and terror
all our days. And as we have sinned, rebelling against thee in every one of
these: so likewise against all the rest of thy holy Commandments: and even
against thy heavenly Gospel and ordinances, as that we have justly forfitted
them all, and all other our privileges and promises.

We therefore acknowledge Acknowledgment of Gods righteousness in all that he
has done to the Churches and threatens.
in the behalf of all thy people, that thou art righteous in all that thou
have done unto us: and if thou still further execute whatsoever thou have
denounced in thy blessed Neh. 1. 8.
Law against us. And yet notwithstanding we do humbly beseech thee, to remember
the word, that thou commandedst by thy servant Moses, saying, Ye will
transgress and I will scatter you among the people. But if you turn to me
and keep my Commanddments, and do them, though your scattering were to the
ut^ermost part of the heaven* yet will I gather you from thence, and will bring
you to the place, which I have chosen to place my name there.

Now these (dear Father) A humble prayer for them and for us all.
are thy people, yea, thy servants and children, our own brethren and sisters,
whom thou have redeemed by thy great power, and by thy mighty hand as well as
our selves, and some of them of the chief of us all, any one of whom is worth
many thousands of the (...) of us. Therefore (Oh good Lord) we beseech thee,
let it be enough to awaken us all, that thou have so far stretched out thy hand
against these our brethren, being thine own children and inheritance, and let
thine ear now at length hearken to the prayers of thy servant, and to the
fervent supplications and loud cries of all thy servants, who desire to fear
thy great name, and give us favor in thy presence, and in the presence of all
those, whom thou have set in thine own place, to be nursing-Fathers and
nursing-Mothers to thy poor Church and people.

Grant that their first care may be, to bring us all to unfeigned repentance
for our sins, that thou may be pacified toward us: and then (good Lord)
put into their hearts a holy submission to cast down their crowns before thy
dear son our Lord Jesus Christ, and to give all their power and authority
unto him, to help by all holy means to redeem and restore his Captives, that
they may again serve thee in their own places, each under their own vine and
fig^ree, and under the authority and command of thy de^re servants, as ever
they did before. Oh let this prevail with us all, to make us all to remember
our vows, to ^urne to the obedience of thy blessed Commandments, and
especially to turn hereby to keep thy Sabbaths, and to reverence thy
Sanctuary; y^ thou may as much lift them and us al up in mercy, as thou have
formerly cast them down: and that thus we and all future Ages may learn to
fear thy great name, and evermore sound out thy praises, both in word dn^
deed, expressing our thankfulness in all holy and new obedience, that so thy
glory may shine in all the world. Hear us most merciful Father, in these our
humble requests and al others, etc.

XIII. A humble confession of the heinous sin of our land, and namely in all
the Popish sort, who have so fearfully polluted it, in rejecting the Lord and
his pure religion, casting it forth of these hearts, and setting up the Pope of
Rome with his abominable Idolatry and superstition in place thereof, to
provoke his heavenly Majesty against us: with prayer for pardon, and that they,
and all other may in due time, see this fearful sin, that casting out Satan
and Antichrist, they and all of us may again set up our Lord Jesus Christ, to
the pacifying of his sacred Majesty, and the saving of us all*
OH Lord, most holy, and most glorious, who can not bear with any kind of
impuri^y or other wickedness in thy people which profess thy name, and whom
thou have chosen to set thy Tabernacle amongst, and much less that they should
reject thee, and cast thee forth from r^igning in their hearts, and should set
up Satan and Antichr^ to obey them in thy ^lace: open (...) that God may (...)
pen out eyes to se^ what we have done* in so ^arre returning to Po^ery again
especially of (...) (...)*
the eyes of all them, who are superstitiously minded, and even the eyes of us
all, to see what we have done in suffering that religion to th^ive* and so
far to grow up again, thrusting thee out with thy sacred truth, as in all
who obey the Pope of Rome, receiving and reverencing hi^ word and ordinances
above thy heavenly word*

Oh grant to all them, who (...).
have so fallen away from thee rejecting thy glorio^ ^sty, and also to all who
(...) in a mammering; and much more all those who have so To dote so upon it
again after such notorious discoveries of the vileness of it.
begun of late to dote after Popery, to bethink themselves seriously, what
they will answer unto thy sacred Majesty, for their so casting thee off, and
thy Religion after the time that thou have so long, so clearly, and fully
discovered the baseness and vileness of Popery, and so to cast it out of our
land, by such a general consent of our Princes, Nobles, and Commons, and so
good Laws made against it*

Cause them, and all sorts, How all sorts had seen before how they had been
deluded by i^.
wisely to weigh and consider well with themselves, that this our whole state
did not so cast it out at once, without just cause, nor our whole land so
renounce it, without a most palpable discovery of the filthynesse thereof. How
before that time, even very Idiots and little children saw how all had been
deluded and robbed by it, through all their Masses, Purgatory, Pilgrimages,
Pardons, with all kinds of their juggling (...)* and how all was but to get
money, to make themselves fa^, and Lords of all, both bodies and souls of men;
that all might be their slaves and vassals, like as it is in all the Popish
Countries at this day. Make them all to understand and know, how all those,
whose eyes thou have not shut How Gods vengeance was most iust^y co^ upon those
their (...) us houses.
up, did tken plainly perceive and acknowledge thy vengeance most justly upon
all those places, called their religious houses; as their Abbeyes, (...),
Nunneries, and the like, in their ruins and desolation, for all the
abominations committed in them. How notorious this filthynes How ^ous (...)
were for filthynesse.
of them was, even more loathsome and abominable then the sin of Sodom,
through their fullness of bread and abundance of idleness. How Blood.
they we^re al red with blood, with the cruel and unnatural murder^ of
Infant^ to hide those their odious sins.

Cause them all at length ^o understand and lay to heart, that those houses
wherein was the chief practice of their religion, were nothing Being nothing
else but dens of thieves.
else but dens of thieves, couzening and robbing the whole land, and every day
by their new devises fetching in new spoils. How all this which is charged
upon them in this behalf, was most apparent in this one thing, that hereby
they had got into their hands, most of the pleasantest and fartest things of
the Land to uphold their kingdom, and to support their wickedness, and so all
other their delusions evident by most notorious discoveries, remaining upon
perpetual record to all posterity.

Lord at length make them, That all may know what their religion wa^ (...), b^
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
and all sorts wisely to understand, before it be too late, that if the
continual practice of Sodommy, Whoredom, Murder, Lying, Robbing, swallowing
up whole Nations, and all under a cl^ake of devouon and pi^y, could demonstrate
a religion most abominable and accursed, then surely Popery must needs be it.

That this was then a chief (...) ^ere was then one part of that Babylon the
mother of whoredoms and abominations.
part of that Babylon, which is called the mother of whoredoms and
abominations of the earth, and that in the f^ll hereof was a part of that
vengeance verified. That Babylon Apoc. ^7. 5.
is fallen, it is fallen, and is become And (...) the ruin ^f it a part of the
fall of Babylon verified.
an habitation of devils, a hold of all foul Spirits; when as the most of them
were afterward hanted with devils in one room or* other of them.

Good Lord, cause them How God has as from heaven proclaimed the (...) of his
approbation of his religion professed amon gest us.
moreover to bethink themselves how evidently of the contrary (as if it were
from heaven (and how mightily thou have maintained and proclaimed thy sacred
truth, and convinced them all, and all the whole land, concerning the evidence
of thy religion professed amongst us, by the blood of so many learned and most
faithful Martyes; yea, by so many of thy Prophets and worthy Preachers in
every part of our land, so many learned writers unanswerable. To think what
they can answer for not being warned by so many and such notorious discoveries
of their bloody rage and practices.


Make them, and all of us, to lay to heart at length, what they can answer:
into thee, who ^ast discovered from time to time, such, and so many most
barbarous and unnatural-(...), either done or intended by their Jesuits and
Seminary Priests, and other of that religion, and especially (...) of their
^ligion
to be the fruits of their religion, and the practice of their own grounds and
principles. Such continual plotting, attempting, and practicing of murdering
of Princes, ^sion of States, butchering even their own friends and kinsmen*
desolating their own native Countries, merciless massacring old and young,
noble and ignoble, men, women, and children. To keep ever in (...), memory*
that insolent invasion of our nation.
Lord cause them and all sorts ever to keep in memory* that which was so much
triumphed of by them before the victory, that outrageous insolent and most
savage invasion of this our Nation, and at the time of a treaty about a
marriage and amity, chiefly managed by her own children and native subjects,
deluded by the principal Fathers and spreaders of that religion.

Oh let that hellish Powder The hellish powder Treason discovering the
cursednesse of that religion.
treason, ever be before our faces* that wickedness, unto which no name can
ever be found out meet and sufficient to express it, or able to set forth
the nature of it. That which was so compact of all the principal works of the
devil, both lying, murdering, and all kinds of cruelty, that thou (Oh Lord)
made them themselves, to be trumpeters and public proclamers by it, of the
abominable iniquity of that accursed religion, whereby it was contrived and
managed; and that they themselves should show to all nations, that it is come
out of the bottomless pit, and the very principal religion of Satan in all
the world, under such a (...) (...) of holiness. Lord give all thy servants
grace, wisely to consider of these things, and to think how fearful it is,
not only for them, who adjoyne themselves, or turn to a religion of such
abominations, but even for us all (who have been so warned thereof so many
ways, and that from thine own Majesty* in such abundant compassion, and by
so many infallible evidences) that we through our negligence in our several
places have suffered it so to grow up again, ^s thus to endanger us by it, and
our whole Nation, yea, even all the Church and people of the Lord, besides the
dishonouring and provoking thy heavenly Majesty to the uttermost.

Oh gracious God, make To consider the ^nies granted to the Gospel in the
miraculous continuance of it, and preservation of our Princes.
them and u^ all, wisely to consider the wonderful Testimonies which thou have
contra^ly granted to thy Gospel, in the miraculous continuance of it,
preservation of our Princes, and us; with all our peace, notwithstanding so
innumerable stratagems to have taken them away for so many years together, and
how these have been as infallable arguments of thy favor and love toward us
for thy Gospel sake, and for thy faithful servants amongst us, as the like
were tokens of thy favor toward Judah or Jerusalem.

Oh make us to call to mind, how many a time thy people amongst us have even
wondered at our incredible deliverances and preservations, with the defeating
of their new hopes and long expected days, and also the new and almost
continual discoveries of their wicked intendments, which even they themselves
at this day, so many as i^ whom (...) the light of nature (...) do^
acknowledge, and wonder at the miraculous o^turning of all the^ counsels, to
wor^ for us, and against themselves (...) this ^ery day, so (...) (...) thy
(...) and watchful eye over us, and hatred of their wicked^. Wherefore (Oh
blessed Father) To beg true repentance for this and all our loud crying sins.
we humbly in-treat thee, to great unto us al, true repentance for this amongst
all other our fearful and crying sins, and daily (...) up more and more, the
(...) of thine Anoyn^ our (...) Sovereign, with all other in high place and
chief authority under him, and all thy faithful Ministers, and whomsoever it
specially concerns, to labor That our land may be purged of it and the evils
threa^ed prevented.
that our sinful Land may be fully purged of it, and the evils prevented,
which thou threatnest against us, by the increase and spreading of it. Grant
that thus we all jointly and generally, setting thee up in our hearts to
worship and adore, and to receive thy sacred religion alone, may utterly
extirpate and abolish all conceit of giving thy honor and sovereignty to that
man of sin, or setting up his Idolatry or superstition in place thereof. That
so we may remain thine own obedient people, that thou may likewise
continue our most gracious God and loving Father, and so our most watchful
protector for ever; and may never repent of the good that thou have done, or
further intended toward us; but may thus make us a most blessed and happy
nation and people, amongst whom thou alone may solely relgne, until thy
blessed Son shall come in the clouds, that then all we who are thine, may
reign with thee in the highest heavens for ^vermore. (...) us oh most gracious
God, h^erein, and in all other things needful for us, or for any member of the
whole Church for our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen, Amen.
XIIII. An earnest prayer that the Lord would open the eyes of our brethren and
sisters, seduced by the Jesuits and other Seminary Priests* that they may
plainly see, how palpably they are, and have been deluded by them: in what a
fearful estate they all stand under Satan and Antichrist, and may speedily
get them from under their Tyranny, and betake themselves to the banner of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to escape the ^orment which they must otherwise endure with
them for evermore.
OH Lord God, most holy, and most righteous, thou have said thou will be
sanctisied in all that draw nee^e unto thee; and therefore as thou ar^ infinite
in mercy toward all those who unfeignedly fear thy holy name, and ^mble at
thy word; and w^t ^eale thy secrets unto them, and make them of thy privi^
counsel; so thou art most dreadful and terrible unto all other, who regard
thee not, in any such holy manner as to (...) thee, and to receive the lo^ of
thy most sacred truth.

Awaken we beseech t^ee, To pray for all (...) with the wine of popery and
(...) other ^gered by i^.
all those who are drunk with the wine of Popery and superstition; that ^t
length they may behold in what ^ fearful and desparate state they stand under
the power of Satan and Antichrist, ready to be ^st into hell every moment of
time. Make them To consider of the righteousness of God (...) upon the.
able to consider aright of the just (...) which thou have threatened to follow
the contempt of thy Gospel, chiefly in the days of Antichrist, and whether
for that very (...) (...) have not deserved it to come upon them. 2 These. 2.
10. 11. 12.
That therefore thou will send upon them strong delusions, that they shall
believe lies and be damned; because they would not receive the love of thy
sacred truth, so as to obey it that they might be saved.

Make them to bethink To bethink themselves what it is so so renounce their
^other and their Baptism (...).
themselves wisely, and seriously, and as (...) (...) presence, what iniquity
they have found in thee, (...) in our way of life* or ^n (...) ^ow they ^de in
Baptism, that they have so (...) renounced and abjured it, and depar^d from
the bo^ of their mother to ca^t her (...) (...), and with her ^hine own ^jesty
^o fearfully ^o (...) (...) (...). (...) (...) ^ (...) of their (...)
blindness and (...) (...), through (...) strong (...); where^ ^o many (...)
(...) (...) been, and are daily so carried away to that Idolatrous religion.

Go^ Lord, make them able (...) (...) Epistle prefixed to our sed ^eed bro^*
to discern, how gross and palpabl^ those lies are, whereby the ^cers do
bewitch them; as ^amely, that so lately divulged, of the Twenty several sorts
of Bibles, which within th^se s^w years past* England has brought forth*
Cause them by this one, to To (...) of their intoil ^able ly^ devised to
deceive the simple.
discern of all the rest of their delusions, when they dare proclai^ such
notorious lies before al^ the world, as every poor simple body may understand
and see, an^ ^ust needs (...). (...) (...) them all t^t (...) unto (...)* (...)
conceive in due time, that this is (...) (...) all other, their most deep^ and
(...) ^entions, whereby they seek^ ^o raise a sland^r upon thine own Me^,
(...) truth, and people to make their poor seduced Pros^lites to abhor^ them,
and so to root out both the remembrance of thy great n^me, of thy Religion,
and people, from the face of the (...).

Make them to weigh well, How they abuse all the simple in persuading them that
they have mo^ holy devotions, then w^.
how they have and do deceive, and most shamefully abuse them all, in
persuading of them that they have more devotion in their Church then we in ours,
and that therefore they are to join themselves to t^em; when as they have
hardly the tenth part of the books of devotion, and others tendi^g thereunto,
viz: to ^orther Religion and god^, which the ignorant ^ort can come by, which
w^ (...) (...) ours, and much less of (...) S^mons tending to ^ ^ding them that
their devotions are more (...)* (...) better the ou^.
the ^ame.

Cause them to have a true sense of that delusion, that they tell them that
their devotions are more holy then ours: when as ours are grounded directly
upon thy most blessed and eternal word; 1 Timothy 4. ^.
their upon doctrine and traditions of men; (...) the doctrines of (...) of
sin, (...) (...).
thy glory, that (...) may (...) thee; their ^o (...) thee of thine honor*
(...) giving it to (...) tend only to (...) Lord Jesus Christ, (...) and (...)
many other thing (...) place of him, (...) which (...) wholly to (...) pride of
m^n, theirs ^o (...) him up like Lucifer.

Make them to concelve aright how ours help us to understand and keep our
Baptism vow and Covenant with our God; theirs to keep them in ignorance of it
all their days. Ours teach us to sight ^anfully under the banner of our Lord
Jesus, and for him only; theirs to sight desparately against him, and all his
armies: ours teaching and helping us to walk in the narrow path prescribed by
^hee our blessed Lord and Savior; theirs to kill all who will not run with
them into bypath and the broad way leading to hell.

How ours instruct and guide us to live only the life of faith, directed by
thy heavenly word* theirs the life of unbeleefe; having nothing for the ground,
but the mere word of sinful man; how ours teach and direct us to live the
life of faith by a particul^ ^plying of Christ (...) his (...), so truly
ingrafting ^d in co^porating us into Christ (...) by his holy Spirit* and
thereby making us good trees, (...) we may bring forth good fruit; (...)
(...) to believe in general, and as the Church believes, without any such
particular application: which ^aith of theirs can never bring forth the ^ound
fruits of ^anctification, and true righteonsnesse, especially when they scorn
and persecute this true and saying faith as fantastical and vain.

Good Father, (...) these poor souls to understand and know, how ours direct
us to live the life of true godliness; guided by thy word and Spirit, which
alone (...) all the promises, for this and (...) (...) life; theirs teaching
chiefly to live ye life of superstition by bodily exerci^ themselves in such
works (...) (...) never required in any such manner.

O^ persuade them all how our^ bring to y^ true practisers of them, full
assurance of thy (...) and love; and thereby ^oy unspeakable and glorious;
theirs bringing nothing but only a ^aggering hope, and so still doubting
whether they be in thy favor or not; which very doubting, when the conscience
shall be thoroughly awaked, will bring ye very flashings of hell fire upon
them. How ours are heaven upon earth, theirs hell upon earth; ours the sweetest
in the end, when as each of them done in faith has a reward promised
thereunto; theirs the bitterest in the end, when instead of reward, thou will
demand concerning the best of them* done without warrant of the word, who has
required these things (...) your hands.

Good Lord, (...) hearts according (...) the (...), that our devotion^ (...)
(...) our Religion, to (...) ^oly and un^, (...) (...) the widow and the (...)
(...); (...).
theirs to make them polluted with lying and all filthy (...); (as in their
(...) and other chief perswa^ to that Idolatry) yea, with the blood of
Innocents; to destroy the widow and the fatherless out of the earth, even all
truly professing Christ name* ^o that their religion i^ the most polluted with
lying and murder of ^nnocents, of all other Religions that ever (...) in the
world, whereby their (...) *

Lord bring to their understandings, and cause them to think of it, and ponder
it well, that all our devotions, as our Religion, ^end wholly to ^ke us
faithful and loyal subjects, to pray for our Kings and Princes, and to have
them in our hearts, to dye and (...) live with and s^r them; and that we dare
not have an evil thought against the Lords Anointed; but y^ in our patien^
sufferings they may see their duties; their devotions ^ending through the
subtilty of Satan and the Jesuits, to make them clean contrary, and to carry
false and tray to^ hearts against the Lords Anointed, unless the Lord (...)
wondefully overruled them by his holy Spirit. For they must of necessity be so
(...), for maintaining (...) (...) devotions, and obeying their directors, and
ghostly fathers, as to (...) to destroy whatsoever (...) hinder it, and to
acco^ (...) a most meritorious act, to destroy all (...), and principally the
chief of them.

Make them to weigh this with themselves, how our devotions are made with
understanding, and so in faith, and with a holy zeal without vain
repititions; theirs without all understanding, in a blind devotion, with (...)
babbling, and repetition, which thou condemnest and (...).

Finally (Good Lord) cause them all at length, in mercy to understand, how our
devotions are such as help us to live a true Christian life, in the practice
of all the duties of piety and righteousness, in examining our spiritual
grows in grace, in heavenly meditations and contemplations, prayers,
thanksgivings, and the like, all directing us to place our whole confidence for
our salvation, and whatsoever else, only upon thy rich mercy in Jesus Christ:
ascribing all our salvation to him, and his merit alone; theirs instead of
these works of piety, See the Spanish Monk.
are in their Masses, Dir^, and Letanies, even to Saints, numbering and
repeating upon their beads, their (...) Nosters, Creeds, Ave Mary's, and such
other, and that in an unknown tongue, without any understanding, or right
edification.

So likewise (good Lord) make them to see and consid^ withal, how they set
their confidence in these and other their superstitions works, and namely and
principally, in the merit of the virgin Marie, and of other Saints; in
Indulgences and Pardons, even for the (...) a number ber of such (...) lying
vanities; whereupon when they come to their death (...) beth ^ke themselves a
(...) H^ ^omming to ^ve ^eir eyes (...) they are in forced to cast away al
these with (...) ^ion, and he of our Religion in their death: Then Christ only.
more se^ously they are f^igne to c^ away all (...) all these, and to accoun^
(...) loss and dung* and (...) only upon (...) Christ; if then they ^y (...)
^ercy by him.

Yea, (...) to consider well (...) tim^* ^w if ever thou open (...) eyes and
(...) they (...) then cast all these away (...)* detestation, as (...) i^
(...)* and rest only upon Christ, (...) Christ (...) ever thou (...) that me^y.

(...) all (good (...)) (...) more time they (...) o^ (...) spend in these
(...) more they ha^ and (...) increase their sin, and make their condemnation
the heavier; and that one hour, yea, one minute, spent in true devotion, only
in the name of Luke. ^3. ^.
Christ, calling upon him, or thee the Father through him, with the repentant
Thief upon the cross, shall be better unto them, then a thousand year spent
in their superstitious manner.

And for this cause (O^ ^ere Father) seeing by their doctrines and devotions,
they can never have that true iustisying and saying faith, whereby they might
be made partaker^ of jesus Christ, and so ^e thy children, having thy Rhem.
upon Romans 3. 22. Sect. 7.
(...) and love, and doing such works as are pleasing and (...) unto thee: but
(...), they do by all (...) scorn and persecute (...) ^aith* make them all
which belong to thy eternal election, to know their woeful estate, how they
must all needs still remain in the estate of nature, and so of damnation,
until they repent and turn to our Church again.

Cause them (Oh most holy (...).
and gracious Father) to apprehend this, and to be warned in time, that seeing
their Religion cannot stand or continue, (...) it be supported and holden up*
by lying and murder and that these two, are, and have been ever the principal
ad^ancers of it i^ a^ Ages and Countries, and that this is notoriously known
to all who will not sh^t their eyes. And moreover, ^eing the this is also their
doctrine, so to promote and advance it: That, that Religion is undoubtedly of
the devil, and that our Savior himself has in mercy so forewarned them of
it, that they may get them out of Babylon, and stand far from it; for fear
of her burning, and that they may escape her torment.

Lord, make them able to That they must of necessity renounce it, or profess
them selve^ to be of Satan their father.
conc^, that these things being so (as their own hearts must needs bear
witness, if they will suffer their eyes to be opened) they must of necessity
renounce that Religion; or else prosesse themselves to be of their father the
devil; John. 8. 44.
as much as ever were the Jews who sought so to kill our Savior, and that
they will (...) his works wittingly and obstinately, fighting against thee our
blessed Lord and Captain, and against all thy armies, to their utter perdition.

Good Father, make them To think what they will do when Christ shall come to
take vengeance of all his enemies.
able to think what they will do at that day, when thy Son Christ Jesus, shall
come to take vengeance of all his enemies, when all the Kings and greatest
Monarchs of the earth, who have not helped him, and his (...)* to the
advancement of his heavenly Gospel, shall ^ry to (...) (...) and mountains to
fall upon them, and cover them* from Apoc. 6. (...)* (...). ^7.
the face of the Lamb, and of him that (...) upon the throne; ^hen the (...)
their ^ther, (...) (...) (...), and all his children that have been deceived by
him: and especially they w^o ha^ (...) for Apoc. 20. 10.
him, against ou^ (...) Jesus Christ* and his (...), must be^ (...) and bo^ and
^ast (...) him into the (...) that (...) with (...) and brimstone, to be (...)
with him for evermo^e.

Lord, make them to consider To weigh and (...) (...) way and the^ in the (...)
of the (...).
of all these things in time, to weigh well our (...) of life, and their way of
life; our rul^ of (...) (...) (...) devotions, and their rule of prayers and
devotions; to weigh and try them in the (...) of the Sanctuary, whether will
outweigh, and whether are more agreeable to thy holy word, whereby they and we
all must be weighed and judged.

So vouchsafe this grace to all other, who are wavering or doubting, to think
seriously of all these things, to try them all by thy blessed word, by that
true weight, that heavenly fire, which will consume 2 Cor. 3. 2^
all their timber, hay, and stubble. Make them to be afraid of conferring
with, or hear^ening to the Serpent, their Jesuits, or other Semi^ary Prests,
who all holding the same head, their holy Father the Pope, must needs be ^ll
l^d and inspired by the same spirit, whatsoever sh^wes they make of the
contrary. Give them grace to be warned by the example of our first mother; and
keeping thy watch, to go to thee first by instant prayer, in all doubts Dan.
9. 2. and 2. 17. 19.
and difficulties, as Daniel did, and after to confer with thy heavenly word,
and with thy faithful Ministers and servants for resolution therein. For all
to be always growing in grace, for fear of being given up t^ their delusions.


Above all, grant unto all of us who yet stand by thy mercy, to labor to grow
daily in the love of thy truth, and in a conscionable obedience to thee in all
thy ways: watching and praying continually, that we may never be given up
with them to these strong delusions; but that contrarily by our faith and
obedience, we may have boldness to draw nearer and nearer unto thy holiness,
with That we may have more power in prayer to help to pull every Lot out of
Sodom.
that thy faithful servant Abraham, and may help by our prayers, though not
to save that filthy Sodom, which thou will have burnt down to hell, yet to
pull out all thy Lots before, even all amongst them, that belong to thy
eternal election, before the fire and brimstone rain down from heaven upon
them, to consume all the wicked scorners amongst them eternally.

Make us all likewise, to To consider who they are that are carried away to them
think with our selves, whether we can name a man, that was first truly
grounded in the principles of our Religion, and after coutinued to make
conscience of his ways according to the same, that ever the devil or the
Jesuits have been able to seduce: but only such, as either were never well
grounded, or never truly made conscience of their ways: or such at least, as
having fallen by little and little from their first conscience and childlike
fear, and so from the love of thy truth, having yielded to be overcome by
uncleanness or some notorious sin, and so given way to Satan to be deluded
by him.

Cause all to understand, how by this means they lie open to Satan, and are
hereby made fit for a Priest to absolve them, and make them as clean as when
they were first borne, as they will bear them in hand; and thus to be
reconciled to the Church, which has this holy power, and can thus pardonand
acquit them whatsoever they do, or howsoever they live, and that without any
pain or trouble: especially if it be so, that they have money enough to
purchase their pardons and the like.

Grant us therefore this grace, to use all means for our selves and all ours,
and even To use all means for our selves and all others that we may be kept.
for all those whom we would save from hell, that we may all first be soundly
instructed in the grounds of the Catechism, and in every principle and part of
thy sacred truth; and after learn to make such a conscience of all thy blessed
ways and Commandments that thou may never give us or them up to these
delusions; but we may for ever remain under thy safe protection, until thou
shall translate us into the heavens, from all the danger of the Dragon.

And for these our seduced So for all seduced by any sin.
brethren, and all others deluded die Satan through impenitency in any
fearful sin; make us able, first to consider wisely of their estate:
secondly, of the means how to save them, and to pull them from it: and lastly,
never suffer us to rest, till we have showed our uttermost love unto them to
bring them to our Lord Jesus Christ.

Oh open our eyes, and That they may be able to see in what estate they stand.
help us, that we may see how they are under the power of Satan, and thine
enemies; every moment of time ready to be cut off in thy just vengeance, and
to be cast into hell.

Make us able to have the like tender commiseration of each of them, as of a
Captive under the cruelleft tyrant; and as of one in a dead sleep, in the
midst of a dreadful fire, ready each minute to seize upon him; or in a deep
water sinking down: or as of a poor Lamb in the mouth of a roaring Lion,
ready to be devoured each moment: considering that the case of never a one of
these, can possibly be the thousand part so bad, as of them that are ready
each moment to be cast into the lake of fire, and there to be tormented for
evermore.

Enable us withal, to think How they are deluded.
ever of their estate, and to keep in memory these things and the like, which
demonstrate to all the world, how palpably they are deluded and bewitched: and
so to use them and all other helps, whereby they may be rescued.

Assist us so with thy heavenly That we may not rest until we have awaked them
or used all holy means, for them.
grace, that we may never rest, till we have awaked them out of that dead
sleep, and convinced their consciences some way, of their woeful case and
estate, and after used all holy means, which thou have, or ever shall reveal
unto us, to pluck them out of the fire; at least thus praying and crying unto
thee our blessed and gracious God for them, as the Christians did for Peter in
prison.

Lord, make them to know That the Lord will pluck them forth if he hay
ordained to save them.
for certain, that if they be thy Lambs thou will rescue and pull them out of
the Lions mouth; if thou have ordained to save them, thou will pluck them out
of the fire, and out of the water; thou will make all the chains and fetters
of the devil to fall off from them: no doors shall keep them, no sorcery
shall prevail against them, beyond the time that thou have appointed.

Cause us all to know, and That all that seek not to save them are g^y.
fully to understand, that he that saves not, destroys; so every one of us,
that does not according to our places and callings, seek thus by all holy
means to save them all* and to preserve all thy Churches, from the dangers
threatened by thee, are guilty of the neglect hereof, and so of the blood of all
before thy heavenly Majesty, and so much more, as we are more nearly tied, by
any more special bon^ of place, calling, or otherwise.

Hear us (Oh tender Father) That all may herein show our loves.
for them all, and all so bewitched, and deluded by Satan, and that herein
we, chiefly all our Pastors, and watchmen, according to their places, may show
all love, and holy obedience to thee: and to all thy tender Lambs which belong
to thy fould; even all thy dear and precious ones, committed to their trust,
never leaving thee, till thou have rescued and recovered them: for the full
assurance of all our own souls hereby, that we are indeed truly thine,
filled with thy For our full assurance.
holy Spirit, the Spirit of faith and love, and thereby sealed against the day
of our Redemption: and that thou may show thy self stronger then Satan,
and that he is but thy vassal, and also that thou art more merciful to save,
then he can be malicious to destroy, for thy infinite pity, and endless
compassion, through our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:

Amen, Amen.
XV. A humble thanksgiving for our dread Sovereign, our gracious Prince, the
Prince and Princess Palatine, and all their royal progeny, and for all the
great deliverances which our blessed God has given unto them, and to us all by
them: with an earnest prayer, that he may make them (each in their times and
places) the happiest heads of the most prosperous and blessed Nations and
people, that ever have been in the world.
OH. Lord our God, infinite inithy mercy, and endless in thy compassions, who
by thy wonderful providence, orderest all things in heaven and earth,
disposing all to the right ends, which before the world thou have ordained to
thine own glory, and the good of thine elect; we do with all thankfulness
An acknowledgement of Gods mercies in our dread Sovereign and his royal
progeny, with all our blessings and ho^es continued by them.
of heart, humbly acknowledge before thy sacred Majesty, how we especially in
this sinful Nation, and with us many other, and namely, all thy chosen flock
among us are bound unto thy sacred Majesty, for the admirable setting up, and
the wonderful preservation of thine Anointed servant our dread Sovereign,
and of all his Royal progeny, with every of thy deliverances and mercyes,
which thou have heretofore vouchsafed by them, or as yet do through them,
most graciously offer unto us all, upon our unfeigned repentance and true
turning to thee. Lord make us ever to be wisely pondering, of thy divine and
Fatherly providence, even in every one of these (which has been so sensible
that our very enemies have taken notice of it) and so give thee glory,
acknowledging thy hand in them. Diddst thou not (Oh good Lord) at the very
naming of thy Royal Servant to As namely our deliverances at his entrance.
be our Lord and King, deliver us all from the hand of our Brother Esau, even
from all those who had long vowed our death, and thirsted after our blood?
Did thou not thereby, cast such a terror upon all thine, and all thy
Churches enemies, as that the fear of him, and of thy people fell upon them
all, that not so much as adogge waged his tongue against any of thy servants:
though our sins had long before cried for such a vengeance as they had
threatened.

And afterward, when we At the Powder Treason from Nebuchadnezzars furnace.
had so provoked thee again, by our impenitency, and by all our
unthankfullnesse, manifested in the breach of our renewed vows and Covenants,
as that we were endangered to be consumed at once by that fiery furnace, made
like Nebuchadnezzars, large and wide, or much more terrible, by thine and our
most merciless enemies (stirred up against us in thy wrath:) yet diddst not
thou again deliver us and pluck us forth, even as the three children of the
Captivity, and cast in sundry of our enemies for us? Did thou not also
principally, work this as by the hand of thine Anointed, not suffering him to
rest, until all our deliverance was wrought? And have thou not both before and
since that And all others.
time, given unto him many great deliverances: and in all his preservations
still preserved us all, especially us of this Nation, together with all our
blessings of so much peace and prosperity, as we still enjoy, in the midst
of the calamities of the other Churches.

And above all, have thou not thus continued thy heavenly Gospel, the life of
our lives, which has been so removed from other Countries, together with their
outward blessings: so as thou have made him to this day the very breath of our
nosethrils, and that through him we enjoy all these our mercies, as under our
vine and figtree, and by him give us new and most blessed hope, that we
shall enjoy them perpetually. Lord these are mercies and favors never to be
forgotten of us: Good Lord set them ever before our eyes.

And for our gracious Prince, besides all his and our former deliverances, and
hopes in and by him, have thou not Preservation of our gracious Prince, and us
all with him, and the rejoicing of all (...) souls through him.
made him to be to us as Joseph* and disposed of all his journey and of his
dangers in it, to the greatest discovery of the devices of our adversaries, and
overturning the hopes of all our wicked enemies. Never suffer us to forgett,
how thou revivedst the hatts of us all, making us to break out into joyful
Triumphs and praises, when thou had caused us to see his face again,
delivering him from so many perils, as our sins had brought him and ^s into:
and those dangers of all sorts, both by sea and land, yea both bodily and
spiritual.

Lord make us able to give The disposing of all that iourny to so preat joy to
all Gods Church and people.
thee thy due glory herein, that thou sitting at the stern, have disposed of
all that journey, and all those adventures, to the admired improvement of all
thy rich gifts and graces in thy Royal servant: caused him to see the
vileness of that most odious superstition and Idolatry, which thy soul so
much abhors, and which he otherwise had never so well understood. That thou
have taught us all to know by most happy experience, what the power of the
prayers of thy people is, when they are sent up with an united force; that they
are able to open the Iron doors, The experience therein of the power of prayer.
and to break in sunder the gates of brass, to make way for thy children and
chosen clock, to pass through the midst of all thine and their mortal
enemies. Lord make us to lay it wisely to heart, how thou have made him so much
more hereby, the future expectation and rejoicing of Israel, under thine
Anointed servant.

And likewise for that perelesse Princess, Lord make us For our peerless
Princess the crown of glory renewed upon her head.
all able wisely to consider, what another crown of glory thou have set upon
her head, even in her lowest abasement (which thou have brought her unto for
the sins of thy people) that she should thus excel in all true renown and
fame, of all Christian and truly Heroike virtues, above all the Princes of the
earth: that thou have made her a Mirror to all of her sex, at this day in all
the world.

Oh suffer us never to forget For her delivery from the Nimrods of the earth.
that wonderful preservation of her, when thou deliveredst her^ at the Powder
Treason, from those cruel Nimrods the bloody hunters, the reedifiers of
Babell, who had in their account, made a prey of her in a special manner, by
her to have accomplished all their hellish ends, and most merciless designs
against our whole Nation, and against all thy poor Churches and people. Let it
never slip out of our mind, that howsoever thou have suffered her again to be
chased, and pursued, as a Do before the Her preservation in the second
pursuit, together with that illustrious Prince and all their^.
hunters, yet thou preservedst her in a miraculous manner, with that
illustrious Prince, and all their Royal seed, and have made them most
fruitful in the midst of all their trials Their fruitfulness in their greatest
trvals, to the astonishment of all their enemies.
and temptations; to the terror and astonishment of all thine, and thy
Churches enemies, and the greater securing and comfort of thy people: to cause
all thine to lift up their heads, in an expectation of a more glorious Age and
time yet to come in all the world then ever heretofore.

And above all, let this ever be before our faces, how thou have thus
wonderfully kept them all alive, against all the plots and layings in wait of
Satan, and all his instruments, by all their stratagems, devises, and bloody
pursuites, and have preserved those thrice happy pawnes and pledges of our
peace and safety, though out of their own Countries and people, and in
foreign parts.

And finally, how thou Our wished and happy ^ion begun.
have begun this wished and happy union, amongst thy Churches and servants,
and the cutting off the long wished hopes of the enemies of thy Church, under
their pretended leagues of peace and amity, whereby they had so much undermined
us, and expected our surprizall of a sudden, whilst we remained yet most
secure.

Not unto us (Oh Father) not unto us, but to thy great name, we give all the
glory, humbly consessing, that by all our impenitency, and breach Confession of
our deserts, that both they and we should have been left into the hand of the
enemy.
of vows and Covenants, which we have so often renewed, and that neither
judgments nor mercyes could prevail with us, and especially for making flesh
our arm, and withdrawing our hearts and confidence from thy heavenly Majesty,
we had long ago deserved, that both they and we, with all our blessings,
should have been wholly left into the hands of thine and our enemies, which
have and do so eagerly thirst after our blood; and that nothing at all has
kept us to this day, but only thy endless compassions, and the yearning of
thy bowels at the cries and sighs of thy poor Saints and children in all the
Churches, looking up to thee alone, and lifting up their hands unto thee.

Awaken us therefore graciously now at length (Oh Prayers to be awaked to
understand the thing; which concern our peace.
thou that have kept thy Israel, and neither slumbrest nor sleep) and cause
us yet in time, to understand the things that concern our peace, and whereby
thou may be wholly pacified toward us in this Nation, with all thy
Churches and people.

Oh grant unto us (most tender Father) to know and thoroughly to conceive
aright, that, that which we have so often and so many a time promised unto thee,
and so bound our selves unto, in all our perils, and which thou have so long
expected* thou now expectest at our hands above all former times: now that thou
have added this above all former mercies, thus far to deliver us from our
fears, and to vouchsafe unto us such hopes for all future times; and every day
to renew the same, in that heavenly union and harmony of thy Anointed, and his
whole most honorable Parliament, for thy Church and causes, and against thine
enemies.

Oh give us all such hearts, To perform truly whatsoever we have formerly
promised.
that we may yet now at length perform whatsoever thou requirest of us, to
make our repentance unfeigned and sound, and our full reconciliation thereby:
in being humbled before thee, both publicly and privately, and in taking away
all our abominations and crying sins, and in doing whatsoever may tend to
the giving of thee thy due glory, with the greatest advancement of thy heavenly
Gospel, and doing whatsoever thou requirest of us; for the ratifying and
confirming all thy mercies toward us, and our making a firm union with thy
Majesty, and amongst us all in Jesus Christ, according to the right tenor of
thy sacred truth.

That thus, as thy hand That as the Lords hand has been stretched out against
us, so how it may be as apparently for us.
has formerly been stretched out against us, and against thy Churches, and
that the enemies have so sarre prevailed in their designs; so now at last
their joy may he as the joy of an hypocrite, and that they may see their
confidence as a spiders web. Oh grant such hearts unto us all, that thou seeing
ou^ true repentance, may give to us, and to thy people, the upper hand; that
we-may be above and not beneath, that we may not only stand valiantly, as one
man of one heart and soul, for thee, and for thy heavenly Gospel, with thine
Anointed, his royal progeny, and Dominions, and each for our selves and ours,
our children and posterity, and for the true liberty of us all: but also that
all of us may be as bold as Lions, and being Filling us with heavenly courage.
strengthened by thee, and the power of thy might, five of us thy servants, may
chase a hundredth (according to thy promise made to the true turning of thy
people to thee) and a hundredth of us, may put ten thousand to flight.

That thus thine Anointed, and all his Royal Progeny and posterity* may
become the happyest heads of the blessedest progeny and dominions, that ever
were formerly in all the earth: and all theirs, and our sins, and the sins
of all the Churches may be freely forgiven, never to be remembered against us,
or against any of thy true Churches any more, according to thy heavenly
promise, Ier. 31. 34.
and that for thy endless glory and praise, and the everlasting triumph of us
all; that we may for ever sing praises unto thy great name, through Jesus
Christ, that King of Kings, our only Lord and Savior,

Amen.
XVI. A humble thanksgiving, that the Lord has already, begun so graciously
to hear our prayers: with supplycation, that as we have made entrance into
this service, to help our Lord Jesus, and his poor Churches, by our prayers
and tears; so we may be every day more fitted and enabled hereunto; until
we shall see, not only the deliverance of his Churches and Captives, but also
the new Jerusalem, and the glory of his Sion, and enjoy the full happiness of
them for ever in the heavens.
OH Lord God, most holy, and most gracious, most faithful and true; who
remembrest always all thy A giving glory to God for remembering his promises.
gracious promises, which thou have ever made to thy Churches and people in thy
blessed word, and wilt in thy due time perform every one of them, even to all
of us who are thine, when thou have first truly humbled and prepared our
hearts to pray, and importune thy sacred Majesty, seeking thee in order. We
magnify So declaring himself to us.
thy great name, that thou have so visibly begun to declare thy self to be
mindful of thy promises, in so graciously inclining thy care unto our cries.

We praise thee, and bless Proclaiming his mercy before us.
thee, that as thou did proclaim thy name before thy servant Moses, to be
The Exodus 34. 6.
Lord, The Lord strong, merciful, gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth: so thou have done it before us all, especially us of this
sinful Nation, that thou herein have made it manifest, to the convincing of
every conscience amongst us, in sparing us, at the prayers of some few of thy
people unto this day.

We glorify thee (Oh good Lord) that as thou have caused it to be registered
in thy book, for all the Ages of thy Church, how according to thy gracious
promises, thou ever did hear thine ancient people of Israel in their
miseries, and when they cried to thee in their troubles, thou then deliveredst
them from Causing his gracious favors toward us in our deliverances to be
registered for all posterity.
their distress; so thou have heard us of this sinful Nation, delivering us
not only at our public humiliation, from the merciless intended invasion,
but also plucked us from Nebuchadnezars furnace, at the private sighs and
groans of thy secret ones, and that so as that thou have made these
deliverances to be recorded for all succeeding times.

Yea, we praise and magnify For still renewing his mercies.
thee, that thou still renewest these thy wonderful and fatherly mercies, to
us a people so unworthy of any mercy, that thou have hitherto continued, and
evidently declared the riches of thy compassion in saving us from all our
fears, first so graciously preserving and bringing back Preserving and
bringing back our Prince.
our most Royal and hopeful Prince, disposing of all his dangers, and our
fears, as thou did to Joseph* to the greatest comforts and hopes of thy
Church: and that thou have since so lately manifested such riches of thy love
and kindness, in such a heavenly Confirming such a heavenly union, for the
advancement of his glory* Gospel, and people.
union, among thy worthyest servants, our Sovereign Lord and King, with all his
faithful Peers, and true-hearted Nobility and Commons, for the advancement of
thy glory and Gospel, and the saying of thy people, with the frustrating the
hopes, and daunting the hearts of all thine, and thy Churches Adversaries: and
in beginning to grant all things according to the cries of thy poor people,
and even above our expectations, considering the heynousnesse of our sins.

Oh Lord, who are we* that Since he has bin so gracious at the prayers of a few.
even at the prayers of a few of us (in regard of the multitude that know thee
not, and therefore do not, nor can seek thy face) thou should be so
gracious to us. Lift up What hopes we may have when we shall more generally and
jointly cry unto him.
our hearts (good Father) that we may conceive aright what thou will do at our
general cries, when we shall be jointly humbled before thee, and all seek thee
as thou have appointed.

Grant specially this grace to every one of us (who have already, or shall
hereafter give our names unto thee, to serve thee heevein, and help thy poor
distressed Church and people) that upon this happy experience, we may To pray
for more integrity and sound nesse of heart to be more able to persevere and
prevail with God.
labor every day to attain unto more integrity and soundness, in walking
uprightly and constantly before thee, in all thy holy commandments. Vouchsafe,
that hereby we may get more boldness, whereby we may approach nearer unto thee,
and even to importune thee with holy Abraham, Moses, Ezra, and Nehemiah, until
we have obtained the pacifying of thy Majesty, by the taking away all the
abominations and crying sins out of the Churches, the delivering of thy
Captives, the restoring and re-edifying of thy Jerusalem; and that all the
hopes of our wicked enemies shall be at an end, and our dreadful dangers* and
fears past, and that we shall visibly behold thy glory therein, and also
enjoy thy glorious presence for evermore.

To this end (dear Father) To use all means hereof more conscionably.
enable us by thy blessed Spirit, to use all the means furthering heereunto,
and that much more careful and conscionably then ever we have done* for
confirming our weak hands, and for strengthening our weary knees. Make us all
ever to keep a fresh remembrance of thy goodness and mercy, how ready thou
art to hear the cries of thy people, and of the power of our prayers, through
our Lord and Savior; how far they have already prevayled with thy Majesty.
Cause us ever to have a ^arefull and watchful To look ever at the word.
eye to thy blessed Word, that in all things we may have that for our guide,
and our direction.

Work in each of us a holy resolution, to cleave fast unto thee, without any
departing To have a holy resolution.
or staggering, walking continually in all thy blessed Laws and Commandments
for ever, even unto the end.

Teach and help us to fear To fear always.
always the offending of thy Sacred Majesty, and that For the Iords eye.
with a true childe-like fear, because of thy holiness, who can not abide
any iniquity, no not in thy dearest Children, and because of the extreme rage
and subtlety of Satan against all thine, dogging For fear of Satan.
us continually at the heels, to provoke us to sin against thee, that he
may accuse us, and incense thy Majesty against us, if it may be, to leave us
unto his malice, or at the least, to hinder thy love and blessing; For our
selves
And also, because of our own vile corruption, which is ready always to
hearken unto him, and to betray us into his hand.

Assist us to watch ever against To watch against all occasions, and over all
parts
all occasions of temptations, keeping strict watch over all our senses, our
thoughts, motions, words, and actions. Make us every To grow better daily.
day to wax better and better, still growing on toward that perfection, which
we do daily wait for in the Heavens.

Cause us ever to keep in fresh memory, that we are through our cursed
Natures, and the industry of Satan, like him that is in a boar upon a
strong stream, that if we bestirre not our selves constantly to go forward,
we certainly go backward; if we but forget our selves, or withdraw our
hands never so little.

Make us able to observe wisely, all our slippes and faylings; and ever to be
careful forth with to seek the recovery of our selves by unfeyned repentance,
and by doing our first and best works. Grant unto us this grace, To look
well unto our particular calling^, that satan take us not out of our ways.
that every one of us may have our own particular and warrantable callings,
that we may know them well, and what special duties thou requirest of us in
them, and that we may labor to walk faithfully therein that thy blessed
Angels may rejoice to attend upon us, and protect us always, and Satan may
never take us out of our way, to get any advantage against us thereby.

Lift up our eyes evermore To have an eye to the recompense of reward.
to the recompense of reward, that therein we may cheerfully follow our Lord
and Savior, running fast toward the mark, until we shall attain the
Crown, which he ever holds forth unto us in his right hand.

Help us to set thee ever before Setting God at our* right hand.
our faces, and at our right hands, as thy servant David, that we may never sin
against thee; but that we may go on courageously with holy Moses* as seeing
thee with us ever that art invisible.

Make us able to rejoice always in our happy estate, To go on rejoicing in
the happiness of our estate.
through Jesus Christ, by comparing it with the estate of the greatest Princes
and Monarkes, who are enemies unto thee, and whether we would change with the
mightiest of them* Cause us to go (...) cheerfully, not only contented with
our condition, but also rejoicing herein, that the lines are fallen Psalm 16,
6.
unto ^s in so fair a ground and that we have so goodly an heritage.

Make us able in praying In praying to ^ive thanks for that which (...) we
have.
continually for what we stand in need of* for our selves, and for all the
Churches and people of the Lord, ever withal (...) give thanks for that
measure which we have already, and for whatsoever deliverances, hopes, or
other (...), which we have formerly (...); or do ^ow injoy^.

And finally, enable us in In (...) (...) Gods* glory.
whatsoever* we beg, to aim (...) a^ the advancement (...) glory, and of the
kingdom of thy* Son, with the saying of thy people* that thus going on in the
zeal* of thy glory* and in the ^owels of commiseration toward thy poor
Joseph, in a tender feeling of Constant in the means.
his affliction, and in the constant use of all holy means, we may be assured,
that we shall be as Caleb, every day As Caleb, Ios. 14, 10, 1^0
stronger and stronger, in all grace, and in the power of prayer; and as the
green Olive in thy house, bringing forth more fruit to our old age and last
days, that our last days may be our best Last days best.
days, and our last breath may be spent for thy Majesty, that so we may see
the sel^citie of thy chosen, and may reign and triumph with thee in heaven for
evermore.

Persuade all thy people, To persuade all of the necessity of this coming to
help.
that every one who comes not thus to help thee and thy poor Church by their
prayers, must perish; and that none can help indeed, but they only who seek
to attain this integrity, and to abide Integrity in Gods (...).
and grow therein perpetually. Hearken unto us (O most tender Father) in these
our humble suites, and in whatsoever else thou know needful for us, for thy
poor distressed Churches, or for any member of thy whole universal and
Catholic church, even for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, thy most beloved
Son, our only Mediator and blessed Redeemer and Savior,

Amen.
FINIS.
Protestants helps for Devotion, and matters belonging to the stirring up of
the same.
A
AVgustines Meditations. Allisons Meditations. Art of happiness. Abba Father.
Abraham's Trial. Alphabet of Prayers. Anatomy of the Soul. Andersons prayers.
Anchor of Faith. Art of meditation.
B
Bradfords Meditations. Bezaes Prayers. Banes Letters. Banes his holy helper.
Banes his spiritual Armor. Bifields Marrow. Bifields signs of Salvation.
Bifields signs of a Wicked man. Bound, of Fasting. Banes on true Happiness.
Banes his direction. Bifields Treatises. Bifields Principles. Burning bush.
Boaring of the Ear. Benefit of Affliction. Battle between Virtues and Vices.
Beautiful Baybush.
C
Christian daily Sacrifice. Crashewes prayers. Crown of life. Christian
watchfulness. Chain of Graces. Christian man's walk. Christian Combat.
Christian Sacrifice. Contemplations, 7. parts. Converts Catechism. Covenant
between God and Man. Christians Touchstone. Conquest of Temptations. Combat
between Man and Death. Christian prayers and meditations. Conduite of Comfort.
M. Cusuerwe^ of ^aith. Christian Armor, by M. Gouge. Caluins prayers. Castle
of the soul. Conawayes prayers, Cases of Conscience. Cases of Conscience.
D
David's Sling. Diamond of Devotion. Daily exercise of a Christian. Deerings
prayers. Delights of the Saints. Discourse of true happiness. David's Key. D.
Duns Devotion. Death subdued. Dialogue between the Lord and the Soul. Dike on
the deceiptfulnes of man's heart. Dike of repentance. Dike of Conscience. David's
Cast. M. Dod on the Commandments. M. Dod on the Lords Supper M. Dods household
government Dents pathway to Heaven. Dents sermon on repentance David's Vow.
Defiance to death. David's repentance. Directions to the waters of Life.
Directions in our duty to God and man. Divine Meditations.
E
Every days Sacrifice. Eye to heaven. Enemy to Security. Enemy to Atheism.
Estate of a Christian. Exercise for Christian Families. Exercise of the
faithful soul
F
Fields prayers. Foot-path to Faith. Lady Fane her Meditations Fountain or
Well of life. Flower of godly Prayers. Fruit of Faith. Freemans Comfort.
G
Glass of Vainglory. Grounds of Divinity. Grounds of Religion. Grenades
Meditations. Godly Garden. Godly man's assurance. Garland of godly Flowers.
Garden of spiritual Flowers Gods Husbandry. Growing in grace Golden Chain, by
M. Rogers Governance of virtue. Garden of Felicity.
H
Help to Devotion. Hundred heavenly thoughts Heavenly progress. Heavenly
Mansion. Handful of wholesome herbs* Harbor of Christianity.
I*
Imitation of Christ, 3. parts. Jewel for Gentlewomen. Joy of a good
Conscience.
K.
Kings Bath. Key of Knowledge. Kings Psalms.
L
Linacars Consolations. Life and death of M. Stubbs. Learn to live. Learn to
dye. Load star of life. Love of God. Life of Religion. Lamp of Virginity.
M
Manuel of Prayers. Marks of Salvation. Meditations and Vows. Martyrs
Prayers. Melancthons Prayers. Marlorats Prayers. Marks of Gods Children.
O
Oil of Scorpions.
P
Practice of Piet^. Practice of Christianity. Practice of Quietness. An
Inuitation to prayer, and the practice of Piety. Poor man's rest. Poesy of
Prayers. Pensive man's practice. Princes Prayers. Pilgrims profession. Pathway
to Paradise. Practice of the faithful. Pathway to Salvation. Pathway to
Felicity. Pearl of the Gospel. Preservatiue against sin. M. Perkins his
Treaties. Pars Grounds. Perfect path to Paradise. Path to penitency* Progress
to piety. Poor man's Pater nostey. Pomander of Prayers. Paradise of the Soul.
Pathway to please God. Precious Pearl. Poor man's Staff.
Q
Queen Katherines Prayers.
R
Righteous man's evidence. Reward of Religion. Rock of Religion. Resolves
divine. Rogers seven Treatises. Right godly rules. Rosary of Christian Prayers.
S
Sick man's Medicine. Sanctuary of a trobled Soul. Supplication of Saints.
Seven helps to heaven. Scudder on the Lords prayer Spiritual detraction.
Simpson on the Psalms. Simeons Sacrifice. Suttons Meditations. Safeguard of the
Soul. Sick man's Salve. Solace of the Soul. Souls watch. Spiritual Garden.
Samuels encounter. Samuel Smiths Works. Saints by Calling. Ship of Salvation.
Sacrifice of a Christian soul. Seven sobs of a sorrowful soul Shield of
Salvation. Sampsons Prayers. Sick man's Comfort.
T
True Watch. Twines prayers. Topsels Meditations. Treasure of Gladness. Trial
of Faith. Trumpet of the Soul. Lad: Tirwits prayers. Troubled man's Medicine.
Treatise of Conscience.
FINIS.
See more concerning all these following in M. Maunsels Catalogue dedicated to
Queen Elizaebeth, imprinted An. Dom. 1595 and sundry others since, not
mentioned.
Helps for suffering adversity and affliction. Page 2. Preparatiues against
Apostacy. 4. Col. 2 Catechismes* Page 28. Col. 2 Treatises and helps for
keeping the Ten Commandments. Page 35. Col. 2 Confessing of Christ. Page 37.
Col. 2 Treatises of Conscience, with comforts for an afflicted Conscience. 37.
col. 2 Treatises of the Creed, for helps for our faith. Page 40. Col. 2.
Helps against the fear of death, and how to dye well. Page 42 Helps against
desperation. page 43 Directions for a Christian life. 44 Of the end of the
world, and the second coming of Christ. 47 Exercises for a Christian Family,
and a Christian life. pa. 48 Helps for true Fasting. 49 Spiritual
preservatiues against the Pestilence. 59 Imitation of Christ. 62 Prayers. 83 Of
Repentance. 90 Helps for preparation unto the Sacraments of the* Lords Supper.
93 Holy Sermons in print, a multitude. 96 Comforts for the sick. 107, 108 True
Confession of sin. 108 Restitution of a sinner. ibid. Of good works, and
exhortation to them. Page 113.
A Table of the particular Meditations of each of the seven generals.
1. General Meditation. HOw our Savior looks for some to help him in the
deliverie and saving of his church: and what things are necessary for every
such a helper to know. Page 12. 2. General Meditation. 2 Of the present
necessity of this work, and of the lively feeling thereof, and how the Lord
calls all sorts thereunto. 7 Here in these particular Meditations.
1. Concerning the calamities and dangers of our Brethren in all places, and
those which are threatened toward our selves, with the chief means of
delivery and preservation from them. page 9 2 How God has been wont to get
himself glory in saving his Church, by Princes and Governors. page 13. 3 How
as Satan and Antichrist have set themselves to fight against Christ and his
Kingdom, so our Savior has ordained Kings and Princes to hold up his
Scepter, and to defend and protect his subjects and Gospel. pa. 15 4 How
Satan and Antichrist set up themselves to be obeyed, and to destroy all out
of the earth, who seek to obey Christ truly. page 18 5 Concerning the
innumerable miseries which our Brethren endure, being deprived of the outward
comforts of this and the better life, and how n^e the like may be to us. page
20. 6 Concerning the general sins of the Churches, so provoking the Lord, and
namely the general abuse of the Gospel, and blessings accompanying it, and
that our sins are of all others most heinous for the same. page 23 7 How
Satan exercises all his power and tyranny against the Churches spiritually,
like as he does outwardly. page 50 8 How the Kingdom and Glory are our Christ's:
how satan and Antichrist fight against him, and his Church, for his cause
only and therefore are sure to be overthrown. page 59 9 How our Lord Jesus is
that everlasting Amen, and coming quickly, for the rejoicing of his Church.
page 67
The third general Meditation. 3 What manner of ones we must be, whom the
Lord now calls, and whom he will accept, and adm^t to be his helpers, in
this Work, and whose Prayers shall be avayleable with him, according to our
Saviors direction and warrant. page 68 Herein these particular Meditations
and marks.
1 To make sure, that we be the true Children of our heavenly Father, and the
means thereunto. page 72. 2 That we be* such as can, and use to seek Gods
honor, above all other things whatsoever. page 86 3 That we use to seek his
Honor chiefly, in the advancement of the Scepter and Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. page 87 4 That we seek also to honor him ^ver, in the full
accomplishment of all (...) Heavenly will. page 89 5 That we be such as look
unto, and depend upon our heavenly Father alone, for all good things. page 91 6
That we be such as feel our sins and infirmities, as in heavy burden, and
travailing under them, do fly ever unto Christ. page 93 7 That we endeavor
to pray continually, Lead us not into temptation. page 95 8 That we be such,
as can and do use to sing the song of the 24 Elders: Glory, Honor, etc. page 97
The fourth general Meditation. 4 Concerning the frame and order of our
Prayers, that they may be well pleasing as well as our persons, and so we may
be more certain to prevayle thereby, when we follow in all things our Saviors
direction. page 100 Herein these particular Meditations.
1 That we pray only unto our heavenly Father, in the name of Christ. page 101
2 That above all, and in all, we aim at Gods glory, and the advancement of
Christ's scepter. page 102 3 That we seek the doings of his heavenly will, for
his glory and kingdom chiefly, not for our selves. page 105 4 That we seek
all things from him alone, chiefly that we may have wherewith to honor him,
and advance his Kingdom. page 106 5 That we seek forgivenes for the same
ends, viz. for his glory and Kingdom, and that our sins do not hinder his
mercies, and so likewise deliverance from Satan, and from all evils. page 108
The fifth general Meditation. 5 The power and efficacy of our Prayers made
and performed in all things, according to the heavenly pattern. page 120
Herein these particular Meditations.
1 That when we can so' pray, he will manifest himself our father, setting
his seal to our souls, that he is our tender father. page 111 2 How he will
from Heaven, show us his glory, when we can pray so, and that more then ever in
this last Age. 112 3 How he will then cause his Kingdom to come with power,
and ruinate the kingdom of Satan and Antichrist. page 115 4 How he will then
fulfill whatsoever is not yet accomplished concerning his enemies, or his
servants, and put new cheerfulness into our hearts, to doc his will. page 116 5
How he will then deliver his people, feed them from Heaven, and recompense
double unto them. page 118 6 How then he will cleanse his people from their
sins, and write his Law in their hearts. page 119 7 He will deliver his stock
from Satan, and dissolve all his cursed works, discovering the depths of all
his wickedness. page 122 8 How then he will declare him self sole Monarch, to
whom all glory belongs, and cause all to acknowledge his Soveraig^ty. page 125
9 How we are never to rest, till we can trium^ in the assurance of faith,
crying jointly, Amen. page 128
The sixth general Meditation. 6 How all but those who are so qualified as is
mentioned, are excluded from helping the Lord, and do rather pull down Gods
wrath upon his Church. Herein these particular Meditations.
1 How all living securely, are excluded hence, and so all who do not in
commiseration strive to come to help him, and his poor Church. 131 Reasons
here of to be seriously thought of.
1 All such must be separated at the last day. 2 All living in any gross
sin, impenitently are excluded hence, for that they are blind and deaf. page
1^5 3 All the threatenings in Gods Book against such sins and sinners are
against them, not any prom^se to them until they repent: and therefore they are
excluded. page 140 4 For that every notorious sinner helps to pull down wrath
on all. page 143 5 All excluded, who have not so much compassion of their
Brethren in their miseries* as to be re^d to adventure them selves for them.
page* 145 6 All but those, who can more lay to heart the causes of God and his
people, then their own. page 148 7 All rejected who will not cast away their
sin, though as dear as their right eyes, and receive the love of every part
of Gods truth page 150 8 All excluded from this service, who but incline to any
evil in their hearts. page 152 9 All but they who endeavor in all things, to
be with our Savior, for that none else can be his true disciples. page 153
2 The second particular Meditation of the sixth general, who may with hope and
confidence offer themselves, only they who strive in all things to be so
qualified as he requires. page 155 Reasons, that only such can hope to have
acceptance here. page 157
The 7. general Meditation. 7 That the Lord notwithstanding, g^ciously calls
all sorts to help herein, and therefore every one who will not strive to be
of this number, must perish. page 165

Reasons showing, that he calls all to help, if ever they will see his face
with joy. pa. 167

Three special Meditations to be over in our hearts, until we be of this
number. page 172

1 That the Lord Jesus stands at the heart of every impenitent sinner, to
enter in^knocking louder now, then ever heretofore. page 172 He knockes at the
heart of every one, reading or hearing this or the like admonition, offering
mercy to them who will admit him in, and having infinite wrath against all who
will still repel him, 175 2 To think what it is for a man to forsake his own
happiness, in rejecting Christ's gracious call, and to join with satan
against him, to his endless perdition, Page 178 3 How God sets herein before
the faces of all, life and death* blessing and cursing: life to each one
harkening to his call, and coming to help: death to every one still hardening
his heart. page 188
Conclusion. How all the distressed parts of Gods Church, do cry to every one
of us to come and help them. page 192 How our Savior himself calls each to
come, notwithstanding all objections of unfitness, or disability, with the
answer of every true Christian heart to his call: Lord, I come, I come. page
195

These with the prayers mentioned before in the general Contents, are the
sum^e of this first Part.

The Second Part, to succeed in the next place; contains Prayers likewise
for all the Churches and people of God, scattered thorough the whole world:
that we may all seek to pacify the Lord, by giving him his glory, in
returning and submitting our selves wholly unto his Covenant; and that we may
obtain by our instant prayers, that w^e may jointly honor him; so walking and
believing as his heavenly wisdom has appointed. For this is a thing
notoriously observed and acknowledged by all, who rightly under stand the state
of foreign parts; that as it ^ amongst us* for the most part; so it has
been very generally amongst them in all the Churches, that they have had only
a bare form of godliness, a naked outward profession of the Gospel in word,
but almost without any power or life thereof, more then for a fashion. And that
this has not only thus fleshed our Adversaries to the destruction of the
whole Church (as doing a thing meritorious unto God herein* for that they
conceyve us to be but a company of Heretics in professi^n, very Atheistes in
our lives) but also provoked our blessed God, so far aire^die to leave so
many of the Churches into their hands, and thus to threaten all the rest, even
us our selves, seeing his kingdom is not in word, but in power. And therefore,
so many of us as have made such a carnal profession, have not only showed
forth a manifest contempt of his heavenly Majesty, and his holy Covenant; but
put a Scepter of Reed into the hand of our Lord Jesus Christ; smitten him
upon the face, and trampled his Crown under our feet, and indeed made his
and our enemies to blaspheme and thus far to prevayle and insult over us.

Whereupon, he has justly begun, and threatened us all, to take his kingdom
from us, to give it to another people, which would bring forth the fruit of
it; and to leave us all to be trampled under foot by these our Enemies,
until we know by wanting, the blessings which we have formerly inioyed, and
the difference between his service, and the slaverie of his Enemies.

As these prayers therefore, according to our Saviors direction, may serve to
prepare the way for all other our prayers, and our right access unto his
glorious Majesty, to come with confident assurance, and do proceed un to the
first petition of the Lords Prayer, and the end of the first Commandment,
that we may all give him his due glory, performing unto him his inward
worship, which is the fountain of all true obedience; so those that are to
follow in the second part (the Lord assisting) are to go according to the
tenor of the same heavenly rule of our Savior; through the whole Covenant made
with our God, both for all his Law and Gospel, beginning at the second
Commandment, and so through the Law, and through all the Articles of faith, with
the doctrine of the Sacraments, and other things belonging thereunto. That thus
all, even the poorest servants of God, may have matter enough of prayer to be
exercised in continually, and all to this very end for appeasing the Lords
wrath, and reconciling him to all his Churches and Children again. First,
every one for himself, and his own particular, to be assured of his own
reconciliation to the Lord by the blood of his Son, when he can so pray and
obey in truth. And secondly, that every one having attained to this assurance
and favor with the Lord, may be exercised daily, as those worthy servants of
God, Nehemiah, Ezra, and Daniel, in confessing their own sins, and the
sins of all the Churches and people of the Lord, and in so crying unto him,
and importuning him* until we shall see the full deliverance and restoring of
the Churches in Bohemia, Palatinate, and the rest: yea the enlargement of them,
by the gathering in of the Jew, and the remainder of his Israel from the
uttermost parts of the earth, with the utter razing of Babel: and until we
obtain whatsoever else the Lord has either promised to his people, or
denounced against his enemies. And finally, until we shall every one see the
heavenly Jerusalem, and the eternal glory of his Sion. The third and last
part, is (God willing) to contain principally Prayers for this our sinful
Nation, that we may first all see, and lively apprehend the danger wherein we
stand every moment, of drinking at the Lords hand, after those other Churches,
which have tasted so deeply of the cup of his displeasure, seeing our sins
are no less, but far greater then theyrs; and that specially since their
ensample has no more prevayled with us. Secondly, that we may all in time
wisely understand the means which in his wisdom and mercy he has yet left
unto us to prevent the execution ready to come forth against us. And thirdly,
that we may every one use all the means thereto, each according to our place
and calling, by turning unfeignedly to the Covenant of our God, not only to
prevent, and for ever to turn away all the calamities devised against us by
our deadly and bloody enemies; but also so to reconcile the Lord unto us, that
insteede of those miseries which our Enemies so long for, to rush upon us, he
may make us the happiest and blessedst Nation that ever was, in this last Age
of the world* so to remain to his eternal glory, the comfort and example of
all the other Churches for evermore.

To these are also to be added some special Prayers for our particular
purposes and ocsions.

FINIS.

