A TREATISE, wherein is declared the sufficiency of English Medicines, for
cure of all Diseases, cured with Medicines. Whereunto is added a collection of
Medicines growing (for the most part) within our English Climat, approved and
experimented against the Iaundise, Dropsy, Stone, Falling Sickness,
Pestilence.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Tho. Man. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lord Zouch. T. B. wishes prosperity in this
world, and eternal life in the world to come.
I Have been (right honorable and my very good Lord) since the time your
Honor vouchsafed to take knowledge of me, and to show both by benefits and
other ways, especial favor toward me, desirous that some testimony might
remain of my duty, and thankfulness again to your Lordship: which although it
be not able either to carry with it the whole affection of my mind, or in any
sort match with your L. bounty, yet may it be, as it were, an assay and taste
of the performance of that duty, whereto both I am bound, and my heart gladly
yields unto. This assay I present you in this my simple New years gift, being
a defense of our native medicines, with disproofe of those of foreign nations.
The question I once disputed in open place: and being required of certain to
show my mind more at large therein, I thought good to communicate it with more
then one or two, adding thereto my reasons to be examined by men of wisdom and
understanding, that if I err in this point, I might have the more reformers: if
my sentence be approved, the benefit thereof might be reaped of many. Now, my
request is unto your L. that this my simple gift be accepted with regard of my
hearty good meaning, rather then of the thing it self, being too base in
respect of your Honors person and desert. You know well the price of scholars
gifts, who as their treasures are of the mind, and not of gold, or silver, so
therein lies the recompense of all good turns; in which kind I confess in
deed my gift might have been greater then it is: yet presuming of your
Lordships taking in good part that which proceeds from an entire affection,
and considering whatsoever could be on my part, were too little in comparison
of your merits, I am bold to salute your Honor with this poor present at this
time, publishing the same under your Honors name, that if any commodity redound
to the Commonwealth thereby, the thanks might be your L. herein, who pricked
me to take such kind of acknowledgement of your goodness toward me, as
therewith some benefit might also arise unto others. The Lord of Heaven and
Earth bless your Honor with many good New years, with increase of Honor and
good days, even to see peace upon his Israel all your life long.

Your Honors bound in the Lord, T. B.

To the gentle Reader.
I Would not have thee ignorant (gentle Reader) of the affection wherewith I
set forth this small Treatise. It is not with any carping mind, I asassure
thee, against any person or state, or with desire to publish a new toy, thereby
to seem to be some body. But considering the benefits which might arise of
the truth of this matter, which seems to me most true, I was willing easily
to yield unto the requests of certain, who thought it good I should make it
common with thee: which so much the more willingly I do, in that I hope this
my enterprise shall be a means to provoke others to deal with the same
Argument more plentifully, and kindle in us a greater diligence to inquire
after the medicines of our own Country yield, and more care to put the^ in
practice. The case is neither mine nor thine only, but the Commonwealths, the
benefit whereof all are bound who are members thereof, according to their place
and calling, most diligently to seek. And this I desire of thee: if thou art of
another mind then I am in this matter, thou would keep moderation of thy
affections toward my person: and in the searching out of truth ioyn with me:
and as I give thee leave to think in this point what lists thee, so disdain
not him who easily gives his ear to reason, and has dedicated his days to
serve thy commodity; which if he misseth of, his good will yet remains with
thee, which he also requires to be yielded on thy part to him again.
Farewell.

A brief Table of the principal matters or heads, contained in the Treatise
of English Medicines.
THE preservation of health consists in the true use of meat, drink, and
exercise. page 2 The virtue of Celendine, herbegrace, veruin and grass. page 6
Opium has a stupifying and benumming nature. page 18 Comparison of Metheglin
with Malmsy. 29 The virtue and properties of Milk. 37 The virtue of Trifolium,
or three-leaued grass. page 39 The virtue of all manner of Mast. 39 The virtue
of Penyrioll. eadem. The virtue of Garlic, Onions, and Leeks, being newly
gathered. eadem. The essence of Primrose and Couslips, good against the
French Pox. page 39 Earth-wormes close and join wounds. 40 Sows or loups, good
against the Iaundies, and the difficulty of making vrin. page eadem. Corns of
horslegs, good against the Epilepsia and Falling-sicknes. 41 The virtue of
frogs decocted. 41 The cure of Cankers. 46 The Gangrene and Sphacelus, cured by
the same. page 46 Plantain, when, with a hedghog dried and drunk, cures the
Leprosy. 46 Misselto of the o^ke, the ^unnet of an Hare, the Piony root,
Enula campana, the scalpe of a man, and an Asse-hoofe, is good against the
falling-sicknes. 47 Plantain, penyrioll, and herbgrace, are good against the
suffocation of the Mother. 47 Worms, and the infection thereof, are cured with
Coriander seed, Colewort seed, Garlic, wormwood, the juice of Purslan, and
Stags-horn. page 47 Peachleaues, hyssop, mynts, purslan-seede, is also good
against worms. 47 Butter, vvarme-water, the decoction of fl^xseed,
Fenugreeke, or Mallows being taken inwards, are good against poison. 47
Sothern^ood, Seahuluer, Nepseed* juice of Horchound, the seed of wild Rue,
vvalnuts, turnops, herbgrace, etc. do expel poison. 47 Read the 37 and 38
pages against poison. Barley, sowre-grapes, roses, violets, the oak, quinces,
damsons, pellitory of the wall, docks, pears, apples, hartshorne, with the
herb and flowers of Mallows, cures hot diseases. 50 For moist diseases,
Cabbage, beets, camomell* fenell, beans, fenugre^ke, etc. page 51 These
simples purge either by vomit or stool. By vomit, Radishroots with the seed,
the Pepon-root, and nettleseed, folefoot leaf and ro^t, the middle bark of
the vvalnut-tree, and the long blossoms thereof, the seed of broom, and the
flowers thereof purge vehemently. To purge by the stool, the flowers and
leaves of the Peach-tree, Violets flowers and seeds, the great garden docke, or
Munks rhubarb damaske-ro^es, wild saffron, the powder of Fetherfew, etc. read
page 52. and 53. For wounds, plantain, hounds-tongue, wild yarrow, Cardus
benedictus, Betony, Scabios, Elme-leaues, Adders-tongue, Moonevvort, etc. page
57.
FINIS.
A Treatise, wherein is declared the sufficiency of English Medicines, for
cure of all diseases cured with Medicine.
ALTHOUGH I be not ignorant that truth often purchases hatred, not of her own
nature, (then which nothing is more amiable and gracious, but by reason of the
great corruption of mankind, whereby, as men are plunged in blindness and
error, so they dasle with their eyes at the light of truth, and savor the
things only which agree with their corruption) although I say this has been
always the condition of truth in the world, and such evil grace finds it
with the most of men, especially when it first offers it self to be
acknowledged for that which it is indeed: yet for the love I bear it, being a
Philosopher by profession, and for the public benefit, being borne under that
condition of men, whereby one is bound to employ his gifts for the benefit of
another: I have ventured upon the displeasure and disgrace of men, and have
taken some pains to bring to light one daughter of Truth, of Time, seeming to
have been forgotten, which if she be received and embraced of thee gentle
Reader, as she deserves, shall requite thee with no less pleasure and profit,
then many of her elder sisters. For what can be more pleasant unto thee, then
the inioying of medicines for cure of thine infirmities out of thy native
soil, and country, thy Field, thy Orchard, thy Garden? and what more
profitable unto thee, then thereby to avoid the infinite charges rising upon
the use of strange and foreigne medicines, whereby not only thy substance is
wasted, but thy health often times greatly impaired? This is then that truth
which I commend unto thee. As England abounds plentifully with all things
necessary for thy maintenance of life, and preservation of health; so needs
it not, partly through natures instinct, partly by the industry of men,
sufficiency of medecin to cure the sicknesses and infirmities, whereunto our
nation is subject: which my opinion and judgment, considering the use and
custom has long been to place greatest value in strange medecines, and the
practice of the most does ratify the same, I know must needs seem strange
unto thee, but read, consider, and then judge, and at the least let me
enterchange my pains with thy attentive waying of that which thou shall read,
prejudice set aside: and that a way may be made for the playner handling of
this matter, I briefly define a remedy, a medicine, a disease after this sort
as follows. First beginning with a remedy, which I call the work of the
Physician, whereby health may be repaired. Physic is an art which takes
charge of the health of man, preserving and mainteining it present by the right
use of meat, drink, and exercise, with other such helps of nature: and
restoring the same decayed, by diet, medicine, help of hand, or surgerie
instrument severally used, or by joint force applied. Which three are Physic
instruments, whereby the action of curing is performed, which action I call a
remedy. And the second of these instruments namely a medicine, I define an
adversary force of some natural thing, equally matching the proper or next
cause of the disease. Of which medicines, Herbs, Trees, Stones, Mineralls and
metally, Barthes, Waters, and all Fruits, are matter only, and not the very
medicines them selves: for as Physic it self is an art, and the action
artificial, and not of nature, so are the instruments of the same action
artificial, and not natural. And as nature affourdeth not to us of her own
work, either garments, or houses, or any kind of instrument, but only the
matter whereof such instruments may be made, leaving with us an industry
rightly to frame them, and wisdom to use them: so, no more is Lettis, Poppie,
Rhewbarb, or Scammonie a medicine, then an Oak a Table or Ship, or a quarrie
of stones, an house. Moreover, all medicines standing in a kind of relation to
the disease which by means of the patients age, sex, time of the year,
custom, and such like occasions greatly vary, no nature which always keeps
constant in the own kind can therefore either be a medicine, or properly bear
the name thereof: which I wish to be noted, least it be thought the simples,
and such other natural things were medicines, because commonly they carry the
names of them. And thus much shall be sufficient to have said of the nature of
a medicine.

Now a disease (which remains last to be defined) is such state of the body,
as thereby it is unabled to perform aptly the actions thereto belonging, or
those actions which the soul does accomplish, by the instrument of the body.

Thus much briefly concerning the explication of the terms wherein this
truth is propounded.

Now the reasons, whereby both I am moved to be of this judgment, and am so
hardy as to propound it to others to be received, whereof the first rises
from the Christian doctrine of Gods providence, which as it serves greatly to
establish the chief^ points of Philosophy, so being drawn and more
particularly applied to the maintenance of man's life, carries with it as a
sufficient provision for maintenance and preservation of health, a like
furniture, and as aunswerable to the necessity of the patient, health being
decayed; I will not stand to inireate of providence being well known to
Christians: and being a truth in Divinity, and Christianity, cannot be false
in Philosophy. Although the best of the ancient Philosophers and Poets have
always kept it as a sure ground, who as they serve little to establish us,
having a surer foundation, yet may they justly condemn the Atheist of this
age, who so far has quenched those remnants of the light of the first
creation, that all things seem to him Fortune and Chance.

There is no nation under heaven so poor and destitute, but it has of the
own country soil sufficient to content nature with, of food and apparel,
which as they be two pillars of life, so from them are taken the means of
preservation of health, which as to beasts are applied by natural instinct, so
are they used of man by reason, the temperer of appetite and affection.

This provision of sustenance is most agreeable with the goodness of the
Creator, who as he is author of being to the Creature, so fails he not to
maintain and preserve the same Creature the whole term of the being thereof:
and because the necessity of the Creature is perpetual, his wisdom has
also foreseen, and provided a perpetual supply of such sustenance, as is fit
for that nature which stands in need thereof: and because the need is not
once for all, but parted into times, varying, according to the diverse
disposition and nature of that for which this provision is made, he has also
so bestowed his goodness in this point, that at all times to all things,
necessary sustenance should not be to seek; and this extended not to men
only, but even to brute beasts, and all things which require nourishment. The
end of this provision is the preservation of the Creature, which Nature most
carefully studieth (if it might be perpetual and eternal) thereto to bring
it, the goodness of the Creator, will nothing wanting, his wisdom will have
it wait upon the necessity of the Creature: wherefore as the Earth is called
the mother of all things, not because it brings them forth only, but
yields them perpetual nourishment, so is the country of all people to them
named, the parent of all parents. Then by natures law, all things being
abundantly ministered unto us for the preservation of health at home in our own
fields, pastures, rivers, etc. how can the wisdom of God, and his goodness
stand with the absence of Medicines and remedies necessary for the recovery
of health, the need being as urgent of the one as of the other: and so as
great an occasion of practice of the same goodness and wisdom in the one as in
the other? which being most plain and evident, it follows necessarily that
the medicine should be as read for the sick, as meat and drink for the
hungry and thirsty: which except it be applied by the native country, can not
be else performed. It is known to such as have skill in nature, what wonderful
care she has of the smallest of creatures, not only giving to every part of
them a careful discharge of sundry duties, as of attraction, retention,
concoction, expulsion of excrements, distribution, and such like, but also to
the whole creature, a knowledge of medicine to help themselves, if happily
diseases annoy them: neither out of India, nor Arabia, but from their very
haunt: which being not denied to them, much more is granted to us, in so much
as (the work of nature being most excellent in man) she is more vigilant over
mankind then over other creatures, as by the shape thereof most plainly
appears. The Swallow cures her dim eyes with Celendine: the Wesell knows
well the virtue of Hearbgrace: the Dove the Veruen: the Dog discharges his
mawe with a kind of Grass: the Spider is Triacle to the Munkey: the
Hippopotamus discharges the abundance of his blood by opening a vein: and
Ib^^ is said to have showed the use of the Clyster: and too long it were to
reckon up all the medicines which the beasts are known to use by natures
direction only, and those not so far fetched as our drugges, but familiar
with them, and taken from the place of their food: it being very probable she
has bestowed this gift even upon all, one having interest in natures care as
well as another. By this then may we gather, if nature fail not the very
beasts in this behalf, neither sends them to borrowe a far of, much more
is that performed unto us the Lords of all the creatures, and for whose use all
things were created: except we be thought less subject to diseases then they,
wherein we be so little privileged, that no creature in that respect is so
frail as we, and those most subject to infirmities which are governed and
dieted by us. So that we of all creatures have greatest need of Natures
liberal hand in this behalf. For be it for the most part, we are more
healthful then sickly, and so have greater use of the means of keeping
health, then of restoring, yet hardly can a man say which of them is more
necessary to be ready and pressed at hand, the danger of diseases being
always imminent, although diseases themselves be not always present. Now if
to any the reason seem weak from that which should be to infer a being
thereof, we are to understand in the works of God, whatsoever should be, is;
he being a workman of an absolute power and cunning. But says one, the East
and West Indies Arabia, Barbary, the red Sea, are the Mines, as it were, and
the fountains of medicines; and Spain, Protugale, and Venice, the vents of
such things, and Navigations the means to obtain them.

It cannot be denied, but those countries yield many strange things, whereof
we take use with great delight, and Navigations serves greatly for
communicating of commodities and enterchange of merchandise: but how far, and
of what commodities? Verily of such as if our delicacie would give us leave, we
might well spare, being things rather of superfluous pleasure then necessary
reliefes, and serving rather for a certain pomp, then for maintenance of
life: and which without great working of the wits, might be proved to bring
more harm to our countriemen, then commodity: both in respect of the
diversity in complexion of our bodies from those of strange nations to whom
they properly belong, the corruption of their outlandish wares, the selling of
one thing for an over, and the withholding from us the best of choice: but of
this hereafter. Moreover, Navigations being of a later invention then the
necessity of medicine, neither practiced of many nations at this day, cannot
supply this want, or if men began then first to be diseased, when they began
to find ways in the Sea to those far countries, does it not greatly detract
from that providence whereby all things are guided, to lay the recovery of man's
health upon the adventures of Merchants? and the disease being in the one part
of the World, to have the medicine in the other, yea, as far distant as the
East is from the West, and the life and death of a man to stand upon a
halfepenie weight of Scammonie, or a dram or twain of Rhewbarb?

Nay, which is yet more absurd, that the health of so many Christian nations
should hang upon the courtesy of those Heathen and barbarous nations, to whom
nothing is more odious then the very name of Christianity? And who of malice do
withholde from us such medicines as they know most for our use? Whereupon the
Turk denies unto the Christians at this day the Terra Lemnia, a medicine to
be preferred before the chief of those we persuade our selves to enjoy. The
corruption of their drugges, is it not so great, that in this light of all
knowledge, scarce is one able to discern the right Bolus Armena, from the Ocre
of Apulia, or to discover the adulterating of Ambergreece, and Musk, with a
number of other corruptions, which have gotten strength by custom of error?
Thamarinds, are counterfeited with Prunes, Scammonie with the milk of Spurge,
Manna with Sugar and the leaves of Seen, Aspalathum with the inward part of the
root of an Olue tree, Frankencense with Rosin, Bdellium and Sarcocalla with
goomes: for Bolus Armena is sold a red earth out of Apulia, for Malabatheum a
leaf of a Limon or Orange, for Turpeth some other other root dipped at both
ends in Goom. Which be as like in virtue to the simples whereof the bear they
visard and mask, as Chalk to Cheese, according to the proverb. And greatly
thou art deceived to think our Nauigations store us with ancient Medicines,
wherewith Physic in old time has been furnished. For at this day neither is
Balm known unto us, neither Xylobalsamum, nor Cardamomum, nor Amomum, neither
Costus, neither Calamus odoratus, Aspalathus, Agallocum, Narcaphthum, with the
most of the noble ancient Medicines: so that Navigations has not at any time
supplied this want unto us, and how it should hereafter I know not, except
Galen take pains again to sail into Cyprus, into Palestine, and Lemnos, to
gather and make choice with his own hands. For what hope is there to be had of
the provision made by Merchants? who buy to sell only, and thereof to reap
gain; and by reason they be unlearned, if they should be faithful, yet must
they fail greatly in this point, and then must we use such medicines as we
can come by, and the patient recover such health as he may.

For the most part these drugs come out of Spain or Portugale, either fetched
of us or brought of them, yet neither of them has borne name of yield of the
best simples, so that if they be of those countries, then they are not such as
they should be: If Spain and Portugale fetch them else where, then lies the
assurance upon their credit. Or let me know how they discern the Coriander of
Ethiopia, the black Helleborus of Cyrene, the Amomum of Scythia, the Myrrha
Trogloditica, the Opium of Apulia, (which are counted the best) from the same
growing in other places, which never carried name of commendation for such
simples.

The Coloquintida growing alone upon the plant, is much suspected of good
Physicians, the Squilla that has no fellows, is thought to savor of a
venomous nature, likewise the Thymelea: now, when these are gathered to the
Merchants hand, who shall tell him how they grew, or who shall inquire but the
Philosopher that knows what may come thereby to these simples, neither is the
danger less in the manner of laying them up, and keeping them ouerlong:
besides the just time of gathering being either ouerpassed, or prevented,
greatly diminishes the virtues of the Medicines. As the use of Euphorbium is
perilous before it be a year old, and after three years it is naught
worth, so Agaricke gathered before it be ripe, or kept past two years,
becomes unwholesome. And as the Peonie root is to be gathered in the wane of
the Moon, and the Crayfish to be taken after the rising of the Dog star, the
Sun entering into Leo, so are there many other, which if they miss their due
time of gathering, fail greatly in their virtues. To these corruptions
moreover may be added the washing of the sea, the long iourneys they are
brought, whereby it should seem nature had denied unto us the use of them, as
to whom they were not of her yielded; with such difficulty, and as it were,
by constraint, they come to us. Then if the best of ancient simples be partly
unknown and wanting, partly adulterated, partly by age and other means spent
before they come to our use, what shall we say to our compounds and mixtures,
which rise of these simples? Can the temper mend them? or a quid pro quo, as
they call them, serve the turn? No verily, not our turns, to whom the
substitute Medicines, as I may call them, were not appointed, being in great
part as hard to come by, as the Medicines whose substitutes they are, and as
much unknown unto us. As for Agallocum Calamus odoratus, for Amomum Acorus,
for Castorium, Bilphium, for Crocamagmo, Agallocus, with a number of the same
sort, which these few leaves of paper will not admit. Neither is it to be
thought these Lieutenant Medicines serve at all turns in the place of the
right Medicines, for so should Ginger serve the turn of Folesoote to purge by
vomit, which it can no more then curds of Cow milk can soften and supple like
butter, or the dung of the stock Dove purge like Euphorbium, or the Dock root
draw phlegm from the head like Pellitorie, which Galene notwithstanding makes
substitutes of these medicines which have such operation. I conclude therefore,
seeing Navigations can not afford us either the simples which we seem to
need, and those which it does, both corrupt and counterfeit in the greatest
part, we have neither to crave thereof in this point aid, much less to trust
thereunto. Now the simples being (but for the most part) bastard ware, how can
the compoundes that amount of the same be other then counterfeit? Whereupon as
Cardanus says in his Method of curing, the wise Magistrates of Venice have
often times forbidden the making of Triacle and Mithridatum, because the
simples could not be had, whereby they should be compou^ded: which if Venice,
the greatest Mart in this part of the world of such wares can not avouch, what
can we hope for from other places? that a man would marvel to see the great
store of them in all shops of Apothecaries under the names of Triacle and
Mithridatum of Andromachus: and it being required in Triacle before it be used,
it should have a time, as it were, of mellowing, which of Galene in his book
of Triacle to Piso is extended to 12. years, and of Paulus Egineta in his 7.
book by 7. years, for those that are bitten or stong of venomous beasts, or
have drunk poison, or are infected with the pestilence, and in other diseases,
from ten years till it be 20. of age; I marvel what assurance we have of the
age of this Triacle, which is ordinary in use; or if we have none, how we dare
use it at adventure, knowing by age the virtue thereof has no small
alteration. I would these inconveniences were the smallest, which I have but
briefly, and as it were, for a taste run over, yet were even they sufficient to
stay our over hasty use of such strange Merchandise, and to move us to betake
us to those we know both in the blade, and in the seed, in the root, and in
the fruit, and know the air, the hill, the valley, the medowe or Marish
ground where they grow. But this trust upon outlandish Medicines has much
more nearly touched us then so. If a man would say by this ouerhastie
embracing whatsoever strange nations do as it were, purge over unto us, we
drink diverse times rank poison in steed of wholesome medicine, I trow it
would justly move us to be advised, and not to pass over the inquiry of a
reason, why such a one should think so, being one whose vocation tends to
the charge of the health of men's bodies. The right Hermodactils are commended
for excellent medicines against all pains in the joints, as the Gout, the
Schiatica, and such like, from which they purge gross phlegm. Doronicum
Romanum has great commendation for comforting the heart, expelling poison,
against the Cough, for avoiding of humors which ouercharge the Chest, which are
great virtues doubtless in them both. Now if they in the shops, as they bear
the name of these medicines, so carried not with them in steed of these virtues
dangerous poison, then should I have less cause to exhort our nation to
betake them to their Gardens, and Fields, and to leave the banks of Nilus, and
the Fens of India. The common Hermodactils being a kind of poison called
Ephemerum, so named, because with such swiftness it charge and ouerchargeth
our vital spirits, that it kills him that has taken it in one day. The
other commonly called Doronicum Romanum, and used for an especial cordial,
so that it has place in the electuarie of precious stones, in the electuarie
of Amber, in the cordial powder, this Doronicum, I say, called of Mathiolus
Demoniacum, that is to say, devilish, noting there by the virtues thereof, is
no baser poison then a very kind of Aconitum, by Mathiolus experience, which
he confesses himself (before having bin abused by the common error) first to
have learned of Iacobus Antonius Cortusus, a man very skillful in the nature
of simples, which Iacobus taught him the experience by giving it to dogs, which
it kills. Now if by reason no such danger happens to us, by the use of them,
they seeming not so dangerous: we are to understand they be given in small
quantity, and mixed with diverse remedies against poison, the good providence
of God providing so, that otherwise they should not be ministered, as in the
purging electuary of Diacnicu, Hermodactils are bridled with Cinnamon, and the
powder of Diatragatanthum frigidum, where indeed it has somewhat too large
scope, being better tempered in Benedicta, with Cloves, Parsely seed, Galanga,
and Mace, and in the pills of Hermodactils with Aloe, Mirobalans, Bdellium,
the seed of Herbgrace, which have force against poison, the which small
quantity of them being bridled, and dulled with other medicines, especially
such as resist the force of poiso^s, is not deadly to us, although great hurt
thereof must needs ensue. I have stood the longer upon this point of strange
medicines, in answering the supply by Navigations, the rather, because it
seems most to make against us in the maintenance of our home medicines, and
breeds, as it were, a lothsomnes of those blessings of God, which we may
daily at commandment enjoy. But hitherto has only bin showed the corruptions
and cou^terfeting of foreigne medicines which belongs to certain only, and
not to all* (although those certain be the chief, and of greatest price) and
that being foreseen, the provision out of strange and far distant nations, may
seem well to stand with that providence we speak of: and except they be in
respect of their strangeness hurtful or unprofitable unto us. the skill of
sailing being a means to present them at our need, natures care should seem
no whit to be blemished. The reasons which I have before alleged, I leave to
the indifferent Reader to consider of: and because I am so far urged, I easily
stick not to hold, we receive no small hurt from all the kinds of strange
medicines, whereof I yield these few reasons which follow.

Our English bodies, through the nature of the region, our kind of diet and
nourishment, our custom of life, are greatly diverse from those strange
nations, whereby arises great variety of humors, and excrements in our bodies
from theirs, and so the causes of diseases rising upon breach of diet, the
(diet being of an other sort) must needs be unlike. Whereupon, although their
humors be in kind, and in a generality agreeable to ours, as blood, choler,
phlegm, melancholy, and such like, yet rising upon other matter then the same
in us: and otherwise framed by a far other state of body, by reason of a
diverse kind of life, the Medicines which help them must needs hurt us, not
finding the like causes to strive with: and this no doubt is the cause why we
are not able to bear such dose or quantity of their Medicines as those
nations are to whom they be native. Besides, they work in our bodies after a
far more unkind manner then they report them to do in theirs: nay, they
destroy us, and help them, which is an argument to me, that every Medicine
has a relation to the diseases of the inhabitant, which if it be profitable to
strangers, yet does it by a constraint and not half so kindly. The Greeks,
as it may appear by Dioscorides in his fourth Book and a hundredth and two and
fifty Chapter, entreating of Scammonie, are able to bear a greater quantity,
yea, double, then we of Scammonie, which is an ordinary purger with us. Who
says, thirty grains thereof may be given with 20. of black Helleborus, and
60. of Aloe to make a just purgation, and of Scammonie alone 60. grains. Now
common experience teaches us the great odds betwixt Scammonie raw, as they
call it, and the same corrected, which we name Dacrydium, both in vehemency of
purging, and tormenting the body: yet hardly dare we pass above 20. grains
of the same, and this mixed with Cordialls, and stomach Medicines. Moreover,
their slender correcting of it, does argue it to be far less noisome to them
then to us, who correct it only, or at the least, are contented with the
correction thereof by a little Salt and Pepper, or a little Ginger: who for the
plenty of excellent simples, which we both want and know not, and for their
skill in the nature of those we correct with, might as well have qualified it
as we, who first wash it in Rose Water, wherein Cytrea Myrobalanus, Spike, and
Cinnamon have been boiled: in which also we let it steep four and twenty
hours, then dry it, then mix it again with oil of sweet Almonds, and some
Goom for Tragacantha, and last of all bake it in a Quince* covered round with
paste. Who has not horror of the torments which both the Hellebores bring to
the body? yet says Paulus Egineta in his seventh Book, and fourth Chapter,
the black Helleborus purges yellow choler from the whole body without pain:
which cannot be verified of our bodies, howsoever it be in theirs, and
therefore we fear to minister the powder thereof in any sort, but the steeping
only of the barks of the roots, from ^0. grains to 6. they being bold to
take a whole dram thereof in substance which is more then treble the
quantity, for one dose. These strange workings of these foreigne drugges in
our bodies, and a more gentle and kind working in theirs, does it not
manifestly declare unto us, that they were not created for us? do they not
force us oftentimes with peril of our lives to give them over? that the
patient knows not diverse times whether he should stand rather to the
courtesy of his disease, then of his potion? There is a simple which has not
many years been in use, brought out of India, and highly commended, called
Mechoaca, it purges gently say they, without vexing or grieuing the body,
without annoying the stomach greatly, and ce^seth purging at your pleasure,
with a little supping. These be great virtues doubtless, and I wish we could
find them in Mechoaca. For experience the touchstone has bewrayed it in our
bodies, to be of a far other operation: it tormenteth the body, it annoyeth
the stomach much, neither does a supping stay the vehemency of purging, and
this have I pa^tly by mine own experience found in Mechoaca, and partly by the
experience of my friends, who upon the use thereof have much complained of
these accidents. That juice or rather milk of Poppie, which is brought out of
Asia named Opium, it is not unknown to all the world, what a marvelous force
it has in benumning the sense of feeling, and utterly extinguishing the
natural heat of the body, so that we fear to give thereof into the body
above the weight of two grains; and those corrected with Safforn, Castorium,
and such like, least it cast the patient into such asleep, as he needs the
trumpe of the Archangell to awake him. Now, the same Opium being taken of the
Turks, Moors, and Persians, brings to their wearied and ou^r^rauelled
bodies, a marvelous recreation, in such sort, as they ordinarily use it
therefore as a present remedy, not in the quantity of two grains or twenty,
but even an whole ounce or twain at once. And Hollerius in his Scholia upon
his Chapter of Phrensey, says, that Kon^elet a learned ^hysitian, and the
French Kings professor at Montpellier, reported unto him, that he had seen a
Spaniard take thereof into his body half an ounce at one time, without hurt.

Wherefore if the difference of our bodies from those of strange nations be so
great, that the thing which helps them, destroys us, that cures them
without annoyance, does vehemently torment us: I would wish us to be better
advised, then to be so ready to embrace them, a^ to contemn in comparison of
them, the medicines which receive, a^ it were a taming, and are broken unto us
by our own soil: neither art thou here to look the wisdom of the physician
should consider the variety and diverse dispositions of the bodies by age;
complexion, region, sex, etc. and thereafter to ^emper these medicines, and so
to avoid the dangers; for the question is not of the manner of using these
things, for then should such consideration have place, but even of the very
nature, which no manner of use can alter. Yet are these simples excellent
creatures of God, made for the use of men, but not for all men: and although we
may receive help from them, by a certain general community that our bodies
have with those of Arabia. Barbary, and the rest, yet no doubt as I have
showed in a few, so we receive by the use of them so much the less good by
them, as we most d^ffer from them, and that which wants of the performance of
good to us, must needs turn us to much harm, the vnhelping part, (as I may
call it) always working, and so ever harming. Neither do I see why the
medicines of India* or Egypt should be laid upon us, more then the Indian or
Egyptian diet, which is to eat Lizards, Dragons, and Crocodiles: for if the
proper medicine does always regard his proper adversary, which causes the
disease (as no doubt it should do) then there being a great difference betwixt
our humors and theirs, a^ much in a manner as is betwixt the flesh of a
Crocodile and of a tender C^pon, our medicines which are to fit us, must needs
be of another kind then theirs, which in our bodies not finding such humors
and excrements, as that strange diet does engender, must need seize upon the
very substance of our bodies to have somewhat to work on: which painful
working especially of the purgers, causes the common saying among the people,
to the great discredit of our art: There is not a purgation but it has a smack
of poison. Truth it is, no purgation can work without natures annoyance, being
in part a prick of nature to avoid her excrements: but when she is so provoked
that she sweateth cold sweates, that she gives over, that the patient
swouneth not by the excess of purging only, but for the most part through the
evil quality of the medicine, it is surely an argument, it wanted his proper
subject to work in. If needs we will take unto us the practice of such
strange medicines, (I call them medicines according to the common phrase, else
properly be they matter only) it were to be desired (which in part is
performed) that such medicines as be so perilous, might be planted in our
natural country, that through the familiarity of our soil, they might first
grow into acquaintance with us, before we entertain them not into our
bosoms, but into our hearts, and chamber them with our vital spirits. And as
it is said of the tree P^rsea, which in Persia being poison, translated into
Egypt, becomes wholesome, bearing fruit to be eaten, and good for the
stomach: to those natures receiving such mitigation of our soil, might in time
better ^itte us then they do. Which as it can not alter their nature being
impossible to be done by change of place, so doubtless might it purge away
that evil quality which annoyeth us, and seems rather to be an evil
complexion, and as it were a cachochimie and disease of the thing, then any
necessary property belonging to the nature. This which has been said of
Persea, is also to be seen in other simples, which in other places are poison,
and kill with the very shadow, yet brought into England and pl^nted with us,
clean change that venomous quality. Vgh called Taxus, of Dioscorides is said
to be so dangerous, and of such venomous nature, that in Navarre the very
shadow thereof poysoneth him that sleeps under it: and Egineta says, being
taken inward, it strangleth and swiftly kills. This Taxus notwithstanding,
being so perilous in other places, our English soil has so reformed, that
boldly our children do eat of the fruit thereof without danger: the like may
be verified of our Hemlocke, which although it be to be numbered among the
poisoning herbs, yet it is far behind that which grows in Candie, or
Megara* or Cilicia, scarce to be accounted poison in comparison of that in
those countries. Now if thou shall think (gentle Reader) as the change of
region alters some qualities, so all, and thereby empayreth the virtue of the
medicine: thou may easily be deceived. For as they depend not one upon
another, so may the one be well without the other, though by one common form,
they seem to be linked together to make one nature. Rhewbarb is known to have
two qualities, one contrary to an other, of purging the body, and stopping:
yet by steeping may the one be separated from the other, the purging virtue
being drawn out by steeping, and the stopping still remaining in the
substance steeped: so likewise may the noisome quality of the medicine be
eschewed, the wholesome and medicinable virtue notwithstanding, being in full
force, yea greater retained, in so much as the hurtful quality would hinder
the operation of the healthful, which being freed, and vnyoked from the other,
does far better accomplish his work. Of all kinds of Honey that of Greece,
and namely of Attica and H^ble are most commended, the next price is given to
the Honey of Spain and Navarre: yet it is certainly known by experience,
that the English Honey is most agreeable to our English bodies, and greater
quantity thereof may be taken, with less annoyance, yea none at all to those
which are not of too hot a temper; the other kinds being more sie^e, more apt
to engender choler, and to infl^me the blood, and more unfit to loose the body.
Whereby we may evidently see, that Nature uses not one shoe for every
foot, but either ministers a diverse commodity in kind, or else by the
country, air, and soil, does so temper it, that greater use may be thereof
to the inhabitant of the same country. By this then which hitherto has been
said, it is manifest we receive great hurt by the use of strange medicines,
and not upon reason onley, but from plain experience, even with hurt to our
own bodies, which as it is the greatest price of knowledge, so therefore ought
we the more to set thereby, and more carefully to seek to avoid the
danger. Again it is evident, that the planting of strange simples frames
them more to our use. Wherefore as there be many excellent Gardens in England,
especially in London replenished with store of strange and outlandish simples,
it were to be wished such endeavors were of others followed, that so we might
acquaint us better with these strangers, and by vsu capio make them our own.
But what soil will brook all things' It is true, yet no doubt of those that
it will brook, which I dare say are four or five hundredth, this frugalitie of
nature toward us as it is thought, might bear a greater show, and we more
safely use them, especially the purgers, which carry with them greatest
annoyance. Now if it be objected, the force of outlandish simples are thereby
more feeble, as we find the Organ of Candie surpassing ours in strength, I
mean the same kind with that of Candie planted in our Gardens, which may be
said also of other strange herbs planted by us: It can not be denied but
they are so, neither can the strange simple in all points be equal with his
kind keeping his native soil, yet is the difference scarce half a degree
under: or if it were a degree full out, what reason were it to fetch that one
degree with much peril, and charge, as far as Candie, Spain, or Venice, or
from another world: whereas a little increase of the quantity of the thing,
would easily suppli^ the want, though I mention not the gain of the freshness
of the same, which makes no small recompense of wanting in the force: neither
is the nature or virtue of a medicine to be esteemed by taste or smell,
neither by the force it has against the disease, the nature of a medicine
lying in an equal matching of the cause of the disease: which if it
ouer-match, so far off it is from the praise of an wholesome medicine, that it
becomes a cause of a contrary disease. Wherefore the commendation of a
medicine lies not in force, but in such force. And therefore the counsel of
the best Physicians is, if the disease will bear any delay, as the most do,
rather to apply a medicine of a weaker force, then at once with a vehement one,
to shake the frame of nature. And the weaker medicine being weak, either in
respect of the nature of the simple, or the small quantity, they counsel
rather to use that kind of curing which is by the feebler medicine in kind,
then by reason of the under quantity. For what skillful Physician would cure a
small distemper of heat, and as it were in the first degree, with a small
quantity of Opium, or Mandrake or Henbane, being cold in the fourth degree,
rather then with the just quantity of Endive, or Succorie? or diminish a small
excess of humors, with an vnderquantitie, of Coloquintida or Scammonie, rather
then with the just quantity of a feebler medicine? Wherefore upon good reason
they conclude it to be far safer for the patient, to cure with contraries of
feebler force, either often repeated, or in a greater quantity applied, then
with a maine force of a medicine of equal strength at once to expel the
disease, nature abhorring all vehement and souden either emptying or filling,
heating or cooling, or any other kind of souden alteration: which being
grounded upon good reason, the delaying of the force of strange medicines by
our soil, serves greatly for the commendation both of planting them with us,
and of the medicines them selves planted; The simple still keeping within the
compass of matter of a medicine, neyth^r being so diminished, but that by
increase of the quantity it may match with the disease, which no man with
reason can deny. Now, if the greatness of the quantity happily procure
loathsomeness to the patient; by extraction, that inconvenience may easily be
avoided: by which me^nes a pound may be brough to an ounce, an ounce to a
dram, and a dram to a few grains, to please the patient with. Such of
strange medicines as will not brook our climate, thereby declare the evil
disposition they have to cure the infirmity of our bodies. Every Medicine is
as it were a mean betwixt nourishmentes and poisons, excepting those medicines
which are applied outwardly, which may both be of nourishments and poisons. In
this mean betwixt these extremes, there is such a scope and breadth, that some
medicines incline to the one, and some to the other. Now, the best are such as
rather incline to nourishments then poisons, which as they do fight against
the disease, so have they a certain token and pledge of agreement betwixt our
bodies and theirs: whereby they acknowledge us for friends, and not common
enemies with the disease; the other medicines which have no such token and
earnest, being apt, as well to destroy us, as to take away the disease, and so
join fellowship with rank poisons.

Then our native soil being by the ordinance of God the fittest to yield us
nourishment, from which our cattle and fruits have a nutritive or nourishing
juice, which render the same again to us, what can we think of those
medicines to whom our soil has not a drop of juice to yield unto, and
gives no entertainment? Verily we are both to learn thereby, that nature
does furnish us otherwise, and also greatly to suspect them to be of an
extreme kind of medicines, the spices only excepted, and such as are said to
be sympatheticall to certain parts of our bodies. Which notwithstanding*
less serve that use, the more str^nge and foreigne they be. What should I
speak of the vnmea^urable charge and cost these strange medicines put us unto?
in my opinion, if it were but that, we might be stirred up to this or such
like consideration: Has God so dispensed his blessings, that a medicine to
cure the iawndies, or the green sickness, the rheum, or such like, should
cost more oftentimes then one quarter of the substance that the patient is
worth? and the provision of an whole year, whereof wife and children, and the
whole family, should with things necessary be maintained in health, be
wasted upon the curing of a Palsy, or a Cholike, or a swimming of the brain,
or any other disease whatsoever? is Physic only made for rich men? and not as
well for the poorer sort? does it only wait upon Princes palaces, and never
stoop to the cottage of the poor? does it only receive gifts of the king,
and never thanks and prayers from him that has but thanks and p^a^^rs to
bestow? or does the Lord goodness pass over them of low degree? has he
respect of persons? yea, has God given the beast a remedy out of his own food
and pasture (as it is most certainly known) with a skill to use it, and has
he set a journey as far as from the Sun rising to the going down, as it
were a wall of Brass, and the fiery sword of a Cherubim to keep us from the
atteining of salues for our sores? justly may we thus complain, especially
those of the poorer sort. And if Physic (as it is in deed) be an art common
to all kind of men, all sorts of nations, all estates, and conditions of men:
I would know why the means also of performing the actions belonging to the
same art should not be as common? And if it be ordinary to all nations to
fetch their medicines far, let me know why, as we cease not to travel for to
store us with outlandish d^ugges, we carry not thither also our country
medicines for change, or they of those nations give not the like adventure for
ours? but they are contented with their own store, and so ought we with ours.
If it be not ordinary, why should it be more extraordinary to one then to an
other. The most of our Apothecarie were is brought from the most vile and
barbarous nations of the world, and almost all from the professed enemies of
the Son of God: shall we say the Lord has more care, or sets more store
by them then by his own people? that he so furnishes them, and leaves us
destitute? or shall we rather condemn the vanity of our own minds, who
unsatiably desire strange things, little regarding, or rather loathing that
which is always at commandment. But God (says one) has not bestowed all
things upon all nations, but has left some thing to be supplied by the
commodities wherewith one nation abounds, and an other wants, that
thereupon mutual dutie^ arising, the society of men might be vpholden. Which
objection, if it carried with it what things they were, and of what kind, that
one nation supply^th to an other, and what sort of commodities they be that
one nation needs the help of another in, a more direct answer might be
made then otherwis^ I may hitte upon: But I guess it is neither of water nor
fire, nor of air, nor of any thing necessary for maintenance of life,
otherwise should the native country of each one be rather a stepdame to us
then a natural mother: but it is of those things only which with healthful,
and lusty bodies we might be without, if custom had not too much prevailed
with us. And to go no further then to the use of Wine in England, in many
respects it greatly hurts us, yet our ordinary use thereof has given us
such a longing thereafter, that we think if we should want it, many of our
days were thereby abridged. Whereby notwithstanding ^hewmes are mightily
increased, the sinews feebled, the natural moisture and heat of the body
ouerhastily wasted, and swift old age brought upon us, with an infinite number
of discommodities besides. Which the nations finding where we have it, do so
delay it, that rather they seem to drink wined water, then watered wine,
except the Aged or such as are feeble stomached, And diverse nations which may
have of the best, because they would be sure to banish the use of it, count it
sacrilege, to taste it: as the Turks at this day, who use in steed thereof a
distilled water of Rice steeped in Milk, thereby supplying the use of wine.
Neither do we find this discommoditie of wine by the abuse of drunkenness
or surfeting only* but even keeping within the three cups that Eu^ulus
powers out to wise men; whereof the first is of health, and nourishment: the
second of mirth, and joy of heart: and the third of sleep, so that a draught or
twain does maruellously distemper our bodies: which inconvenience we find
not by our ordinary drink, yea, though it be stronger then wine. If I should
compare our Mede with the best wine, and the Metheglin of the Welchmen, with
Malme^ey, I could take great arguments from the nature of Honey to prove it;
especially being tempred with certain wholesome herbs, which have virtue to
strengthen the parts of the body. And by experience it is known, that Honey
mixed with water, turns in time to a wholesome liquor, in taste much like to
wine. Whereupon Pena in his Chapter of Honey, folio ^2. doubts not to
affirm, that the Mede of the P^lonians and Muscouites, and the Metheglin of
the Welchmen, are more wholesome and pleasant, then many of the best kinds of
wines, he him self being a French man, and therefore in his judgment less
partial. Wherefore to conclude this argument, seeing wine (which is the glory
of strange merchandise) is but an hurtful superfluity, the rest must needs
he far other then necessaries. But medicines being such as without which our
health and l^fe runs into infinite perils, by causes inward and outward,
through breach of diet, vnwholesomenesse of meat, wounds, bitings of venomous
beasts, infections of the air, and such like, it follows necessarily, that
they be not such as God would have one nation gratify another with: which if
they were, greater reason were it to charge the neighbor nations therewith,
that thereby their minds might with performance of such mutual duties so
necessary, be in straighter amity and peace linked, who cea^e not for the
enlarging of limits to vex one another, rather then the nations so fair
distant, who have neither fellowship of love, nor quarrel of hatred equal
with the borderers. Neither would I be so taken, as though I knew not at some
times that one nation has need of an other, even in things necessary, as the
supply made by Joseph to his father Jacob, and other nations out of the store
of Egypt: but the controversy is of an ordinary course, which the Lord uses
in bestowing his blessings, wherewith he does fully satisfy the need of all
nations with things necessary, saving when he punishes with famine or want of
victuals, which is extraordinary in respect of his accustomed course of
preserving his creatures. Now if the strange medicines (for the most part
hot) should seem rather in the whole kind, then by reason of abundance,
superfluous to them, and so more fit for us, being of a colder temper: we are
to consider the use of them is manifold to the inhabitants, and not only to
warm them: as the Aethiopians called Troglodites, although they be parched
with vehement heat of the Sun, are said to live with Pepper, not to correct
the distemper of their bodies, which would rather increase it then diminish,
but to correct their evil waters, and watrish fruits, wherewith they in part
do live. Again, we are to understand, that the disease which is most
agreeable with age, s^xe, region, custom, complexion, is always most
dangerous, as ingendered by an exceeding vehemency of the cause, whereto
nature has yielded, and so requires a like vehement medicine: wherefore if
the Arabian, the Indian, the Spaniard, fall into cold diseases* or such as
follow cold: no marvel though nature has ministered unto them plenty of
strong wines and spices, which the Northren nations need not. Who as they be
more apt to fall into such diseases then they, their temper thereto agreeing,
the air and region furthering the same, so are they not thereof so dangerously
sick as they of the South countries, and therefore require not so forcible a
medicine. But I mind not to stand to show the use which foreigne nations have
of their commodities, let them see to it. Hitherto has been showed, both that
they be hurtful unto us, and that it is not absurd for hot region, to abound
with hot simples, the use of them being diverse, both in respect of curing their
bodies, and other uses without the compass of Physic. These be the reasons
which move me to suspect the use of strange drugges, and drive me to think,
that Nature has better provided for us: and as the Indian, Arabian, Spaniard,
have their Indish, Arabian, and Spanish medicines, so also the Germane has
his, the French man his, and the English man his own proper, belonging to each
of them. I know gentle reader nothing does more hinder the accepting of truth
diverse times. (especially with such as see with other men's eyes) then the
person of him who first propounds the matter, being taken rather to be an
opinion of one, then an undoubted truth to be cherished of all, as who have
interest therein. Wherefore that such might be satisfied, I will add to my
former reasons taken from the nature of the thing, the authority of more
doctors then one, who agreeing with this which I hold, may be a means to
draw the gentle reader the more seriously to consider of this matter, and
truth may take some strength thereby, and win the more credit* Pliny in his
four and twenty Book of his history, and first Chapter, has this sentence,
thus much in English: Nature would that such only should be medicines, that is
to say, which easily might be come by of the common people: easy to be found
out, without charge, taken from the things whereby we live: but in process of
time, the craft of men, and sleighte^ of their wits, found out these shoppes of
strange drugges, in which a sale of men's lives is offered, whereupon
confections, and infinite mixtures began to be extolled, India and Arabia a
man would think he were in them, and for a little gall or small ulcer, a
medicine must be fetched from the red Sea: whereas every day the poorest do
suppe with true medicines. And in his two and twenty Book and four and
twenty Chapter, We do not meddle (says he) with the medicines taken from the
merchandise of India or Arabia, or of the new world, they are not fit for
medicines and remedies, they grow too far off, they are not for us, no, not
for the nations where they grow, else would they not sell them away. If we
shall needs use them (says he) let them be bought for sweet perfumes, and
sweet oils, and dainties, or to serve superstition, because when we pray we
burn Frankensence and Costus. And thus much out of Pliny, whose judgment as
it is ancient of a 1000. years, so is it of him, who most diligently sought
out the mysteries of nature, and published them for the use of posterity. Now
if happily it be objected, that Pliny might well verify that of Italy which
England can not perform, we must understand, that Pliny reasons from
nature, which serves for all nations of the world as well as for Italy, and
directs his pen not only against the medicine^ strange to Italy, but even
against all that are far fetched and dearly bought, as appears plainly by
his words. To this sentence of Pliny, I will add the judgment of two
Physicians of late time, least Pliny being no physician, should be thought an
insufficient testimony. Fuchsiu^ in his first Book of compounding of medicines
and 76. Chapter, thus agrees with Pliny. If we were not so carried away with
the admiration of strange things, and were not fools (says he) who had
rather use medicines fetched from strange and far countries, contemning our
native Medicines) then such as grow in our gardens: we might make Honey serve
in steed of Manna. But with the exceeding cost and charge which those medicines
put us unto, we are worthily punished for our folly. Lo, here two witnesses,
the one a great Philosopher, and the other both a Philosopher and a Physician,
comparable with the best of late days.

The third witness with Pliny and Fuchsius, is Martine Rulandus, to whom the
students of Physic owe much for his Medicina practica, and other works. This
Rulandus in his preface to Medicina practica, has these words: thus in
English: We have simple medicines (easily had, homely, of our own country of
Germany, to be bought with little money or none at all): ready (says he) and
entreated of in writing, by which only all kinds of diseases are certainly
and undoubtedly cured, oftentimes better and much more easily (believe reason
and experience says he) (and that with no hurt or danger) then with the long
compoundes of the Aposthecaries, which are costly, evil gathered without
knowledge of the Physician, oftentimes imperfectly mixed, and unskillfully
confused, and as unskillfully boiled, oftentimes putrefied, and by age of force
wasted, slouenly and with great negligence confected. In which words Rulandus
briefly has comprehended in a manner all the discommodities of strange
medicines.

These testimonies I rather have alleged, gentle reader, that thou may
know this my opinion is not mine only, and new sprung up from the leisure of
a student, who might easily be overtaken with a speculation which never could
be shown in use and practice, but has with it the voice of authority, and
suffrages of excellent Philosophers and Physicians, although they have not of
purpose and an a set treatise handled this argument, as thou see: which
notwithstanding contains indeed the matter of a great volume. Hitherto has
been showed the great inconveniences and dangers which rise of the use of
strange medicines, by reason, by experience, by authority of Philosophers and
Physicians. If my reasons be evil gathered, the experience false, the
authority not authentical, what have I lost thereby* a few hours
meditation, and a few lines writing, or my credit impaired will some say. If
my credit could either buy such virtues to strange medicines as they carry
the name, or purge the shops of counterfeit stuff, or redeem the harms they
have done, I would verily esteem as much of the change, as he which made
exchange of brass for gold. Although I ween it be a propriety to man's
weakness unavoidable of any, to err, and therefore if obstinacy be not
therewith coupled always found pardon. But if my arguments rise from the causes
and effects of these foreigners, and causes and effects of our bodies, which
are of all arguments the most forcible to establish or overthrow any thing to
be decided by reason, and the authorities such, as justly exception cannot be
taken against: blame me not (gentle reader) though I be carried into this
persuasion my self, and of a love and zeal to benefit thee, have published
that which I have conceived of this Argument. If I be deceived in my judgment
of strange drugges, (which I wish with all my heart I were) these reasons, the
woeful experience, the authority of such men have induced me. All which if
they may be answered, that which seemed more th^n doubtful before, shall by
this controversy shine most clear, and truth as it were wrought with the fire
of reason, receive greater strength and perfection. Thus much touching the
unableness of strange merchandise to perform unto us sufficiency, yea, any
measure of medicines, as belonging unto us properly, and the discommodities of
them. Now if strange medicines serve not our turns, and all medicines be
either strange or home borne, it must needs follow, that the home medicines
are most natural and kind to us, except a man would say all medicines bring
harm unto us, which is not of the nature of a medicine, being an instrument of
perfourming remedies unto us: or if it were so, yet have we this by
experience, that strange medicines do more annoy us then strangers, yea,
destroy us, and restore them: wherefore home medicines and of our country
yield, of equity must necessarily perform the same to us, which their
medicines do to them. Else I would know why we should be inferior unto them,
or one nation more privileged that way then an other, the need being common,
and the providence of God all one, yea such as rather then remedy should need
the chariot of the Sun to fetch it from one end of the world to the other, or
be so far to seek as our common drugges are, he has linked the remedy in
many things so straightly to the cause of our hurt, that even the self same
which harmed us, carries with it amends. As the Scorpion rubbed upon his
stinging, cures the same. Likewise the Ranie divided and applied hot to the
wound, cures her venomous biting, and so the Pastinaca marina as it brings
most d^ngerous hurt, it refuses not (being thereto applied) to minister
remedy. Which practice of nature might veri^ie move us to think her meaning
is not to send us either into Arabia or India for aid of our griefs, but
thereby to commend her care unto us, and give occasion of praising Gods
providence, and stirring us up to make diligenter search into our own
provision, and to take better trial then we were wont of the same. Wherein
the great liberality of God appears in such large measure, that rather
superfluity then spating may be noted herein; in that both one simple nature
carries with it the virtue of many medicines; and many simples, remedies
against such diseases as we might be thought like never to be subject unto:
and such things as in respect of their nature might seemevile unto us, afford
us (being skilfully applied) most sovereign medicine: whereof for a taste I
give two or three examples: Milk is either to be considered in all the parts
together, or them severed. All kind of Milk boiled, especially burned with
stones token from the sea shore, helps all inward ulcers, chiefly of the
jaws, the lungs, the gu^tes, the bladder, and the kidneyes, it is good against
the itch and wheales, and it helps bloody flixes. New Milk is good against
frettings made with poisons received inward: as of Cantharides and such like:
it is profitably gargled against swellings and frettings in the rawes. The whay
of Milk is good to pulge the body, especially of such as be melancholic,
and disposed to the falling sickness, leprosy and breaking out with scabbes.
The cheesie part of it, as curds, fresh without salt, softneth the belly which
pressed and broyled stays the laxe. Cheese laid on, helps the inflammation
of the eyes. The butter of Milk drunk, softneth the belly, and serves
against poison for want of oil; rubbed upon their gooms with honey, helps
the toothing of children, and cures the itching of their gooms and soars of
their mouths, It helps such as are bitten of the serpent called Aspis. The
soote of butter is very effectual against watering eyes, and swiftly skinneth
sores.

Thus thou leest reader what treasure is hid in Milk (even an excrement)
being used both whole and in parts. That which I have said of Milk,
belongs also to most of creatures, which both all serve for medicine, and
each of them for sundry purposes. Whereby Natures endeavor to furnish us with
all help of medicine may evidently appear, yea, most of all when she seems
to be so iealouse over our health, that she provides against Dr^inus,
against the Scorpion; the viper, and Cerastes, and the most of venomous bitings
of Serpents, wherewith notwithstanding we are not as other nations encombred,
and those not common, medicines only, but even proper unto them. As the venom
of Drysmus is abated and utterly extinguished with the Trifolie, and with all
kind of mast, be it of the Beech, o^ the Oak, or of any kind of tree that
bears Acornes. Peneriall cures the Scorpions sting: against the biting of a
viper, Garlike, Onyons, and Leekes new gathered, are principal triacles:
wherewith also the venom of Cerastes is ouermatched. Ergo, if Nature fail us
not against the venomes of strange Serpents, from which we be freed by reason
of the temper of our region, repugnant to their natures, (All things being
done in the actions of nature in exquisite wisdom, and by a precise rule of
Gods providence) much more are we furnished against the diseases bred in our
bowels. What has been said of venomous beasts, may also be showed in the cure
of strange diseases, wherein nature seems to be as careful as in the other.
The French Pockes is an Indian disease, and not known to this part of the
world within this hundredth years, before that voyage of Charles the Emperor,
which he took against Naples, where being brought over with the Spaniards
which returned with Christophorus Columbus, who first discovered the West
Indies, it has since infected the whole world. Now this strange and Indian
disease has nature provided remedy against, not only out of India, as the
Guaicum, and Salsa Parilla, but even out of Europe as effectual: as the Smilax
aspera, wherewith Fallopius says at Pis^ he cured diverse of the French pockes.
And La Riuiere in French his Apology, affirms the same to be done with the
essence of the Primrose and Couslip.

The anoyntings with Mercury are known by daily practices what force they
have, against this most grievous disease, which although some do mislike,
because indiscreetly used, it is somewhat dangerous: yet Antonius Chalmeteus,
a skillful Surgion, in the fifth Book of his Enchiridion and 5. Chapter,
affirms, that therewith he has perfectly cured diverse without danger, and
if it has otherwise fallen out with some, that it has rather proceeded of
unskillful using, then by the nature of Mercury. Now, gentle reader, thou art
to understand the Pockes in India, being the same disease with that we call
the French Pockes, is there a gentle disease, not much differing from the
Scabbe, void of such grievous symptoms as it brings to these quarters,
corrupting not only the fleshie parts of our bodies but even the very bones
also. This testifies Fallopius in his Book of the French Pockes. Yet need
not our medicines crave the help of India for the cure thereof, no, not
although it rage far more fiercely (as it does) against us then against
them. Which being evident, let us consider how justly nature may be blamed to
fail in the provision of medicines. Scarce would a man look for any great
virtue of medicine in the worms of the earth, being a creature so abject: yet
join they, and cleave together wounded sinews, they cure tertians, they help
the pains of the ears, the toothache, and the powder of them drunk provoke
urine. The little vermin called Sowes, which being touched run together
round like a pease, who would think they cured the difficulty of making
water, the lawnes, the Quinsey, for which purposes they be of great force, and
for to discharge stuffed lungs, with tough and gross humorus, nothing may be
compared. Likewise the corns of horse legs called Lichenes, although they
be base and v^le excrements, yet help they such as are taken with the falling
sickness. The decoction of Frogs with salt and butter, is a triacle against
the bitings, stingings, and poisons of all serpents, and the ashes of them
burnt, stays the flux of blood being thereto applied. These base creatures
the rather I propound, that being known, the treasures which Nature has hid
and laid up in them, with such variety of virtues, we might, the better
esteeming of her benefits, and the blessings of our own country, both
acknowledge them, accept them, and be more thankful unto God for them. The
which base creatures the viler they seem to be, the more commend they the
goodness of the Creator, who would not the abiectest thing that is, should
altogether be without wherewith to serve, and do homage to his Lord and
master: which if these things afford us, what may we justly promise to our
selves, and require of the rest more excellent creatures? Let not the reason
seem strange and weak to thee reader, who art a Christian, which is taken from
the providence and wisdom of God, to prove the sufficiency of his execution
and performance of the same. For if Galene thought it reasonable, (as it is
most reasonable.) to gather the wisdom and providence of the Creator by his
work in the Creature and maintenance thereof, which he in the end of his books
of the use of parts, calls a point of divinity, far to be preferred above
the whole Art of Physic: much more reasonable is it for me, and the reason
sounder which is drawn from that divine providence, to the practice thereof.
And if Galene had that religion in him, being a Gentile; and groping only in
the mist of natural knowledge of God* could not satisfy himself with a
Psalm or Hymn (as he himself calls it) of seventeen staves, every staff
containing a whole book (for thus he himself calls his Books of the use
of parts) of the wisdom of the most wise God, esteeming that duty more
acceptable unto him then sacrifices of an hundredth Oxen, or the most costly
perfumes and incense; let it not be harsh in thine ears gentle reader, to
hear now and then the goodness of our God, his wisdom and providence, to
be both entreated of and advanced of a Christian Physician, and to Christians,
to whom the sun of righteousness has shined and scatterred those mists of
natural darkness, and has given the earnest of immortality. And be
assured there is no truth in Philosophy, but may stand with, yea rather may
rest, and be vpholden of Christianity. But let us proceed. Julius Bassus,
Nicerates, and Petronius Niger, as says, Dioscorides, thought their country
medicines, and those which their native soil yielded, most worthy to be
exactly entreated of by them, belike either thinking them sufficient for the
inhabitants, or more agreeable with them. Which homely practice of the na^ions
where he traveled, Dioscorides confesses to have been the matter whereof he
compounded his golden book of medicines, which at this day remains a rich
storehouse to all Physicians. Now then I would know why we should more be
provided of medicine against one disease then another, of our country yield?
is it because such diseases which require strange medicines are more
dangerous, or less? if more dangerous then should the remedy for them be
more at hand, then for other: if less, why are then the strange medicines
esteemed as most forcible? and if we be less subject to such diseases as are
cured with them, and so the absence of them may seem tolerable, why then are
tertian agues chiefly cured with Thamarines and Rhewbarbe? whereof the one
comes out of India, and the other for the most part out of Barbary. What so
ever nature is yielded to any nation, it serves either for nourishment or
medicines, or being neither nourishment nor medicine, is plain poison. Now a
subducction being made of each of these, one from the other, what part shall
we think will nourishments leave to medicines? a far greater doubtless then
they them selves be: and as they exceed nourishments, so greatly do they and
beyond al comparison exced the poisons. Wherefore if the most of creatures in
every nation, be a fit matter of medicine, greatly no doubt are all nations
stored with them: which store declares, that as diseases partly rise of breach
of diet, and partly through poisons, so Nature would furnish us with medicines
in number answerable to the causes of both: which being not sufficient, argues
that Nature misseth of her purpose, having sufficiently declared her endeavor:
but Nature always brings her works to perfection, except in case of
monsters, which are not ordinary. Wherefore her will, (she being an instinct of
Gods) ever going with the execution thereof, must needs perform that to us
which she pretends in the variety. But that thou may (gentle reader) have
better hold and greater assurance of the sufficiency of thy country
medicines. I will set down briefly according to the variety and sorts of all
diseases cured with medicine, medicines taken from our native soil aunswerable
unto them, and effectual to cure them. And because medicines have relation to
diseases, I will first touch the diseases, and thereto join the medicicines.
All diseases are either in the complexion, or frame of the body, such as are
in the complexion are all cured by medicine; which I named in the beginning of
this treatise one of the instruments of Physic. Of diseases in the frame,
these only are cured with medicines; Quantity superfluously increased, or
diminished: obstructions, ouerstraightnesse or ouerlargnesse of passages in the
body. These are only the diseases properly to be cured with medicine: other
diseases which rise of these, either of their own accord vanishing by the cure
of these, or else to be cured by surgerie, as evil figure and shape through
want of proportional quantity, that being restored, the figure forthwith
returns; or if not, ^ather is to be cured with help of hand. And luxation of
joints, and evil coupling of parts, if they rise of distemper only, that
being taken away with medicines, returns oftentimes with it good situation
of parts. Likewise, the situation perverted through distemper, the complexion
being restored, the other consequently do follow.

Now, having declared in general the diseases which only require medicine;
that every disease may have his proper one, I will subdiuide them more
particularly, joining to every disease that medicine which thereto belongs*
The diseases in the complexion are either in all the parts of the temper
thereof, or else in one or twain. In the whole complexion are such as are
engendered of venomous causes: and those either engendered in the body, or
happening thereto outwradly they which are ingendered in the body, are
Cankers, Leprosies, falling sickness, Suffocation of the matrix through nature
corrupted, Swounings through corruption of Worms engendered in the body. And
these be the diseases of venomous causes bred in the body. Such as happen
thereto by outward occasions, are either by poison taken into the body, or by
outward touching procured: taken into the body, as the poison of Toades,
Henbane, Nightshade, Hemlocke, Ratsbane, Quicksiluer, and such mineralls, and
last of all infected aire^ causing pestilence, and Carbuncles. Such as are
outwardly procured, are either without wounds or with wounds: without wounds,
infection passing from one to another, as the French pockes. With wounds,
venomous bitings and stingings of beasts, as of Serpents and mad Dogs. And
these are all the diseases said to be in the whole temper of the body, which
having first showed to be sufficiently cured by home medicines, in like man^er
will I prosecute the rest. And herein (gentle reader) thou art not to look I
should set down all medicines which our native soil is known to bestow upon
us for cure of these diseases, which would grow to an infinite volume, I
herein referring thee to the works of those who of purpose have written of
the nature of simples, and are authors of practice, but it shall I hope suffice
for this purpose to pick out amongst a great many, those of choice for these
diseases. And first to begin with Cankers, which being not exulcerated but
remaining humors, are cured (if with any medicine) by the juice of Nightshade,
all the sorts of Endive and Succorie, with Agrimonie, with Saint John's wort,
wild Clarie, called Oculus Christi, the flesh of Snayles boiled, Crayfishes,
green Frogs, and to conclude, with all kind of metalls and mineralls; and
among them Lead, how so ever it be used, is most sovereign. If it be
exulcerated, then herein have the mineralls and metalls the chief place. ^o
the exulcerate Canker belongs the Woolfe (which is naught else, but a Canker
exulcerated.) The Gangrene and Speacelus, are cured by the remedies of the
Canker and Woolfe, the one being a degree of an Ulcer in which the parts
begin to be mortified, the other when they have now lost life altogether. The
leprosy is an universal Canker, and for outward medicines requires no other:
among the inward, Plantine, Whay, Hedgehogs dried and drunk, help greatly.
And thus much for Cankers and Leprosies, which as they be diseases hard to be
cured by any medicine, so receive they as great help by these our home
medicines, as by any of strange countries. The falling sickness, if it be in
such as are aged, and have been long diseased therewith, is a disease hardly
or not at all to be cured. But where it is curable, these medicines be
comparable with the best: the root of the Missleto of the Oak, the runnet of
an Hare, the Peonie root, Enula campana, the scalpe of a Man, an Ass hoose,
Hyssope, the mylt of an Horse, the stones which are found in the mawes of the
first brood of Swallows, five leaued grass, the juice of the Couslippe, the
juice of Horehound with Hon^^. All suffocations of the Matrix are cured with
Plantine, P^^eriall, Herbgrace, and by an infinite number of home medicines.
Worms and that infection, is taken away by Coriander seed, Colewort seed,
Garlike, Wormwood, and in a manner with all bitter herbs, with the juice of
Purslane, with the fylings of Stags horn, little inferior in virtue to that
which is commonly taken for the Unicorns horn. Peach leaves, Hyssope, Mints,
Purslane seed. Thus much touching medicines against diseases engendered of
venomous causes within the body. Now touching such as happen by outward
occasions: and first of those that by mouth are taken into the body. Against
which generally it helps greatly to drink store of butter in steed of oil,
with warm water or the decoction of Flax seed, Fenigreeke, or Mallows, and
the^upon a vomit: which done, Sothernwood, the root of Seahuluer, the seed of
Nep, the juice of Horehound, the seed of wild Ru^, Walnut^, Turnops, Herbgrace,
^i^e leaued grass, with an infinite number of native medicines, expel the
poison, and restore the patient. More properly to the poison of Cantharides,
belong Peneriall, to Buprestu all kinds of Pears, and woman's milk: to the
Salamander, Chamepitis, Seaholy roots: to the worms of the Pine tree, such as
cure the poison of Cantharides: against the poison of of the Toad, the roots
of R^edes and Cyperus: against the Chameleon, radish roots and Wormwood:
against Ephem^rum Asses milk or Cowes milk, hot: against Doryc^^^m, Goats
mike, Asses milk, Cockles, and Cray fishes: against the poison of Aconitum,
Organ, Hearbgrace, Horehound, the decoction of Wormwood. Against ^hriander,
Wormwood, salt b^oth made with a Goose or Hen, which expel also the poison of
Flewort: the poison of Hem^ocke is cured with Mint, Hearbgrace, Nettle seed,
^ay leaves, which (...) cure the po^son of Vgh, and Carpasus. The poison of
that kind of Crowe^oote, called Sardonia, is cured with drinking store of
Mede, and Milk: (...) me with Nettle seed, wild Endive, Mustard s^ede, and
Rock^^: Cearuse, with Mede, hot milk: Peach stones, with the decoction of
Barley, with the decoction of M^llows: Quicksiluer, with store of Milk drunk.
Mercu^ie sublimed with Crystal: Lime, Orpiment, ^ars^ane, and such like, wit^
the decoction of Flax ^^ede, and Milk with M^de. And to conclude this point,
there is no ^ind^ of poison, but it finds cure by ou^ country medicines
without borrowing. Th^s much for the cure of poisons taken into the body by
eating or drinking of them: Pestilences are cu^ed (if with any medicine) with
Angelica, Carduus benedictus, Ars^^ke, worn about the body, the root of
Pimpinell, of ^ormentil, Hearbgrace, Setwall, Walnuts, the powder of S. John's
wort, ^uniper berries, Ve^uen, and the chief of all, the ^oble s^mple water
Germa^der, and the Duarfgentian. For pestilent sores and Carbuncles, Scabious,
Ofbit, Lousestrife, and the Marigolde: to the pestilence may be referred the
small pockes and such like, which agree in medicine also with the pestilence.
And thus much for the cure of poisons. Against bitings and stings of venomous
beasts, and poisoned weapons, there are also both general and particular
remedies. The general are these: the ashes of the cuttings of the Vine and of
the Fig tree, with Lee, Leekes, Onions, Garlic, the Sea water, mustard
seed, Endive, Heth, the root of the Sea Huluer, Bay berries, Hearbgrace,
Dill, Sowse bread, Fenell, Peneriall, the runnet of an Hare, the Wesell, and
these general: particulars, are such as follow. Against the bitings of
Phalangium, the seed of Sothernwood, Aniseede, the seed of Trifolie, the
fruit of Tamariske. Against the Scolopendra, wild Rewe, Thyme, Calamint:
against the Scorpion, Basil seed: against the biting of a Viper, Adder, Snake,
etc. Sothernwood, Bays, green Organ, the Bramble, the brains of an Hen, Cole
seed. Against the bitings of a mad Dog, Crow garlike, the river Crabbe,
Balm, an actual cauterie, the liver of the mad Dog broyled, the blood of
a Dog drunk. And thus much for the bitings and stingings of venomous beasts,
which also serve against poisoned wounds, else to be cured with the medicine
which respects properly the poison wherewith the weapon has been infected.
The infection without wound is the French pocke, whereof (sufficient having
been said before) I will here say nothing.

This then shall suffice to have written of the cure of all diseases rising of
venomous causes, wherein (if Nature of her own accord as it were, and in this
great neglect of our Country and native medicines) has showed her self so
liberal, how large would she be* if with set purpose and careful endeavor
greater trial of things were had, and proof made by learned and discreet men.
Now follow the diseases which are by the excess or defect of one or two parts
of the temper, which are hot, cold moist, and dry, simple or compounded: which
if they be not procured by evil humors, then require they altering only by
contrary qualities. If by them, as fleame, choler, melancholy: then are these
humors first to be avoided and diminished.

Such as require altering, are cured by natures of contrary quality, not
only generally, but even answerable to all degrees of excess. And first to
begin with hot diseases of the first degree, they are cured with such
contraries as follow: Barley, sour Gr^pes, Roses, Violets, the Oak, Quinces,
Damsings, Pellito^y of the wall, Docks, Pears, Apples, Hartshorne, the
flowers and whole he^rbe of Mallows.

Of the second degree; the water Lilly, Ducksmeat, Knotgrasse, Vine leaves,
the Bramble, Plant^ne, Cheries, Lead, C^russe, Barberies, Covvcombe^s, Mellons,
Courds, Citralls, whites of Eggs, Medlers, and Services.

Of the third; Purslane, Housleeke, Mandrake, Henbane.

Of the fourth; Hemlock, Poppie. Thus much for hot diseases.

Medicines for cold diseases, are these hot which follow. Of the first degree;
Buglosse, Borage, Fumitorie, Sage, Horsehoofe, Maydenhaire, Butter, Lillies,
Flaxe-seede, marrow and fat, Chamomile, Fenigreek, etc.

Of the second; Dill dry, Mugwort, Parseley, Saffron, Honey, Balm, Salt, etc.

The third; Anise, ^olefoote, Calamint, Commine, Fenell, Hyssope, Mints, etc.
The fourth; Garlicke-cresses, mustard, Celendine the great.

For moist diseases these medicines are good; Of the first degree dry: Cabbage,
Beetes, Chamomile, Fenel, Beans, Fenigreek, etc. Of the second; Dill, Mugwort,
Shepheards-pouch, Doddard, Lint^ls, Honey, Rosemary. Of the third; Wormevvood,
Germander, Hyssope, Juniper, Five leaued grass, Organ, Horehound, etc. Of the
fourth; Garlick-cresses, mustard seed, wild Rue.

Dry diseases have these medicines, Buglos, Malowes, Turnops, Endive, for the
first degree. The second; Violets, Water-lillie, Lettice, Purselaine, etc. The
third, and fourth degrees, as these are evil supplied by strange simples; so
are they recompensed by increase of quantities of moist in the two first
degrees. And thus much touching medicines belonging to the cure of diseases in
one part of the temper, which being in two parts, and without humor, require
either temperings the simple qualities aforesaid, in diverse simples, or
natures wherein such two do exceed; which because they be as plentiful as
those I have before mentioned, and that hereof none makes doubt, I will not
touch. If this double distemper rise of humor, as for the most part of it does:
Then is that humor to be diminished or altogether to be voyded out of the
body, and then the distemper remaining to be altered. The humors are properly
to be voyded by purgation, other ways there be diverse: as exercise,
fastinges, sweating, urine and such like. But properly the vacuation of fleme,
choler, melancholy, which are the causes of this double distemper, belongs
to purging medicines: which purgations, as the greatest doubt is of natures
provision in them, so they being supplied by our country soil, the greatest
part of this controversy may seem to be decided.

Purgations are either by vomit, or by stool: by vomit our native soil
ministers great choice, as, very gently, the radish roots with the seed;
the pepon root and nettle seed: with more vehemency, solefoote, leaf and
root, the middle bark of the wall nutte tree, and the long blossoms thereof:
and yet most vehemently the seeds of broom and the flowers thereof: and these
for vomit. By the stool, and first to purge choler: the flowers and leaves of
the Peach tree* Violets flowers and seeds comparable with Rheubarbe, the great
garden docke called the Munkes Rheubarbe, Damask roses, wild Saffron, the
powder of Fethe^fewe, all the kinds of spurges, the root of the wild
Cowcumber, the root of Bryonie, and Coloquintida. Melancholy is purged with
Coloquintida, the oak fearne, the juice of Mandrake, the flowers of broom,
bearefoote, and Antimonie. Fleame and water are purged with Coloquintida, the
juice of Rhineberries, the gross bark of the Elm, the juice of the root of
Walworte, of Elder, the gardine Flowerdeluce root iuyced. The dry leaves of
Laurel, the seawythwind, scurby weed. These are a show of our Enlgish store
of purgers: which if they be too strong, then are they to be ministered in
smaller quantity mixed with those of feebler working; if too weak, then are
they to be sharpened with quicker. If they offend any part, they are to be
corrected partly with cordialls, and partly with medicines respecting such
parts as they annoy. Which wantes are not only to be charged upon our
country medicines, seeing even the best of foreyne purgers are to be touched
with the same. As scammonie is corrected with quinces, otherwise troubles it
the stomach with a griping and gnawing, it purges over vehemently, it hurts
the liver, and is enemy to the heart, and does exulcerate where it passes,
and procures dysenteries, that is to say, ulcers in the guts. Turpeth is
corrected with ginger and long Peper, Mastich with oil of sweet Almonds, and
Sugar, else overthrows it the stomach, troubles, and ouerdrieth the body.
Coloquintida with oil of sweet almonds, goom, tragacant, or mastich, else
troubles it vehemently the whole body, procures the bloody flixe, and
miserably tormenteth the guts. So, Agaricke requires to be steeped in wine
with ginger and cloves, yet scarce abstaineth it from overthrowing the stomach.
Cassia marreth the stomach, and requires to be mixed therewith stomach
medicines. The excessive dryness, and binding of Rheubarbe is corrected with
some moystening syrope. Aloe requires Mastich and Goome Trageacanth to
mitigate the fretting thereof. Seen marreth the stomach, and either through
windiness, or through vehemence of scouring, tormenteth the body, and therefore
needs Ginger, Cinnamon, or Spike, sweet Prunes, fat broth, and Raisins.

Hermodactiles offend the stomach, and cause wind, and require Ginger, Cumine,
or Spike: and to be short; there is no purger of strange drogues which
requires not correction of great faults; which correction is taken from such
medicines as respect those parts chiefly which the purgation does annoy,
whereof such is our store, that in all parts we be sufficiently armed
therewith. But of these shall hereafter be spoken.

Now, if any man think, for want of Cassia, Manna, Seen, Rheubarb, these
humors cannot be voyded, or not so well; let me then know how the Grecians
wanted them, and yet found no lack, using only Scammonie, Helleboru^, and
Colocynthis, Aloes, and Agaricke, for their chief purgations: The other being
brought in of late in comparison, by the Arabians; who both in knowledge of
Physic, and in the works thereof, were far inferior to the Grecians, to
whom I say (I mean the ancient of them in Galens time and before) neither
Manna, nor Cassia, nor Seen, nor Rheubarbe, nor Hermodactiles, were known
either at all, or at the uttermost for purgers. And as for Manna, Fuchsius
says, that certain having been about the Mount Libanus, made report that the
inhabitants of that mountain, having eaten their fill thereof, neither feel
themselves any whit troubled therewith, nor their bodies loosed, but use it
for an ordinary sustenance. Whereby again appears a great diversity of
working of strange medicines according to the variety of countries. But what
should we say of the nature of purgers, it is doubtless one of the hardest
points at this day in all natural Philosophy, neither mind [at this present
to deal therein: but this may I say, as by preparation, one nature may
according to the variety thereof, receive diverse, yea contrary virtues; so
seems it to me that this virtue of purging may be procured to natures of
themselves destitute thereof, by preparation.

Diverse and in a manner all the metalls, and mineralls, being burnt and
washed, give over their fretting nature, and quicksiluer (which of it self it
is not sublimed, or precipitated) becomes a vehement scouring medicine: so
likewise Antimonie, before it be turned into glass or oil, is not known to
purge the body: which being done, is greatly commended against the Dropsy,
the French pocks, melancholy, and diverse other diseases, which it cures by
purging. So that it seems, art of preparation, as it makes no nature (that
being a work of the universal nature) so may it not only be a preparer,
but even a maker of medicines: which medicines are not natures, even as
health, and sickness are not of the nature of man's body, but even accidents
thereto.

Which being certain, let us then consider what an infinite variety of
medicines would arise of things, the same being used not only entire, but
diversely prepared and even corrupted: wherein the industry of Alchmists is
verily greatly to be commended, and far more excellent then the common
Pharmacopolla rather so to be called then Pharmacopolya, by the skill whereof
diverse natures in one thing are so exactly severed, every one having a diverse
operation. Now of^times because the humor to be purged is gross and tough and
so hardly yields to the medicine, or has some other evil quality wherewith
it might greatly hurt the parts, whereby it passes; nature not forgetting
this point, has as abundantly supplied such helps in this behalf, as need
requires: as for the preparing of choler, Plantaine, Roses, the verdiuice of
the grape, endive, suchorie, sorel, sperage, etc. For melancholy: violets,
borage, buglosse, baulme, ^umitory, doddar, ceterach, or fingerfearne, etc. For
fleme: fenel, persely, be^onie, neppe, penetial, thyme, sauerie, germander,
etc. Of these I less stand upon, because the preparers of humors are least in
controversy, although from hence may an argument be drawn not lightly to be
passed over, to prove the store of purgers, seeing nature has miniistred
sufficiency of preparers, and as it were harb^ngers to the purgers of country
yield. But I will draw to an end: and thus much shall suffice for this present
purpose to have said of medicines, belonging to the cure of all diseases in
complexion. The other kind of diseases are in the frame of the body: and of
those, if quantity be superfluously increased, and that in the whole body,
medicines which do vehemently waste, as those of the third degree hot, diminish
the same. If in the part only, medicines which we call eaters, and fretters,
dispatch the same: as coperous, the ashes of spurge, burntalum, mercury
sublimed and precipitate, verdigrece, burnt salt, etc. If measure be
diminished, and that without loss of substance, the glewing medicines bring
cure: whereof our native soil is so stored, that for wounds, the Surgions need
neither to send into Barbary, nor India: as Plantane, Hounds tongue, the
flowers and leaves of willowes, yarrow, carduus benedictus, betony, scabious,
veruen, elm leaves, adders tongue, moon worte, herb turpence, Self heal,
and these if the wounds be in the fleshie parts. If it be breaking of bones,
such are joined with fine flower, the brain of a dog, with woll, and the
white of an egg, the holyhocke root, the moss of the oak, glewe, roses,
worm wood, etc. If there be loss of substance in the fleshie parts either by
wound, or ulcer, Incarnatiues fail us not: as barlie meal, fenegreeke flower,
fighene meal, and to be short all such as be of the first degree hot and
dry, without egernes or felnes. Now the diseases in straightnes of passages or
obstructions, if they arise of the humors before said, and in those places
whereto the medicine may conveniently come, then are they to be set free by
purging. If upon other causes, or in such places whereto the force of the
medicine which purges cannot come, or hardely enters, or of such causes as
be no humors, but through some other strange matter, or by straightnes of the
vessels, where though the passage is, then are other remedies to be used
whereof we have great plenty, as softners, loosers, and such as do enlarge
tho pores of the body, of which sort are such a^ be not above the first
degree hot: as Chamomile, Lillies, new butter, Swines grease, Linseed,
Fenigreek, Brionie root, all marrowes: Also medicines which make the matter
thin, or cut it, and divide it into sundry parts, of which sort are they of the
second degree hot to the third degree, as Dill, Peneriall, Sauerie, Organ,
Thyme, Marioran, Saint John's wort, Worme-wood, etc. Now, if the humor prepared
be to be voided by place medicine, then salt, salt water, Lie, Ashes, Alume,
and Lime, take place; and if more vehemency be needful, Calamint, vvild
Cresses, Triacle, mustard, Garden Cresses, Mustard seed, nettles, dragons, all
the spurges are to be numbered among the best: and if these serve not, the root
of Crowfoot will make the supply. If the humor cannot be voided conveniently,
except it be altered into another matter, of which sort is pent blood out of
the veins, then are ripening medicines first to be applied: as butter,
wheat flour, Sorel, Horsehoof, Lillies, Marchmallowes, Onyons roasted; which
all are singular ripers. If the matter be rough and clammie, these scourers
avoid that inconvenience; Endive, Suchorie, Red-roses, Plantaine, Houseleeke,
Agr^monie, Betony, Honey, Horchound, Worme-wood, Baulme, Pimpernell,
Watergermander, etc. Now, if the matter which stops be the stone, as in the
kidneyes, or bladder, then are these medicines most convenient for that use:
Grummell seed, Goats blood, the juice of Mugwort, Seahuluerroot, the stones
found in the great snayles heads, radish roots, Saxifrage, etc. If any hard
matter be in other parts, the softners and wasters, and dissoluers are to be
applied.

Thus much touching the cure of obstructions and straight passages, which
according to the variety of place where they light, cause sundry diseases, or
rather take to the^ sundry names. As in the brain, the Apoplexy; in the
bladder of Gall, the yellovve Iawnes; in the Spleen, the black: in the synewes
of motion, the palsy or trembling; in the lungs Asthma, and so forth.

Now, if these passages be too large, they are to be stopped and straightened
with cooling and drying medicines, of which sort in a manner are all of sharp
and sour taste; as Vine-leaues, the Brier, and the Bramble, Barbaries,
Medlers, and Services, Quinces, and such as are of themselves, or by mixture
with liquor clammie, as wheat flower, bean flower, the white of an egg,
plaster, washed lime, Litharge, and Ceruse.

Now moreover, because in all good cure, not only the cause of the diseases is
to be oppugned, but the part also to be strengthened, which must needs
(partly by the cause of the disease, and partly even by the conflict of the
same cause with the medicine) befeebled; that nothing be wanting unto us for
the restoring of health, nature has provided even special munition for every
part of the body, that the whole furniture against all diseases might be
complete. As for the head, Aniseedes, Folefoot, Betony, Calamint, Eyebright,
Lauender, Bays, Marioran, Piony, Sage, Rue, or herbgrace, Lettise, the leaves
and flowers of water Lillies, Roses, garden nightshade. For the lungs,
calamint, dragons, licoras, Enula campana, hissop, linseed, horehound, the
lu^gs of a fox, scabious, water germander, barley, garden poppe violets,
horsehoofe. For the heart, buglosse, borage, saffron, baulme, basil, rosemary,
violets, the bone of a stagges heart, roses. For the stomach, wormwood, mints,
betonie, baulme, mint, quinces, medlers, Sorell, purselane. For the Liver,
Dartspine, or chamepitys,, germander, agrimonie, fenell, endive, suchorie,
liver worte, barbaris. For the spleen: Maiden hear, sperage, fingerfearne,
dodder, dodder of thyme, hoppes, the bark of the ash tree. For the kidneys:
Sea huluer, Grumel, Parseley, Knecolme, saxifrage, Mallows, Plantane,
Pellitorie of the wall. For the womb: mugwort, peneriall, fetherfewe, sauine,
walwort, Juniper. For the Joints: chamomile, saint John's wort, organ, rue,
multen, and coweslips, the less centaurie, and chamepitys.

Thus have I (gentle reader) briefly run over the diseases cured by medicine,
having passed by those which either rise of these, as evil figure by
immoderate excess, or defect of quantity, unequally increasing or wanting, or
number, evil situation for want of good couplance through distemper, and such
like, as also the compounde of those, which require (only composition
excepted) the same medicines. Whereby evidently may thou see, the goodness of
God toward thee, in so plentifully furnishing thine own soil with such
variety of medicines: which if it yield thee such plenty in this neglect and
lothing of our country remedies, what fruit were thou to look for, if
diligence and pains were used? Verily right well might we both avoid the
dangers before declared, ease our selves of immoderate charge, and have better
assurance of our medicines then we have: yea very well satisfy our
daintiness even with strange simples, or find out such as should not only in
virtues match with the spices of India (which is a plain case) as Rosemarie
matcheth Cinnamon: Basil, Cloves: Sage, the Nutmegge: Safforn Ginger: Thyme,
Musk: Sauerie, the leaf called Malabathrum, but even in pleasantnes of rast
express the same. And as Auens does most lively represent the taste of cloves
unto us, so likely is it if search were made, and this enterprise of examining
and trying our native simples taken in hand by men of wisdom, and
understanding, we should no more be destitute of spices then India or Arabia,
although neither Indish, nor Arabicke: and as the small iagges of the roots of
Auens, fail little from cloves in taste, so might we as likely find that
which were little inferior to Cinnamon, ginger, nutmegges, and mace, not only
in likeness of working, but even in similitude of nature: but I will refer
this to that time, when either men shall be more careful for public benefit
then private gain, or sufficient allowance bestowed on such men as should spend
their days only in searching out the virtues of natures, which at this time is
greatly wanting, even as for all other professions of arts. Our English soil
is greatly commended, as it justly deserves, for temper of the air: and of
such as have experience thereof, of strangers, and great masters of simples,
for variety of excellent medicines carries great praise, who report they
find such simples in the valleys and woods of our North parts, as they find
in the tops of mountains in the South countries. So that certain gardine^
in England, especially in London, are able to affourd great variety of
medicines even of foreign simples to all diseases. And if the Dittany of
Candie, the Cipres ^ree, the Nicotian out of India, Coloquintida, the Almon
tree, the Pomegranate tree, will brook our soil, and flourish therein, as they
do, we need not doubt, but certain and sufficient provision of all
medicines, (I mean all kinds, but not all of every kind, which were
unnecessary, neither can any country challenge the same) might be made partly
of a voluntary yield of the same, partly by planting, and sowing, with just
temper of the mould, and situation of the plant, out of our own country, both
with less charge and less danger, for all diseases.

Now, if it be demanded, why then both the practice is, and has been
hitherto otherwise; I will only say thus much for answer, although much more
might be said: The whole art of Physic has been taken partly from the
Greeks, and partly from the Arabians. And as the precepts of the Art, so
likewise the means and instruments wherewith for the most part the precepts of
the same art are executed: which has bred this error in times past, now by a
tradition received, that all duty of the Physician touching restoring health,
is to be performed by the same remedies, not in kind only, but even
specially with those which the Grecian and Arabian Masters used, who wrote not
for us, but for their Greeks and Arabicks, tempering their medicines to their
estates, although their rules be as common as reason to all nations.

Galen says in his first book of preserving health, he gives the rules
thereof no more to Germans, then to Boares and Bears, but to the Grecians.
Which declares, they respected their own nation both in rule and medicine;
whom also the Arabians in the same point followed.

Now, we receiving the same medicines with the rule, must needs fall into the
absurdities afore-saide: Much like to the evil Musician, which plays only
upon the instrument whereon his Master taught him, which if he assay upon
another, commits diverse discords among other evil graces in music. But
the wise and learned Physician, being furnished with other arts more general
then his own, whereto natural philosophy most nighly approaches, being a
knowledge of all natural things not of Arabia, or India, or Greece, but
universally, finds in all Countries medicines for diseases, nature yielding
sufficiency of contraries to all sorts of them, whereto the inhabitants are
subject, at the least, in all quarters, which rise not of a blind tradition,
but from a certain knowledge of nature. This then I take to be the chief
cause of this custom in using strange medicines, which ignorance of nature
does feel, and nourish daily. I blame none, neither tax I any man, and I dare
say there is not a learned Physician in this land, who is not able to perform
this point with English medicines, if they would take the matter in hand:
whereto I rather exhort them, then instruct them, being a thing sufficiently
known unto them. For it is not the Nutmegge, or the Mace that strengthens the
brain, and cures cold diseases, and moist diseases thereof: but a drying and
warming virtue, with a secret agreement which they have with the brain to
preserve the same, which being found as sufficient in Sage, in Rosemary, in
Betony and such like, the nutmegge and the mace, with such other spice, for
that turn may be discharged. The same may be said of all strange natures,
which although we want, yet have we such as are as sufficient to serve in
st^ede: for as every nation has a peculiar condition of the same diseases, so
must the medicine also needs be of another sort: and as the medicine varieth,
so why the matter of the same medicine should not also vary I know not. The
medicine varieth in respect of the complexion of the patient being other in one
country, then in an other: which medicine is as it were seated in nature, which
has many qualities besides the medicinable, which quality if the medicine be
good, must agree with the patients complexion* if not, then hurts it greatly.
If it agrees with the complexion of a Moore, an Indian, or Spanyard^, then
must it needs disagree with ours, which disagreement and want if it be
patched up unto us by correctours, yet declares that patching, that the
medicine is rather by force constrained, then naturally yields it self to
the remedy, and so of it self unmeet. Wherefore as well the matter thereof is
to be changed, as the medicine it self. And if those correctors need also
correction, what then? I will not say that all simples need their correctors,
although it be avouched of some, and such as carry great authority for their
skill in Physic. Thus have I (gentle reader) for thy benefit I hope, made a
way to the greater use of our home medicines, wherein if I have said freely my
mind against strange drogues, thou may understand that otherwise the way were
stopped to our English medicines, and blame me not, if I say as much for ours,
as the strangers say for theirs. And if as yet by custom it seem hard to
alter the common course, let each practicer look to that, I set no laws to
any, only I crave liberty in this point, both pleasant and profitable to
English men. Wherein I have examples of excellent Philosophers and learned
Physicians, neither broach I any idle conceits of my own. Of this mind is
Plinius Secundus, Fuchsius, Rulandus, Symphorianus, Campegnis, Octauianus
Horatianus, Physician to Valentinian the Emperor, that all countries have
sufficient medicines for all diseases. I know much more might be said of this
point. But this I thought sufficient for the present time, breaking as it were
the yse I hope to others, who hereafter shall more copiously deal in the same
argument, or at the least, drawing the first lines (of a more large treatise to
my self which as leisure, and opportunity shall serve may hereafter be
accomplished) this gentle reader I desire thee to accept in such sort, as I
offer it unto thee even with a mind to spend my days according to my small
talent, for thy benefit. God keep thy soul and body for ever.

FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF Medicines, growing for the most part within our English
Climat; approved and experimented against the Iaundise, Dropsy, Stone, Falling
Sickness, and Pestilence.
Set down alphabetically, for the ease of all, that shall have occasion to use
them.

Arnold. de villa noua. Qui potest mederi simplicibus, frustrae quaerit
composita.

At LONDON printed, 1615.

A Collection of English Medicines, etc.
ABsinthium, Wormwood the infusion decoction, or iuce thereof, Wormwood.
draughts.
being taken the quantity of three cyaths or draughts every day, cures the
Iaundise: Dioscorides, it thrusts out the choleric humors of the belly,
and auoideth them by urine; whereby it cures the Iaundise: Galen, Paulus
Aegyneta. The cream of wormwood given by it self, is profitable to them that
have the Iaundise. Anton. Donatus ab alto mari. Wormwood given in meat and
drink is profitable, to them that have the Iaundise. Adam, Lonicerus. Wormwood
boiled with Smallage or maiden hair, is with great profit given against the
Iaundise. Ant. Mizaldus. If he that has the Iaundise, do drink two ounces of
the juice of wormwood, for the space of ten days together with sugar, he
shall be cured of the Iaundise. Gualtherus Riffius. Wormwood boiled in wine
and drunk, cures the Iaundise: Nicholas Spindlerus. The seed of wormwood if
it be boiled with the root of the Flowerdeluce and drunk, does very much
avail against the Iaundise: Anton, Mizaldus.

I have given (says the Author) that potion of wormwood which John Wierus has
prescribed for the Scuruie, A potion against the Iaundise and Scuruy
and have very happily cured many of the Iaundise, and this is the form of the
potion. Take Comarum of wormwood, our dry common wormwood, Juniper berries
bruised, goats milk, or for want thereof cowes milk or whey of milk, the
quantity of four pyntes, boil it to the consumption of the third part, and
let it be strained with expression, then mix therewith a dram of saffron in
powder, then again let it boil another walme and strain it, this decoction
must be given somewhat warm, thrice a day, viz. in the morning fasting, and at
three of clock in the afternoon, and at entrance into bed: by our own
experience we know that wormwood wine does cure the Iaundise. Actuarius says
that the sirup of wormwood does cure the Iaundise, as witnesses Vitalis de
furu^, and Adolphus Occo. Abrotanum, Sothernwood. Bearefoot.
Sothernwood: the wine of Sothernwood being drunk, is very good for the
Iaundise, D^o^corid. Acanthum or Bearefoot: the ^ootes whereof which the Romans
do call tric^rdumcan three or four roots green or dry boiled in water to
the consumption of the one half, and expressed, and strained from the roots;
give thereof to drink against the Iaundise: Galenus. Acetosa: Sorrel.
eaten by it self and the decoction of the root boiled to the thirds, does
suddenly help those that have the Iaundise: Actius. It is approved in the
Iaundise to give the roots of Sorrel: Auicenna, (...) Valescus. The roots of
Sorrel drunk with w^ne helps those that have the Iaundise: Antonius
Mizaldus. A certain man that had the Iaundise, used to eat the condite of
Sorel, which he did eat in the morning fasting, and drank thereupon a little
endive water, and so became hole as witnesses Amatus Lusitanus. Acetum,
Vinegar: If he that has the Iaundise, and sits in the sun, Vinegar.
and does draw up into his nostrels most sharp venegar, and do contain the
same a little while, pressing his nostrels; it does carry away the relics of
the Iaundise, which do remain about the eyes and the face. Aetius. Paulus
Fuchsius and many others. For the yellowness of the eyes it is good to smell
to vinegar actually hot, because those subtle parts do ascend up to the head,
afterward by reuerberation they do descend to the eyes, and there they ratify
the pores of the eyes, and after they exhale. Marcus Catinarius says, it is
our experiment.

Acorus, or Galengal: Galengal.
the decoction thereof and read Cicers given to drink, is a present remedy
for the Iaundise. Petrus Hispanus, Leonellus Fauentinus. Make a bath of the
water of the decoction of Acorus, and it does the same. A draught of the
decoction of Acorus in water, cures the Iaundise Quintus Appollinarius.

Adiantum, Maiden or Venus hair: every kind of them, is profitable for the
ouerflowing of the gall. Dioscorides.

Maiden hair boiled in wine or aqua mulsa, and drunk for some few days
together helps the obstructions of the liver, and therefore consequenly is
good against the Iaundise: so says Adamus Lonicerus And, generally, Omne
adiantum, quia Iecoris obstructiones aperit, Ictericis confert. Every maiden
hair because it does open the obstructions of the liver, is very good against
the Iandise: Fernelius.

Agarieke.
Agaricus: agaricke, is given the quantity of two drachms, to those that have
the Iandise: to those that feel a fever, it must be given with aqua mulsae,
but otherwise in vino mulso. Dioscorides. Agarike has a digestive faculty,
and does cut and incide gross humors, and does purge from the tournings of the
bowels, and therefore it does cure those that are troubled with the yellow
Iandise, through the obstruction of the liver. Galen. Agarike does mightily
open obstructions in the Iaundise. Nicholas Piso. Agaricke with rheubarb is an
excellent medicine in the Iandise. Gualtherus Bruel: the often use thereof is
good against the Iaundise, whether it be in potions, or in pills.

Agrimoni.
Agrimonia (called commonly Eupatorium) the decoction of common Eupatorium or
the juice is with great profit given to them that have the Iandise. Mathiol.
The distilled water drunk, cures the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus.

Aiuga: (or Chamaepitios) the leaves being drunk for seven days together in
wine, Camaepit.
cures the Iaundise. Dioscor. Chamaepitios is a good remedy for them that be
troubled with the Iaundise. Galen. The decoction thereof cures the Iaundise.
Mesue. Fernelius affirms that it is a good remedy for the Iaundise; and
Petrus Bayras says that it cures the Iaundise: Being given to drink with
melicrato it cures those that have the Iaundise. Iacobus Sylum.

al^^ekengi
Alcechengi: the berries thereof being drunk with some convenient liquor, does
purge the Iau^dise by vrin: Anthon. Fumanellus.

Allium or garlic: Garlic
Praxagoras does mix garlic with wine and Coriander against the Iaundise.
Anton. Mizald.

Aloes being given the weight of a drachme to drink, does purge the yellow
Iaundise, Dioscorides. Aloes
Adam Lonicerus, if the cause of the Iandise do proceed from obstruction of
phlegm or gross choler, as for the most part it does, take one drachme of
Aloes in the form of pills, an hour before supper and it is an effectual
remedy if it be continued every other day: and if it be too weak to purge let
it be strengthened with three or fowergraines of Diagridi^^^: Io. Arculanus.
Aloes taken with goats milk cures the Iaundise: Quin. Apollinares. To
euacuate choler in the Iaundise, Aloes in the form of pills is very much
commended. Leonellus Fauentinus.

Ambubeia, Common succorie: Common Suchorie.
The whole plant boiled and drunk, helps those that are troubled with the
yellow Iaundise. Mathiolus. see Intybus.

Ammoniacum: gum Ammoniack being given to the quantity of two scruples with
mulso and the roots of Cappars or with Aromaticall wine, it is good against the
Iandise, and helps them that be falling into the Dropsy, avoiding
wonderfully by the belly, the obstructions of the bowels: Jacob. Hollerius.
Ammoniacum is commended against the Iaundise, for it is very forcible to
deliver from obstruction, for it cures the Iaundise, and those that are ready
to fall into the dropsy through the same. Nich. Piso.

Amygdalae, Almonds: the kernells of wild Almonds bruised with vinegar, and
strained, Almonds.
and the liquor expressed, and given in the morning to the sick patient, upon
a fasting stomach, or in the evening at the entrance into bed, is good against
the Iaundise. Hieronimus Bruswicensis.

Anagallis, pimpernel: some use the juice thereof to purge the head by the
nostrils, Pimpernel.
if any of the Iaundise do rest about the face and eyes: Aetius, Fuchsius,
Anton. Donatus.

Buglosse.
Anchusa, red buglosse, (so called in shops) the first decoction thereof is
given to them that have the Iaundise: and if there be withal a fever, it is
given with aqua mulsa. Dioscorides: Adamus Lonicerus.

Anchusa called Onoclea, has the property to cleanse and purge bilous, Onoclea.
and choleric humors, wherefore it is given to them that have the Iaundise:
Galenus.

Two spoonefuls of the d^^e roots, taken in three draughts of water to drink,
is good for the same purpose: idem Galenus. The root of red buglosse boiled in
water to the thirds, is drunk for the Iaundise: or contunde and bruise one
drachme in odoriferous wine and drunk, is good for the same. Aetius. A full
spoonefull of Anchusa bruised and given with mulsa for the Iandise. Nich.
Myrepsus.

Anchusa, called by Dioscorides, Onoclea, and by some is the root of red
buglosse: let it be boiled with mulsa if there be a fever, or in water or
thin wine, adding thereto sugar or honey, and give the decoction thereof to
them that have the Iaundise, or two drachms thereof reduced into pounder, and
give it in four ounces of mulsa, or thin white wine: Iacobus Hollerius.

Anseris stereus Goose doung: It is a country medicine to cure the Iaundise,
Goose dung
given the weight of two drachms in wine for some days: this is proved. I
says the Author am wont to cure with this following medicine the Iaundise
(which medicine is used in Frisia by the common people in the Scuruie) but
especially if it be the black Iaundise: I take goose dung, and ox dung, such
as have fed only upon grass, of either a like quantity, that it to say the
quantity of three acorns, or two chestnuts, and I macerate them for a few
hours in four pintes of Rhenish wine for the richer sort, and in stale beer
for the poorer, afterward I strain it through a linen cloth gently and so
let it settle; then I take two ounces of Radish roots sliced and bruised, then
infuse it in some fit liquor, wine or beer, and let it macerate for a night,
then in the morning strain it, and mix it with the first liquor of the goose
and ox dung, and so being mixed together use them: and that it may be the
better for the taste, bruise lightly nutmeg and cloves and let it hang therein
tied in a piece of linen: of this liquor as often as the sick will, let him
drink thereof, so that in the whole time of his cure, let him drink no other
drink: This medicine although it be somewhat ru^tical and common, yet is of
great use in this business, as we find by experience, so that nevertheless
those things aperitiue be not neglected, which by the art of Physic ought to
be given. And if we consider the ingredients of this medicine, it expels the
Iaundise by vrin, for this potion does consist of diuretics and of subtle
parts: for we see how much the Radish avails, that being taken by any manner
of means cures the Iaundise. The goose dung is of that hot faculty that it
burns the grass where it lies: heerehence we may gather how, and of of
what subtle and thin parts is is, and how mightily it moves vrin, being
transfused, with some convenient liquor. The dung of a bull has also the same
virtue, cheefely if it be gathered in the fields. Some that are superstitious
will have that dung gathered that has read hairs; but that is not needful,
so that it be gathered in the field where they feed on grass: Some gather it
in the winter whiles they feed on hay, but every man may do as they please:
And this says the Author is my experiment.

Aparin^: goose grass the distilled water thereof, taken twice or thrice a
day, Goose grass
the quantity of three spoonefulls, is an excellent remedy against the
Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus: Nich. Spindlerus.

Smallaga.
Apium: Smallage. ^he roots of Smallage boiled in some Apozem, and being
strained and drunk, helps the Iaundise: Fernelius.

Garden Smallage, or the seed of common parsley, is given in white wine for the
Iaundise: Anton. Mizaldus.

Aqua salsa, salt water: Asclepiades ministered saltwater for two days together
against the Iaundise: Saltwater.
Celsus.

Aquilegia: Columbine: the roots thereof given being bruled, the weight of a
drachme, with Saffron the weight of half a drachme, drunk in wine, and the
body covered forthwith and caused to sweat, it does very much auail against the
Iandise: Adam Lonicerus.

The seeds of Columbine, as those that do write of the virtue of herbs, given
in the wine of Candy the quantity of 2. drachmes adding thereto a little
saffron, cures the Iaundise; but the sick must forthwith sweat in his bed.
Mathiolus. Take the seed of Columbine the quantity of a drachme, of Saffron a
Scruple, and with an ounce of vinegar and two ounces of Celendine water, mix it
and give it in the morning fasting, and in the evening at the entrance into
bed, and drinking nothing thereupon, it purges the Iaundise by vrin, but with
the draught taken in the morning we may mix sugar. Hier. Brunswick.

Arthemisia, Motherwort: Motherworte.
some give the distilled water to drink, against the Iaundise: Gualtherus
Ruff. Artemesia with the leaves of hearts tongue and a little wormwood boiled in
wine and drunk, is good against the Iaundise: Quint. Apollin.

Asarum Asarabacca: Asarabacca.
cures the Iaundise by opening the obstruction of the liver and spleen:
Fernelius. Asarabacca put in sit up, cures the Iaundise through oppilation,
and properly the infusion thereof, Pet. Bayrus, put into must or new wine so
that it may boil therewith, cures the Iaundise: others put Asarabacca in Must
for three months, then they strain it, and give the same wine, and it is
wonderful against the Iaundise, Idem. Wine of Asaron, cures the Iaundise:
Dioscorides. Beer of Asarabacca is exceeding good for the ouerflowing of the
gall: Joan. Placotamus.

Asparagus: Sperage
Sperage the root thereof boiled with figs or Cisers and so taken does cure the
Iaundise: Dioscorides. The wild root thereof is good against the Iaundise, the
seed thereof also given in drink is good for the same: Carolus Clusius: the
root of Asparagus boiled in wine by opening the obstructions of the liver,
cures the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus. As well the root as the seed helps the
Iaundise. Fernelius.

The roots of Asparagus boiled with thin white wine, is given the quantity
of four ounces for a time, against the Iaundise. Marcus Gatinaria.

Asphodelus, Daffodil, the root drunk with wine helps the Iaundise.
Daffodil.
Mathiolus.

Coporaes.
Atramentum sutorium, or Calcanthum called in shops Vitriol, I find very
effectual to purge the head in the Iaundise. Vitriol also dissolved in woman's
milk. Aetius.

Atriplex, Orache, or Orage, the seed drunk with aqua mulsa, Orach.
cures the Iaundise. Dioscorides.

The seed of Orache, helps the Iaundise, that comes by obstruction of the
liver. Galen.

When there is a fever with the Iaundise, Atriplex is very good, because it
opens: Mesue.

The seed of Orache given the weight of a drachme with fero lactis, is also
good. Nonus.

Mouse ear
Auricula muris, mouse ear: the kinds of these are pilosella mayor, and
minor: every kind of them taken morning and evening fasting boiled in wine,
helps those that are troubled with the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus.

The decoction of Pilocella cures the Iaundise. Nich. Piso.

The water of the decoction of Pilosella being drunk, or the wine thereof does
presently help them which have the Iaundise. Petrus Hispan.

Diverse do commend Pilosella against the Iaundise, because it does strengthen
the liver. Mathiolus.

B
Barberries: the middle rine of the barberrie tree the quantity of an Acorne
being bound in a cloth and boiled in water, Barberry.
let the sick drink thereof in the morning and evening, or mix that liquor
with wine, it cures the Iaundise. Hier. Brunswick. Nich. Spindlerus.

Beta, the beete: whose juice being taken up into the nostrels purges the
yellow color that rests about the face and eyes. Beets.
Aetius.

Betonica, Betony.
Betonye releeueth them that be affected with the Iaundise. Dioscorides.

The powder of Betonye given with wine the weight of a drachme, helps very
much those that be troubled with the Iaundise. Adamus Lonicerus.

Betula, or birche, Birch.
the sweet juice of the birch tree gathered in the spring, and being drunk,
is reported to be very auailable against the yellow Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus.

Bos, the ox: Ox.
the stone which is ingendered in the gall of the ox some times the bigness of
an egg and of a saffron color, and very easy to be broken, is given in
powder to be drunk in wine for the Iaundise. Mathiolus.

Brassica, Coleworts: the juice thereof is given with great profit against the
Iaundise: to those that are feuorous it is given by it self, but to those that
want a fever it is given the quantity of a spoonefull with wine. Aetius.

The juice of the Colwort with wine, cures the Iaundise. Mesue. it is also
given against the Iaundise in red wine for forty days together: Ant.
Fumanellus. And Mizaldus says with white wine; which I think better:
Bupthalmus, or ox eye called by Apothecaries cotula soetida, restores the
natural color to them that have the Iaundise: Dioscorides. The decoction of
the flowers drunk for some days together cures them that have the Iaundise.
Adam Loni.

C
pennyroyal.
Calamintha: wild pennyryole the decoction thereof being drunk cures the
yellow Iaundise: Dioscorides.

Calaminte through his inciding and abstersive faculty, is good against the
Iaundise. Galenus.

Calamint cures those that have the Iaundise, clensing and purging the
oppilations of the liver.

Canis. or the dung of a white dog the quantity of two ounces, Dogs dung.
with the fourth part of honey given to drink for three days together, cures
the Iaundise: Galenus. Dogs dung, only fed with bones, dry and beaten to powder
and given to drink, cures the Iaundise: Valescus. A white dogs turd, feeding
upon bones, dried and powdered, taken in drink, is good against the Iaundise.
Auicenna. Marcus Gatinaria. Nich. Piso.

Centauri^m, the lesser Centaurie, Centaury.
boiled in water to the thirds, and then drink a good draught thereof, and it
shall cure the Iaundise. Apuleus Platonicus.

Cepae, the Onyon: Take a great white onyon, make him hollow, Onions.
and fill the hollownesse with as much Triacle as an acorne or chestnut, and two
or three drachms of Saffron, wrap it in a sheet of Brown paper moistened, and
let it roste under the ^inders, and being roasted stamp it and strain it and
take of the juice thereof, and let the sick take some thereof fasting in the
morning, as hot as may be, and cover his body warm that he may sweat, and
this medicine shall cure the Iaundise. Joan. Iacobus Weckerus.

Cerasia: The leaves of the cherrie tree, Cherrie tree
a handful of them boiled in a sufficient quantity of milk, or rather wheye,
and let the sick drink a good draught of the strayning, twice every day, in
the morning, and at entrance into bed. Hierons. Brunswick. for it cures the
the Iaundise by expelling it by the belly, Nich. Spindlerus.

Chamedrios, or Southernwood, Southernwood.
the decoction thereof cures the Iaundise. Mesue. The seed thereof drunk is
good for the same. Mathiolus.

Camomel being drunk purges the cause of the Iaundise. Dioscorides. Camomel,
Camomel.
boiled in water and drunk, drives away the Iaundise. Galenus. cures those
that have the Iaundise. Pet. Bayrus.

The decoction of Camomel with the tops of wormwood, liquirish, Fenel,
persly, A medicine for the Iaundise.
Asparagus with the four cold seeds, the wine of granots with Iui^bes and
Sebesten and endive water sweetened with sugar, half a measure taken in the
Morning, the stomach fasting, cures the Iaundise. Joan. De Vigo.

D
Ciccory.
Deusl^onis, white Succorie every kind thereof, the juice thereof being
taken, if the sick drink thereof the quantity of four cyaths or draughts,
cures the Iaundise. Galenus. The juice of Cichorie and endive, is profitably
given to those that have the Iaundise, and to those which have a fever
therewith, by it self, and to those that have no fever, with wine. Aetius.

E
Eruca, or Rocate: wild rocate cures the yellow Iaundise. Rocat.
Adam Lonicerus.

Euphrasia, Eybright: the decoction thereof with wine is good against the
Iaundise. Eyebright.
Hieronimus Tragus witnesses that he used it himself. The herb boiled in
wine and drunk morning and evening, without doubt cures the Iaundise. Nichol.
Spindlerus.

F
Filipendula, called in shoppes Saxifraga rubea, drunk with wine cures the
yellow Iaundise. Filipendula
Adamus Lonicerus.

The weight of a drachme of the root drunk with aqua mulsa cures the Iaundise.
Nicholaus Spindlerus.

Ferrum, Iron: Iron*
The Iaundise is very happily cured with wine wherein gads of steel or iron
being made red hot is quenched, and the wine given for to drink. Gesnerus.

Foeniculum, Fenell: Fenel.
The seed of fenel and the root drunk, drives a way the Iaundise:
Dioscorides.

The root thereof drunk in some decoction is good for the same, Galenus.
Paulus.

Fraxmus, the Ash, Ash.
the distilled water of the Ash rind being drunk, is a most effectual
remedy against the Iaundise. Ad. Lonicerus.

Fumaria, Fumaterrae: Fumaterrae.
the decoction thereof and of send opneth the obstruction of the liver and
cures the Iaundise, purging it by vrin. Adam. Lonicerus. The roots of the
same herb boiled in wine is given for the same purpose. Gual^. Bruel. Of the
iuce of Fumaterrae and sugar, is made a sir^up, which cures both kinds of
Iaundise. Adolphus Occo.

G.
Gallina, the Hen, A Hen.
the inward skin of the stomach of hens being well washed with wine, dried
and poudered, and a drachme of the same powder being cast upon a toste of bread
dipped in wine and so given to him that is sick, fasting, and in the evening
when he enters into bed, cures the Iaundise. Hieronimus. Brunswic.

Gramen, grass or vulgarly called Cooche: the water of the decoction of the
root is given with great profit to them that have the Iaundise. Coocligrasse
Rondoletius. We use the gramen roots with good success in opening decoctions
against the Iaundise.

H
Hyssopus, Hissop, the leaves drunk with wine, does cure the Iaundise: Hyssop.
Petrus Bayrus.

Hypericon: Saint John's wort boiled in water to the third part, Saint John's
worte.
or poudered and searced, and a dram thereof given with some sweet wine,
cures the Iaundise. Actius. Ant. Donatus.

The decoction of hyperi^on, is given against the Iaundise. Donatus. Nonus.
Saint John's worte, and maiden hair boiled in water is given to drink against
the Iaundise. Galenus.

I
Iris, the waterflower deluce, the roots whereof being boiled and drunk is
given with great profit to them that have the Iaundise. Flowerdeluce.
Mathiolus.

Iuncus Odoratus, the sweet rushgrasse, a bath made thereof is used against the
Iaundise. Galenus.

L
Lactuca, lettice: two drachms of the juice of lettice is drunk every day
against the Iaundise. Lettice.
Symphor. Campegius. Mesue. Against that disease the dissolved water of the
same being drunk, is very good. The same Authors.

The decoction of lettice, of wild lettice, is available against the Iaundise,
if it be given with earth worms prepared and dried. Valescus.

Lauendula, Lauender, the flowers boiled in wine and drunk hot for some days
fasting, Lauender.
drives away the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus. Nichol. Spindlerus.

The decoction of Lauender, with the flowers prepared, is profitably given
against the Iaundise, that comes through the stopping of the liver;
especially if horehounde, Cinnamon, and the roots of fenell, and Asparagus be
added. Mathiolus.

M
Martubium, Horehound: Horehound.
the juice thereof taken up into the nostrils, purges the Iaundise.
Dioscorides. and Galenus. The juice of horehound drawn into the nostrils,
purges the Iaundise: or the same juice dried and mixed with honey and put into
the nostrils, does cure the same. Pet. Bayrus. The decoction of horehound
cures all kinds of Iaundise, if the decoction be made with white pure wine,
and give four ounces of the straining with sugar in the morning. Marcus
Gatmaria.

Millipedae* the loop, Loops.
or the worm with many feet drunk in wine, cures the Iaundise. Dioscorides,
Paulus. Under vessels of water there are found loops which being bruised and
drunk with mulsa, cures the Iaundise. Galenus. Those millepedae drunk in
wine, cures those that are sick of the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus. I (says
the Auth or) have bruised those loops lightly, and bound them in a thin piece
of linen, adding thereto wine, or the decoction of horehound, and being
pressed, I give thereof to the sick in the morning, as he lies in his bed,
and this I do for some days together; and for the taste sake, I add a little
cinnamon and sugar, and this says the Author is our experiment.

N
Nasturtium, Watercresses: The juice of watercresses drawn up into the
nostrels, Watercresses.
takes away the color of the Iaundise. Mesue. The seed of garden cresses,
and radish, of either of them a drachme given in wine, is used for a secret
against the Iaundise.

O
Ouillum stercus, sheeps du^g taken with an ounce or an ounce and a half of
persly, Sheeps dung.
in broa^h, cures the Iaundise. Adamus Lonicerus.

P
Pastinaca Erratica, or wild pers^^p* boiled in wine to the thirds, cures the
Iaundise. Paulus.

Pentaphillon, five le^ued grass, three draughts of the juice thereof for some
days together does very quickly cure the Iaundise. Dioscorides. The iuce of
the root of five leaued grass, is effectual against the Iaundise. Mesue. The
juice of the leaves of five leaued grass, drunk with wine, cures the
Iaundise. Petrus Bayrus.

Pimpinella, Pimpernel condite, Pimpernel.
does help those that have the yellow Iaundise. Anton. Fumanel.

Porrum, Leekes, cures the Iaundise. Leekes.
Vitalis de Furno.

Pulegium, Pennyroyall, Pennyriol.
the decoction thereof does cure the Iaundise. Mathiolus. Wine of pennyriol is
good for them that have the Iaundise. Dioscorides.

Q
Quer^us, the Oak: Oak.
A medicine of the burning coals of the oak, cures the Iaundise.

R
Raphanus, the Radish: Radish.
one part of the juice of the radish root, with two parts of sweet wine mixed
together, or one Ciath of wine, with one Ciath of the juice mixed together, is
good for the Iaundise. Aetius. Fuchsius. The decoction of radish leaves, is
profitable against the obstruction of the liver, and therefore the Iaundise.
Ant. Mizaldus. The distilled water of the leaves of radish, being drunk is
good against the Iaundise. Marc. Gatinarius. We says the Author in diverse that
are sick of the Iaundise do mix the juice of radish with white wine or aqua
mulsa, or it has been tried by it self with great profit giving it for some
days together.

Rosa, the rose: the juice of red roses and chiefly of white roses, Roses.
mixed with whey or made into a kind of sirup with sugar, is good against the
Iaundise. Fernel, water wherein fresh roses be macerated, or a draught of the
juice thereof does cure the Iaundise. Antonius Mizaldus. Joan. Huerinus.

Rosemarie.
Rosmarinus, rosmarie: The seed of rosmarie given with wine and pepper, cures
the Iaundise. Dioscorides.

The decoction of rosmarie being drunk cures the Iaundise^ Galenus.

Rosmarie boiled in water to the thirds, or a drachme thereof given with sweet
wine to drink cures them that have the Iaundise. Aetius. Anton. Donatus.

The Seed of Rosmarie given with wine and pepper, and so drunk, brings
great help to them that have the Iaundise. Anton. M^zaldus.

S
Sabina, Sauin* drunk with honey and wine cures the Iaundise. Sauin.
Galenus. Adam. Lonicerus.

Sambucus, the eldern, the oil thereof is good for him that has the Iaundise.
Elder.
Adolphus Occo.

Saluia, Sage, the decoction thereof cures those that have the Iaundise. Sage.
Q. Apollinarius.

S^rpillum: Sauorie, or wild Thime being boiled in water, Sauory
or in sweet wine, and the decoction thereof given to drink, or a drachme of
the powder given in wine to them that have the Iaundise cures them. Aetius.

T
Tamarinds, Tamarinds
the decoction of tamarinds is given to them that have the Iaundise. Mathiolus.
It cures them that have the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus.

Tormentilla: the juice of the green root, Tormentil.
and the juice of the leaves drunk with wine cures the Iaundise in a short
time. Adam. Lonicerus.

V
Valeriana, Valerian: Valerian.
the wine of the decoction of valerian, drunk in the morning, remoueth the
obstruction of the liver and spleen, and thereby drives away the Iaundise.
Weckerus.

Vermes, Earth-wormes.
Earth-wormes dried given for three days in new wine, purges the Iaundise by
vrin. Fuchsius. Earth-wormes dried and taken with white wine, cures the
Iaundise. Nich. Piso. Earth-wormes dried remove the yellow Iaundise. Auicenna.

Worms dried in an oven and poudered, and taken with white wine and Sugar,
cures the Iaundise. Thomas Erastus.

Vrina, vrin: If a man that has the Iaundise does drink his own vrin for
some days together, Vrin.
being fasting, it helps very much the Iaundise. Hermes. Anton. Mizaldus. It
is approved to be very available in the Iaundise to give every morning,
fasting, this potion following: Take the vrin of a boy that is found, and not
polluted, five ounces, white sugar, half an ounce, mix it and give it to
drink, which must be continued for ten days together in the Iaundise.
Benedict. Victor Fauentinus. Take the vrin of the patient, with a radish root
bruised and strained, and give thereof to drink Evening and morning, Hieron.
Reusnerus.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of simple English Medicines, easy to be prepared, against the
Dropsy.
ABsinthium, Wormwood: Wormwood.
an excellent medicine against the Dropsy, which we call aquaintercus, and is
to be prepared after this manner: take the leaves of wormwood new, let it be
sea wormwood, or common, the quantity of a pound, sugar three pounds: bent it
in a stone mortar, and the sugar being well powdered, mix them, and work all
well together in the mortar, until it be all one body, then reserve it to
your use, half an ounce thereof being taken three hours before supper.
Mathiolus. Wormwood cures the dropsy. Mesue.

Sea wormwood is a singular remedy in the weakness of the liver, so that by
the only use thereof it does sometimes cure the Dropsy. Iacobus Siluius. If
one ounce of the juice of wormwood with sugar be drunk for ten days together
it does deliver a man from the dropsy. Gualt. Riffius.

Allium, Garlike the use thereof is profitable against the dropsy, when it
proceeds of a cold cause, because it does draw dry, and consumes the
moisture between the skin, Vitalis de Furno.

The use of garlik, if it be familiar to men of poor estate that have the
dropsy, it cures them. Wierus. Garlike with the lesser centaurie boiled in
wine and given to drink, is good against the dropsy. Quint. Apollinarius.

Alumbe.
Alumen, Alum liquid given the quantity of a bean, being dissolved in water
and strained, give thereof to drink against the dropsy. Aetius.

Anagallis, Pimpernel, boiled in wine helps them that have the dropsy. Adam.
Lonicerus.

The juice of yellow pimpernil taken by it self or in wine, Pimpernil.
is given for the dropsy. Anton. Donatus ab Alto mari.

Apium. Smallage: The roots of smallage boiled in wine with the roots of
persly, Smallage.
and the liquor strained, it is given to drink to them that be hydropical,
because it procures vrin.

Columbine.
Aquilega, Columbine, the root boiled in wine and drunk, does profit them
that have the Dropsy.

Motherwort.
Artemesia, Motherwort. A certain man gave the distilled water to drink, to
them which have the dropsy, and the quantity is two ounces for a time for
forty days together.

Asarabacca.
Asarum: Asarabacca, is good against the dropsy. Dioscorides. So is the wine
of Asarum. Idem. Asarum put in M^st or new wine, or boiled with the same,
cures the dropsy. Pet. Bayrus. Asarum purges the dropsy Ascites by vrin.
Anton Fumanellus. The decoction of Asarum drunk, does only profit, especially
if there be a little Cinnamon joined therewith. Leonh. Iacchinus.

Asclepias, Vincitoxicu^ of some, Swallow-wort.
but called truly swallow worte: the decoction of this plant by it self cures
the dropsy: or else take half a pound of the roots thereof, and let it be
marerated in white wine for a night, then boil them to the thirds, and give of
the strayning thereof in the morning fasting, and there will follow sweats by
the soles of the feet, whereby the dropsy will avoid, as experience
declares. Mathiolus, Adam. Lonicerus, Alexander Petronius.

Asphodil, Daffodil, Daffodil.
the root thereof drunk in wine helps the dropsy. Mathiolus.

B
Betonica, Betony, Betony.
the leaves and flowers thereof boiled in aqua mulsa, and given hot to drink
for some days together, does help those that have the dropsy, wonderfully.
Adam. Lonicerus.

Brassica marina, or Soldamella, Soldanel.
the decoction thereof with Rhubarbe being drunk, it auoideth the water of
those that have the dropsy, so does the powder thereof with Rhubarbe and
cubebs often given. Mathiolus.

Bryonia Syluestris, Wild Bryony: Bryony.
the roots thereof are very profitable in the dropsy given mixed with sea
water and wine: and when they drink it, let them drink two measures at a
time. Dioscorides.

The root of Bryony is some times cut in small pieces, and infused in wine*
whereof the patient does receive a draught in the morning, to which is some
times added a little cinnamon and maces, that it may do the less harm. (...)
Wierus.

C
Centaurie.
Centaurium, Centaurie, the less: the decoction thereof is used against the
dropsy, some give half a drachme thereof in powder, adding thereto anise
seeds, and caraway seeds, of either of them half a drachme with wine.
Arnoldus de Villa noua. The root o^ the greater centaurie, is given for the
dropsy mace^ated in wine, as also drunk in powder. Mathiolus.

Onions.
Cep^^., the Onion: the juice of the onion, with the juice of senel, is given
with great profit, in the beginning of the dropsy. Anton. M^zaldus.

The Juice of onyons distilled with tr^acle adding thereunto a little saffron,
it cures the dropsy if there be given every morning daily, the quantity of
two drachmes for a time. Nich. Richi^.

Cuscuta, Dodder, a handful thereof boiled in wine, Dodder.
is good against the dropsi^. Adamus Lonicerus.

D
Carret.
Daueus, the Carret: the seed is good against the dropsy because it pu^geth
the wa^rish humor by vrin if one ounce thereof be boiled in half a pint of
Rhenish wine, to the consumption of the third part for three doses, and this is
an experiment.

E
Ebulus, Walworte, it drives forth by the belly, water, of those that have the
dropsy, Walworte.
and sometimes it works by vomit: the juice thereof is drawn forth either
from the root or from the middle rine being bruised, pouring thereon aqua
hordei, or the decoction of reasons, with a little cinnamon, or nutmeg, with
sugar, the dose is one ounce. Fernelius.

Eringium, Eringus, Eringus.
the decoction of the roots helps the dropsy. Mathiolus.

Eupatorium: the decoction, Liuerwor^.
or juice of the common liuerwort is profitably given for the dropsy.
Mathiolus.

F
Fa^ae, Beans: of the burnt stalks of beans, there is made Alixiuium, or
lie, Beans.
either with white wine or Rhenish wine, the use whereof is against the
dropsy, and there is given inward the quantity of three ounces for a time.
Ioannes Hu^rinus.

Ferrum, Iron: Iron.
The water of iron is given for the dropsy, especially if there be hardness of
the liver and spleen, or daily obstructions or when the dropsy follows the
laundise, and it must be prepared after this manner: extinguish iron in water,
so long as it shall leave behind it a certain taste of the iron and a
sharpnes thereof; as for example, take common water twelve pints, then quench
iron glowing hot in it, and let it be quenched so long till there remain but
four pints of this water, mix with wine or other fit water to drink.
Alexander Petronius.

Filix, Fern, the decoction of the root, or the juice thereof is an excellent
remedy against the dropsy. Fern.
Julius Caesar Arantius. But beware of the use thereof in women, because as
Dioscorides witnesses it induces bariennesse and sterilitie.

G
Broom.
Genista, Broom, does very much euacuate water, in them that have the
dropsy, which is done by Alixiuium made in this manner: take one part of
Broom ashes, wine three parts, and add thereunto Nutmeg and Cinnamon, both for
taste and also for the stomach, give three ounces for a time. Joan. Huerinus

H
Helenium, enula campane, the roots being bruised and the juice expressed,
Elicampane
and mixed with honey and so taken for eleven days the Moon decreasing: the
quantity to be taken, is the quantity of a Chestnut, morning. Wal^herus
Riffius.

Hypericon, Saint John's worte, one drachme of the seeds in wine, is profitably
given for the dropsy. Anton. Donatus ab Alto mari. Saint John's worte with
garlic boiled in wine, and the wine drunk, it purges water by vrin
exceedingly; this is an experiment.

I
Iuniperus, Juniper: Iuniper^
Three handfuls of Juniper berries, boiled in pure wine to the half, let it
be strained, and give thereof six ounces hot, and it provoke sweat, and
this must be continued for some days together. Martinus Rulandus.

Alixiutum framed of the ashes of Juniper, and wine, and so drawn through an
Ipocrasse bag, and and so often infused, and so drawn. Joan. Wierus. A lie
made of Juniper ashes, and white wine, the quantity of four or five ounces,
does exceedingly purge by vrin, so that many hydropicall bodies, have been
cured by this only remedy. Mathiolus.

L
Laurus, the Baye: we use bay berries with honey, in the form of a Cataplasme,
to the swollen testicles. Baye.


Lumbrici terrestres, Earth-wormes: E^rth-wormes.
it is given with profit, boiled in broth, or some other convenient liquor,
against the dropsy, Anasarca. Gasparus Hoffmannus.

M
Maiorana, Marioram, Marioram.
boiled in wine and drunk in the beginning of the dropsy, cures it. Nichol.
Spindlerus.

Marrubium, Horehounde, the decoction thereof with wine, is marvelous against
the Dropsy. Mathiolus.

P
Paracentesis: is the last remedy in the dropsy, and is not to be used
without urgent necessity; but the belly being once well, and orderly opened,
it works great effect, Opening of the belly.
for the water is thereby euacuated, which cannot otherwise be carried from
that region, neither is that Apertion so dangerous, if it be rightly done.
For we often see, some that are wounded in the belly to recover, so that the
small guts be not wounded; besides, it is profitable to them to whom an
eruption happens by chance through the navel, for thereby the water is
avoided, and they are cured. But nevertheless, this kind of cure is not to
be assaied in those whose faculty of the liver is dead, and that cannot
engender good blood: or in those that have a Schirthus of the liver or spleen
confirmed, or in those that have this disease bred from an ulcer of the lungs:
for experience does teach us, that all those do die with this remedy, neither
must this remedy be tried, in very old or weak men. But indeed all the
time of the cure, we must study to strengthen the liver and bowels, as much as
may be. Ioh. Wierus.

This cure which we call paracentesis, is not fit for any kinds of the
dropsies, but that which we call Ascites. Paulus. Hippocrates does commend
paracentesis in the dropsy. Galenus.

And all other Physicians* when they have tried other remedies without profit,
so that the sick be young and strong and other things thereto agree^^^.
Nevertheless, the water must not be avoided all together, but by little and
little for some days together, by degrees, according to the Aphorism of
Hippoc. In which he counsels to avoid all speedy euacuation. And how the
incision must be made, Paulus, and Aetius, and many others do teach us.

Q
Quercus, the Oak: the tender leaves or rather buds of the Oak are infused by
some in wine, Oak.
and of this wine we must give for some days together to those that have the
Dropsy. This is an experiment. A bath made of the leaves of the Oak in the
fall of the leaf, or in Autumn, does cure the dropsy.

A water distilled of the buddes or tender leaves of the Oak and drunk, does
help the dropsy. Ioh. Huernius.

R
Raphanus, the Radish: Radish.
The use of the Radish is commended in the dropsy, because it has power to
purge by urine.

Ricinus, or Palma Christi, Palma Christi.
purges the water in the dropsy by vomit and stool. There is given five
grains, or at the most eight, in the decoction of Fenell and Raisins, adding a
little Sugar and Cinnamon. Also the grains whole in Sugar melted, and ^rapt in
Honey, and so swallowed, gently purges water with little or no offense of the
stomach. Fernelius.

Rosae pallidae, whiteroses, or damask, Whiteroses.
the juice thereof does euacuate yellow water in the dropsy. Fernelius. But
because they provoke the menstrues, we must take heed how we give it to women
with child. Io. Hernius.

Rue.
Ruta, Rue: the decoction thereof taken for many days together, is reported to
cure the dropsy Timpanites. Anton. Fumanellus.

S
Sambucus, the Elder: the juice of the root of the elder, Elder.
being drunk in wine the weight of two ounces, drives out water. Paulus. The
root of the elder boiled in wine, and given in meat, helps those that have
the dropsy.

The common sort are wont to prepare this following decoction against the
dropsy: They take two handfulls of the inward rind of the elder tree with a
pint and a half of Rhenish wine, and they suffer it to boil to a pint, then
they aromatise the straining with a drachme of cinnamon, and give it to drink.

T
Tormentilla: a water distilled of the herb and roots of Tormentil,
Tormentill.
it cures the dropsy, if it be continued and drunk for nine days together.
Gesnerus. For it does mightily procure vrin.

V
Valeriana, Valerian. Valerian.
A certain man boyleth the roots in wine against the dropsy, and does give the
decoction to drink: this is an experiment.

Vitriolum, Vitriol: Some there are that do give certain drops of the oil of
Vitriol, Vitrol.
to those that have the dropsy, and is given in a draught or cyath of wine,
and is a great secret. Joan. Wierus.

Vrtica, the Nettle, the seed thereof cleansed and mixed with honey is given
against the dropsy, A Nettle.
Asci^s.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of English Medicines, against the stone of the kidneys, and
bladder; written alphabetically for the case of those that shall have occ^sion
to use them.
Sothernwood.
A Brotanum, Sothernwood: the seed thereof does break the stone, if i^ be given
with pepper and white wine. The decoction of Sothernwood made with Smallage,
and sugar, and so drunk, breaks and expels the sto^e of the kidn^^s, and
bladder. Q. Apollinaris* in libello German.

Adiantes, Maiden-ha^^e: the decoction thereof does break the stones.
Maiden-haire
Dioscorides, and Mesue. All maiden-haire does very much purge the reins, so
that it is supposed to diminish the stone. Fernelius. It does diminish the
stone both of the kidnie, and of the bladder, if it be drunk* Paulus. The
decoction breaks the stone, and bring once broken, with often use it does
wonderfully expel it. Anton. Fumanellus.

B
Betony breaks the Stone in the reins. Betony.
Mathiolus. Betony with Mulsa and Pepper given to drink, sends forth the
stone of the kidneys and bladder. P. Hispanus. One handful of Betony, with
three measures of water boiled to the thirds, or Betony water distilled,
breaks the gravel and stone. Georgius Pictorius.

C
Carduus benedictus, the leaves thereof being boiled in wine, and drunk hot,
breaks the stone. Carduus.
Adam. Lonicerus. Baths and incessions to sweat in* framed of Carduus
benedictus, are profitable against the Stone. Idem. Carduus benedictus breaks
the stone. Fuchsius. The roots of your vulgar Carduus benedictus being new
taken out of the ground, or dry, being boiled in pure White Wind, are given to
them that have the stone: but we must give a good draught at a time. Aetius.

Cepa* the Onion; Onion.
The distilled water of the white onion breaks the Stone. Marianus Sanctus.
When the stone causes great pain and intolerable, take two or three Onions,
and let them be cut very small, and make them very hot upon a tilestone, then
sprinkle them with white wine, and let it be applied pla^^er-wise upon the
reins, or upon the perinaeon. Ges^erus.

Citri^m, the Oringe; Oringe.
being cut into small pieces or parts, let it be boiled in a hens belly, the
bowels taken out, let the patient drink of the broth thereof for twelve days
in the morning, after the use of turpentine in the stone of the reins. Nich.
Piso. The oil of the grains of the citrou, drunk or anointed, drives out
the stone of the kidneis, and bladder: Adolphus Occo.

D
Carret.
Daucus, the yellow Carret, first the seed and after the root, does
vehemently exp^ll vrin, and exclude the stone. Fernelius. The carret root, and
the seed^, howsoever taken, cures the stone of the kidneis, the same virtue
has the distilled water. Adam. Lonicerus.

E
Walwort.
Ebulus, Walworte: the leaves thereof stamped drives out the stone. Plinius.
The same herb boiled in water for a bath* after the boiling of the herb, put
the herbs into a bag, and so apply them hot to the bottom of the belly, for
the stone of the bladder; and upon the reine^, for the stone of the kidneis
Hieronimus Braunsweig in libello germanico.

F
Fenel.
Foeniculi semina, Fenel seeds* decocted and boiled in wine* cures the stone*
Adam. Lonicerus. The root and seed of fenel, does break the stone. Galenus.
Wild fenel called hyppomarathrum, breaks the stone of the bladder.

Fraga, Strawberries, being very ripe, put them into a glass of hot water
for 40. hours space, Strawberries.
then strain them, and again put in fresh strawberries into the same hot
water, and so leave it very well covered and stopped, that no breath go forth
the first strawberries, after a strong expression through a linen cloth, keep
the liquor by it self: when any man will use it, he must take three or four
spoonefuls, in a month, taking a spoonefull in the morning, adding thereto a
little powder of sugarcandie: this is a most grateful and acceptable medicine,
and an effectual remedy against the stone, which some that have been
tormented therewith, above more then twenty years, has commended above all
other remedies, but the patient must be careful of his diet, that he avoid
such meat as may engender gross and viscous humors. The Author hereof is
Gesuerus.

The distilled water of ripe strawberries drunk, is very good against the
stone. Petrus Pena.

G
Genista, Broom: the seed of broom does cheefely diminish the stones of the
kidneis and bladder. Broom seeds
Pernelius.

The seed of broom does mundifie and cleanse the reins, and does not suffer
any thing that may be converted to the stone, to rest there: it breaks the
stone of the reins, and bladder, the Dose is two or three drachmes with mel
rosarum with roses and Mastich, because it hurts the stomach* Pet. Bayrus.

Grasserootes.
Graminis radices, being boiled in drink, does diminish the stony excrements
of the bladder. Dioscor.

Take the roots of Gramen three ounces, make a decoction with Aqua Mulsa,
despumated to on^ pint, and let it be aromatized with Cinnamon, or the like. Io.
Huernius.

H
Hircinus sanguis, Goats blood of a young Goat strangled, Goates-bloud.
about the time that grapes grow ripe, excludes the Stone. We must receive the
middlemost blood, and cast away the first and the last: we must receive it in
an earthen vessel glazed and set in the sun, being stopped with a piece of
linen, that by the heat of the sun the virtue may not vanish away. Let it be
dried and faithfully reserved for your use. And when you will use it, take half
a drachme of the powder, with some White Wind or Malmsey. Hollerius ex Aetio.
You shall observe that the blood will be more effectual if the Goat be
nourished before with Diuretics Ant. Valetius.

Hyssop.
Hyssopus, Hyssop; to stir up the stone of the kidneys is a very easy and
familiar remedy; which may appear by the syrup of Hyssop, with a double or 3d
part of Parietarie water: with which remedy, given in the winter fasting for
ten or twelve days tog^^ther, it sends forth stones and sand from the
b^^dies of many men. Anto. Mizaldus.

I
Imperatoria, Pellitory, The root, Pellitory of Spain.
seed and leaves boiled in wine, auoideth the stone of the kidneys and bladder.
Adam Lonicerus.

Juniper berries scowreth and cleanses the kidneys from S^nd and sl^me.
Fernelius. Juniper.


The Duke of Witenberg* taught Doctor Luther a present remedy against the
stone, viz. That he should take an earthen pot glased, and fill it half full
with fresh Juniper berries, which shall be afterward filled up with wine and
water, wherein shall be boiled the Juniper berries to the co^sumption of the
third part, and of this potion let him take a draught or two, then shall he
feel ease, and after feel the stone to avoid. Io. Manlius.

L
Ligusticum, Louage, Louage.
in baths and incessions helps the Stone. Adam. Lonicerus. The wine boiled in
wine, drives out the stone. Idem.

Limonum succus, Limons.
the juice of Limons is very much commended against the stone. Hollerius. The
distilled water of Limons, or two ounces of the juice, with three ounces of the
decoction of Radish, drives out the stone. Anto. Fumanellus. Take an ounce of
the unripe juice thereof, with three ounces of Malmsy, mix them, and give all
to the patient. B. Victor Fauentinus.

M
Marrubium. Horehound; Horehou^d.
One gave the juice thereof with good success in the suppression of the vrin: or
the powder may be given in white wind.

Mel, Honey, is good for those that have the stone, and it is taken to hinder
the increase. Honey.
Simeon Sethi. And to stop the increase of the stone, take 2. pintes of fresh
honey, and one pound of Venice turpentine, let it be distilled, and take the
water thereof, and drink thereof an ounce for a time: this is an experiment.

N
Nuces, Nuts: filberd nuts, with their inward rindes, Filberds.
or membranes, eaten daily at the beginning of dinner and supper, do remove
the matter of the stone from the kidneis: but it is doubtful by what property
they work, whether it be found in its d^^enesse, or in the inward skin* but
some do affirm it to be in the oily part. Amatus Lusitanus. Auicen does
number those filberds amongst the medicines, that do take away the matter of
the stone: and some do commend the shells of filberds against the stone.
Hollerius. A medicine to be prepared, approved against the stone in children;
Take seven filberds new and green, beat them with their outward rindes, and
take a handful of leekes unwashed, and draw the juice from them both, and
strain them, and mix them both together, and give (...) the child seven days
together* and when the chil^ goes to sleep, anoint his yard, and testicles,
(...) the whole perinaeum with oil of Been hot, or wit^ old oil. Petrus
Bayrus.

O
Ouorum Cortices, Eggeshels, from whence chickins have been hatched, being
beaten to powder, Egge-shels.
take two drachms with the juice of parietarie, and it drives forth the stone.
Anton. Fumanellus.

P
Paeonia, the Pionyes, Piony.
are good against the stone of the kidneis: and if there be stopping of vrin,
through the greatness of the stones the herb drunk with mu^sa, is an excellent
remedy. The root thereof is given the quantity of two or three scruples*
Alxander Trallianus The grains thereof drunk, break the stone in children.
Dioscorides.

Pimpinella, Pimpernil cond^^e, Pimpernil.
helps them that have the stone: the root there of is good against the stone
of the kidneis. Mathiolus.

R
Raphanus, the Radish, Radish.
helps those that have the Nephretic^ passion through the stone, especially
if a man boil the outward part thereof with white wine and water, or bru^ed
and strained, and so drunk in the morning fasting, and so continued for
certain days together. Anton. Mizaldus.

There is also Acetum Raphanatum to be framed against the Stone, to consume
them of the kidneys, and deturbe them in general, and is made after this
manner following. Take Radish roots dried and brought into powder, then pour
it into a v^ssel that has wine in it, and mix* them, and so let it rest for
some days; and so have you the Acetum raphanatum prepared, which is very
profitable against the Stone. Idem. For the Nephretick proceeding from the
stone, and for the colic coming through winds, Take the rides of very sharp
Radish an ounce, 2 drachmes of the stones of Medlars or open arses, stamp them
well, and macerate them for eight hours in four ounces of white wind, then
strain it, and give it a little warm at the entrance into bed, and in the
morning when he rises, and ^o repeat the drink again if need be. The doss
may be diminished or increased for the state of the body and age. Alexander
Petronius.

S
Saluia, Sage, I have proved that he which does use to eat Sage in the
morning, Sage.
eating two or three tops bruised with white wind in the form of an electuary,
has been preserved from the stone. Valescus de Tharanta.

Saxifrage.
Saxifraga, Saxifrage, does diminish the stones of the kidneys and bladder. The
herb and root beein^ boiled in white wind, breaks and drives out (...)
stone of the kidneys and bladder. Nevertheless, (...) is more effectual, if
we give a drachme of the dried powder in a draught of white wind. Mathiolus.

Serpillum, Sauery. The seed of either of the Saueries drunk in wine, the
quantity of half an ounce, Sauory.
expels the Stone. Petrus Bayrus.

V
Verbenaca, verum, Verum.
The root thereof bruised and given in Mulsa lukewarm, does exceedingly help
those that have the Stone* Anto. Fumanellus.

The juice of the root and herb Verum or the decoction, helps those that have
the Stone. Qu. Apoll. The distilled water thereof being drunk, has the same
virtue. Idem.

Vrtica, the Nettle is of that abstersive faculty, that it does very much
cleanse the reins, The nettle.
and is exceeding good against the Stone. Fernelius.

The seed of Nettles drunk with wine, auoydeth the stone of the kidneys.
Christoph. Wirsung. For a praecaution of the Stone new nettles are very good.
Idem.

Honoratus Castellanus does chiefly approve the decoction of the nettle being
new, for a preservative against the stone, especially from the beginning of the
Spring until May. The decoction of the nettle and the juice breaks the
Stone. Plinius.

The distilled water bring drunk is commended against the Stone. Michael
Schrick. The root of the dead nettle boiled in wine, and drunk, is commended
against the Stone. Q. Apollinarius.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of English Medicines, against the Epilepsie, or Falling sickness.
AIuga, Chamaepiteos: the decoction of the whole plant, Chamaepiteos.
if it be given for many days together with rhodomel or oxymel, is good
against the falling sickness. Mathiolus.

Pimpernel,
Anagallis, Pimpernel: the flowers of red pimpernel, has a proppertie against
the falling sickness. So has the juice thereof with honey. Hollerius by the
authority of Apuleus, hangs the red flowers of pimpernel, to defend from the
falling sickness. Joan Wierus.

Angellica.
Angellica two or three spoonefuls of the water of Angellica, is given in the
^itte of the falling sickness, we must macerate in the best wine Angellica,
for two or three days together, and mix it with lauender, water a like
portion. Euonimus.

Aper, the Bore: the bladder with the vrin of the bore, Bore.
being baked in an oven, or any ways dried, and brought to powder, and the
quantity of a bean thereof given in an ounce of Oxymel in the morning, is
approved against the falling sickness; as witnesses Alexander, who saw a man
in three days perfectly cured. Mesue.

Asinus, the Ass: The hoof of an Ass, Ass.
being made into powder, and two spoonefuls drunk for many days together,
cures the falling sickness. Dioscorides. The Ass hoof burnt, cures the
falling sickness; and also the weight of two drachms of the powder burnt, is
very auailable against the falling sickness. Arnoldus de Villa noua.

B
Betonica, Betony: Betony.
A drachme of Betony in water, cures the falling sickness. Dioscorides.
Lonicerus. Betony is good for them that have the falling sickness; as
witnesses Galenus.

The seed, of Betony drunk with aqua mellis, or with vinegar of Squils, does
avail much. Hugo Semensis.

Bryonia, White vine: the root thereof taken, White vine.
the quantity of a drachme daily for a whole year, is given against the
falling sickness. Dioscorides.

C
Canis, the Dog. Feed a white dog tied up for 14. days together with
bones only, and the fifteenth day take a spoonefull of the dung burnt, and
give it fifteen days together, against the falling sickness. Alexander
Trallianus.

Chamaedris, Germander, is very good against the falling sickness. Germander
Mathiolus. Take Germander in May, as much as you please, let it be dried in
the shadow and reduced into powder: then when you will use it, take one or two
yolks of eggs, and a spoonful of the said powder, with which being well
mixed and cocted, let it be given to the sick to eat for eight days
together, morning and evening, but in the mean time, let him abstain from
venerie, sallets, beans and peason, and other meat, that breeds ill juice and
vicious: and this is a most noble secret and a good one. Alexis Pedemontanus.

Cichorie.
Cichorium, Cichorie. Some give the sirrup of Cichorie day and night to infants
to lick thereof. Cichorie of its own property, is supposed to be an enemy
against the falling sickness. Nicholaus Piso.

Hearts horn
Cornu Ceruinum* Hearts horn, poudered and drunk with wine, cures those that
have the falling sickness. Pet. Hyspan. Hearts horn taken with wine is very
effectual. Syluius.

The fume of hearts horn burnt, does recreate those that are in the falling
sickness. Adamus Lonicerus.

Cranium hominis, a man's scull: we find that by a natural property the
scull of a man, Man's cull.
is good against the falling sickness. Gerardus has this secret, and he
himself does give it against the falling sickness, and they are delivered,
and so they take a man's scull for a man, and of a woman for a woman, the scull
must be burnt until it be very white, and then poudered, and being drunk
daily, it cures the falling sickness. Gerardus a solo et Gal. Simpl. de
ossibus lib. 11.

A medicine used against the falling sickness by Christian the third King of
Denmark: Take the scull of a man, especially of a thief hanged, that died of
no disease; broile this upon a gridiron, and then reduce it into powder, then
take three grains of piony, with one drachme of the said powder and a
spoonefull of lauender water, and give it to the patient early in the morning,
also three days after do the same, and take the powder fasting, and for three
days let him keep himself at home, with a small quantity of meat and
drink, and such as is pure and easy of digestion, as new laid eggs: and it
will not be amiss, that the sick every day in the morning, take down a
spoonefull of lauender-water. Henri^. Rausouius. Against the falling sickness
the powder of a man's scull is approved, and especially the oil distilled of a
scul, does very much help. Vide Ossa humana.

E
Enula campana: Elecampane
of its whole property Enula campane is good against the falling sickness.
Hollerius.

Equus, the horse: the horse hoof being burnt is good to cure the falling
sickness. Bayrus.

Eringium, the roots of Eringus being drunk with Hydromel, cures the
falling sickness. Eringus.
Dioscorides.

F
Filipendula.
Filipendula* is very good to be used against the falling sickness. Bayrus.
The powder of the root mixed with the meat, is good against the falling
sickness. Mathiolus.

Filipendula, is a remedy against the falling sickness: the powder thereof
used in meat, is good for that purpose. Hortus Sanitatis.

G
Gagates, Ieate, drunk and smelled unto, is good against the falling
sickness. Ieate.
Rosa anglica, the ^eate stone burned, and the fume taken, does raise them up
that are in the falling sickness. Cardanus.

The oil of Ieate is most healthful for those that are troubled with the
falling sickness. Euonimus.

H
Hyssopus, Hyssop: the sirup of Hyssop, is very auailable in the falling
sickness, Hyssop.
and so is the decoction of the said herb* John. Agricola.

The decoction of the said herb with Oxymel Squilliticum, does also profit
against the falling sickness. I. Heurnius. Galen in his experiments
witnesses, that he cured those that had the falling sickness with the
decoction of Hyssop, Asaruin and both the Aristolochia^. Bayrus affirms that
Alexander cured many with the only decoction of Hyssop, but sometimes he gave
it with Oxymel of Squils. Hieronimus Cappiuauius.

Hypericon. I he decoction of Hypericon when it flowreth, is cheefely preferred
by some against the falling sickness, if it be drunk. Mathiolus.

Hypericon, is said to cure the Apoplexy, and the falling sickness* Iodac.
Harchius. Saint John's worte.


The distilled water of Hypericon, is given to them that have the falling
sickness. Adam. Lonicerus.

Manardus does very much commend the distilled water of the roots of
Hypericon while it flowreth. Joan. Manardus.

L
Lilium Conuallium: Lilly.
An aqua vitae distilled of the flowers of Lilium Conuallium, by Balneum
Mariae, after this manner, is exceedingly commended against the falling
sickness. And is after this manner.

Rec. Vini Cretici lib. xvi.

Flores Lilium Conuallium. lib. iiij. Mix them in a glass body, and let them
so remain in the Sun for nine days together; and then distill it:
afterward, take all the said distilled water, flowers of green lauender lib.
i. mix them and let it stand again for nine days in the sun as before,
then distill it according to art by Balneum Mariae, and thereof is wont to be
given three or four drops to the sick, even in the very fit. Apollonius
Menabenius.

M
Marrubium, Horehound: Horehound.
Let him drink three spoonefuls of the juice of Horehound, and so much of honey
for one time, and it shall cure him. Petr. Hisp.

M
Balm.
Melissa, Balm, let it be put in wine to distill, and thereof give a
spoonefull with a little of the best Triacle fasting, and it will perfectly
cure the falling sickness. Euonimus.

Melissa.
Melissa, bruised and macerated in wine for a night, let them drink of that
water distilled every day, or let it be contained in the mouth, they say it
cures the Apoplexy, and also the falling sickness. Remaclus.

O
Ossa humana, the bones of a man: some have given the bones of a man burnt,
Bones of a man.
and have cured the falling sickness and Ioynt-ache, so that the sick was
ignorant, that they were the bones of a man, least the sick should abhor it,
by this remedy many have been cured. Galenus.

The bones of a man being burnt, has a natural property against the
Epilepsy. Weckerus.

Oxalis, Sorel, is given from the first of the new Moon, Sorell.
for xxx. days together being green, and is good against the falling
sickness. Symphorinus Campeius.

P
Piony.
Peonia, Piony: The root and seeds of Pyonie according to every
administration, is a very great medicine against the falling sickness; for if
we give every day thereof, from two drachm^ to four, with aqua mellis and
Hyssopi, or with Oxymel, it is exceeding good against the falling sickness.
Peonia hung about the neck of children cures the falling sickness; But that
is found most true of the male Piony. The male Piony that is sweet, does
wonderfully refresh and comfort the brain, and cures the falling sickness.
Fernelius.

Palma Christi, or Recinus: one drachme of the powder of the seed being drunk
with wine, Palma Christi.
cures the falling sickness. The same thing does the decoction of the root in
wine long mixed, which must be given to drink as well at dinner as at supper.
Mathiolus.

Passer, the Sparrow: the brain and flesh of sparrowes, according to Gerardus
Cremonensis, is very good against the falling sickness. Valescus. A^tuarius
does affirm that the brains of sparrowes of the fields, have a great
property against the falling-sicknes. Actuarius.

Q
Quinquefolium, Five leaued grass: Five leave grass.
the leaves thereof being, drunk thirty days do much profit. Dioscorides.
Five leaued grass drunk with wine, for the space of thirty days, cures the
falling sickness. Auicenna, Arculanus. Five leaued grass drunk for thirty
three days does perfectly cure. P. Hispanus.

The leaves of five leaued grass a drachme thereof being daily drunk cures
the Epilepsia. Altomarus. The leaves of five leaued grass being drunk with
wine, is auailable against the falling sickness. Hortus Sanitatis.

R
Rosmarinus, Rosemarie: the seed thereof does help the falling sickness.
Rosemarie.
Dioscorides. Rosmary with a little Fenell, is also commended by Serap^on.
Joan. Bapt. Theodosius.

Rostrum Porcinum, Wild Endive: the distilled water thereof, Wild Endive.
especially if it be macerated in wine for some days, it does profit very
much in the falling sickness, both in children and others. Gesnerus. Vide
Hieracium.

Ruta Siluestris, Wild Rue, is good for them that have the falling sickness.
Wild Rue.
Dioscorides.

Wild Rue being beaten or stamped and cast into the nostrels does help in the
sit: the same does the powder thereof, and if we cannot get the herb fresh,
for want thereof we may use the common garden rue, and the juice thereof.
Valescus. If the powder of dried Rue be snuft into the nostrels at the hour
of the sit, he that is sick will presently arise out of the sit.
Bertrusius.

S
Sage.
Saluia, Sage, is good against the falling sickness. Mathiolus. Sage is
convenient for those that have the falling sickness. Joan. Bapt. Theodosius.
Wine of the decoction of Sage is also good against the falling sickness.
Platcarius. By what manner soever wine of Sage is prepared, whether it be by
decoction of the plant or by hanging thereof in a bag it is of marvelous use
and power against the falling sickness, which grows by fault of the
stomache, or the mother, by the simpathy and consent of the parts. Mizaldus.

Sinapi, Mustard-seede being beaten and applied to the nostrels, helps the
falling sickness: Mustard-seede.
Mustard-seede being snuft into the nostrels causes to sneese, and does raise
him up that has the falling sickness. Bayrus.

A certain Physician does use to put into the mouth of him that has the
falling sickness mustard, whereby he is presently raised up and much fleame is
forthwith avoided out of his mouth. Nostrum.

A Collection of Medicines against Venom, and the Pestilence, easy to be had,
and growing within our English Clymate.
ABrotanum, Sothernwood, Sothernwood.
a drachme of the seeds thereof with some of the leaves, being macerated in
white wind, adding thereunto a walnut, and bole Armoniack, and then strained
and drunk, it has a marvelous force against poison, and the pestilence. Ant.
Mizaldus.

Absinthium: Wormwood.
The powder of the leaves of wormwood eaten in the morning, opens the liver
that is obstructed, hinders putrefaction increasing in the stomache, and is a
most effectual preservative in the pestilence. Joan. Vochs de Colonia. Green
wormwood with salt eaten in the time of the pestilence, or the water thereof,
is drunk for a preservative.

Acetosa, Sorrel, is commended by Marsil. Ficinus in his sixth Chap. of
Epidinial diseases, Sorrel.
saying that sorrel has a marvelous force against the pestilence: if it be
macerated in vinigar, and taken in the morning it is an approved remedy:
neither shall it be amiss to report, what Ant. Guainerius has written hereof,
as touching the pestilence: Sorrel says he, has an excellent virtue against
the pestilence, as I have understood by a certain faithful friend, which was
sick of the same, which never changed place, but received help only by that
plant, whereof he received every day a bolus before dinner and supper, and gave
to every one of his household in like manner, and if there wanted green sorrel,
he took the dried powder thereof in white wind, and with all he sometimes used
the pills of Rufus against the pestilence, whereby he preserved himself and
his whole household from infection. pil. communes.
Ant. Mizald. in horto medico.

Pimpernel.
Anagallis, Pimpernel, both kinds of them are marvelous against the pestilence
being boiled in wine, or so used that the patient may drink half a draught,
and then be well covered in his bed that he may sweat, and so shall all
the venom be thereby expelled, Hieron. Trag. lib. 1. Historiae, plantarum.

Angelica, the root thereof is a singular remedy against poison, and against
the pestilence: a piece of the root held in the mouth or chewed, it dryueth
away the pestilent air.

Angelica is an enemy against poison, and cures pestilent diseases if it be
used in time, a dragme of the powder thereof is given in a draught of white
wine; but if the patient have a vehement fever, with the distilled water of
Carduus benedictus, or of tormentil, with a small quantity of vinegar, and
sometimes alone, or with Triacle of Andromachus.

Aron, Cuckopinte, the root thereof taken in meat, is very wholesome in time of
pestilence. Cuckopinte
Author est Plinius lib. 24. Cap. 16. The root is best that has spotted
leaves, whether it be dry or fresh bruised, and there must be a drachme
weight thereof at the least taken, and it is a present remedy against venom
and the pestilence. Some join thereunto as much Triacle of Venice. A spoonful
or more of the juice expressed, of the herb being drunk, has the same
faculty, and if to the same a little vinegar be admixte, it causes less
biting of the tongue. Tragus. lib. 2. Histor. Plant. et Tarq. Schneleberg.
Tract. de 20. Herbis pestilentiae veneno aduersantibus.

Arthemesia, Mugworte, Mugworte.
is very much commended against the pestilence by diverse well learned. They
take a bundle of Mugworte, and burn it unto ashes, and with four pintes of
running water they make a lixiuium, which must be put into anolde pot close
stopped, and set it over the fire that it may boil to the consumption of the
liquor, that which rests in the bottom like salt make trochisks of, of the
weight of a scruple, or half a drachme: dissolve one or two of those
trochisks, according to the strength of the sick in three ounces of the best
Malmsie, and let him drink it, and after he has drunk let him walk half an
hours space, then let him go to bed and sweat there two or three hours,
then shall he vomit and go to stool as though he had taken Antimony; in this
manner for the most part, all that have taken it in due time, before the venom
has gotten to the heart, have been delivered: this experiment is of Ambrose
Pareus, which he practiced in Paris.

Betonica, Betony: the leaves poudered and mixed with sugar in the form of a
dredge, Betony.
and used the weight of half a dram or a drachme, or the fresh leaves eaten
in the morning, is a great preservative. Gasperus Reglerus. If the leaves be
carried about the body they profit much. Manarclus. Betony does maruailously
avail against the putrefa and ion of the air, and resists venom.
Sauonar^lae.

He that will preserve himself from the contagion of the pestilent air, ^et
him take in the morning fasting, the powder of Betony with wine, or the
distilled water of Betony: it is tried and approved by many testimonies, and
especially by Ioannes Pistorius observed in his experiments. Tarq.
Schnellebergius. Betonie is good against the pestilence, and every venom. If
a man in time of pestilence, do take the powder of the leaves of Betony often
with wine, he shall purge the poison of the pestilence by vrin. Henr. Dobbin.

Bistorta, Snake-weede, the root being reduced into powder, Snake-weed
and a drachme thereof taken i^ drink, does resist the pestilent venom, and
expels the same through sweates. The same virtue has the distilled water:
and the decoction of the root in wine, is good for the same. Tragus lib. 1.
Histor. Plant. Brunswicencis gives an ounce of the water in the Morning. Bruns.

Butirum* Butter, in the time of the pestilence, it is a good preservative for
the household to eat in the morning a tossed and butter. Gasparus Reglerus.
Butter.
Some there are that take butter for a preservative in the beginning of their
meat. Anton. S^eberge^us.

Calendula, Marigold, Marigold.
does comfort and strengthen the heart, and withstandeth poison, and is good to
be taken any way against the pestilence. Fuchsius. Alexand. Benedict. tells
that he has proved by his own experience, that if from the beginning of a
pestilent ^euer, the patient drink two ounces of the juice or three at the
most, and then afterward be well covered with clothes to sweat, he shall be
delivered from the same, Symphor. Campegius. The distilled water of Marigolds,
does resist the pestilence, and venom: Iodothus Harchius.

Carduus benedictus, the blessed Thistle: The blessed Thistle.
the powder of the leaves ministered the quantity of half a drachme, is very
good against the pestilence, especially if it be received within twenty four
hours after the sickness is taken, so that the patient sweat upon the same:
the like virtue has the wine wherein the herb has been sodden. The Italians
make great account of this herb, especially against the pestilence. Mathiolus.
The powder of the leaves as much as will go into a walnut shell, being drunk
with wine, is a great preservative against the pestilence. The same virtue has
the leaves boiled in wine and drunk. Tragus lib. 2. Histor. Plant. et Adam.
Lonicerus.

Onion.
Cepa, the Onion: some give the juice of white onions with vinegar. Ma^sil. in
epid. Cap. 9. an onion with milk or butter being eaten, is very good in this
disease of the pestilence. Ant. Guainer. de peste diff. 2. Cap. 3. There are
some laboring men that before they go forth in the morning, are used to eat
a raw onion with salt and bread instead of Triacle, against the infectious
air, persuading themselves that then they were safe for that day, that used
this remedy: neither did their hope fa^le them, for it appeared by experience,
that as there was nothing more common, so there was nothing more effectual
against the distemperature of the air, for this is as good as a Triacle. Trag.
lib. 2. Histo. plantarum. Auicen shows that he which eats a raw onion
betimes in the morning fasting with milk, shall be all that day preserved from
Epidemial diseases.

Celidonsum, Celendine: the water of the greater Celendine, Celendine.
drives away venom from the heart by sweat, therefore it is good in the
pestilence. Ant. Famanellus.

Cichoria, Cichorie, Mars. Fic. in epid. Cap. 6. the wa-of Cichorie is drunk
against the pestilence. Cicoree.
F. Lym. in historia aquarum. The weight of an ounce, or half an ounce at a
time. Brunswe.

Doves dung
Col^mbarum stercus, Doves dung: it is holden that a sum made thereof is good
to deliver him that is infected, and to provoke vomit. Ant. Snelbergerus.

Comfry.
Consolida mayor, the greater Comfry: they say there are five herbs, very
conueniet in this case to be used both inwards and outward, which do resist
venom, and are is it were temperate, that is to say, Consolida mayor, Scabiosa,
Agrimonia, Britanica. Aristolochia, Mars. Ficinus in epidem. cap. 15. uses
these words, Some say that Consolida being bruised between two stones, cures
the Anthrax and Carbuncle by divine miracle. Joan. de Vigo. These three plants
are commended by all learned Physicians, to be applied upon the Anthrax or
Carbuncle, Morsus Diaboli, Scabiosa, and Consolida maier, if they may be had
fresh: bruise the Scabios and Consolida with a little salt, and fresh
pork-larde, and let it be applied hot, and remain for a day natural, in the
form of an Emplaster. Learned Chirurgians do teach, that these plants do
maruelously resist the Carbuncle, also if Comfry bruised between two stones be
applied. Joan. Crato.

Cornu ceruinum, Hearts horn: Hearts horn.
Some use the shauings of Hearts horn, or the bone found in the heart of the
Heart, for they hold opinion, that it strengthens the heart and preserves from
poison. Anton. Fumanellus. That same bone found in the heart is exceeding
precious against every venom, and is mixed with every Antidote that is
prepared against venom. Mathiolus. The first head or horn of the Heart, is
thought maruelously to resist venom, no less then does the Unicorns horn:
the bone of of the heart is very auailable against venom and the pestilence,
for so witnesses Andernacus.

The powder of the Hearts horn being often taken, does preserve from the
pestilence: the often drinking in a cup wherein is hearts horn, is a greater
help in the pestilence then any other medicin. Joan. Crato.

FINIS.
In page 111, line 5. for verum, read Veruin.


