The true Soldiers Convoy.

A Sermon preached upon the xvjth. day of May 1640, upon a prayer day, for the
Princes good success in going forth to war.

By WILLIAM BRIDGE.

Thou have broken Rahab in pieces as one that is slain, thou have scattered
thine enemies with thy strong arm. Psalm. 19. 10.

IN ROTTERDAM.

Printed for Thomas Lippagde and are to be sold at his house on the Iron
Bridge, 1646.

To the Reader.
REader; out of desire to the good of Gods people, and in respect of these
trouble-some times, it was thought not altogether unfit by some friends, to
print these few notes, in reading of which thou art desired not to expect much
compleatnes of dependency or style, as not being ordered to the press by the
author himself, but by a very weak hand: whatsoever therefore thou shall find
herein profitable, that improve: if any thing otherwise, that cover by
Christian love and the God of love be with thee Amen.

Numbers cha: 10. the middle of the 35 verse.
Rise up O Lord and let thine enemies be scattered.
THis chap. delivers it self into four parts.

First part the Author speaks of the silver Trumpets and of the matter and
use of them.

Secondly he shows the march of the children of Israel under their several
standards.

Thirdly he speaks of a conference had between Moses and Hobab verse. 29.

Fourthly you have Moses prayer: And they departed from the mount verse. 33. and
the Arc of the covenant of the Lord went before them in the three days
journey, etc: And it came to pass when the Arc set forward, that Moses said,
Rise up O Lord and let thine enemies be scattered, when they removed still they
prayed, when they set forth with their army, they used those words: Arise O
Lord and let thine enemies be scattered: when they returned with their army at
the latter end of the year, or at any time, they said, Return O Lord unto
the many thousands of Israel.

You have here their going forth, arise O Lord etc and it is as if he had said
thus: O Lord thou have promised thy presence to thy people and therefore thou
have given them thine Arc, the outward sign of thy presence, now we are to
go forth to war, and that is a dangerous work, oh let us not go alone
without thee, but let us have thy presence, wherefore arise O Lord and let
thine enemies be scattered; He does not say thus, O Lord we entreat thee, give
us good munition or good provision, or (that which the world calls the nerves
of wa^re) give us money, but as if he would show that Gods presence is most
desirable to an army, and that Gods presence is their munition and provision
and contains all things, he says Arise O Lord etc.

These words contain some thing employed, and something expressed: implied two
things.

First that God has enemies, that seems to be granted.

Secondly that God sleeps to his enemies, therefore he says arise, these
implied: expressed three things.

First the matter of the petition, and that is that God would arise.

Secondly the effect of Gods rising, that his enemies may be scattered.

Thirdly the occasion of this petition, that is their going forth to war:
from these words, then Moses said Accordingly there are f^ue notes or
observations that I intend (God willing) to run through at thi^ time.

First that God himself has many enemies.

Secondly as God has enemies, so sometime he sleeps to all their enmity.

Thirdly though God sleeps and they work, yet there is a time when they
shall be scattered, and when God arises, they are scattered.

Fourthly our prayers awaken God.

Fifthly, when the people of the land go forth to war, Gods people should go
forth to prayer

First, God himself has many enemies, Let none wonder at this, nay rather
wonder that God has any friends in the world it is so wicked, the Scripture
is full for it, in that Psalm. 8: verse. 2. Out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings have thou ordained strength because of thine enemies. Psalm 37. 20.
But the wicked shall perish and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat^ of
lambs. Psalm. 74. 4. Thine enemies roar, etc. Ye know the Psalm. For lo thine
^nemies O Lord, for lo thine enemies. Ps. 9^. 9


Rea 1. Those that a^e in league and covenant one with another, have common
friends and common enemies. Gods children are in covenant with God, and
therefore they having enemies, God has enemies,

the flesh lusts against the spirit and the spirit against the Gal. 5. 17.
flesh, for they are contrary: take but this one instance in this matter of
contrariety, to see how contrary God and the godly are to the Devil and the
wicked. Let a thing be never so bad, God and the godly will turn it to good
and Gods honor: Let a thing be never so good, the Devil and wicked men will
turn it to bad and Gods dishonor: now enmity being nothing else but enlivened
contrariety, and there being such a contrariety between God and the world, it
cannot be but that God should have many enemies, has more.

incomplying in all his ways therefore certainly God himself must needs have
many enemies; and very deadly: Inimices habeo
the complainte of a heathen man, I have enemies, his friend standing by gave
him this answer, but that ^s worse that thou have no friends, though sed pejus
est quod amicos non habes.
a man have many enemies, yet if he has some faithful friends he may comfort
himself thus, though I have most bitter and vile enemies, yet I have as fast
and sure friends: so that here is a further argument to shore up our
unbeleeuing hearts God himself has many enemies.



of the breakers of any of the other commandments that they are haters of God,
but of those that break the second commandment: visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me: so that though they pretend most love yet they are the most haters.



himself has many enemies: the second observation is,

As the Lord has many enemies, so he is pleased for a time to sleep un^^ his
enemies: he sleeps, therefore it is said here arise: arising is opposed to
sleeping, Lord why sleep Ps. 44. 23.
thou? but what is that? not that we should understand it literally, for so the
Prophet derided Baals Priests; cry aloud it may be your God 1. King 1^. 27.
sleeps: but understand it metaphorically: A man is said to be a sleep when
he is so intense about one business that he does not regard another, that
business which he does not meddle with he is said to be a sleep to: so now
when God shall have many enemies, and they shall blaspheme his name and revile
his people, and hinder his ordinances: and God shall be deaf to all their
blasphemies reuilings, and all their wickedness when they shall persist in
evil and bring their ^^cked devises to pass, and yet God shall be as it were
blind to all their dealings, then God sleeps to the enmity of his enemies:
would you know the reasons?

First of all, it may be the enemies are not yet great enough for God to
contend with: the Eagle does not hunt after flies, and a lion does not harness
himself to battle against a poor worm: it may be the malice of the enemy
is not yet great enough, and so is not a sit object for the great
indignation of the great God, and therefore God suffers them, to go on that
it might be a greater and a more full object to bear his indignation.

stirred enough against their enemies to cut them of fully when that is done
then God awaketh.

Woe to him that Hab. 2. 19.
says to the stone arise, shall God arise to his people when they say to the
stone, arise? Shall God arise for his people when they sit down, and rise not
up themselves? Brethren faith is prayer in the coals, and prayer is faith in
the fla^e: now it may be men's faith does not burn out enough, it burns dark,
they pray, but are not hot in prayer, they live, but they do not live out of
themselves in God enough, wherefore that God may awaken his people, he sleeps
himself.

Fourthly, sometimes it is for this end, because the pit of his enemies is not
yet dug: consider that 94. Psalm. 12. 13. Blessed is the man whom thou
chastenest O Lord, and teach him out of thy law that thou may give him
rest from the days of adversity, until the pit be dug for the wicked,
there is a time when the pit of the wicked is digging, and all that time Gods
people may be in suffering, God suffers the wicked to run away with the
bait, and does not yet draw them, because they are not full on the hook, but
when they have swallowed the hook, then he will draw them.

thou not that we perish? so it is many times when a storm arises upon the
Church, God seems to sleep, and we run in have to God, and are apt to charge
God: Lord carest thou not that we perish, but peace peace, he sleeps only, he
will awake shortly, you shall see it, and they shall feel it, for the third
point tells us that.

Though God seem to sleep, and his enemies prevail, yet there ^s a time when
they shall be scattered, and when God arises they are scattered: there are
twop arts in this doctrine, J will handle them severally.

First. Though the enemies of the Lord do prevail, and God seems to sleep,
yet there is atime when they shallbe scattered: In that 68. Psalm. 1. You have
the same words tha^ are here: Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered, in
the following part of the Psalm, 12. verse. it is said, King sofarmies did flee
apace, in the Hebrew it is they fled they fled, fled is twice, why so? That
is, they did flee very hastily, and they fled most confusedly, they fled
always, they fled, they fled, noting the greatness of the flight. Reasons:

He will wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, so that a Psalm. 58 10.
man shall say verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God
that judges in the earth: But did they not know it before that God rules in
the earth? True, But men will not say all that for God always which their
hearts know; and the glut of prosperity often does quench their knowledge, but
when Gods judgments are abroad then men shall say (he does not say godly men;
but then men shall say) though they be but bare me^ they shall say etc. Oh it
is a sweet time when ungodly men shall own their own principles, and if you
look into the Psalm, you Ps 68. 11
shall find when the enemies of the Church are destroyed, that God has many
prechers made that do teach his praises, says the Psalmist ver. 12. The Lord
gave the word great was the company of those that published it: Kings of
armies did flee apace, and she that tarried at home divided the spoil. The
words in the original are very significant and do note two things: (Nephesh
soul) is to be understood as in that place of Ecclesiastes, it is said there
The words or book of the Preacher. Eccl. 11,
which being in the feminine gender does suppose Nephesh and as if he should
say (as Vatablus has it) the words or book of him that has a preaching soul
or heart, or the words of a preaching soul or heart, so here where it is said
great is the the army of preachers, the word being in the feminine gender, it
is as if he should say, great is the army of preaching souls, whose very
hea^ts with in them shall preach of the Lords works, now my brethren it is
much to have a preaching army, but if this army shall with heart and soul
preach of Gods praise, O that is a blessed thing: yet thus shall it be when
the enemies of God shall be destroyed, and therefore seeing God will not loose
all those sermons of his own praises, in due time the enemie^s of the Church
shall be scattered.

curse, now the curse scatters, and the bleffing gathers, when God blessed,
then the people were gathered, when God curses, then they are scattered: you
know when Jacob was to bless his children, in stead of blessing Levi, he
seems Ge. 49. 7
to pronounce a curse upon them, that they should be scattered in Ifrael,
surely it is a part of the curse to be scattered, and the enemies of God and of
his people are always under the curse, and (as a learned holy divine of your
own has it) they are never prayed for, but look as it is with some grass
that grows upon the house top, though it be higher then that which grows
in the field, yet noe man prays for it, or not man says, the Lord bless it,
but the grass and corn that grows in the field, the men that come by say;
there is a good crop of corn the Lord bless it, so though wicked men and the
enemies of the Church do perke up higher then the rest; yet they are never
under prayer, but always under the curse; and therefore no wonder though they
be scattered:

Psalm. 59. Psa. 59.
you shall see how sin is answered with the like punishment, the Psalmist
speaking concerning his enemies ver. 6. 7. They return at evening they make a
noise like a dog and go round about the city, behold they belch out with their
mouth, swords are in their lips, that is, they revile, they jeare and scorn
at the godly there is their sin, now look into the latter end of the Psalm at
the 14. verse. you shall see their answerable punishment, And at evening they
shall return and make a noise like a dog, and go about the city, let them
wander up and down for meat and grudge if they be not satisfied as they went
about the city barking and making a nois like dogs so shall they go about the
city howling like dogs, thus God will answer men in their own kind: was not
Adonibezek punished in his own Jud. 1. 7
kind? Egypt in its own kind? And the Jews of old in their own now kind?
this is Gods method still, and therefore if you compare the 8 Rev. and 9. cha.
with the 16 of the Rev. You shall see that the trumpets and the vialls are
alike, and some take them to be all one; but the trumpets note out the time
when the sins are committed, and the vialls the time when the punishments are
inflicted, but the evils mentioned in both are much alike, because God
proportioneth men's punishment to their own sins, now the ene^ies of the Church
have scatterd themselves up and down to do mischief, how are the Jesuits and
the locusts of our time scattered up and down in all places? they have
scattered Gods people and they scatter their own sins wheresoever they
become, therefore there must come a scattering time for themselves also for
that is equal.

You will say do we not see the contrary? our eyes are witnesses of the
contrary, we s^e the people of God are scattered, but we do not see the
enemies are scattered.

It is true: Gods people are scattered, and truly it is the remainder of the
curse upon them, for which we are to be humbled, though God provides a place
for us in the world yet certainly it is some part of the curse to have our
names changed from Israel to Jezreel: this is Gods way, that what ^uill he
does afterward bring upon his enemies, he does many times, first bring it upon
his own friends, by his and their enemies, he first sleeps to them, then
he awaketh for them; but to answer; Gods people are often scattered but though
they be scattered, yet there is much difference between their and the worlds
scattering: The scattering of Gods children is turned into a blessing to them,
the scattering of his enemies is a curse and so it ends, a plain instance
for it you have in Levi, says Jacob Let them be divided Gen 29. 7.
in Jacob and scattered in Israel, yet that proved a great blessing, for the
tribe of Levi being scattered among all the tribes, by that means all the
tribes had preachers: so now it is in the scattering of the Saints, though
they b^ scattered into diverse places, yet they are made thereby a blessing to
many countries: hereby they carry truths into other places; hereby they are
cleansed from their own filthiness, herby they learn to walk more humbly,
herby they learn to dye daily to the world and outward comforts, herby they are
weaned from their friends and all natural engagements; hereby they are made
more conformable to Jesus Christ, who was a stranger upon earth hereby they
meet with many experiences, hereby they see many promises fullfilled, here by
they enjoy the ordinances of God in a purer manner then before, so that all
their scatterings are blessings to them.

For great shall Hos. 1. 11.
be the day of Jezreel. yet more fully Ier 23 2 3 4 Therefore thus says ye Lord
God of Israel against the Pastors that feed my people, ye have scattered my
flock and driven the^ away and have not visited them, Behold J will visit upon
you the evil of your doing, says the Lord, And J will gather the remnant of
my flock out of all countries whether I have driven them, and will bring them
again to their foldes, and they shall be f^uitfull and increase, and I will
set up shephards over them which shall feed them, and they shall fear no more
nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, says the Lord. Yea they are
therefore scattered that they may be better gathered. 34. Ezekiel: 11. 17. Thus
says the Lord God, Behold I even I will both search my sheep and seek them
out as a shepherd seeks out his flock in the day that he is among his
sheep that are scattered, thus says the Lord God, behold I judge between
cattle and cattle, between the rams and the he goats, before their
scattering the goats were mingled with the flock; upon their gathering, the
goats were separated: a good garment may be ripped into pieces, that it may be
better sewed, good is that speech of Augustine, He that Qui true cidat
nonconsiderat quomomodo laniat, Qui curat considerat quomodo s^cat.
kills considers not how he slasheth and rendeth, but he that cutteth to
cure, considers how he cutteth, or thus, Suppose a man be to cut two men; the
one to cure him, the other to kill him, that man which he cutteth to cure, he
considers how he cutteth him, but he takes no care how he slasheth him whom
he intends to kill, so does God deal in the cuttings and scatterings of his
own children, and the vile world: or thus, an army you know, may be scattered
two ways, The Soldiers when they come from their trenches, every one goes to
his hutt, and the whole army is in some measure scattered and divided, but in
order, this is an orderly scattering: but when they are routed, that is another
scattering, wherein there is no order, Gods people are scattered as those that
go to their huts, but the wicked are scattered otherwise, their scattering is a
full routing, that is never gathered, this is the punishment of the enemies of
the Church, they shall be scattered.

venom of their teeth shall abide in them to all eternity. the text says as
for those mine enemies etc. It is some grief to be slain before justice, but
before mercy it self, that is more grevious, it is some grief to be slain
before those that cannot help: but to have help stand by and not help, that is
most bitter, such is Christ, he is our help, he is our merciful high Priest,
and yet he says, As for those mine enemies which would not that I should reign
over them, bring Luke 19 27
hither and slay them before me, oh what a sad thing it is to be Gods enemy.

Quest. But who are those enemies?

Answ. You will all say thus, that if a man sees the picture of another, and
as soon as he sees it, he falls a tearing of it, and the more like the
picture is to the man, the more he teareth it: surely this man was an enemy to
him whom the picture is like unto, so when men shall fall a tearing of Gods
people, and therefore because they are godly, are not they enemies to God?

Psalm. 68. 21. there is a plain place to show you who are Gods enemies, says
the Psalmist, But God shall wound the head of his enemies and the hairy Psalm.
68. 21.
scalp of such an one as goes on still in his trespasses. Such as go on still
in their trespasses, are Gods enemies, there is no child of God but may and
does fall into sin, he may ^aile in his speech, and in his practice, but it is
the character 1 Ioh. 5. 19
of the world to ly in wickedness. and therefore know you such an one as has
been a drunkard and a drunkard still, a swearer, eight, nine, or ten years
ago, and a swearer still, a Sabbath-breaker, a liar, an adulterer a great while
ago, and so still, that man is an enemy, and in due time the Lord will wound
the hairy scalpe of such a ruffian, for he is an enemy.

longs to him, of the churches and of all the ordinances, but when men hear
of good news of the Churches, and of the ordinances, and do secretly grudge,
repine and wish it otherwise, these are now secret enemies, and will be open.

Lord make plain thy way before Ps. 5. 8.
my face, because of mine enemies. in the Hebrew it is, Lord make plain thy way
before me, because of my observers, malicious observation is a sign of enmity,
and therefore when men shall diligently observe, and lay wait for the haltings
of Gods people, and are glad to find any thing to raise a scandal, more
rejoicing at the scandal, then greeving for the sin: those (as beasts Quitan
quam famelici porci immergunt se, in stercora sanctorum et exjis delicias
faciunt Luther in Genesis 9.
which seek for the excrements of men to nuzzle in them) are Gods enemies, and
God is theirs

Fifthly. Those that hinder the great proceedings, that God has in the world,
are his enemies, In the restoration and rebuilding of the Temple, God had many
enemies: Tobiah, Sanballat, and many others; how did it appear? they did out
of malice labor to make the work of God to cease: so when men in their
generations and times, shall 5 Nehem. 6. 1.
maliciously labor to cause the works of God to cease, and hinder the great
proceedinges, which God has on foot in the world, these are enemies and none
but enemies, now God is and has been working of many great works in the
world; if any man's heart tell him that he has thus taken up arms against God,
let him lay down his weapons, and humble himself, for God will be above him,
God is greater, and will break him; The second part of the doctrine follows.
viz.

That these enenmies, when God arises, are scattered; Gods rising is the cause
of their scattering.

all his followers arise, and when they arise the enemies fly, and so are
scattered.

Ps. 68. 2.
wax may lie a while there and not melt whilst the fire is not blown up, yet
when the fire flameth, the waze melts; they are compared to the Jude. 13.
waves of the Sea, that roar whilst they are in the Sea, yet when they come
to the shore, they break; they are compared to smoke, which though Psa. 68. 2.
it rise like a dark cloud, yet is soon scattered and consumed by the puff of
the wind; they are compared to vapors, Hos. 13 3.
mists and clouds: which though they may seem to threaten the earth with some
great sto^m, yet when the sun arises in its full heat, then are they
scattered, such wax such waves, such smoke, such vapors and mists are the
Lords enemies; soon therefore scattered when he arises.

Object. But though it may be easy (in regard of Gods power) to scatter the
enemies of the Churches; yet when we look upon the condition of the Churches,
as they are in themselves, their deliverance is very difficult, it is an
unlikly thing that the distressed Churches should be delivered as the matter
now stands with them, when were the enemies of the Church more prevailing
then now they are?

Answ. So it must be; what is more unlikely, then that a dead man who lies
upon the graves mouth, should be raised up to life, and to such life as to
ascend, and go up to heaven, yet such is the deliverance of the Church when it
comes; Reu. 11. 12. It was Rev. 11 12.
a very unlikely thing, that Judah should ever come out of Babylon, the Jews
did despair of it, and therefore as a man that thinks he shall never return
the way that he goes, takes no heed to his way, observes not by what
turnings, windings and marks he comes: so were they in their journey and way
to Babylon: wherefore says Jeremy, Set thee up way marks, make Jeremy 31. 21
and 22.
thee high heaps, set thine heart toward the high way: even the way which
thou wentest, turn thee again oh virgin Israel: turn again to these cities
etc. For the Lord has created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass
a strong man: as if he should say thus, you think your seleus in a very weak
and low condition, the enemy strong, and you in their hands, well, but the time
shall come, that a woman shall lay siedge to a strong man: Faemina virum fortem
Angustiabit, Ps. 1 18.
for that word read to compass, in the Hebrew signifies also to compass by
way of Siedge, and that word read man (in your translations) signifies a
strong man, and the sense of all is, that those which are as weak as women,
shall beset, incompasse and beleaguer those that are strong and valiant men,
but we see no likelihood might they say of this, No, it may be so, but says
God, I will do a new thing: but there is no means.

Answ. It mattereth not, J will create a new thing: I that drew once the world
out of nothing, will draw the deliverance of the Churches also out of nothing:
I will be a creating God to the Churches though they be never so low, was it
not an unlikly thing for Peter to be delivered that very night Acts 12. 5. 6.
when he was to die the next day; First he was in close prison, Secondly he was
fast in chains Thirdly he was there kept with Soldiers. Fourthly he had rough
keepers to keep the prison doors. Fifthly he had to go through the first and
second watch. Lastly he was to pass the i^on gate that leads into the city,
yet prayer conveyed him through all these parties of opposition, the Church
prays and Peter comes, but what is this to us? we may not expect miracles
now. Ans. yes, we even we are commanded to commit our souls into the hands of
1. Pet. 4. 19.
God in well doing, as unto a faithful creator: not as unto a redeemer only,
but of a creator, who has promised his creating strength to supply us in our
distresses, and therefore says, into the hands of a faithful creator; well
then, though the afflictions of the Churches be never so great, let us not
mourn as those that are without hope, for God can do it with ease, and much
facility: he is our creator he will do it in truth, and in much faithfulness
for he is our faithful creator, into whose hands we are to commit our selves
and the condition of all the Churches.

Rev. 22. 8. he fell down and trembled: Rev. 2 2 8.
John was a good man, he had not a guilty Conscience, yet when an Angel did
but appear: John falls down, how shall men tremble when the great God shall
appear, and they shall appear before him in all their guiltiness, surely they
will tremble and fear then, and that their fear will end in scattering.

I will rend the cawle of their Hos 13 8. Judge. 16. 9.
heart and there will I devour them like a lion: was it not an easy thing for
Samson in all his strength to break those cords and withs where with he was
tied, Jesus Christ is our spiritual Samson, and though his body the Church be
bound with the withs and cords of the Philistims, yet he can easily arise,
crack, and break, them in pieces, though they be never so strong, Is it not
an easy thing for a man to open his hand, God opens his hand and we are
satisfied, Is it not an easy thing for a man to set his face against another?
God only sets his face against his enemies and they are scattered, O with
what infinite facility can God help the church: if his servants had noe credit
with him, or if he could not help them but with much difficulty, there were
room for our discouragments, ^ut it is not so he speaks the word only,
hisseth, stampeth, ^iseth and we are helped.

when the hand Isa. 26 11
^ the Lord is lif^ed up on high ^ey will not behold his Maies^ An other are
those that the Psalmist strikes at in the 2 psa 10 verse: Be wise therefore O
ye Ps, 2.
Kings verse 12 kiss the son least he be angry and ye perish in the way,
who seeing and observing God fetching his stroke at a land or people, will not
stand out of Gods way, and reach; the third sort are those that degrade the
works of God and nickname them, saying they are none of Gods works but works
of Satan, like the Jews and Pharisees who when Lazarus was raised from the
grave by a miracle would have killed Lazarus out of spite to Christ, so these
men when God has wrought gloriously for the conversion of a poor sinner, or
the destruction of his vile enemies, do what they can to put Gods work to
death, calling that hipocricy which is Gods grace, that obstinacy which is good
conscience, and that chance which is Gods glory; But let all these consider
that one place in the Ps. 28. 5. because they regard not the works of the Lord
nor the operation of his hands he shall destroy them, and not build them up
there is more in it then we are aware of; who does not desire to be build up;
wherefore do many men of knowledge and learning study and take so much pains
wearing out their flesh, but that they may be built up in name and credit,
wherefore do you trade up and down the world but that you may be built up in
your estate, and what is that which men fear more then destruction;
destruction is final ruin, now my brethren if the great works of the Lord
be done before you and you do not observe them, you cannot be built up, and if
you will not attend the operation of the Lords hands you shall be destroyed;
Gods judgments will take hold on those that will not give heed to his
judgments, a man may be destroyed for not observing another destruction, it is
a fearful^ judgment to have no judgment, and he has no judgment that does
not mind the Lords judgment, it is mad^ the Character of the Saints i^ the
latter times of the worl^ that they are able to sing t^ song of Moses the
servant ^ God and the song of the La^ saying, Great and marvelous a^ Rev. 15 3.
4.
thy works Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of
Saints: who shall not fear thee O Lord and glorify thy Name, for thou only
art holy, for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy Judgments
are made manifest.

Quest, But suppose evil befall other men, it may be that it falls out by
common providence, how shall I say that God is risen, and to be seen, and seen
specially in a judgment, and when may a judgment be said to come in way of a
judgment.

Answ. First when wicked men are snared in the works of their own hands, then
God is seen, and seen apparently Psalm. 9. 16. The Ps. 9. 16
Lord is known by the judgment he that he executes, the wicked is snared in
the work of his own hands. Higgajon Selah: there is not such a clause again,
in all the whole scripture that J remember, you have Selah in many places, but
you have not those two words Higgajon Selah in any other place: the word
Higgajon comes from the Hebrew word Hagah that signifies to meditate, and
Higgajon is Meditandum aliquid, a thing worth our meditation, or as much as if
he should say, this is a matter of special meditation, that God is to be known
by the judgment that he executes, when the wicked are snared in the work of
their own hands, whe^^ therefore wicked men begi^ a work against the people o^
God, and it wheeleth about upon their own heads, insomuch as they are taken
and snared in their own practices, then God is seen specially, and known by
the judgment that he excecuteth. Higgajon Selah.

Answ. 2. Then God is specially to be seen, when the judgment lies beyond the
reach of second causes, and is greater then the stock of the second cause c^n
bear, Samsons strength was a judgment to the Philistines, How was God to be
seen in that? yes, for Samson was the strongest man that ever was, yet his
mother (when she was breeding him) was commanded to drink no wine, or strong
drink, Judges 13. 4.
nor to eat any unclean thing: (which also did include strong meat) God would
not have Samsons strength imputed to the strength of second causes, out of the
weak came strong, the second cause was not able to bear so strong effect, ^his
strength was their judgment, their vexation, their scourge, and this their
judgment lay beyond the reach of the second cause, therefore was God seen
herein apparently: where there is any thing of Gods creating power, there is
God plainly to be seen, now where the effect lies beyond the bounds of the
second cause, Gods creating power is seen for to raise that, and therefore if
in any evils, which befall the children of men, the strength of the second
cause cannot reach them, there you may say: Oh my soul here is Gods judgment,
Gods plague, Gods hand, h^re is God seen, and seen specially, here God is risen.

Answ. 3. When Gods judgments for men's sin, do so find them out, as they are
their own blabs, their own accusers, their own condemners, and sometime their
own executioners, then God is to be seen, and seen especially: so with Judas,
and many others it is written of Julian the apostata, (who raised an army
against the Persians, in the fight he was st^ucken, whether with an arrow or
otherwise J say not, but) being sorely wounded, he took a handful of his own
blood, and flung it into the air, saying: Vicisti Galilee, thou have overcome
me O Galilean: you have many stories to this purpose in the book of Martirs,
recorded by Master Fox: J will name but that one, of that vile wretch, who
dealt so injuriously with the Martyr James Abbes, who after all his base usage
of that good man, was taken with a strange kind of Phrenzy, and cried out James
Abbes is saved and I am damned, James Abbes is saved and I am damned, and so
died: others were not privy to all his injuries, but his own guilt made him
his own blab, so now when a man's sin comes, and aresteth him, and his heart
and conscience is upon the rack contially, he bursting out into hideous
outcries, being his own accuser, his own condemner, or his own executioner,
there God is seen, and seen apparently.

Answ. 4. Further when the work of the Lord is carried with such a strong
hand, as cannot be resisted, there God is seen: I will work, and who Jsa. 43 13
shall let says God.

Answ. 5. Then a judgment comes in way of a judgment, when it makes way to a
further judgment, as when God gives in mercy, he gives that he may give, so
when he smites injudgment, he smites that he may smite, he makes way to his
anger, when he is angry indeed, and when you see this: then say, here is God
seen and seen especially, now God is risen, Blessed are all they that trust
in him.

Quest. But how shall we raise God, that he may be seen in the world, for the
good of the Churches?

Answ. The next point tells us: viz. what authority it does all, it will show
you its commission in that place: 2. Chron. 7. 1. 2 compared with 2. Chron. 6.
Where God wrought a miracle, to show that he would answer prayer.

Quest. But you will say, can any prayer do this, excite, stir up and awaken
God?

Answ. 1. No; But it must be a crying prayer, if violence be offered to a man
in his house, and he does not cry for help, help comes not in presently,
but if there be the eues in the house, and he puts his head out at window,
and cry murder, murder, men will break up the doors, and come in presently.

Answ. 2. Besides, they must be selfwakening prayers, that prayer will never
waken God, that does not waken your selves, and that prayer will never stir
and raise God, that do not stir and raise your own souls.

Exo: 32 10: 14.
would consume Israel, and raise up him, to be a great people. Moses lays by
all that, and he goes to God in prayer, and what arguments does he use, his
prayer was but short, and all the arguments were fetched from God, and the
covenant, remember thy covenant with Abraham, and thou art a merciful God,
slow to anger. etc. not a word of himself, it was a self-denying prayer, and
was heard presently, in prayer, those arguments take most with God, that are
from God.



If y^ John 15
abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what you will, and it
shall be done unto you: he does not say if you abide in an tavern or in an
alehouse, or in such a vile course, but If ye abide in me, and my words abide
in you, then ye shall ask.

Virtutes sunt orationis fundamenta there is no energy in those prayers that
are not strengthened with reformation, either your prayers will eat up your
sins, or else your sins will make a hand of your prayers Isai. 58. 6. Loose the
bands of wickedness Isa. 58* 6.
etc. Then shall thou call and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he
shall say here am I; if thou etc. Though the lesson be never so good, yet if
the instrument be out of tune, there is no harmony, and harmonious prayer is
very speeding therefore.

prayer, it was holding prayer, for they continued, it was seasonable, for it
was the night before his appointed death, yet withal the Church prays, and
Peter comes, one string does not make the harmony, and the word is, If two or
three of you shall Mat. 18. 16.
make a Symphony Mat. 18. 19 It shall be done for you: God that is overcome by
none, suffers Deus qui nullis contrase superari potest precibus superatur
Hieron.
himself to be overcome by prayer, but your prayer must be full of himself,
pressing and a close leaguer, wherefore all you lie perdue, keep Centinell, or
to speak in Scripture phrase Isay 62. 6. 7. All you that are watchmen upon the
walls of Jerusalem, all the day and all the night continually, cease not, ye
that are mindful of the Lord, keep not, ye that are mindful of the Lord,
keep not silence, And give him no rest, till he repair, and until he set up
Jerusalem the praise of the Lord.

Use Will prayer do it? Will prayer raise God, for the scattering of the
enemies of the Churches? J beseech you in the name of God, let us consider
where to lay the fault, and the blame of much of that evil, which is come upon
the Churches, in these latter times when the defeat was lately before Antwerpe
there was fault laid on such a man, and such a man, when we consider the
afflictions of Germany, we are ready to say, if such a King or country had
stepped in, all this evil had been prevented, the Palatinate restored, and
peace settled, but may we not rather say, if our prayers had stepped in, This
word tells us, that our prayers do awaken God, and when God is awakened, then
the enemies are destroyed, we see then in truth where the fault lies, our
prayers have not come in full enough, wherefore the less we have prayed
before, the more let us pray now, pray in your closets, pray in your families,
pray in the assemblies, pray alone, pray in company, pray for all the Churches,
pray for Germany, the first place of reformation, pray for Holland your hiding
place, and in all your prayers forget not England, still pray for England, take
some motives,

if you pray not; it is reported of Croesus his son, that he was dumb: and
seeing one about to kill his father, though he had been always dumb before,
yet then he burst forth into this speech, what will you kill Croesus? If you be
in Christ, the Church of Christ is more to you then many Croesusses; your grace
does not extinguish nature, but advance it, help, and not hinder, a gracious
heart cannot be unnatural though it loves to be supernatural.

to help that on, Oh Lord says the soul, help me, I will help thee; I will
put my shoulder unto thy work, as thou art pleased to put thy hand to my duty;
now the great work which God is doing in these times, is the pouring out of the
seven vials, Rev. 16. and if you look into the Rev. 5. 8. You shall find that
the saints prayers are their vials, help forward then Gods vials, with your
vial, vial does call for vial.

have the comfort of it, when it comes, or else that you may not envy at those
that have prayed, for it is a hard thing for one that stands Idle, not to
envy at him that works.

He that loves Jerusalem, prayeeh for the peace of Jerusalem: Do you love
England? Do you love Germany? Do ye love Holland? Do you love the Churches,
and your friends? He that loves Jerusalem, prays for it, and if you do not
pray for them, you have no love to them.

you cannot prosper if you pray not for the Churches, will you not pray then?

to pity the dust and stones of fallen Jerusalem: says he, thy servants pity
the dust thereof, as if they were not servants that have no pity, I know you
would not have your livery taken from you, all things of the like nature
sympathize with one auother, if you have the same nature with the Saints, you
shall, you will, you must sympathyze with them in all conditions you cannot but
pray.



a carnal selfe-ish spirit is very loathsome in what is spiritual, and what
are you the better for your rich cabin, your warm cabin, your neat cabin,
if your ship sink.

Nehemiah 1. 2. There you find it written, Neh. 13 1. 2.
that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not come into the Congregation of God
for ever: what was the reason? because they met not the children of Israel with
bread and with water. He that will not meet with distressed Israel, with such
relief as he may, is an unfit man to have a name in a Church of Christ, and it
is unfit he should come into the house of God for ever, wherefore as ever you
desire to have a name in Gods house, pray, pray, oh now pray, you may with this
bread and water meet with Israel, and in meting with them, you do meet with
Christ.

Fugiantia sequimur.
the time may come it may not be purchased or bought in by prayer. J remembcr I
have read of a man that brought the book of the Sibils unto the Emperor or
King of the Romans, and desired a great price for those books, the Emperor
refused, he goes away, burns half the books doubled the price, and then
comes to the Emperor, and offered him them at that rate, the emperor
refuses again, he went away, and burnt the half of those books which were
left, and doubled the price, which the Emperor considering, gave him the whole
money which he desired, so now it may be, you may have the welfare, the peace,
the life of the Churches for prayer, time may come wherein though you add to
your prayer, your estates, to your estates, your liberties, to your liberties,
all your welfares, and to your welfares your lives, yet you may go without it,
now it may be had at this good rate, will you not take this good commodity
whilst it is offered to you?

Tenthly It may be the business 10.
of the Churches stays upon your prayer, if that midwife would come away, the
woman would be delivered, Reu. 7. Four Angels were Reu. 7.
sent out to punish the world, and after that a fifth Angel is commissioned to
go bid them hold their hand, till the servants of the living God are sealed in
their foreheades: Angels work must stay, till they be sealed says Hezekiah.
Is. 37 3. This day is a day of trouble, Isay 37 ^.
and of rebuke, and of blasphemy, for the children are come to the birth, and
there is not strength to bring forth. So say I brethren, it may be the Lord
your God will hear the words of all Rabshakahs, whom the enemies of the Church
have employed to reproach the living God and will reprove the words, which the
Lord your God has heard, wherefore lift up your p^^yer for the rem^ant that
are left, God said to Moses, let me alone, but to you otherwise, why do you
let me alone, I stay for you, if you pray earnestly, I will come quickly.

Genesis 32 24. and 33. 10. Isa. 54 26. 17 58. 14:
meet with rough Esau, then remember what one nights sweating in prayer did,
how it first obtained the face of God, then of Esau, the promise is made to
you, Jf every promise is a new footstep for prayer, wherefore you that ever
prayed, pray now, nay you that never prayed, pray now, now is a praying time,
and it is good pulling whilst God is coming, begging whilst God is giving,
and has God dealt out nothing to the Churches in these last times? Do but
observe which way the wheel turns, in these latter days.

Quest. But why do you exhort us to pray? we are here purposely, and come to
pray.

Answ. True, we are so, but we must pray at other times too, we are here this
day to pray, that we may pray hereafter, that we may set wheels of prayer on
going, prayer does fit for prayer, but yet pray for the present, and so we come
to the fifth note.

Obser. 5 When the people of the land go forth to war, the of the Lord should
go forth to prayer, when the Arc removed, then said Moses, Arise O Lord etc.
our prayers are to lead Armies into the field. 1. Josh. 17. see how the people
lead forth Joshua, According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will
we hearken unto thee, only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.
you know the prayer of Asa, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and other worthies, to this
purpose, reasons of it, are these especially.

Reas. 1. Every business is to be led forth by prayer, prayer is a leading
duty, to all our dut^es, and the greater any business is, the more prayer is
to be made, the business of war is a great business, almost miraculous,
when I see an Army, methinks I see a company of walking Towns, it is a great
matter, and will you not have so great a business led on by prayer.

Object. But if a man have a business to do, which requires have, by
attending to prayer, he may loose his business.

Answ. For that purpose, consider but that one place, in answer to this, Josh.
5. 2. In the foregoing chapter the children of Israel went through Jordan and
came into their enemies country, and in this verse the Lord said unto Joshua,
Make thee sharp knives, and circumcise again the children of Israel the
second Joshua 5. 2.
time, now upon their circumcision they were sore, wherefore verse. 8. it is
said, They abode in their places in the camp, till they were whole. Now being
come through Jordan, and lying before Jericho, among all their enemies, the
natives could not but hear that they were circumcised, and how sore they were,
insomuch as the children of Israel might have objected and said, Oh Lord, if we
be circumcised, we shall hinder our designs, weaken our selves, advantage our
enemies, that they may fall upon us in our trenches, but as the Lord commanded,
so did they, they were circumcised, neither did this act of Religion hinder
their business, and therefore let none say, If I stay upon prayer, my
business will take despair, No no, precedent prayer will make it prosper,
trust God, and you will find it.

Reas. 2. Salamon says, All things are beautiful in Eccles. 3 1. 11.
their season: there is a time for all things: therefore a time for prayer, and
though we are to pray continually, yet there is sometime, wherein we are
especially to draw near to God; says the Psalmist: For this shall every one
that is Psalm 32 6.
godly, pray unto thee, in a time that thou may be found, Grace makes one
pray, the wisdom of grace makes one know the occasion, season, and time of
prayer.

Psalmist; At what time I am afraid, J will trust in thee, and true faith soon
works it self into prayer.

Zeph. 2. 3. Seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the earth, if so be that ye may be
hid in the day of the Lords wrath, etc. when the world labors under
uncertainty, then should the Saints labor in prayer, Again the morning time
is a time of prayer. Ps. 5. 3. My voice shall thou hear Ps. 5 3.
in the morning, O Lord in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee. There
is a morning of every year, as well as a morning of every day: there is a
morning to every business, as well as a morning to every day; now is the years
morning, now is the morning of our great business, wherefore now up in the
morning of this great work, let us direct our prayers to the Lord, and look
up, pray now my brethren, for now it is seasonable.

Reas. Ps. 76. 3 Psalm 76 1.
There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, the sword, and the
battle: where? In Salem, Jn Sion, He does not verse. 2
say in the field, the arrows are first broken in the assemblies by the
Saints prayers, after that in the field by the Lords Soldiers, It is said of
Archimeder being a Mathematician, that he did more by drawing his lines, then
any other Soldier did by his valor, so Gods people may do more by the lines
they draw, and the prayers they make, then others can do any other way, prayers
are the Saints scaling ladders wherewith they leap over walls, and their
strength whereby they break through hosts, you know usually there is much
disorder in Armies; the Soldiers have much evil and sin among them, though
the Soldiers be outwardly strong yet many of them are inwardly weak, and
prayer comes in to gather up the weak forces, Numb. 12. 15. you may see how
that for the sin of one woman, the whole host of Jsrael was staide, and could
not march on, her sin hindered their march, she was but one, and a woman, it
may seem therefore strange that the whole body of the Army should stay upon her,
yet so it was, and they could not remove till prayer came in: verse. 13. Moses
cried to the Lord saying, heal her now O God J beseech thee. Then she was
healed, and the people iourneyed, thus prayer orders the ranks, fetches up
the weak forces; leads on the Army upon the enemy, and comes in the rear,
without prayer then; there is no footing, we are not fit to strike till our
arms be in joint, and prayer iointeth us, we are not fit to be exalted, till
we be humbled, and prayer humbles us, and if it be so, then by way of use.

Use You may see what work we have to do this day, we are to lead forth this
well formed Army, as you heard in the mandate, sent unto us by the States, of a
wellformed leaguer, under the command of that Noble and worthy General, the
Prince of Orange, and mee-thinks he does as it were put prayer in office, and
says, I will not be commander, prayer, shall, J will be only Lieutenant unto
prayer, let prayer go first, let prayer strike the first stroke mee-thinkes I
hear a dialogue and conference between him and the country, we desire you Sir
to take the care of this great Army, we commit it to your wisdom, go and
prosper, but says he, I dare not go until prayer go, J am under prayer,
give me prayer first, and then I will go, first smite with your prayers, and
then we will smite with our weapons, smiting prayers are now expected, and
though there are diverse motives which I have used to stir up your hearts, to
pray for the Churches in general, yet take three or four more, which may have
some special relation, unto this people and you amongst them.

Sicut paupe^es spir^tis and simplices ad predi candum elegit, ita asta tos et
du plices Antichristus ad falsitatis predicationem assumet. Greg mor. lib 12.
cap. 5.
you pray against are the most wicked enemies that God has of all enemies
those are most wicked that are most crafty, the artificial sinner is the worst
sinner, (as the naturalized grace is the most gracious) such are the
Antichristian enemies of the Church, for as (Gregory observes it) Jesus Christ
did choose simple poor men to preach the truth, so Antichrist chooses those
which are crafty, subtle to disperse errors, of all enemies those are most
vile, which are most cruel, and those are most cruel unto the Churches, that
have once made profession of the truth, and proved Apostates, the Scripture
points at three especially in this particular, the Devil, the Jews, and
Antichrist, the Devil is cruel unto mankind, he is the grand Apostate, the
Jew is cruel unto all Christians, he is a vile Apostate, Antichrist is cruel
to all the present Churches, and he is a great Apostate, yea not only an
Apostate, but Apostasy in the abstract. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. and therefore cruelty
it self: in the book of the Revelation, Rome and the Antichristian party is
called Sodom, it is called Egypt, and it is called Babylon: you know the
unkindnesse of Egypt, the cruelty of Babylon, and the vilany of Sodom unto
Gods people, why should Rome and the antichristian party stand under all these
names, but because they are guilty of all their evils, and the worser they are,
the more hold you have on them to pray against them, Arrius was a vile enemy to
the Churches, and ver^ ciuell, yet he was destroyed, how so? Historians tell
us, Orationes opus fuit, non morbi, his death was the work of prayer, not of
his disease, such effects may your prayers have, what stubble can stand before
the flame of prayer, Oh that our hearts were much inflamed in this great
service.

Deuteronomy. ^. 18. 20.
and the half tribe of Manasseh, were come into their lot, and inheritance,
before the rest of the Children of Israel, What then, should they sit down
quietly? No, at the 18 verse. they were not to sit down, but they were to pass
over armed before their brethren, so God haueing provided for you, before many
of your dear brethren, and his good people, you are not now to sit down
quietly in your own lot, but to go up armed before the rest of Gods people, and
prayer is your best harness.

to pray, you know it was theirs and your reproach, this place is your Gilgall,
wherein the Lord has rolled away that reproach from you, Oh that your liberty
might not degenerate into license, you have now praying liberty and if this be
the thing you are come for, and now you have such an oppertunity, will you not
improve it, if a man leave one place of trading, that he may set up his shop
wirh more freedom in another, and in the second place money be brought unto
him, will he refuse to take money? this is your case, you could not have so
free a trade for heaven as you desired, here you have leave to open your shops,
and behold this day a praying oppertunity, which I call money, is put into your
hands, will you refuse it, Consider you are come on purpose to pray.

he compared to Sardis, and thence foretold all the evils that have come up on
it. Holland, Swethland, Stotland, and the French he compared to Philadelphia,
and says though they have but a little strength, and the hour of temptation
shall come, and some shall labor to shut their door, yet none shall shut it,
it is the rather to be considered, because he foretold the evils that came
upon Germany, and why may he not speak true in this also, and then who would
not pray for this people, seeing that he may not loose his prayers? wherefore I
entreat you in the Name of God, now up and be doing, arise; O daughter of Sion,
arise O he^rts of the people of God that God might arise, and his enemies might
be scattered, awake, awake, and now up to prayer.

Quest. You will say to me we are agreed, we must go to prayer, both now and
at home; but what shall we speak, that God may arise and that his enemies may
be scattered.

Rev. 1^ 8. Ps 121. 4. 2 Chronicles 6. 34. 35
that has condemned her: the Lord says, He never slumbreth nor sleeps, the
Lord says in his word; If his people pray when they go forth to war, he
will hear and maintain their cause, go and tell God; Lord thou have said thus
and thus, thou have said thou will neither slumber, nor sleep, thou have said
thou will maintain thy cause, Oh then, arise O Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered.

It is Ps. 119 126.
time for thee Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law, and again, Have
mercy upon Zion, for the time to favor her, Ps. 102 13. 14.
yea the set time is come, for thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and
favor the dust thereof: this is the reason why the time is come, so go to God
and tell him; Lord thou have stood still a great while, oh now the time is
come, men have made void thy law; the Saints pity the dust and take pleasure
in the sto^es of the wasted churches, it is time for thee to rise. Arise O
Lord. etc.

Arise O Lord, etc.

ta^kling all ready, and the anchor is up, only the m^ster is not come into
the ship, they will send one to tell him, Sir the wind is good, your servants
are ready, and the ship is under sail, we pray you come away, so tell the Lord
that all his people are up at prayer expecting him; and all the prayers of Gods
people are spread; and their hearts under sail, and nothing can be done till
the Master come; until God himself come; come therefore O Lord; come away;
Arise O Lord and let thine enemies be scattered.

After this Sermon began to be printed, something was added, the rest was taken
by Characters, whilst it was preached.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
page 5. l. 25. read. These. p. 12. l, 1. for so that read but p. 18. l. 6. r.
flame r. p. 20. l. 5. r. are apt. and l. 12. r seems. p. 25 l 2. r. blessing.
p. 28. l 1. r. own p. 29. l. 5. r. contrary. and l. 21. r. be. p. 30* l. 4. 5.
and 7. r hereby. p, 42. l 12. r. wax, p. 45. In the margent for Ps, 1, 18,
read, Ier 31, 22, p: 58 l 5. r this p. 93. l. 9. r prayer and l. 19, r, at a
window* p. 65. l 14. r. me. and l. 18. r. a tavern p; 66. l. 1 r fundamenta.
p. 67. l. 17 r. you that ly p. 67, and 68, r ye that are mind. full of the Lord
keep not silence but once. p, 73. l. 19. r one another. l 76. in the margent
r. fugientia l. 77 l. 21 r. for tenthly eleventhly. p. 79. l 18 blot out Jf p
80. l. 21. r. first p. 81 l 1 r people of the Lord p 84 l 24 r prayer. l. 87.
l. 10 r Archimedes p 88. l 6. r. gather up. and l. 14. r strange. p 90 l 17 r
our p. 91 in the margent for spiritis r. spiritus and for astatos r, astutos.
p. 93. l, 6 r very and l 8 r orationis p. 93. l. 11. and 24. r orportunity. p.
96. l. 20. r for turned governed.


