Wits Trenchmour, In a conference had betwixt a Scholar and an Angler.

Written by Nich. Breton, Gentleman.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. Robarts for N. Ling, and are to be sold at his shop
at the West door of Paul's Church. 1597.

To the right Worshipful and noble minded, the favorer of learning and
nourisher of virtue, William Harbert of the Red Castle in Mountgombry-shiere,
Esquire, the highest power of the heavens give the happiness of much honor.
THE humble service that in bounden duty I do owe unto your honorable house,
with the true report that I have often heard of the nobleness of your own
spirit, as well in regard of the learned, as favor of the virtuous, has made
me presume to adventure the pardon of your discretion, in offering to your
patience a president of so simple a wit, as dancing a Trenchmour in the shadow
of understanding, dares not come into the light without the comfort of your
good countenance: to make a large gate to a little Town, were but a mockery
to a trauailer, and no praise to the builder: therefore referring to your good
leisure the reading of a mad discourse, and to the happiness of your good favor
the commandment of my better service, I take my leave in all humblenes.

Your Worships ready at command, Nich. Breton.

To the Reader.
HE that will think in writing to please all humors, must have more variety
of invention then one wit can hit on; for my self, I would be glad to please
the best spirits, for other, I wish them more perfection of understanding then
lavishness of speech, and my self but the happiness to be out of the censure
of the unwise, which since I cannot be, putting my labors to the view of the
world, where all minds are not of one mould, nor all spirits of a like virtue,
I will hope well of the best, and keep patience for the other; and so loath to
make a long entry to a little house, I will leave to your leysures to read,
and your courtesies to like, of such matter as you shall find handled, betwixt
an Angler and a Scholar; how their talk came to light, and what you may
gather of their discourse. And so in have, from my lodging, I rest for this
time, and always as I find cause:

Your loving friend, N. B.

The Anglers conference with the Scholar.
AMong the walks of the weary, where liberty and air, are the best comforts
of the forlorn spirits of the world, it was the hap of a poor Scholar, (who
feeding his imagination with the perswations of contemplation, making his
passage down a falling piece of ground, somewhat near unto a little hill,
fast by a river side, whose streams seemed to slide along the banks of a lower
platform) to espy a human creature, standing upright and holding out his
arm over the water, whom approaching unto somewhat near, and finding to be an
Angler, he saluted in this manner: True figure of patience, no offense to your
conceit, how might it fare with your cold exercise? The Fisherman (as it
might appear by his answer) being better trained in the variety of
understanding then could be contained within the compass of a casting Net,
upon the sudden made him this reply: Shadow of intelligence, to stay your
further eloquence, when fools gape for flies, mad men may go a fishing.

Oh Sir (quoth the Scholar) I pray you enter not into choler, with him that
meant not to trouble your better humor: but rather do me the favor to
instruct me in the reason, that might lead you into this looking labor, then
to take me up for halting ere I come at my iourneys end: I promise you I was
half afraid, that Ouids tales would have fallne out true, and that Narcissus,
or some of his kindred, had been so in love with their own shadow, that he
could not go from the River side: but coming near, and finding the deceit
of my imagination, confessing my folly, I am to crave your kindness in a little
conference, touching the profit of this cold pleasure, and what may be the
fish that you angle for with a fly.

Sir quoth the fisherman, to turn wit into choler, is such a piece of new
Alkamie, as I never found written in the true rules of Philosophy: and to tell
truth, as I remember when I went to the school of understanding, I found this
a sentence of discretion: It is but a trifling of wit, to be troubling of
humors: but since you crave a favorable instruction in a matter of small
importance, being persuaded that your have is not great, nor affairs weighty,
if you will sit down and bear me company, we will feed the air with a
little breath. My good friend, quoth the Scholar, (for so I would be glad to
find you) to confess a truth, neither is my have such, but I may stay well,
if not too long to your liking, neither my affairs of such import, but that I
may put them of for a time, to enjoy the benefit of your good company. Then
sir quoth the Fisherman, let me tell you, I sit here as you see angling for a
fish, and my bait a fly: for little fishes, as Bleakes, Roches, and such
like, a fly will serve the turn: but for greater fishes, we must find out
greater baits: and with these flies we catch such small fry, as serve to
bait our hooks for greater fishes. Now, if you can apply this figure to a
good sense, I will hold you for a good scholar in ciphering.

I cannot tell (quoth the Scholar,) how you would I should interpret it,
but this I conceive of it, that a child may be won with an apple, when a
Costermonger will not be pleased without a whole Orchard. I perceive quoth the
Angler, you are of Adams race, you think so much upon the apple, that poisoned
him and all his posterity, but if one should examine your conscience, do you
not mean the golden apple? Which quoth the scholar? that which was offered to
Juno, Pallas, and Venus. I think it to be but a mere jest, for surely in
these days, and in such Countries as I have passed my travail in, I never saw
any creatures so angelical, but they had spirits so terrestrial, that if a
golden apple should be offered, it would be ca^cht ere it could be thought of:
and therefore I pray you satis-fie your self with this answer to your first
figure, and so to other, as it will fall out. The Angler holding himself
contented with this construction of his conceit, followed on with his speech in
this manner. Some fishes there are that keep altogether in the deep, and they
we must angle for with a worm, now to this worm we must have a line of hair,
as near as we can of such a color, as may best please the eye of the fish to
play with. Now to this line we must have a plummet, which must guide the bait
to the bottom, which drawing now and then up and down, at length so pleases
the fish, as ventring upon the bait, aunswers the hope of our labor. Now
what think you of this figure? Truly Sir, quoth the Scholar, I think that
when wit is led away with humors, reason may be entangled in repentance, and
the pleasing of the eye, is such a plague to the heart, that the worm of
conscience, brings ignorance to destruction, while in the Sea of iniquity, the
devil angleth for his dinner.

The Fisherman smiling at this answer, fell to him with another piece of
angling, in this manner. We have, quoth he, a kind of fly made only of
silk, which we make our bait for a fish called a Trowt, with which we often
deceive the foolish thing, as well as with the fly it self. Alas sir quoth
the scholar, this shows but the vile course of the world, where wit finding
out a fool, feeds his fancy with such illusions, as makes him some-time
loose himself, with looking after a shadow: as words are without substance,
when they are laid for easy believers.

Well sir, quoth the Angler, since you roue so near the mark of an unhappy
meaning, I will not yet trouble you with further disciphering of conceits, but
only tell you a little cause of my pleasure taken in this cold exercise.
Before I had leisure to learn this lesson of patience, to sit on a bank side,
and only pleasing my conceit with the hope of my cunning, to deceive a silly
creature of her comfort. I saw diverse kinds of fishing in the world, which
though they were easily learned, yet I had no mind to look into, at least for
mine own use, howsoever it profited other: but of these were diverse sundry
sorts, and of diverse natures, according to the Fishermen, or the fish that they
baited for: of which kinds, according to the permission of time, I will acquaint
you with a few, which I have learned to forget, as unpleasing to put in
practice. One kind was substantial, an other metaphorical, and the third
fantastical. The substantial was fishing with the golden hook, which rich
men only laid in the deep consciences of the covetous, where they plucked up
such favors, as brought them a world of commodity: and yet I remember one
more welthie then wise, having made a hook of a great weight, which was
swallowed by a wide mouth, the great fish pulled the no little fool into the
water, and either drowned him in the deep, or so swallowed him up quick, that
he was never seen after in the world.

Alas sir quoth the Scholar, this fellow was either too greedy of his gain,
or persuaded himself to be another Jonas, that after three days he should
be cast out of the Whales belly, and come to shore with a Muscle boat: but he
was pitifully deceived, for by all that I can guess of him, he had but one
syllable of his name, and that was the last, for he proved himself but an
Ass, howsoever Ione fed his humor. Alas sir quoth the Angler, there are many
such misfortunes in the world, a man may swallowe a Gudgin, whilst he is
fishing for a Pickrell, and leap a Whiting, whilst he is looking on a
Codshead. Yea, quoth the Scholar, but that is foul play, that a man should
loose his stool, while he is looking for a cushion, and be robbed of his bread
whilst he is reaching for butter. Indeed quoth. the Angler you say true, when one
sits by ill neighbors, he had need look to his skirts. But leaving these
Items, let me come to my first reckoning: fishing for the great fish I tell
you, was wont to be with the golden hook. Let the Mermaids sing never so
sweetly, they make no reckoning of their music, it is the golden hook that
they will only come unto, and without that, it is but vain to lay for a fish
and catch a Frog. Why, I have heard of fishes that have been made drunk with a
golden kind of gum, that after they have but tasted it in their mouths, they
have turned up their bellies. Now for such great fishes as I speak of, the
very oil of gold is of such virtue, as the quintescence of half a million,
will so overcome the senses of the^ that taste it, that they will turn up both
back and belly, with the giddines of that operation.

Oh sir quoth the Scholar, a vengeance on the devil, here is a long tale
quickly construed: Jack of both sides for a bag of money, where among the
company of the Brokers the devil angleth for Usurers. But I pray you sir on
with your fishing, and if you have done with your substantial, begin with
your metaphorical. Sir, quoth the Angler, in truth my store of gold is so
little, that I care not if I speak no more of that hook: and now, touching
the metaphorical fishing, I found it only by wit, a conceited kind of hook,
that is only laid in the shallow sense of understanding, where kind fools
are cosend with fair words of fine devises: as a foul Crow, to be persuaded
with eloquence, that she is beloved for her white bill, till to feed a
flattering humor, she leave never a feather in her wing. Oh, quoth the
Scholar, I understand you, as he that made fair wether with Vulcan, because
he would make fair work with Venus. No, no, that is a foolish kind of
fishing, to fish for a Codshead, and carry a knaves head to the market. Oh
brother quoth the scholar, you are too plain in your Aduerbs. In truth,
answered the Angler, it is not worthy the name of a Proverb: for every note of
experience is not a golden sentence, and yet give a fool a Cocks-combe, and
let every honest man have his right: for my self, I never loved to angle for
credit with a show of more sober countenance then simple meaning, for in
truth brother, and verily sister, made the devil dance Trenchmore, where
hypocrisy blew the bagpipe. Yea, quoth the Scholar, how catch you a Trowt but
with a silken fly, and can you better deceive a fool, then with a Taffatie
face? Oh sir, laugh upon every man at the first sight, make a curtsie of the
old fashion, say a long grace without book, find fault with long hair, and
great ruffes, and tell youth of his folly, and all imperfections of the flesh,
shall be excluded from the spirit.

Oh sir, quoth the Scholar, you should have set down probatum, a good
medicine for a mad humor, to take physic without an Apothicarie, and to
bleed in a lither vain. Go to sir, quoth the Angler, such fits of natural
philosophy, put you from your book, and me to mine angle: but leaving these
new tricks of an old dance, let us fall again to our old galiard: and touching
angling, say that a mad fellow made a bait of a fair wench, to catch a foul
churl withal, how many favors might her sweet eyes pluck out of his sower
heart? In deed, quoth the Scholar, it is not a little treason in youth, to
catch age in a wheelebarrow, especially when an Ape brings a Bear to seek
honnie in a Bee-hiue. Well sir, said the Angler, what say you to him, that
angleth with a counterfeite Diamond, to deceive an ignorant Lapidarie. Alas
quoth the Scholar, it is but a common Interlude, betwixt the cunning of wit,
and the folly of pride. Yea, quoth the Angler, but what say you of honesty? I
think as fools do of learning, it may be spared at the market, and hinders
the Country from good sport. In deed Sir, quoth the Scholar, an Accidence in
an old cover, has no grace in Court library. And a ballad be it never so
good, it goes a begging after the Fair: and for honesty, it is such a jest,
that even the beggar is weary of it, it has so little place among other
people.

Oh sir, quoth the Angler, you forget your self, has not virtue been ever
the beauty of learning, and honesty such a Badge, as puts down a painted
Cognisaunce? In deed, quoth the Scholar, I must confess, Olim meminisse
iuuabit, it does me good to think of honesty, though it thrive but
ilfauouredly: for Tempora mutantur, et nos mutamur in illis, we may go in our
Ierkins in Somer, but we must have a Cloak for the Winter. Indeed I have
seen the devil painted like a Friar when he went to deceive a Nun, and Judas
looked like a holy brother, when he played the villain with his best Master.
Did you take these for Fishermen, quoth the Angler? But ill-favored ones quoth. the
Scholar, when the one of them laid his bait in hell, and the other followed
his hook to the devil: and yet I have heard it is a common note in the world,
for Friars to be wanton, and rich men to be covetous.

Indeed quoth the Angler, you say well, Mediocria firm: better be walking in
the highway, then building Castles in the air, or seeking Lobstars in the
Sea: but let me talk with you further of angling. Say that Beggary had found
out ambition, and laying a plot for his possession, never thought of honesty,
till his villainy were at an end, when the bewitching of an idle ear, may breed
the loss of an addle head: what say you to this angling? I say, quoth the
Scholar, while the Peacock is gazing at his train, the Fox will be knitting
of his hose-garters. Well sir quoth the Angler, since I see you so merry with
this metaphorical kind of fishing, I will tell you a little of the
Fantastical. This last kind of angling is only in conceit, where wit lacking
understanding, lays his bait in a dream, to catch a fool, when he is
awake: as when an ouer-weening spirit of his own power, will compass the
course of the seven stars, with staring only at the Moon, and so loses
the benefit of his study. Oh sir quoth the Scholar, such a one was he that
having a Dear in chase in his sleep, when he waked, found that a Calfes head
and the brames, gave but a Huntsman and his dog their dinner.

Well sir, quoth the fisherman, there is another fantastical angling, called
Quasi, as if it were: As a mad fellow in a poetical fury, imagining he had a
Mistres, made love to his conceit. Oh quoth the Scholar, I know such a fellow,
as making verses of Venus, who was better acquainted with the black Smith,
forgetting his better business, and gaining nothing by his idle labor, found
he had been better to have kept his wits fasting, then to cesen his belly of
his breakefast. Well, quoth the Angler, what say you to him that baytes his
hook with a fained Ague, to steal favor from Pity. Indeed quoth the
scholar, when women were wont to be kind-harted, conceits in men were very
feuourous: and who could be so pitiless, as to see the conswaption of a kind
humor, for a word of little good meaning. But now a days I hope there are no
such men, knowing the nature of the femall sex, given rather to love a strong
body, then a strong breath, and a good purse, then a fair tale. Well said sir
quoth the Angler, but what think you of him that angleth for authority, with a
devised countenance of counterfeit majesty. I think quoth the scholar, that
Fisherman to be the Ass in the Lions skin, whom the Fox with long flattery
leading to fear the wolf from his borrough, no sooner head the Owl sound
her Trumpet, but he threw off his proud couer-paine, and ran home to his old
Crib, like a tale soldier at a course Manchet. Well sir quoth the Angler, but
what say you of him that angleth for a Budget in the highway? Oh sir, quoth
the Scholar, such open-eyed sleepers, ere they be well broad awake, may hap
to be hanged for their dream. In good earnest sir, quoth the Angler, I can not
but smile at your pleasant aunswers: But since I see the Sun draws down
apace, and I fear we shall have shorter time of conference, then may be I hope
with both our good lykings, I will no further trouble you with these kinds of
anglings: but after that I have told you of the nature of some fishes, I will
tell you a little tale of the choosing of their King. Sir, quoth the Scholar,
you kindness being such as expects no ceremonies in courtesy, let it suffice
you, that what I friendly receive, I will thankfully requite, which if I cannot
as I would, I will deserve as I may. Sir quoth the Angler, to make no long
harvest of a little corn, I will tell you touching the nature of fishes, I
find this by experience, that the Porpuse sildome plays, but it is a sign of
foul weather. True, quoth the Scholar, a gentill Prognosticator, for him that
is weary of his life:

An. The Whale is never hurt, but he makes his will on the shore.


Sch. Good: where his Oil is better for the Merchant, the^ his body was for
the Mariner.


An. The Herings sildom scull, but in a thick misty morning.


Sch. A wholesome kind of meat, like the air that he delights in.


An. The Mackrell brings in Summer, for he comes but in May.


Sch. Like a Nosegay of flowers, that is no longer sweet then it is new
gathered.


An. The Stockfish must be beaten, yea: and then quoth the Scholar, it makes a
jolly mess of brewes.


An. The Cunger must be sowst, and the Eele in a Spechcock, or else they are not
in their kind: In deed, quoth the Scholar, a raw Shrimp, and a burned Oyster,
are no very pleasant dishes to digest: But me thinks this is but the nature of
their dressings: You say well, quoth the Angler, for in deed all fishes are by
nature windy: watery you would say, quoth the Scholar, for I am sure take them
out of the water except it be hot water, and the wind will do them little
good: No, quoth the Angler, I mean wind in another sense: Oh you mean either
breeding of the chollicke, or blowing of the backpipe, but a good cup of Sack,
will kill the malice of a red Herring: but Sir since, to tell you true, I take
no great care of their conditions, having a stomach of that disgestion, that
was never afraid of a raw Oyster. I pray you let me hear your tale of the
choosing of their King: Sir, quoth the Angler, as I have heard it I will tell
you: in the unknown deepes, of the wonderful water, called the never seen
Sea: when fishes could speak, and waves carried news to the banckes of the
earth to mock the babies of the world, it was a noise in the air, that if
there were not a King in the water, Frogs would eat up the fishes, whereupon
poor fools holding an opinion, that wonders might come to pass, fell to a
counsel among them selves, how to choose a King for their comfort. For a
little time great hold and show was among them, in so much that there was a
great fear of civil wars to grow among them. Some would have the Whale for
his greatness, some the Dolphin for his swiftnes, other the Sword-fish for his
stoutnes: but when the Whale was seen unwieldy, though he were great, the
Dolphin was too nimble to trust to, and the Sword-fish too dangerous to dwell
by: they no sooner saw the Herring come with his million of attendants, but his
readiness to bear them company, at all times, and at all services, made them
with general consent to go of his side, and so he received his title: But
among the slow fishes that sliding low by the water, could make no have to the
Court, came, the Plaise with a pied coat: who had no little hope, that his
cost would purchase him great honor: But being met by the way, by one that
either pitied his expense, or laughed at his folly, he was told he might
return home again, as he came: for the King was chosen, and allowed. Who
(quoth the Plaise) the Whale, no: why so? He was unwieldy, the Dolphin? no, and
wherefore? He was too nimble: the Sword-fish? no: for what cause? He was too
quarrelsome: the Codde? neither: for what fault? He gaped so wide, his throat
was full of flies: who then? The Herring: Herring (quoth the Plaise) wrying his
mouth so in scorn, that he could never since set it strait. And reason (quoth
the Scholar) when a fool in a pyed coat, will be putting for a kingdom: he
must have his mouth, or his neck, or somewhat stand awry ever after.


But Sir, for your tale I thank you, for I have heard it often, but not in
this manner. But I pray you Sir let me entreat you, to tell me a little of the
properties, and services of the fishes, especially, such River fish as you take
pleasure to angle for. I will tell you (quoth the Angler) for Seafish, I have
not been acquainted with many: but so far as I can speak I will tell you
mine opinion. My judgment is that the Porpuse is like a Swine, a great
deuourer of Sprats, that makes him in taste so like a red Herring: and being
served at a table, he is a good gross dish, for a course stomach. Old Ling
without musterd, is like a blew coat without a Cognisaunce, and a piece of
Greene-fish with Sorrel sauce, is no mean service in an Alehouse. A Whiting
is so old a Courtier, that he cannot loose the credit of his service: Fresh
Sammon, Sturgeon, and Conger, are no victuals for poor people, especially for
weak stomachs, that must have wine for their disgestion. Oysters are stirring
meat, especially with the help of an Onion: Mussles, and Lobstars, Crabs, and
Tortus, are dangerous for Agues: Smelts are good for women with child, and
Shrimps are pretty picking meat, for idle people after dinner: now for River
fish which we cheefely call Fresh-fish. The Pike is so ravenous, that he will
destroy a whole pond, and eat up his fellow Pickrell: mary the Perch is so
backed, that he dare not meddle with his bristles: the Carpe feeds most in the
night: the Eele ever stirs most after a rain, and the Tench is the only
Surgeon for all the Brook: But for Roches, Bleaks, Dase, and such like, they
are such little fools, that against every little shower, they will be caught
with a Fly, For their services, a Pike in broth, a Carpe baked, an Eele
roasted, a Tench sowsed, a Swelt fried, and a Shrimp new sodden, are served in
their best kinds: but of all fishes, fresh, or salt, whatsoever opinion is
held of dainty tastes. The Herring is he that passes Town and Country for a
good fellow: and thus much for my knowledge in fishing. Now for the cause that
first led me into the delight of this kind of angling, I will tell you. When I
found the substantial angling, with the golden hook, was sometime deuilish:
the Metaphorical with the conceited hook, was often knauish, and the
fantastical, with the dreaming hook, was foolish. I thought it better living,
as I do not far hence, to walk from my house hither to the water side: and
angle for a dish for my supper, then run into the Town I know not among
whom, to gape like a Codshead, or so practice with a knaves head, that I may
fear the devil in my conscience, ere I have half made my market for my
dinner. In deed sir, quoth the Scholar, you say well: for when I was a
Scholar in the University, many years a go: me thought solitarines was a
sweet life, it did so avoid occasions of evil: but leaving my study, and
falling into a little travail, I have run into such a world of varieties,
that finding all vanities but virtue, I had rather walk as I do sometime, to
contemplate the hopes of the blessed, then to run up and down among the
confusions of the wicked. Truly sir, quoth the Angler, I am glad to hear a
Scholar make so good a benefit of his study: as having escaped the snares of
the devil, as it seems you have, that you are so adicted to serve God, as I
hope you do: but since you have been both a Scholar and a trauailer, I
beseech you let me be beholding to you, for a little both of your learning and
experience.

Sir, quoth the Scholar, to acquaint you a little with my learning, you shall
understand, that after such time as I had passed the Punies form, that I had
gone through the rules of my Grammar, read over a little Poetry, and knew the
grounds of Logic, I fell to the study of Philosophy, where finding Nature such
a Mistres, and Reason such a Master, that they could not agree without
patience, I took no little delight to note the dividing of the quarrel.
Furthermore I found such secrets by observation, as I would not have missed for
a mountain: As how, I pray you, quoth the Angler? Mary, quoth the Scholar, I
will tell you: touching the quarrel first I will tell you. It is in the rules
of Philosophy, that contraries cannot at one time be in one subject: which we
see otherwise do fall out in a man, that warmes his hands, and cooles his
pottage, and all with one breath. Yea, quoth the Angler, so a knave may flatter
his Master, and abuse his friend, and all with one tongue: but what of that? I
pray you go on: how decide you the quarrel? I will tell you, quoth the
Scholar, by only Magis, and Minus, for in respect of the cold, it is warm,
and in respect of the fire it is cold. Oh, quoth the Angler, I understand you
by a Candle: which in the dark gives a pretty light, but in the Sun it goes
out. True, quoth the Scholar, so is a fool held wise, among wits of weak
understanding: but in the judgment of discretion, he is quickly decided. Now
the next point that I learned in natural Philosophy, was this: Naturam
expellas furca, licet, vsque recurret: That which is bred in the bone, will
never out of the flesh. In deed, it is hard to turn black into any other
color: Kat after kind will be ever good Mouse hunt. In deed, quoth the
Angler, a Iack-daw is never like a Tassell-gentill: but by your leave, what was
your next note? This, quoth the Scholar, Contra principia non est disputandum:
Which is this in effect. There is no disputing against principles. Oh, quoth
the Angler, you mean with Princes, and good reason, for their pretogatiues are
great, and therefore their powers must be absolute, their displeasure feared,
and their wills obeyed. In deed, quoth the Scholar, you say true, he is
higher minded, then witted, that will contend with his superiors: but that is
not the sense of this sentence. There be some Rascals called Athiests, that
will dispute against the majesty of God. Oh, quoth the Scholar, leave them to
the mercy of the devil: and as you say he that is so conceited of his wit, as
to go from all good understanding, let him go hang himself in his own
School, and God bless me from his learning. Amen, and me to, quoth the
Scholar: but now to an other point: A particulare ad generale: non est tenenda
ratio: Though one man be true hearted, every knave is not to be trusted. No,
quoth the Angler, for one Swallow makes not Summer: the Priest may be an honest
man, and yet many a knave in the Parish: and Uirgine wax is for Christmas
lights, which is not sold by every Chandler. True, quoth the Scholar, some
men grow wealthy with good conscience, but it is not general in these days.
But to leave these Sentences, I will tell you further of my learning. I find
by my reading, that man was compounded of the four Elements, of fire, water,
earth, and air. How, quoth the Angler, is it possible? The fire drink up the
water, and the earth dry up the air, and when they are consumed, what is left
to make man of.

Oh sir quoth the Scholar, I thus understand the four Elements, Choler,
Fleame, Blood, and Melancholy. Indeed quoth. the Angler, I think you say true,
a chollerick fellow, will be angry with his own shadow: and a phlegmatic
woman, has her nose ever dropping: a melancholy fool, is like a dream of a
dry Summer: and a sanguine faced youth, will bleed at the nose if he see a
fair woman. Oh sir quoth the scholar, you speak merrily, but let me tell
you, the chollerick man is soon augrie, and soon pleased: the phlegmatic, is
a better land man then a sea man: the sanguine, is a fine Courtier: and the
melancholy, a great studient. Just quoth the Angler: the chollericke is like a
hasty pudding, soon hot, soon cold: the phlegmatic is like a Culles,
consumed into ielly: the sanguine like a Cherrie tart, that would say come eat
me, ere I came at it: and the melancholy, like a brown loaf that had been
half burnt in the baking. Truly sir quoth the Scholar, I have not often
heard such descant upon a plain song: but let me tell you, that without the
knowledge of these grounds, it is hard for the Physician to minister cure of a
disease. Well quoth the Angler, what soever you note by your reading, this I
find by observation, that fire is good in Winter, and water in Summer, air
sweet in ye spring, and earth most comfortable in the harvest: and good cheer
and honest company, makes a merry heart, and a sound body. I like not to study
too far into Nature, to forget God, or to confound reason: indeed if
Physicians cannot judge of simples, they may think of Com, but they shall come
by few pounds. But yet for all my jesting, I pray you go on with your good
instructions.

Well sir then quoth. the scholar, the next was this, Narura semper gignit sibi
similem: an Eagle never hatched an Owl, nor of a Lion came a Monkie. True quoth.
the Scholar, a bird is commonly known by his feather, for every long bill
is not a Woodcock. No quoth the Angler that is true, and yet master Constable
may be wealthy, and his son an unthrift. Oh quoth the scholar, he may
perhaps take after the Mother, who did eat up her Cream when she should have
kept it for Butter: but to tell truth, a Greyhound and a Mastiffe never breed
but a mungrell. But I will tell you further of my notes: I learn the
property, quality and effect of many things, as first and chiefelie of Man.
Reason is proper to every man, honesty to many a man: now reason with
honesty, effects credit with commendation.

Well said quoth. the Angler, and contrariwise, a man may have reason to enrich
himself, but if his quality be to be a thief or a Traitor, the effect will
be shame and hanging, if he chance to escape hell after. Uery true quoth the
scholar: but now in other things, as in Corn, to grow is the property, to
make bread his quality, and his effect is our nouriture. But quoth the Angler,
if the ground be not well tilled, the seed well fowne, and the dow well
kneaded, you may happen as good be fasting, as to keep your stomach for a
loaf: but what say you of quantity? Indeed quoth the Scholar you say true: a
good quantity of money, will help to grace a little wit, but I have seen one
no higher then a horse-loafe, wiser then a world of wormes-meat. But indeed
according to the quantity of your Roses, you must look for your sweet water
from your Still. Oh sir quoth the Angler, you mean according to the quantity
of your wit, you must look for the sweet of your inventions. Sir quoth the
scholar, how soever my inventions are, I am sure yours are so quick, that if
I were again to go to school, I would be glad of such a Master. Well quoth.
the Angler, flattery is an idle point of Rethoricke, and therefore, I pray you
let me entreat you to give me leave to be merry with you, and crave a few of
your notes upon your Morrall philosophy. Sir quoth the scholar, in brief,
with thanks for your kindness, I will grant your request: My first note was,
that Omnes sibi melius esse male qua^ alterio: Every man had rather be his own
friend then his neighbors. Oh quoth. the Angler, but that is a rule against good
fellowship.

Why so, quoth the scholar, I think he that will not provide for his own
breakefast, can hardly bid his friend to dinner. Well sir quoth the Angler,
what say you to your sentence in this sense? A young lover in a cold night,
gave his wench his cloak, and went himself in his doublet in the rain. I say
quoth the scholar, love is deerer then life, and therefore, she being the
sum of his hearts joy, he preferred his Mistres before himself, according to
the custom of kind hearts. Oh quoth the Angler, such Lovers in deed are
pretty fools, like the bird that flies in the air, and suffers his hen,
to hatch her eggs on his back, while he flies up and down, for meat for her
dinner. But in deed to tell you truth, nearer is my skin then my coat, and
that is the plain sense of your sentence. Well then quoth. the scholar, to go
on with another note: Erustra sapit qui non sapit sibi: He is a fool for all
his wit, that is not wise for himself. Indeed quoth the Angler, he that will
till his neighbors ground, before he has done with his own, may happen to
have Corn in the field, when other have their harvest in the Barn. Indeed
sir quoth the Scholar, he that does for other, for I thank you, till he say
to himself I beshrew you, he may have more kind wit, then commodious
understanding: but by your leave, among many that have been studients in this
course of instructiou, I find one notable vile creature, whose philosophy I
may rather call mortal then morrall, his notes are so full of poison, to the
spirit of all good disposition: and this good old Gentleman, his name was
Machauile.

Oh quoth the Angler, a vengeance of all villains, I think there was never
such another, he has left such deuiltish lessons to the world, that I think
he will hardly come at heaven. I pray you sir, quoth the Angler, let me
entreat you to recite some of them. I will tell you sir quoth. the scholar,
among many notes that I took ont of diverse places of his discourses, I
remember this was one of the first: That it was good for a man of conscience to
keep the bands of his oath: and yet when policy may purchase a good purse, an
oath has been ventered for a less matter then a million. Ang. O bace
companion, a fit steward for the devil, to bring souls into hell. A gentle
instruction to persuade a covetous spirit, to bring the body and soul to
destruction. But by your leave, he that will venture his own soul, shall have
nothing to do with my body. Well, what was the next note? Mary quoth the
Scholar, that Fathers in their government should be feared of their Children:
But quoth the Angler, I am not of his mind in that point: for love breeds
more assurance then fear does comfort. But what else? Sch. That it is good for
Masters to be bountiful to their servant, were it not, that Keepers will
say, that fat hounds will hunt but lazilie. Yea quoth the Angler, such
lessons as these, drives so many poor serving men, that pay for their own
liueries, to run on the skore for their breakefasts. But I pray you what
more? Sch. That he that will not curtsie to a Millstone, make music to an Owl,
dance trenchmore with an Ape, and fall to wonder at a Wether-cocke, may hope
after nuts, and pick on shells for his comfort.

Tush man quoth. the Angler, are these of his notes? Not in these words, but to
this effect answered the Scholar. Indeed quoth the Angler, now that I do
remember me, I think he that can carry a Ring in his mouth, a book under his
arm, a pen in his ear, and a knife in his pocket, may hap to make himself
good cheer, when better minds may miss their dinner: but on with your notes I
pray you. Sir quoth the Scholar, I will tell you, I red in certain notes of a
scholar of his, that a man that will thrive in the world, must have his eye
upon one, his hand upon another, his foot upon the third, and his tongue for
the fourth: but he must not set his heart upon any of them: for if he grow in
love with a woman, or in league with a friend so far, that he commit his
secrets to his keeping, his head is under an others girdle, his purse at an
others command, and his wits in an others keeping: and then, for lack of a
little discretion, he may even go current for a fool. Oh this was a pretty
scholar at the devils Alphabet, quoth the Angler, was not Timon of Athens one
of the fathers of his church? who gave counsel to the afflicted to hang
themselves for their comfort. I think he was quoth the scholar: but God
bless every good spirit from such a wicked kind of humor: But to go on, I red
further, that it was no little proof of wit, to find out a prodigal heir to
use him like a younger brother: and if there were ever a Lawyer of a large
conscience, what a bribe might do for a conueiance. Oh quoth the Angler, the
pillary is a sit window for such villains to look out at. But are these the
best notes that you remember in his study? Not the best quoth the scholar,
nor the worst, but as they come into my head, I tell you them. I pray you sir
quoth the Angler, have you not been a little red in historiographie, or do
you not remember any pretty accident that has fallne out in your travail,
which in the discourse of your kindness might do well to entertain the time
with?

Truly quoth the Scholar, I was never any great historian, neither has my
travail been long, yet have I seen more then I have read: but of either, as
time will give me leave, I will tell you a little to laugh at. First touching
histories, or rather indeed fained tales, as good as fables, I red in a book
whose Author I have forgotten, a discourse of a man whose name I found not
written, but since the matter is somewhat fresh in memory, I will as near as I
can recite it, and thus it was. There was an old man of more age then grace,
who having spent all his youth in byrding, fell in his elder years to
Conny-catching, but when the arest of Time, brings the long day to a dark
night, that no coin could make excuse, for none appearance upon the sommon,
Death would be satis-fied with no answer, but depart: this old fellow, having
a young son, much after the greedy humor of his gross Sire, before he ended
his life, close at his bedds side delivering him up the keys of his Coffers,
left him this lessen for a farewell: My boy quoth. he, if thou will be wise and
take heed, I leave thee enough to keep thee like a man, and therefore look
to thy self, for when thy money is gone, thou may go hang thy self for any
help thou shall have of thy friends, flatter thee as many as list, as there be
knaves enough in the world, to find out a fool ere he be half bred: but
mark well my words, make much of money, for it is a jewel in these days. If thou
have land and money, a fair house, and a good purse, then, if thy nose stood in
thy forehead, and thine eyes in thine elbowes, thy head like a paued causie
between two thin grown hedges, nere a good tooth in thy head, good word in
thy mouth, nor good thought in thy heart, yet if thou have thy purse well lined,
thou shall have prayers of the beggar, a curtsie of thy follower, welcome of thy
friend, and perhaps a glaunce of a fair Lady: if not, thou shall have a wench
that shall ride as merrily to the market, as if she were set on a side saddle
of the best fashion. Now, if thy money be gone, the beggar is thy companion,
the fool bidds thee welcome to a Pescod, the knave stands and laughes at thee,
and the honest man, perhaps more pitties thee the^ releeues thee: the proud
man scorns thee, thy virtues are buried, thy name is forgotten, thy qualities
are trifles, thy learning but lost, thy wit but folly, and thy honesty put to
no use: thy friend regards thee not, thy wench knows thee not, and thy foe
spares thee not: and thou art left to sorrow to make an end of thy miseries, or
by some desperate course to fall into Gods forbid. And therefore my boy make
much of thy money, it will bring thee music when thou art melancholy, physic
when thou art sick, and company when thou art solitary. Remember what I say,
look to the maine chance: Aurum potabile will fetch him to life that is half
dead. Be true to thy Prince for fear of hanging: be not busy with religion
for fear of trouble: strive not with power for fear of a fall, and spend not
thy money for fear to go a begging: Lo, this is all I have to say to thee, oh
I have a pain at my heart, and so he died.

Why quoth the Angler, did he never bid him serve God, nor call himself on
him for comfort? Alas quoth the Scholar, how could he think on God, and the
devil always so near him? Well quoth the Angler, we must not judge any man,
but I would be loath to be his half at the day of Doom. But I pray you what
other pretty history or devised tale have you read in some other humor, that
may serve the turn to pass away the time withal. Sir quoth the scholar, I
have red many pretty toys, too tedious at this time to call to memory, but
among all I remember one pretty discourse of a Lady and her servant. Oh quoth
the Angler, I beleene it is a love tale, if it be it shall be welcome. For, to
tell you true, though I be in this time of my declining youth, an unfit dauncer
in such a Morice, yet let me ever love music, though I cannot tune a
virginal: it is a good confirming of my repentance, to here a president of my
imperfection. Then sir quoth. the scholar, thus it was, or at least was said to
be. In the Island of ill fortune, where idle heads seek for favors, and virtue
has little countenance, where money is the great Monarch, it fell out that in
the court of the Duke of Calliflorida, among many creatures of worthy
commendation, there was one especial fair Lady of so honorable a spirit, and
excellent a wit, as gave the wise admiration, in her conference, and the
valiant, happiness in her favor: this pure Diamond among a number of fair
jewels, I mean this kind of Angelical creature, among a troop of sweet
Ladies, as she could not but be honored of many, so was she especially
followed with the affectionate service of one worthy Caualiero, above many
other: much there was to be commended in them both, but let this for my
discourse suffice, she was exceeding fair and wise, and he no less kind
then truly valiant, but as it seemed by that which was written of them, his
understanding was inferior to her wit, whose beauty had the command of his
resolution.

Long had this poor Gentleman with the silence of love followed this princely
Lady: who more favoring his discretion, then revealing her own conceit,
took this occasion one fair evening in a pleasant Garden, to single her self
from company, and in a solitary walk, espying her servant all alone, met him
suddenly at a half turn, when putting up her Mask to salute his reverence
with a word of favor, as though her coming thither had been by chance,
which was done in deed of set purpose, she entertained the time with this
speech.

Sir, quoth she, thus you see the course of the world: each conceit has his
cross, and a woman a cross conceit to a thousand. I am snre you little
thought, choosing out this solitary walk, for the better passage of your
meditations, to meet so unhappily, and unlooked for, with the subject of so
much trouble. The poor Gentleman little expecting either so kind a companion,
or so sweet a speech, with no little gladness, made the Lady this answer. Good
Madam, to make a trouble of comfort, were so unkind a construction of
happiness, as howsoever other conceive of it, I desire not to be acquainted with
it: but when the heart of a poor Soldier, had rather with his sword make way
for his Mistres honor, then with his tongue for his own favor. Let me humbly
persuade so far with your good discretion, that if in the kindness of your
command, you will vouchsafe the employment of my service, I do not doubt but
that in the proof of my action, you will easily see my affection, which in the
only hope of your good countenance, shall set up the rest of my worlds honor:
To which short speech the Lady no less quick witted, then well read, made
him this sudden answer. Oh sir, Soldiers generally are of that imperious
humor, that they had rather command a look then yield to a tittle: and in
mine opinion, if Cupid were now alive, Mars would cut his bowstring, ere he
should do any good with his arrows, so that by want of the company of good
spirits, Diana might keep alone in the Woods, while Venus might make her will
in her Chamber. Truly Madame, answered the Knight, I know not what fed the
Poets wits, to feign such fables as are written: but for my self while in your
virtue, I behold the object of my honor, I will rather diuote my service to
your worthiness, then trouble my self with trifles that I dare not trust, as
are the fictions of idle heads, or the painted couers of inward imperfections.
Sir Knight quoth the Lady, by the little sight of our eye, we behold a great
circuit of the earth: and shall not the spirit of our understanding through
the eye of our mind, behold the light of that truth, that may lead the care
of our reason, to the content of onr conceit? I hope the best: and though as a
mist may dim the sight of the eye, and dissembling the sense of the mind, yet
for that I will try before I doubt, and command before I favor: let the
patience of your discretion attend the pleasure of my employment: and for all
courses what soever fall out, if I do you good, be glad, not proud of it, and
open not your window to the Sun, when she has power to send her beams
through the glass: and so not entertaining your service, till I may acquaint
you with my best content: I pray you walk aside for this time: For I see a
Gallant, that I must talk with, and will soon be rid of. The good Knight
vnwilliug, by any motion of discontent to put out the fire, that was now in
kindling with humble thanks took his leave, and left his Lady to her new
Lover: who no sooner came near her, but observing all fine ceremonies, with
kissing his hand, in putting off his hat, with a Passa measure pace coming
toward her sweet presence, greetes her with this salutation. Fair Lady, the
Quintescence of your beauties excellence, has so enflamed the spirit of my
affection, that except I have favor in your eyes, my heart will surely consume
to ashes: and therefore if my service may have acceptance in your contentment,
I will not be behind with my good will to execute the office of your command.
The Lady with a blushing smile at this wise Gentleman's formality, made him this
quick and quipping answer. Sir, if your new coined eloquence were not too
far out of the way of mine understanding, I would fit you an answer to your
motion: but since silence can best talk with wooden Rethoricke, I pray you
sir if you have any thing to say to me, let me plainly know your meaning: Why,
quoth this Whippet, if I should tell you I love you, and you believe it not, if
you believe it, and yet regard it not, if you regard it, and yet confess it
not: what shall I be the better to speak plainliar then I have reason? Well
sir, quoth the Lady, to this abundance of little wit, if I did like to study
upon such Riddles, I should perhaps trouble my self to find out a fit
answer for the cipher of reason. But to tell you plain, your love I know
not, your self I love not, your words I regard not, and how you take it I care
not: But if you have any thing to say to any other end, I will hear you as I
think good, and answer you as I see cause. Why then Madam, quoth he, to tell
you plain, my Lord your Father saw you out of his window walking with Signor
Felio, and upon the sudden willed me to come for you. Well sir, quoth the
Lady, nothing dismaide at the message, I am ready to attend his pleasure,
though I wish he had sent a fitter servant to mine humor. But to make as short
tale as I may sending word by this odd Gallant, that she would forthwith
attend his pleasure, calling to her a Gentlewoman, that she saw sitting in an
Ar^our somewhat near unto her, taking her in her attendance, away she goes to
her good Father, who with a natural kindness dissembling his discontent, in
suspect of the talk had betwixt her and Don Felio, with a smiling countenance
entertained her with this welcome: taking her by the hand, and leading her into
his Gallery, he began in private thus to fall in talk with her. My best girl,
whom above all the children that I have, I most esteem in the true joy of my
heart, and well worthy, for thy good caridge in all courses, as well for thy
duty toward me, as thy reputation in the world, I must confess, I never had
cause to suspect thy discretion in any cause of dislike, but if a Fathers care
prove a kind of jealousy, excuse the error in abundance of love, and tell
me truth to a question that I will put unto thee. The sweet Lady, not willing
to delay her Father with long circumstance, with a modest countenance, not
once altering her color, but keeping the care of her wit, entreated his
commandment of her duty: who in kind manner made her this speech. I have
been here in my Gallary walking most part of this evening, and looking out at
one of these windows, I espied Don Felio all alone, walking a turn or two in
the long walk, where he had been but a while, when you found him in his
Muses, and entertained him, or he you, I know not with what conference. The
man is one that I love, and will be glad to prefer to any honor that he
deserves, but I pray thee tell me, what was the substance of your talk?

Truly Father, quoth Madam Fianta, for so was her name, I would gladly tell it
you if I might presume upon her patience, and not doubt your displeasure, I
will acquaint you with as much as I can remember. The Duke expecting another
matter then she delivered, with a dissembled countenance of promised content,
willed her boldly to say her mind. Then good Father quoth the Lady, thus it
is: little thinking to find any creature in that walk, when fingling my self
from my company, I took my Book of Da plisses in my hand, and meant to
contemplate some divine contentations, being near unto him ere I was aware,
and loath either to disgrace him with entreating his absence, or upon the
sudden to withdraw my self from his company, in such good manner as it
might well beseem him, he saluted me with this speech. Honorable Lady, I am
sorry that it is my ill hap to become a trouble is your contentiue
solitarines: but how does my good Lady, and your good Father? Him quoth I,
in good health I left not long since, and my self you see, not troubled with
good company: but what should make Don Felio to choose this solemn place for
his solace? Alas Madam, quoth the poor Knight, I dare speak to your Ladyship,
who in the pity of your virtue have ever been a good furtherer of all suits
of your Fathers servants: so ill has been my hap, that after the spending of
many years, loosing of no little blood, and wasting of some part of my little
substance, now there is no use for me in his wars, to make my adventure
upon the enemy, my years growing to that height, that I must before the
declining of my best age, put my wits to some work for the better relief of
my poor carcass, and maintaining of my mean estate: having had a long suit
unto him, which by the crosnesse of my back friends I am almost now out of
hope to enjoy, I am devising not far hence near unto the City, in a large
Orchard that I have belonging to my house, to set up an Ape-baiting: which
being a new matter, and never in practice, at least, that ever I have heard in
this Country, will tole a world of wise people together, who shall pay every
one for his coming in, howsoever they repent it at their going out: now I
will tell you in what manner it shall be. I will have an Ape tied to a great
logge, which shall be round about besette with Bee-hiues, and when the Ape is
set among them, his nature is to catch at any thing that buzzeth in his care,
now when on Be has been about him, and he fall to catch and miss, that Be
will bring another, and that another, till in a little time Jack will be so
stunge, that what with mowing, crying, and skipping, he will make sport enough
for a penny. Now before the sport begin, there shall at the entrance into the
Garden sit a blind man, and a deaf woman, disputing an argument of love,
and at the further end of the Alley, a Bagpipe and a Gittr^n, play Trenchmore
to a Tinkers dog. Now will not this do well for a devise, to help a poor
man to a little money?

Now fie Sir, quoth I, lay away this melancholy humor, I will rather be your
friend to my Father, and help you to a far better matter, then you shall
purchase by this badde or base invention: and therefore I pray you to lay aside
your determination in this point, till you hear further from me of my Father.

The good old Prince, little thinking his pretty Monkie could upon the
sudden have devised this Apish tale, giving credit to her discourse, made
her this joyful answer. My dear Fianta, I must confess, he has had
back-friends in his fortune, yet has not his desert lien dead in my favor:
for no longer then yesterday, have I signed, and caused my seal to be set to
the grant of his suit, which to morrow thou shall give him, with my purse full
of gold, for he is one that I love dearly, how soever I make show of less
matter: soon at night forget not to come to me for it. And so with a few other
good words, left her to her best company to her liking: who the next morning,
having received her fathers blessing, with his bountiful tokens of favor to
his servant, secretly sent to the Knight, to meet her in the walk where he
left her. The message not a little welcome, made him not long in coming to his
dear Mistress, of who^ receiving for the term of threescore years, the
gift of a stately house, with diverse goodly Lordshippes and Parks to the same
belonging, with his purse full of money, the better to defray his charges, with
humble thanks to his gracious Master, and no less to his dear Mistress, who
had thoroughly acquainted him with the course she had taken for him, according
to her secret direction hastend himself into the Country, where after a few
loue-letters that had passed betwixt them, within a little time the Duke died,
and his daughter (with her dowry) made a match with her true Knight. Oh fine
tale quoth the Angler, made upon the fingers ends: for it could not be but
there were many cross tricks in the Cards ere the game went about, but you
see the time is short, and therefore you do well to abridge the best. But now
Sir, if in kindness I may, I pray you let me entreat a little of your travail,
what you have noted in your passage to and fro. Sir quoth the Scholar, to tell
you a little here and there what I have seen and noted, I am contented: and
therefore to be short, I will tell you in one Country where I came I saw a
strange wonder: for where as in many other Countries men did use to eat up the
sheep, in that Country sheep had eaten up both the men and their houses. For
in the pastures, where I saw great flocks of sheep feeding, I might near
unto certain foote-pathes, behold here and there a piece of an old stone
causie, which had been in times past some street or by lane, in some Town or
Uillage, but now there was neither house nor town, nor man left, more then
the Shepherd, and his sheepish Master to look upon them: this was one of my
first notes. In an other Country I found by ye speech of the people, a great
alteration of men, for a number of Gentlemen of ancient race, by the wretched
course of fortune, or folly of their own or their friends indiscretion, were
gone from the Court to the Cart, and the son of What lack you, was become
the only right worshipful. This is my second note.

Well Sir quoth the Angler, touching your first note, let me tell you, that the
Wethers wool sticks not in the Graziers teeth, and a good purse with quiet,
makes one plough worth two swords. But on I pray you with some more of your
notes, for I like these very well. I will tell you quoth the Scholar, in one
Country where I came, I saw the Woods so brave it with great trees, and the
Barnes so flourish with sheaues of Corn, that a number of poor people died
with hunger and cold. Alas quoth the Angler, that is too common in many
Countries: but indeed it is pity to see such dogged minds among Christians,
or at least, such as make profession of Christianity: but on I pray you with
your discourse. In an other Country quoth the Scholar, I saw one year such
bloodshed, that there has been wars there ever since. Alas quoth the Angler,
the massacre in Paris can be your witness for that truth: where the devil and
the Pope made the Duke of Guise the chief murderer. In another Country quoth
the scholar, I saw men given so to drink, that God to punish their sin,
drowned a great part of the Land.

You say true, quoth the Angler, they that pour so much liquor into their own
bellies, deserve to have some water in their beds: but proceed I pray you. In
an other Country I saw many pretty accidents, though of no great importance,
yet worth the noting: of which one I remember, which I am persuaded will make
you smile to hear, if at the least I can hit near the manner of it, as I
heard it. I pray you heartily quoth the Angler, let me be beholding to you for
it. Not so, quoth the Scholar, but to content your kindness, thus it was.
Having travailed long upon a rainy day, and after a weary journey being
somewhat wet, come into mine Inn, being brought into the Parlour to mine
Host, who it seemed by his sheepe-furd short gown, to be the Officer for the
Parish, I mean the pinching of bread, and nicking of pots, besides, prisoning
of thieves, carrying beggars to the stocks, and watching of the Town at
midnight, that it ran not over the bridge, for lack of a gate to keep it in
before morning, and keeping the kay of the Cage, and the Cucking-stoole, after
the manner of some formal Constable: this substantial Yeoman, who as it
should seem to be the Son of some Flesh-monger, as Muttons, Beefes, and such
like commodious kind of Beasts, who together with his Inkeeping, and the help
of Maid Marian, a good Hosts to draw on guess, could with his gross nodle,
making a night gown of an Oxe-hide, keep himself warm in a cold Winter,
and purchase not only the house that he dwelt in, for this young Gentleman his
biggest Son, but some old Ruddocks for his young Roiles, having brought up
this his heir for sometime at the free School, and a little before his death
put him to the Uniuersity, made this cipher of wisdom, to observe his Fathers
rule, in the education of a Son of his, who a little after my coming in,
came home to his Father from the Acadeime, as it seemed, being sent for by his
Parents, against the Christmas hollidayes, to be posed by Master Parson: but
to be short, after we had supped, mine Host calling for a chair for
himself, and an other for me, to enuiron a good warm bank, of Sea-coale
fire, few guess being that night in the house, began to examine his Son of
his study in this manner. Come hither Sir, how have you spent these five last
years, that I have been at no little charge with you for your learning? Let
me hear you what have you read, since you gave over your Grammar, and your
Cato, and those toys. Sir, quoth the Boy, with a crooked curtsie, I first read
Logic: Logic, quoth the old man, a vengeance on it, what should you do with
it, an only cunning of wit to play the knave with a plain meaning: a proper
trick of treason, to maintain a lie against truth. Well, what next? Forsooth,
quoth the Boy Rethorick: just quoth the old man, an other fine piece of
learning to teach a lewd mind to paint out a false tale with fair words: but
what more? Forsooth, quoth the Boy, the next was natural Philosophy. What,
quoth he, do thou mean to be a Physician? Use abstinence, and keep good
diet, and care not a pin for the Apothicary. But on with the rest: what else?
Forsooth, quoth he, Moral Philosophy: What, quoth the old man, to learn to
leere, and look big, to curtsie, and kiss the hand, to be at your silver
forke, and your picktooth? Sir, it is not for your Fathers son, to trouble
his head with these trifles, your Father follows the Cart, and thou art not
shaped for a Courtier: but well, is this all: or is there any more yet? Yea
forsooth, quoth the young man, I have read a little of Arithmatique: that quoth
the old Sir, I shall find by the account of your battailing: where, if In
primis, and Item, make Totalis, above allowance, I will take you from your
book, and teach you another profession: but what else? Forsooth quoth he, I
have a little looked into Music. How now, quoth his Father, what, art thou
mad, to be a Fiddler? A head full of Crochets kept never wit in good compass:
but on I pray thee with the rest? Forsooth, quoth the Stripling, I have read
somewhat of Geomatry. Oh quoth the Father, I like that well, thou meanest to
save charges, when thou have timber of thine own, thou will not be beholding
to the Plough-wright: but a little more. What else? Forsooth quoth he, my Tutor
was beginning me with Astrology. What quoth the old man, teach thee to go to
Tennis with the whole world? No, the ball is too big for the best Racket of
his brain: but have you looked nothing into Astronomy? Yes forsooth quoth he,
and whereto, quoth his Father? To learn to lie in an Almanacke, to cosen
fools with fair weather. But what have you learned of Divinity? Forsooth
quoth the youth but little as yet, only a few rules of Cathechising: yea so I
thought, quoth old Twagge? Well, this is a wretched world, to see how new
Schoolmen, have a new fashion in their teaching: they were wont to teach
little children when I went first to school, before they learned one letter,
to say, Christ's cross be my speed and the holy Ghost, but now among a
number, Christ, his Cross, and his holy Spirit, is so little taught among
little scholars, that it is almost forgot among great Masters. But leaving
spelling and put together, which is eastlie learned in a Horne-booke, let me
tell you somewhat of all your studies that you never heard yet at school, and
if you mark it well, perhaps it shall do you no hurt. Begin first with
Divinity, learn to know God, and know all, know not him, and know nothing:
Learn to know him in his power, to love him in his mercy, to honor him in
his goodness, to believe him in his word, and to confess him in his glory.
Apply this knowledge to your comfort, and be thankful for your blessing in his
grace: know him I say, humbly, love him faithfully, serve him truly, and pray
to him heartily, and so in despite of the devil, how ever the world go with
thee, thou shall be sure of the joys of heaven. Now, for your Logic, learn
to maintain a truth, and to confound the contrary: For Rethorick, only learn
this out of it, that to speak much in a few words, is a good note of a wise
Scholar. Now for Arithmatique, it is not amiss in time of have to make a
reckoning quickly: but take heed, that reckoning without an Host, put not thy
purse to a new expense. For Music, a merry heart is worth ten crowdes, and a
Bagpipe. And for Philosophy, it is better to use her effects, then know her
secrets: And for Moralities, be not too saucy with thy betters, nor too
familiar with base people, coy to thy friends, nor too kind to fools, and
with a little observation of times and places, thou shall be a Philosopher
without book. Now for Geometry, rather learn, and study to purchase Land,
then build houses: for it is a cost will soon decay, and titles in these days
are tickle holds to trust to. Now for Astrology, rather love a Molehill of
thine own, then a Mountatne of thy neighbors: and for Astronimy, rather keep
thee in the warmth of the Sun, then follow the shadow of the Moon: and
whatsoever you learn by the book, be sure to have this always by heart:
Crumena sine pecunia, quasi corpus sine anima: A purse without money is like a
body without a soul: and therefore whatsoever you remember, forget not your
purse, I mean your money: for when I was young, I saw many do so much in
many things, that there was almost nothing done, (I mean for worldly matters)
without it. I remember, not a mile from the town where I dwelt, I saw a sweet
young soul married to a sower old Sir, only for money, and hard at the towns
end many a proper man make his will upon the gallows, and only for money. I
saw a knave that had cosend his father, loose his cares on the pillary for
many. I saw some drawn, hanged and quartered, for clipping of money. Some
misers grow mad to part with their money, and poor beggars starve and die,
with lack of meat and drink, and money. Why let me tell thee, if thou do
continue at thy learning, it will paint thy study, and fornish thee with
books, it will clothe thy back and feed thy belly, it will guilde thy speech,
and give fame to thy wit, make room for thy presence, and keep a cushion in
thy seat: thou shall sit uppermost at the Table, feed on the best dish, and
not be contradicted in thy speech, but welcome with a world of kindness, where
wanting that Earths chief ornament, thou shall have a sachell full of holes, a
study without glasse-windowes, books without couers, and a threadbare Ierken
without a cloak, thy belly pincht with lack of victuals, thy head ache with
fruitless study, and thy heart sick with grief of mind, thy welcome cold in
most companies, thy place below thy inferiors in worth, shouldered of every
Jack, and sometime stand with out a stool: and therefore, if thou be a Divine,
get a Benefice, if a Physician, get a suit, if a Geometritian, get an office
of surueying, if whatsoever, get money, and then serve God, and follow what
study thou will. So the time calling to bed, the old woman loath to wast fire
and candle, bad shut up doors and away: when the good man with a brown loaf
gape, and a hey ho at the end of it, betaking me to my chamber, got himself to
his Goose-rest. Where leaving him to short with his sow, I heard no more of his
good mastership, but in the morning, having have of my way, taking order for my
charges, gave a farewell to the flying Ostrich, which was the Arms of his
Inkeeping, fair painted upon the signe-post.

Now truly Sir, quoth the Angler, I thank you for your merry tale, I think
he was some kinsman, or of his race, that you told me you had red of, who at
his death left his son such a lesson to look to his money. I think Sir
quoth the Scholar, they were birds of one feather, though they lived not at
one time: but it is strange to see sometime, what sharpnes of wit a man shall
meet with in such a bald noddle. You say true Sir quoth the Angler, but it is
pity that ever good Wine should come into a fustie vessel: but might I
entreat you for one discourse more, of some accident that you met with in your
travail, and so with the setting of the sun I will take up mine angle, and
entreat your company to my poor house, where having been a scholar and a
trauailer, I hope you will take your welcome with a few dishes. Sir quoth the
scholar, for one discourse more I will not deny you, but for my trouble at
your house, I must entreat your pardon for this night, to morrow it may be, I
will wait on you as I come by you: for this night I am invited at the Keepers
of the great Parks, where having past my word, I would keep my promise.

Sir, quoth the Angler, use your discretion, now to morrow, or at an other
time, your welcome is set down, and your company desired, and therefore I
beseech you, while I shall enjoy the benefit of your good company, let me be
beholding to you for your discourse. Then Sir, you shall understand quoth the
Scholar, that in the time of my travail, coming (by occasions) as well into
the Palaces of Princes, as the cottages of poor people, it was my hap, yea I
may well say, that under heaven it was my greatest happiness that of this world
I ever found, to light into the courtlike house of a right worthy honorable
Lady, the desert of whose commendations, far exceeding the style of my study, I
must leave to better wits to dilate of, while I poorly speak of the little
world of my wonder. For in her eye was the seat of pity, in her heart the
honor of virtue, and in her hand the bounty of discretion: to see her
countenance the comfortless, argued a divine spirit, to hear her speak, which
was never idle, proved an oracle of wit, to behold her presence, might speak
of a miracle in nature: to be short, except Plato, I knew no such philosopher:
except the excepted, I mean the Lady of Ladies in this world, the honor of
women, and wonder of men, the teacher of wit, and the amazer of the wise, the
terrifier of the proud, and the comforter of the oppressed, the beauty of
Nature, the wonder of Reason, and the joy of honor: the handmaid of God, the
heavenly creature of the Earth, and the most worthy Queen in the world, the
princely Goddess, or divine Princess, the gracious sovereign of the blessed
Island of England: except I say this sun of the earths sky, I know not a
star of that state that can compare light with this Lady: while her thoughts
keep the square of such discretion, that no idle humor dare enter the list of
her conceit. What praise can be given to that spirit, that has so ordered the
careful course of her senses? she does all things as she did them not, and
uses the world as she esteemed it not, Honor is her servant, Virtue is her
love, Truth is her study, and Meditation is her exercise: yet is she affable,
with such courtesy, as winnes honor in humility: to make an abridgement of her
praises, in a few words of her woorthines, let this suffice, that Nature and
Wit, Virtue and Honor, Pity and Bounty, Care and Kindness, have so wrought
together in the perfecting of a peerless creature, that I may bite my tongue,
and burn my pen, lay up my little wits, and wish for a more divine spirit,
to enter into the conceit of her desert, ere I further show my weakness, to
speak of the wonder of her commendation. But among many good parts, whereof
her praise is top full, I will tell you one action, and not the least, that fell
out in my time of attendance on her favor: Her house being in a manner a kind
of little Court, her Lord in place of no mean command, her person no less
then worthily and honorably attended, as well with Gentlewomen of excellent
spirits, as diverse Gentlemen of fine carriage, besides all other servants, each
of such respect in his place, as well might give praise to the Governors,
where honor sets rules of such discretion. It might perhaps seem teadious,
to set down the truth of such perticulers as deserved a general commendation,
where first, God daily served, religion truly preached, all quarrels avoided,
peace carefully preserved, swearing not heard of, where truth was easily
believed, a table fully furnished, a house richly garnished, honor kindly
entertained, virtue highly esteemed, service well rewarded, and the poor
blessedly relieved, might make much for the truth of my discourse, while Envy
can but fret at her confession: but least in blowing at a coal I do but put
out the fire, and obscure her praise, that may be pend by a better spirit, let
this suffice for the sum of my speech, that where the eye of honor, did set
the rule of government, kindness was a companion in every corner of the house:
now, to this little Earths kind of Paradise, among many sundry kind of people,
came by chance a poor Gentleman in the ruin of his fortune, by the devise of
a close conueyance of an imagined friend brought in, having more wit then
discretion, in the nature of a good fool, to give this Lady cause of laughter:
who no sooner sounded the substance of his wit, but with the deep eye of her
rare judgment, percing into the humble virtue of his spirit, pitying his
fortune, and perceiving his want, made use of his service in a better sense,
and in the divine nature of her blessed spirit, determined the mean of his
advancement. With her countenance she graced him, with good words she
favored him, with her bounty, she relieved him, and would suffer no man to
hurt him: for seeing honesty want maintenance, and virtue oppressed with
malice, she did not like a helping hand to fill up a half penny purse with a
poor reckoning, but like herself in the absolute power of her honorable
spirit, she comforted the afflicted mind, revived the heart half dead, and as
it were drawn out of the ditch of misery, set the spirit in the warm sun
of Gods blessing. Thus did this Princess entertain this poor Gentleman, till
by the faction of the malicious, the delightful working of the envious, and
the desert of his own unworthiness, finding in the deceiving of this his
bright sun, the sinking of his too happy favor, supping up his sorrow to
himself, taking leave for a time, to travail about a little idle business, in
a cold snowy day passing over an unknown plain, not looking well to his way,
or being ordained to the misery of such misfortune, fell so deep down into
a Saw-pitte, that he shall repent the fall while he lives: for never since
daring to presume, but in prayers to think on his fair Princess, and living
in poor Cottages, to look toward that Court-like palace, he has gone up
and down like a shadow without substance, a purse without money, and a body
without a spirit.

For ever since, as he has often told me, if he have come among men, it has
been like a Fair of rude people, compared to the sweet company of that house,
if in the company of women, like a meeting of Gossips, in respect of the
gracious spirits of the sweet creatures of that little paradise: and if by
chance in his weary passage, he has had any private conference, with some
espetiall bird of the Country, yet for all the best notes that ever he heard,
they were all Sparrowes to his Nightingale. For according to the dispositions
of their minds, he might see the weakness of their spirits: as some would
talk of nothing, but the new fashion, pinning of ruffes, starching rebaters,
the Outlandish tire, and the long bodies: the fine stuff, and the pretty
pinke, the Lawne shadow, and the cutworke Lace: other of the pyed Cow, the bay
Horse, the black Sheep, and the branded Pig: another? her Malt in the Kill,
her Oats in the scuttle, and her Rye in the sheafe, her Cheese in the press,
and her Butter in the cherme. Now with this galimawfrey of such good matter, as
filled his ears with more sound then good sense, must he satis-fie his
sorrowful heart, that, when it got him alone by him self, with calling to
mind the excellent matter, that in variety of method he had often heard from
the mouth of his Minerua, would so fall into a sighing, that had not the
heavens the better blessed it, it would surely have burst asunder. For, say quoth
he, that though some few I found of extraordinary good spirits, yet among a
number of these Country daunces, I did light on such a Galiard, as had a trick
above Trenchmour, and could speak more to the purpose, then many of the wives
of the Parish, who having red many English books, could tell pretty tales of
idle people, yet compare this Crystal with my Diamond, she would quickly show
her dunnes: and among all other things, if by the revenue of a pretty Dairy,
she could privily put up three pence to spend at a blind bridaile, if perhaps
in a good humor, she had a mind to pleasure a poor friend, it would come so
dropping out of her fingers, as though it hoong at her heart blood: and then
perhaps with such a lesson to it, to take heed of unthriftiness, with a shrug
of the shoulders at the hardness of the world, that it would break the heart of
a good mind, to think on the misery of such Alms.

To go from Hiues that give the golden honey,
To shilling Spirits, that will tell their money.
And then calling to mind the golden showers of his Ladies favors, bled
inwardly in the heart, with such drops of unseen tears, as makes him like Adam
out of Paradise, hope of no happiness, till he come at heaven: Or like the
Phoenix, live in ashes, till he may get life by the virtue of his bright Sun
again: and now this is only his worldly comfort, that she lives, whom his
heart honors, and his soul prays for, though his unworthy eye, be
abandoned the blessing of his senses admiration: Who though he live in the
dungeon of sorrows darkness, will never cease prayer to the heavens for his
bright Suns eternal blessedness: and that as her name does live only in the
high Meridianis, so her soul may be blessed in the highest Caelis. Alas poor
wretch, quoth the Angler, why do your eyes water your cheeks, at the shutting
up of this discourse? If it be your self, be not dismaide, Princes have
gracious spirits, and great powers, who at the time of their pleasure will
comfort patience in misery: and after the woe of a long Winter, give the fruit
of a little Spring, howsoever hope hit on a good Summer: and therefore continue
thy constancy, in thy prayer to remember the happiness of thy hearts honor, and
fear not, but virtue will one day have a glaunce of favor: and therefore if I
may advise thee, let not mal-content breed a madness, to drive thee from thy
self to a worse companion. Serve God, and care not for the world: for I am
persuaded, that she that is made of so many exceedings, cannot but at her good
time make thee happy in her comfort, who though a while she shut up the hand
of her bounty: yet will send thee a little of that Quintescence, that will save
thee from a deadly swound, howsoever sorrow possess thee. And therefore be her
bead-man in thy prayers, till she make employment of thy further service. And
now since I see the Sun grows so low, as will scarce give us light to our
lodging: let me at this parting challenge your promise, that to morrow you will
visit my poor cabine: which with all kindness that I can devise, shall be
always with my self at your command. Thus with hearty thanks each to other,
with a few good words of either side, taking a kind leave, the Angler takes up
his hook, and away they part from the River side. From whence when they were
gone in a manner out of sight, a certain odd Diogenes of the world, like a
forlorn creature on the earth, thrown lately out of the fortune of his
Mistres favor, getting a Paper-booke under his arm, and a pen and Ink
under his girdle, in a melancholic humor, meaning to trouble the Muses, with
some doleful Ballad, to the tune of all a green willow, sitting down on a
little molehill, among a thick grown plot of Ozters unseen, in steed of his
intended piece of Poetry, writ as fast as he could this discourse that he
heard betwixt this Angler, and the Scholar.

FINIS.

