THE STRANGE FORTVNES OF TWO EXCELLENT PRINCES: IN THEIR lives and loves, to
their equal Ladies in all the titles of true honor.

Imprinted at London by P. Short, for Nicholas Ling. 1600.

To the woorshipfull my very good friend the favorer of all good actions, and
nourisher of good spirits John Linewray Esquire, Clerk of the deliueries and
the deliverance of all her Majesty's Ordenance, and other munition as well
within and out of the Tower of London, as all other her Highness Stores within
the Realm of England, health, happiness and heaven.
SIR, unthankfulness is so near to unhonesty, as to avoid the touch of
both, I have been often desirous of some good mean, to deserve some one of
your many received favors, which loath to bury in such obl^ion, that I should
be thought unworthy the regard of so good a mind, I have thought good to
acquaint your kindness with such occurrents, as have lately come to my hands,
though they be no matter of this state, yet were they such tracts in the
fortunes of two Princes, as being read with that discretion, which, in your
good leisure, can judge of the labor of wit, in the honor of virtue, I doubt
not but that you will favorably patronage this first apparent proof of my
love, till in some better occasion of employment, you may have a more
sufficient trial of my affection. The substance of my history being love, the
subjects Princes, the nature honorable, the adventures dangerous, the fortunes
strange, and yet the end happy: will suffice I hope, to persuade the witty to
read, the wise to favor, the learned to allow, the honest to commend, and
your good mind to accept of: which being no more then I desire, nor less then
I hope of, leaving my book to your kind patience, with my self to your
commandment I rest.

Yours, very much in assurance, N. BRETON.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, for so I hope to find you, or else shall I be sorry, to
have bestowed so good a term upon you: Writers in these days have so many
humors to censure their labors, that it is easier to run mad with seeking
to please every body, then to be wise with displeasing of any: but since this
is nothing to that which follows, let me tell you, that if you will kindly
read, that is friendly offered you, and part with a little money, for a matter
of more worth; it may be you shall have more contentment, then you look for:
in brief you shall read of much variety of matter, the fortunes of Princes,
the true honor of Ladies, the virtue of love, and the life of honor, the
subtlety of a knave, and the rewarding of a villain: the constancy of
affection, and the joy of comfort. But I fear if I go a little further I
shall tell my story without Book: and therefore leaving you, through a little
Door, to go into a great House, hoping of your kind patience, to take al well,
that is meant no worse; and to speak as well of my labors, as my good will
would be glad to deserve, I rest

Your friend, N. B.

The History of two Princes, Fantiro and Penillo.
IN the Islands of Balino, near unto the City of Dolno, there lived a great
Duke named Firento Sanelli, a great Lord I say, for that he was great both in
honor and possessions: he was wise, and therefore much honored; honorable, and
therefore much beloved; with his wealth he was full of charity, and therefore
envied of none, but the courtous: he was valiant, and therefore feared of the
wicked: but covetous, and therefore followed with the kind: and virtuous, and
therefore blessed by the highest. This Lord had to wife a sweet Lady, called
Merilla, a creature of much worth, in the best construction of commendation;
and if a woman might be like an Angel, she might be saincted for her virtues:
her modesty with his gravity, her pity with his valor, her love with his
charity, her bounty with his wealth, and her zeal with his virtue, made such
a conjunction in perfections, as that under the heavens, there were hardly
found such creatures on the earth.

This blessed Lord and Lady had issue male, only one son named Penillo,
and female one only daughter named Merilla: the parents of these two children,
lived till they saw them both to follow their course in the best content of
their affections: Penillo was of the age of four and twenty years, of
stature tall, ruddie of color, well complexioned, but not too fair; his hair
not black, but somewhat-inclining thereto, his countenance mild, but not
effeminate, his proportion in no part imperfect, and for his mind, it was of
an excellent temper: he was silent, but upon good cause, and then not to learn
what to speak; resolute, upon good aduisement, but not rash upon any
adventure: he was well read in histories, and well qualified in many points,
but especially in the variety of languages, wherein he exceeded maine of his
fathers court: he was stated for his wit, gentle in nature, kind with
discretion, bountiful in rewards, not vain in affection, and constant in
friendship; in sum, he was amiable among Ladies, affable among Courtiers,
sociable among soldiers, and honorable among all: such a one, as was a joy to
his Parents, a spectable to his Court, a comfort to his friends, and an honor
to his country.

Now for his sister, as she was exceeding fair, so was she admirably wise,
yet with such modest kindness, that she was so honored for the one, that she
could not but be loved for the other: For every part of her proportion, let
it suffice, that nature showed her Art, in leaving nothing imperfect; for her
stature not tall, nor very low, but in a sweet mean; her countenance sober
with such a sweetness, as ravished the love of much discretion; her speech not
much; but uttered with such government, as amazed the hearers, that could judge
of the worthiness of commendation; her affection chiefly carried unto virtue,
and her love known but unto one, of whom depends a great part of my
history, as hereafter you shall hear. But I will leave further to talk
either of her, or her lover in this place: and only entreat of another Duke,
who dwelt in the Islands of Cotasie, confining upon the aforesaid Islands of
Balino.

This Duke had to name Ordillo, a man famous for much worth as well in wit as
valor: who in all his wars against his enemies was never known to turn his
back, but with advantage, upon retire, gave over no assault till he had entered
the strengths, nor surceased his wars till he had the honor of the field: he
was at home a Lamb, and abroad a Lion, where wisdom with clemency so
governed the nature of his disposition, that his subjects no less loved him,
then his enemies did honor him: In particular, to lay down his commendation
were but tedious, and therefore in sum let it suffice that he was a Prince of
that worth, that made him held worthy of his government.

This Duke had to wife a gracious Lady, whose goodness was such in the world,
as made her soon fit for the heavens: for such was her delight in divine
contemplations, and so little her foie in any earthly substance, that
languishing in the world with longing after heaven, she lived not many
years with her loving Lord on the earth, but the Lord of all love took her
up into the heavens: yet before her departure from this life, she had by her
Lord the Duke, two blessed children, a son and a daughter; her son, named
Fantiro, and her daughter Sinilia. The young Lord, a man of excellent parts,
both for body, and mind, whose particular perfections, would requre a volume
to describe in their true kinds, but for that by a little light, mai^ the
whole day be considered, let thus much suffice, that both for valor and
virtue, he might well be called the Soldiers Dictionarie, (...) the Courtie^s
Looking glass: And for his sister, if I could as briefly set down her
excellency, I would not think it the least point of eloquence; but for all
those rare perfections that may dignifie the name of an earthly creature, I
may say, she was in the honor of reason, the wonder of nature. But least in
my introduction into my history, I (...) more tedious then pleasing, I will
leave this Duke Ordillo with his blessed children for a while, and I will
return to the Duke Firento, of the Islands of Balino, and his son Penillo,
one of the most gallant gentlemen in the world.

This Duke Firento finding his son of so noble a spirit, a^ could not
contain his content, within the confi^es of his fathers country, but that as
well by his delight in the reading of histories, his forwardness to the
wars, his conuersa^on among strangers, and especially such as professed
arms, noting I say his disposition (...) to the travailing life, that he
feared he should not long keep him at home, upon good ^ration, how best to
advise him either for his stay, or travail to his liking, finding him one
day by chance all alone walking in ^ close arbor in his garden, commanding
apart all his attendantes, took occasion in great kindness thus to deal with
him.

Penillo, what fondness it were in me, to flaster thee, with thy much
worthiness of my love, I had rather thou should conceive, then I explain,
although I re^oice therein more of my knowledge, then I would have thee proud
of my content: but my dear son, let me tell thee, that as I think my self
not a little happy in my hope of thy good, as well for my private comfort, as
the profit of my whole country: so, if by the indiscretion of thy disposition,
or by the cruelty of fortune, crossing always the course of virtue, thou
should not only deceive my hope, but destroy my happiness, to the sorrow of
mine age, and cutting off my days, think with thy self my dear son, if it
may lie in thy power to prevent the worst, and perform the best, should not
thou find thine own unkindness, in proouing so unnatural, as to grieve the
soul of him that dearly loves thee, and to be an occasion of his death, who
under heaven was the original of thy life? Be not appauled my son, speak
freely I give thee leave; if thou can imagine the cause of my speech, and as
thou best likest, without the least doubt of my displeasure, I pray thee give
me thy answer.

The young Lord, little expecting this kind of greeting with his good father,
and never unprovided to answer the darkest demand that might be made him,
especially from his father, in whom he could not have any thought of the
least dislike of him, with a stayed humble countenance began thus to frame his
reply. My gracious Lord, as I rejoice not a ^title in the greatness of your
more natural, then deserved love, which looking only into your own
goodness, have builded your hope of my happiness, so if I could find in my
self the least thought of vnthankfolnesse, whereby I might justly purchase
your hard opinion, surely, I should think my self worthy of death, that
should live, to give offense unto the fairest comfort of my life: But, as my
conscience does assure me of no such criminal conceit, so do I protest that I
do not a little marvel what should lead you into this manner of question:
for as I cannot be unnatural, so will I not fear you to be unkind, but
humbly beseech you for the better accomplishing of your content, in some
plainer method to acquaint me with your good meaning.

The old man loath to move grief in his son, whose deserved love he was
fully assured of, and yet willing to be satisfied of his true resolution,
touching his humor of travail, with much ado brake into this speech with
him. Penillo, I have of late noted in thee, as well by thy study in the
languages, as by thy conversation among strangers, and thy love to soldiers,
that the adventure of thy fortune abroad will be more pleasing to thee, then
thy best contentment at home: but if I might by the advice of my experience,
persuade thee to the care of my knowledge, I should easily make thee find the
sweet of the old proverb, that home is home, be it never so homely: The
rolling stone gatheresh no moss, and that prospers in one ground may perish
in another. Adventures are dangerous, the seas boistrous, and the wars
perilous, and great is the difference between strange companions, and home
friends: what can thou see abroad, that is not here? The same earth, and
little different in nature either for heat or cold; the same sun shining
there that shines here; men and women in the same shape that thou see here;
in their universities, the same kind of sch^lers, in their cities, marchantes,
and men of trade and traffic as we have in ours; in their villages, such
farmers and laborers; in their tribunal seats, such judges; in their wars,
such men of arms; in their court such Lords and Ladies, and in all places such
kind of people as in some places of our dominion, thou may take notice of,
if thou be circumspect: what shall I say to persuade thee rather to stay at
home, then stray abroad? Thou have a father that loves thee more dearly, then
any friend can do; a sister, whose virtue with her beauty, deserves an
honorable fortune, and which I think not thy least charge in conscience to
have a care, in as much as may lie in thee to accomplish, thy mother holds
thee so dear as her life, thy friends make a jewel of thy kindness, thy
followers in thine honor settle the hope of their fortune, and my subjects in
thy wisdom repose the happiness of their whole state: All this and many more
particular causes of content, thou have here at home, likely every day to
increase, where abroad, how bitter will be thy change, I fear to think,
should sorrow to hear, and shall not live to dilgeste, though perhaps such
may be the merciful nature of the glorous height of the heavens highest
grace, as may favor thy disposition, prosper thy adventures, and bless thee
in all thy actions. But as it is ill to distrust God, so is it not good to
tempt him: answer me therefore truly to that I demand of thee, whether thy
desire be to travail, or not, and what are ye reasons that persuade thy
resolution, howsoever it be, y^ shall find in me that kindness, that the
condition of thy love deserves.

The young Prince carried no less in obedience to the love of his father, then
willing to adventure his fortune, to atchieue the honor of his hope, in as good
terms as he could, upon the sudden made his father this answer. If it
may become so unworthy a son as my self, to so honorable a father as your
majesty, to stand upon arguments of controversy, for the direction of his
course of life; craving pardon for what soever I shall speak, that may
perhaps be unpleasing to your expectation: I will not only deliver you the
truth of my intent, but the reasons that have induced me into the determination
of my resolution. I have heard your majesty often say that nature begets
no deformity, but rather the true image of it self; and as in outward
proportion, so do I think in the quality of the spirit, the son may
participate with the father; and although tha^ virtue be the gift only of
God, yet in the inclination and disposition of the mind, the son may take
somewhat of the fathers spirit. For proof whereof, I have often heard you say
that yo^ were your fathers son, such was your desire to see the world, for
till he was married he had no desire to sieve at home, hard fare, cold lodging,
bitter storms, sharp (...) in a foreign soil, or in the Ocean sea, were
more pleasing to him, then the most dainty banquet, the softest bed, the
calmest weather; and the sweetest peace, that either his fathers court, his own
chamber, or the most pleasant Paradise that his whole country at home could
yield him: and such were your delights, rather to hear a Trumpet in a field,
then a Lute in ^ chamber, and to see the assault of a forte, then the dancing
of a mask. Your majesty would ever prefer a trotting courser, before an
ambling lootecloth, a peale of ordinance, before a ring of belies, and a
bloody sword before a painted looking glass: in sum, if in alsuch courses
of your conceit, you followed the inclination of my Grandfather, will you think
it strange in me to follow the steps of your affection? Have you not allowed my
reading of histories, and how many of any account are written only of home
actions? Have you not wished me to make much of strangers? and shall I not
study languages where with to entertain them? I must confess there is no
friend to a father, whose love cannot be separated from the fruit of his own
body. Home dwelling is full of ease, but not of honor, which is rather
purchased by adventures, then by nature inherited: friends are kind, so may
strangers be full of courtesse, and he that looks not into the world, wants
much wherein to glorify the Lord God. My sisters fortune I had rather leave
to the effect of your wisdom, then my weakness: and knowing her discretion will
nothing fear the honor of her affection. My mothers tender care of me may be
more kind then commodious, for though I will not live but to be in all
humblenes her child, yet mus I have a care for my countries good not to be a
babie to my (...): for to read of the noble adventures of diverse honorable
(...) rits, what perilles they passed, what conquests they made (...) they
enriched their countries, enlarged their kingdoms. ^nanced their followers,
increased their (...), and left (...) to their houses; shall I as one dull of
wit not to vnderst (...) what I reed, or fearful of spirit to follow the
paths of (...) passages, not like your son lie still at home, and blow
(...) banquet, dance in a chamber, or tumble in a bed, where (...) sleep may
dull my senses, music may brown my spirit, (...) su^feiting may kill my
stomach: far ^e it from your (...) to show so little of his fathers nature
for dangers, they are the ^als of the valiant; for adventures they are the
honor of the resoluto, and for labors, they are the praises of the patient,
(...) where are these at home? No, by traua^le is gotten knowledge, and to
answer to some points of your propositions: (...) the same sun shines in
one place that shines in another, but not at one and the same time; men and
women are of the same proportion, but not of the same disposition, which is a
note of great regard; the diet, apparel, deineanour, and inclination of every
country is to be deserved, and the observations well taken may fall out to be
commodious, so I have heard you say, my self have read, and verily believe: by
travail I shall learn who are our friends or foes, and so either to esteem
them or beware of them: My friends that you may spare will follow me in my
course, or allow of my content, my servants will attend the issue of my
fortune, and my country I hope shall be benefited by my travail. I intend no
long voyage, nor any at all without your liking, but if with your leave I
might have my desire, I must confess I would willingly a little set foot
abroad into the world, and for that there are, as I am certainly informed, a
great number of gallant young gentlemen, shortly intending to attend the
Emperor in his wars against the Turk, wherein, who performs the true
parts of valor, shall return with the badge of deserved honor, I humbly
beseech you, with as little charge as it shall please you, to furnish me to
this piece of service, from whence I am assuredly persuaded, I shall never
return with coffeehouse. Now having revealed unto your majesty both the
nature of my inclination, the ground from whence it grew, and the reasons that
have there to induced me, I leave to your fatherly love to consider of my
duty, and your discreet consideration, to think of my stay or frauaile.

The good old Duke, finding that the colte of a courser would hardly be brought
to the harrow, a lapwing would run as soon as it was out of the shell, and a
bird of his own fether would take after his own slight, though it could not
but grieve him, to have him far out of his sight, yet knowing the quarrel good
that he went to fight in, with the Emperor against the Turk, and that many
princes had sent their sons to gain honor in that piece of service, after a
few words of some unwillingness to want the comfort of his presence, was not
only contented to like well of his desire, but promised, with his blessing to
furnish him for his voyage: And so, leaving him with his father the Duke, going
into his palace to persuade the Duchess patience to his departure; I will
return to the Duke Ordillo of the Islands of. Cotasi, of whom when I have
told you what happened of his son Fantiro, I will return again unto the Duke
Firento, and the young Prince.

But touching the Duke Ordillo, you shall understand, that one day in the
heat of summer intending to take his pleasure in a forest near unto the sea
side, and having a stately read dear so long in chase, as had almost spent
all his whole cry of hounds, weary with following the cry, and knowing that
the young Prince his son was of so strong a body, though but a child in
years, that he would bring him the news of the death of the Dear, with a soft
pace breathing his horse, with a pretty train of his attendantes, retired
himself to his palace in a park near unto the forest, where I will leave
him for a while expecting the return of his son, and I will tell you what
became of the fruit of his expectation.

The young Prince sole heir male unto his father, and so little beloved by his
uncle brother to the Duke, and one of his privy Counsel, that to advance his
own children, he cared not what became of his brothers son, was by a
villain that he had hired for the purpose, trained aside from the chase,
somewhat near unto the sea, where having him alone, far enough from
company, either to hear what he said, or to see what he did, drew out his
sword, and with a terrible countenance framed for the purpose, after he had
made him to lightdowne from his horse, used this speech unto him: How now
young master? You dined well, but you had no good sauce to your meat, but I
must make you such a dish of sauce to your supper, their all the cooks in your
fathers Court never saw the like: For to make short work with you, I must see
what blood is about your heart, and I must send it to your uncle to his
venison: now, if you can come and bear him company, you shall tell me if it
be not worth the tasting.

The young Prince Fantiro, having in his heart no little spark of his fathers
spirit, seeming nothing at all dismayed at his shreates, nor as it were,
making ante fearful account of death, throwing off his cloak, and vnbuttoning
his doublet, with a s^erne countenance, made him this answer: Thou saucie
rascal, what art thou? a man? a dog? or a devil? that dare to think so
villainous a thought, or to utter so impious a speech, as to murder the
innocent, or to luie a violent hand upon the least hair of my head? am not I
son to thy master? and master to thy self? did I ever hurt thee? Naie, have
I not been too bountiful in my good will, unto so ungrateful a villain?
Look about thee, see thou not a God in the heavens? and know thou not
there is a devil in hell? that upon the instant of thy villainy, stands not
ready to receive thee? Oh worst of all creatures, how can thou look toward
the heavens? and do not hang down thy head, to think of the villainy of thy
heart? Look thou wretched slave, my breast is open for thee, think I fear not
death, for I know I shall not live one minute past the hour that is appointed
me; and therefore do thy worst: and for mine viscle, God forgive him the
unnatural villainy that he has showed in this action.

The intended murderer, not a little amazed at the spirit of so young a body,
unwilling to return to the Court without performance of his promise, as well
for the want of his promised reward, as for fear of his displeasure that had
set him to work, and yet loath to embrue his hands in the blood of so sweet
a creature, replied unto him with these words: My Lord, the Lord of lords
knows how loath I am, to fall into the lapse of the devil by this hellish
action; and therefore as well to save your life from the murtherous malice of
your uncle, who will never leave by all devises to seek your-bloud, as to save
mine own assured to be lost, if I return without his contentment: I beseech
you give ear to what I say, and I hope it shall be for both our good. In the
next haven near adioining, liesh a ship ready to put to sea toward the
city of Dolno, in the Islands of Balino, the Merchant that has freight and
victualed her is one Mario Duronte, a friend of mine, to whom I will put you as
my son, entreating him to carry you shither, and there to leave you
either-with some Courtier or Merchant that he is acquainted with for some term
of years, for that I would have you to learn the languages; Now there, if your
fortune be to do well, I shall be glad of it, if otherwise, woe be to me,
though unwillingly to be the author of it.

This speech though it were no little grief to him to leave his fathers Court,
and to abandon his country in so poor a sort, and upon so hard a fortune, yet
willing of all ils to choose the least, was contented rather to accept this
little kindness, to be put servant to an unfit master, then to trust any
longer to the courtesy of so wicked a creature; and therefore with great
thanks, assuring him that God would regard his pity, and that himself
would never forget his honesty, giving him a purse of gold that he had about
him, keeping very few crowns for himself, took his way toward the haven,
and by the way meeting with none that knew him, passed vndescried unto the
ship, where being aboard, and entertained into service with Signor Mario,
they put to sea, the tide serving fi^lie for their purpose, leaving the
villain to return to his wicked master with the news of his Nephew, whom I
will leave at the Court, telling him in secret a devised lie of the drowning of
the young Prince, and I will tell you what became of him, and his fortune.

The wind serving well to their wished shore, it was not long till Mario
Doronte arrived, at the city of Dolno, where he had not lien many days, but
having occasion to go to the court, took with him his young servant Rantifo,
for so was the young Prince now miscalled by the villain that had intended
his death: Now being come to the Court, and there well entertained by some not
of the meanest sort, with whom he had to (...) with in his business, crossing
the Court, there happened a Noble man of the Dukes chamber, to cast his eye
upon this young Prince, the Merchantes imagined prentise, whom calling to him,
after a few words had with him, affecting very much both his person and
spirit, made such means to the Merchant, that for a small sum of crowns,
with promise of a greater friendship, he obtained him at his hands, and
entertaining for his page, and finding in him such fine qualities, as did much
deserve the increase of his good liking of him, he held him in such account,
as was not commonly seen nor by him expected, upon so little knowledge: But
the Merchant after the dispatch of his business returned to his country, and
the young Prince now a page carried his service with such care, as was not a
little regarded in the Court, nor unrewarded of his master; who in few years,
having perfected his forwardness in many good qualities, by maintaining his
desires in all good instructions, with true commendations of his worthiness,
preferred him to the Duke his master, who in a little time, took so due a
regard of his service, that to the view of his whole Court, he made show of
his exceeding favor. But I will leave him for a while in the beginning of his
fortune, in the Court of his fathers enemy unknown to him, and himself
unknown to the Duke what he was, and I will return to Pinello, the young
Prince, son to Feronte.

The Duke of Dolno in the Islands of Balino, who having obtained leave of his
parents for his voyage into the Emperors Court, and so to attend him in his
wars against the Turk, had no sooner set foot aboard, but a sudden storm
took him scarce out of sight of land, and drove him for sauegard of his life,
and all that were with him, to put in at a haven within the Islands of Cotasi;
where the Duke Ordillo his fathers enemy was chief governor: who though he
were in his debt for a sum of money lent unto his father, and therefore by
lack of payment had purchased his displeasure, yet having heard of his sons
arrival, sent to entertain him in such good sort, as befitted the honor of
his person, who being met in great solemnity, by diverse of his Lords, was
after he had been feasted by the Governors of his chief city, with a great
troop of Nobles attended unto the Court of the Duke, of whom he quicklte
received such an unexpected welcome, as in the roialty of his spirit, would
have remitted both all debt and displeasure: not to stand too long upon
needless discourses, let it suffice that the Dukes kindness, the Nobles
attendance, the Ladies sweet favors, and the welcome of the whole Court, was
such, as made him many days longer then he determined, to make aboade in that
country: but above all, the gracious kind countenance of the Dukes only
daughter, not a little affected by this gallant young Prince, was not the least
cause of his state, of whom since a great part of my story depends, I will
tell you, what I read fell out betwixt them.

This young Princess the only daughter of Ordillo, not a little affecting the
outward person, and inward virtue of this young Prince, who was nothing behind
with her in great contentment with her much worthiness of his good liking, took
occasion one morning, seeing him walking out of his lodging into a garden,
right against her chamber window to take a private way through a gallerie
down into the same garden, where in a close walk near unto the green alley
where the Prince was walking unseen of him a pretty while, fell into this
talk with a gentlewoman an attendant of hers, whom she held in great account,
and to whom she revealed the secret of all her heart: Oh Delina quoth she (for
so was her name) little do thou know the cause of my ^ate melancholy, but I
dare trust thee with my life, and for that I know thou have past through the
Labyrinth, that I am now in, I will hope the better of thy advise for my
comfort: Since the coming of the Prince Penillo, into my fathers Court, thou
have not seen me heartily merry, for though I conceal much of my passion, yet
will I somewhat ease my heart, with telling thee somewhat of my mind. Some four
or five days before the news came to our court of the arrival of this worthy
Prince, I had a dream that held me all the time of my sleep, the most part of
a whole night: the remembrance whereof in the morning and ever since, has
troubled me very much: which as near as I can remember I will tell thee.

Me thought I was going thorough a thick wood, where were a number of nets
and snares, laid in every pathe where I should pass, yet me thought I
passed thorough them so easily, as if they had been of no strength; till at
last I came toward a great water, where near unto the shore lay a great
Boat, and from the Boat lay a long line, made all of gold and pearl,
within the compass whereof, treading yer I was aware, me thought some thing
gave a snatche, wherewith the line whip^e about my middle, and carried me into
the Boat, with the sudden fright whereof I awaked. Now what say thou to
this dream? Delina, no less witty concetted of her dream, then noting the
carriage of her humor, made her this answer. Madame if a blind body may catch a
Hare, I may happen to come somewhat near the expasition of this night fancy.
The wood you went in, is the court, the nets, the eyes and tongues of your
suitors, that had no power to take sure hold of your affection; now the great
water may be the Sea, and the golden line, the young Prince, that may carry you
away from your father: for if I be not much deceived, he has you by the heart,
whatsoever it was that held you by the middle. Unhappie wench, quoth the
Princess, thou rouest too near, that hittest the mark so right: but yet
may thou be deceived in one point, though not in some other; I have past
the nets, that is true; and I am caught, it is not untrue, but that he either
will, or shall carry me away, that I fear will not fall out: But God knows
all, to whose only will I leave it, as far may come as near, foes may be
friends, and love where he does light does more then all the world besides. His
presence may please the purest eye, and for his wit, I heard my father wonder
at it, for his bounty, our court speaks of it, and for his virtue, who does
not see it? but for his love, happy is she that shall enidie it: for princess
wisdom, with honorable bounty, shows a divine spirit in an excellent
nature, and of such a temper I hold him, and for such a one I love him, and
will ever honor him, though I never have him.

The young Prince hearing this pretty parley betwixt the Lady of his love, and
her handmaid, with a voice loud enoughe to be heard of them that were so
near, fell thus to talk to the air: Oh heavens, who can withstand the force
of the fates? was I going to the wars to gain honor in the field, and am I
driven to seek a peace, by being vanquished in a chamber? Did I go to fight
with the great Turk, and am I now afraid of a little Christian? Is this the
fruit of a storm at Sea? to come into this kind of calm at land? Well what
should I talk to the trees that hear me not? or to the birds that
understand me (...)? or to the air that helps me not? Oh Bilanta, blessed
werte thou borne, if thy beauty have been the beginning of my happiness; and
happy, if thy virtue join issue with my affection: for though our parents be
at jar, we may be at one, and what anger in them cannot yield unto, love
may effect in us, an end of heartburning in our patentes, and a beginning of
quiet in our countries. But how shall I hope of thy love? my fathers
displeasure may breed a doubt of my love; besides she may be affected
otherwise then I know: where at the young Princess in her close walk replied
no. What quothe the young Prince, is there here such an echo? The Lady again
replied, oh. The young Prince amazed at this echo, went on with this speech:
Oh that I knew Bilanta indeed would regard my love; she answered love: Love
quoth the Prince, but whom does she mean? I would I knew his name; she
answered name: name quoth the Prince, but who may it be? If it be one only,
she answered only: Only quoshe he, only happy in deed, would so were
Pinello; she made answer Pinello: With that the Prince putting the words of
the echo together, made up this speech: Oh love, name only Pinello. And
musing a little upon his conceit of this sound, looking aside, espied the young
princess, with her attendant walking out of the Arbor into the Garden, whom
meeting with, at the end of a cross alley, he saluted with this greeting.

Sweet Princess, when there be two Suns shining at one instant, it cannot be
but fair weather: one in the sky, and an other on the earth, both which meet
so sweetly in this blessed piece of ground, that let him die in his bed, that
will not walk in such a morning. The Lady not fully persuaded of his
affection, for all his playing with ecche, and yet hoping well of his words, till
his deeds fell out otherwise, with a modest smile made him this answer. My
Lord, if your speeches were not so high in the clouds, that poor souls on
the earth know not how to guess of your meaning, I should be the better able
to frame an answer to your salutation; but howsoever the sun shine in the
heavens, the shadow of your imagination, if it were a substance of that worth,
that might answer a far less figure, then your favor, would be loath that
any foul weather should hinder the happiness of your fair walk: but I
perceive such morning Astronomers can play prettily with their own humors.
Pretty Lady (quoth the prince) the best play that I know, is at, be you
pleased, where he that lights upon a good card were unwise if he would
change: the princess rouing unhappily at his conceit replied again, and yet
my Lord, to be afraid of good fortune, is sometime cause of much loss: yea
Madame answered the Prince, but fortune is so fantastical, that there is no
trust to be had in her* and therefore I hold my opinion; rather to keep a good
choice, then to adventure a bad change. I am no gamster answered the Princess,
and therefore can speak but idlte of the sport, but they that are pleased are
happy, and they will not hold themselves so, are unwise. The Prince playing
upon this word pleased, went forward with this speech: Good Madam, mate it
then please you to be pleased, with the service of my affection? which no
further then desert, will seek the houour of your favor. The Lady with a
modest smile somewhat concealing her content, (...) him this answer: My good
Lord, I am glad it pleases your greatness to be so merry with your poor
friends: but such service, as your favor, must be graced with greater honor
then my unworthiness can accomplish.

The Prince not a little contented with her speech, replied again in these
words: Madam, to make a long harvest about a little corn, were but a weak
piece of husbandry; and therefore not to hold you with a tedious discourse in
plain terms, you are the card that I mean, my play is no jest, your love
is the stake, that I would be glad if I could to win, you are the choice, that
I have made, and that I would be loath to change: and therefore if a soldiers
eloquence, may have favor in your audience, let my heart and hand in your
honor speak for my desert in your affection. The Lady not able to cover the
fire, that was now past kindling, brake suddenly into this answer. My Lord,
to reap the corn ere it be ripe, may prove more haste then good speed, and
yet to let it grow till it shed, were great loss to the farmer; and therefore
the taking of time is profitable to the provident. I will not teach your honor
what to do, but if my love be the prize of your pleasure, you cannot loose the
hope of your patience, assuring my self, that the reach of your conceit,
exceeds not the roialtie of your spirit; which in the regard of virtue
deserves nothing but honor: and for that the heart of a soldier, is free
from the tongue of a dissembler. I will rather believe the truth of valor,
then give ear to the falsehood of a weaker spirit: But for that many cross
fortunes, may hinder the happiness of the most honorable resolutions, let me
entreat your patience to make trial of (...) constanci^, ere you make my
unworthiness, mistress of my contentment.

The Prince nothing disliking this good motion in her good mind, kissing her
hand, made this kind conclusion: Fair Princess, the discretion of your good
motion, I exceedingly like of; for your credit to my truth, I cannot but thank
you, for the honor wherewith you entitle me, I return it fully* upon you, for
the nature of my love, let your virtue discern it, and for the faith of my
affection, I vow you shall command it: but as you know I have resolutely
intended to attend the Emperor in his wars against the Turk, where if I
gain honor, the garlandd shall be graced in your wearing; if I die, let it
suffice thy self to know the honor of my love, with, whom howsoever be my
fortune, I vow to leave the faith of my affection: and so, thinking to proceed
in their further conference, spying certain Ladies, and Gentlewomen with their
friends and attendants coming into the garden, they singled themselves one
from another, he retiring himself to his lodging, and she to her close
arbor, where I leave them for a while to meditate upon their muses, and I will
return unto (...) late Page unto the Duke Feronte.

Fantiro son to the Duke Ordillo, preferred by the Merchant before spoken of,
unto one of the Duke Ferontes Court, and after by his Lord and master unto the
Duke himself, having so well carried himself in his service, that he was not
only beloved of the Duke his now Lord and master, but of all his whole Court,
and especially of Senilla the only daughter of the Prince, of whom he had
often received such secret tokens of honorable fausurs, as except he would hide
both his eyes, he must needs perceive some part of her affection: But among
al, this was not the least, that one day among other, in the afternoon, the
Duke being disposed to have some (...), and dancing in the presence, falling
out in a dance, that every knight was to take his Lady, and every Lady her
servant, on whom she would bestow her favor; in the presence of her father
the Duke she took Fantiro by the hand and accompanied him in the measure, till
the dancing was wholly ended. Which was noted of many, especially of one, who
having more wealth then honor, thought to buy love with dross, which
ill-favored dog, vnworth^e to be called a man, yet attended with far better
then himself, seeking in what he might to disgrace this unknown Prince, came
one day by chance into a galleris near adioining to the presence, where he
found the young Princess walking all alone, and upon the sudden standing as it
were in a muse, looking upon a picture of an Ape playing with an Owl, where
smiling to her self which was the best shaped creature, she saw coming
toward her the only hobby horse of a man, that ever disgraced a coat of
velvet: whom, rather for the favor that he held with her father, then for
any affection, that the had reason to carry him, she for ill fashions sake
thus saluted Signor Sperto, for so was he called (whether christened or no, I
know not) God give you good morrow: The flouch of a slouen with a slauering
smile, upon a slubbered conceit, after many good (...) began to trouble her
with this tattle. Truly (...), I am glad it was my good hap, to mere so
convenient (...) lie with your (...), as well for the honor that I wish you,
a^ for the service I would be glad to do you: for though a Quince be a tree
of no straightness, yet it bears a fair (...) wholesome fruit, the fallow
(...) is rough, yet it bears the best (...), and the Ore has but an ill hue,
yet is there pure gold to be had in it, so may it be that in me you may
u^nde some cause of coffeehouse, (...) you have made trial of more then I
will protest: but emploie me in your service, consider of my desert, and do me
justice in your favor: Let your fathers love be an ingression into my Grace,
and the endeavor of my duty, the increase of my good for tune: The (...) (...)
is commended for shining as well upon the valleies as the mountains, ye sea is
beloved as well for a Pinnis as a proud ship, and is not the pearl in a shell,
more worth then the oil of a Whale? then think it not impossible, to find
that spirit in me that you may perhaps find in a fairer faced ereature: a
Diamonde is the brighter for his foil, a fair horse, is the more beautiful,
by the deformity of a foul jade, and how can you be better graced, then in
favoring the disgratious? for my love, I will compare it with any living; and
for my service I would it could express my loving. Good Madam pardon my
boldness in acquainting you with my suit, which has no life but in the only
fruit of your good favor.

The Lady so little liking the outward dog, that she had no patience to
think of the inward Devil; little studying for an answer, brake of a sudden
into this speech: Sir, for your kindness I thank you, but for your pains I
would be loath to trouble you: for though your eloquence be great, yet all is
but a sound, and when the stringes are once slipped, the lute is but a piece of
wood: the Diamond is to be loved for his fire, not his fotle, a comely horse
with a jade, will make an ^lfauoured conjunction, (...) to grace the
ungracious, is against the hair of a good wit. My fathers love, and my liking
may differ upon causes, and your service and my command not meet in any
occasion of emploiment: for the sun shining on the valleies, it is a blessing
of the heavens; and for the Pinnis sailing thorough the seas, it is by the
bearing nature of the water, but for the pearl in the shell, indeed I must
confess it is far better out, of it, then in it; and to conclude, for the
inward sharpness of your wit, if it were not in so gross a person, I
could perhaps take patience with my favor, to make some emploiment of your
service: but for that I would not feed you with vain hopes, to hang upon the
skirtes of my fair speeches, let (...) suffice you not to abuse you, that I
could be content of ten to hear you, but never to see you. Whereat the wicked
wretch, like a galde horse kicking at the noise of a currie-combe, fret^ing at
his own deformity, where a squinte eye, a half nose, and a wrie mouth had no
grace, in a great rage, (...) (...) his cold entertainment went away with
these words: Well, if you like not that you see, you may pull out your eyes,
and softly muttering to himself, I will meet with you ere you be, aware, and
cross you in your most comfort, meaning with Fantiro her love, now in that
Court called Rantifo.

But I will leave the wretch to his wicked inventions, going from the Lady to
the Duke her father, and I will tell you a few words of the Lady and her
lover, whose good hap it was presently after the departure of this sweet
Gentleman, to come into the gallerie where his Lady and mistress was, very
solemnlie walking, but fearing that he had offended her favor with pressing
into her presence, began to retire himself toward the door, as not willing
further to mo^ue her patience; which the Lady espying, and willing a little to
embolden his duty in her favor, called him unto her with these words: My
good servant, what means this too much good manner? or shall I call it
strangeness? or found you them not here that you looked for? or are you
displeased with them that you see? Truly I will not hurt you, and to put you in
further comfort, if you have any suit to my father or affection to any friend
of mine, assure your self I will not hinder you, though how much I will
further you I will not tell you.

The young Gentleman, in this Court unknown what he was, and therefore
carrying no greater title, not a little glad of this kind greeting, made her
this humble answer: My gracious Lady and mistress, I feared nothing but your
displeasure, nor joy in any thing under the heavens but your favor: my suit
to your father, is but his imploiment of my service, and for my affection to
your friends, it shall be wholly in the honor of your virtue: Now therefore I
humbly beseech you pardon but my truth, and regard my trial, which shall make
me nothing my self more then I shall be happy in your service. Oh servant
(quoth. the Princess) I see you study not for nothing, I believe you read Ovid,
you would seem to make such a Metamorphosis of your self, of late a soldier
altogether in the field ^ now a lover fall to courting in a chamber. Rantifo
not unprovided of an (...) replied in this manner: Good Madam, my affection is
no fiction, what soever it may please you to think of my study, but when the
honor of a soldier is the favor of his mistress, give me leave to serve your
father in the field, and honor you in the Court: and though the meandness of
my estate make the unworthiness of my fortune, yet think a star in his right
place, may hap to prove to be a planet.

The Princess of the sudden began thus to reply, for stars (...) planets,
I leave the propriety of their places, to the study of Astronomers; but if
your mind be heavenly, the highest prosper your humor: and, as she was going
onwards with her speech, upon the sudden she espied certain Ladies coming in
to enter at her company into the garden, wherewith leaving her prayer to her
servants Amen, with a favorable glaunce she left him to his muses, and with
the Ladies that came to her, went down into the garden; where I will leave her
in the pleasant walks to take the benefit of the sweet air, and I will tell
you, what did follow of Fantiro, and his fortune.

Fantiro now called Rantifo, no sooner had left his mistress, but with a
concealed ^oy gat him presently to the Dukes chamber, where taking his place of
attendance, espi^d coming from the Duke, Signor Sperto the sweet gentleman
that I before spoke of, who coming by Rantifo, with a fleering laughter, as
one that had played the Jew with him behind his back, gave him a wrie mouth
good morrow; which he taking very kindl^e, not yet knowing his cunning
practice, returned him very humbly: but after his departure finding the Dukes
countenance, as it seemed to him upon the sudden somewhat altered, from his
former kind of kindness, began so suspect, that Jack an apes was not without
his tricks, and that his being with the Duke had done him no good; as he did
shortly after perceive: for within few days after, it was his hap lying
under a pale of the park near unto the palace, where the Duke with this
wicked horselea^h was walking, to hear the talk that passed betwixt him and
the Duke, which was as follows.

My gracious Lord (quoth this ungracious lubber) the many favors where with
your high^es has bound me unto you, in all the sernice that I can devise to
(...) you, will not suffer (...) to conceal the least cause that I know (...)
be an occa^ of your discontent, and in what I can humbl^e to advise your
favor in the preventing of all that may endanger the just weight of your
displeasure. The Duke better acquainted with his wit then his conscience,
minding to make use of the one, (...) soever he should find of the other,
replied unto him with th^se words. Good Sperto, thy careful regard of my
content, I cannot but kindly think of; and thy providence in preventing all
occasion of my dislike, I will not let pass unrewarded: and therefore I pray
thee playnelie deliver me thy mind in every point of thy meaning.

Signor Sperto, having studied upon purpose, to pla^ she d^laine in his kind;
began thus to utter his (...). My gracious Lord, for that you shall see how
indiffer entlie I will deal, in giving reason his due, as I would be no
aduancer of pride, so would I not be any back friend to the honor of
vert^* in the sky you see there is but one Moon, which has her light from
the Sun: now on this Moon attendes a number of stars, but if any one should
presume past his place to step within the circle of the Moon, think you not
the higher powers would not thrust him quite out of the heavens? I am no
Astronomer (quoth the Duke) but I think it were ^it it should be so: but I
pray thee trouble me not with figures, while I would have thee more plainly
tell thy mind. Then answered Signor Sperto, may it please your grace, by the
sky* I mean your court, the Moon your daughter, and the Sun your self,
from whom and the Almighty, she takes all the virtue of her honor* Now if
any attendant in your court should presume further then your pleasure, to
press into the favor of her affection, were he not worthy to be banished
your court? Yes, and shall (quothe the Duke) whatsoever he be without
exception: Then my gracious Lord, said Sperto, you know, you have long
favored, and by your favor advanced Rantifo, a stranger in your country, and
such a one as though I must confess by his much worth many ways, deserves
no little honor* yet if for your favor ^ustlie extended unto him, he will
presume to wrong your kindness, in (...) at your Crown, or robbing you of your
chief comfort, I lean to your wisdom to judge of his reward.

The Duke marking well every part of his speech, and withal ^ing to mind the
open show of her favor in taking out of Rantifo from all the company, both
of friends and strangers, to lead her in the meas^re of her dance, thinking
well both upon the man and the matter, made him this answer. Signor Sperto,
I see well thy watchful care of my comfort, and do suspect no less then
perhaps thou do better perceive, but to prevent all mishappe, and give no
cause of offense; let us ad^ what is to be done. The man has served
faithfully, and in many good services has deserved honorably, our friends
in a manner all do love him, I hear almost no man speak ill of him, and if
our daughter affect him, shall we therefore hate him? God (...) (...), virtue
will have honor in despite of fortune, and love has caused princes to favor
very poor people, I speak not this either to pardon his presumption, or to
favor his proceeding, for I will devise in what I can, to remove him far
enough from my daughter, howsoever my self shall regard him. But let me have
thy advise how so to work it, that he may rather be glad of our countenance,
then mistrust our coffeehouse.

Signor Sperto, fearing to be thought malicious, and yet not able to cover the
^llanie of his humor, made this answer to the Duke. May it please your
highness, to consider of what m^le (...) out in ^he event of this fortune, if
it wore not fore seen* If your daughter should ^o disgrace your ^hole Court,
as to cast her affection upon a stranger, and leaning to look upon many
noble per (...), should fall in liking with I know not whom, nor of how
(...) a parentage; it cannot be but a discomfort to your heart, so to see your
^ewell, that you hold of the highest price in your Crown, to be set in so
base gold, as may perhaps prove but copper: and if it be as pure as the
purest, that he should prove honorable in birth, wise in conceit, valiant in
(...), virtuous in disposition, and every way worthy of as much honor, as the
greatest of your favor could af^orde him; yet what a heartburning would it
breed in your country, that a stranger should (...) (...) (...) of (...)
(...), and carry away the garland of your Duke (...)* yea, (...) (...) not
only all the actions of your noblest (...) would lie as dead, or not spoken of,
while the Trumpe of ^ame would* sound only the honor of his fortune; and so
in process of time, not only your Court and country would be disgraced*
(...) agrieued, but your highness should see a greatfall of your (...) (...),
when by the fresh memory of his fortune* all former honors would be
forgotten; but to prevent all misfortune.

Stay there a little (quoth the Duke) and let me tell (...) a little of my
mind: my daughter, is but a part of my self, that is now from my self; in
affecting the vertuon^, I must commend her disposition, and in favoring the
honorable* I cannot mislike her discretion; and that he is honored by me, he
may the better be graced by her: Now, if a stranger deserve w^ll it may give
an example to our Court, (...) to bar him his right, is a b^ot in courtesy:
she may like though not love, and he serve though for no such reward.
Moreover, what he is we know not, and therefore let us think the best, and
such may be his worth, as may be worthy our regard. Fame is not partial
(...) sounding the honor of deserts; and therefore who runs (...), let him
win the Bell, and wear the Garland* he has little grace in himself, that
fears the fortune of another, and the fresh memory of one action brings in
the honor of another: and for my self, while I live, I will keep my sword,
when I am gone let my son keep my scepter. For Rantifo, I find so much good
in him, that I cannot but love him; and yet not so well, but to prefer my
daughter to a better fortune, and to content such of my Court as may be
agrieued at him, let me hear thy advise for the remove of him both from our
Court, and country.

Signor Sperto biting the lip at th^se speeches, and yet glad to hear this
conclusion, made the Duke this answer: May it please your Majesty to think of
y^ embassage you mean to sen^ to the Duke of the Islands of Cotasi, touching
the sum of (...), that he has long detained from you, and the disgratious
answer that he lately sent you: This Gentleman your (...) knows to ^e (...)
(...) the (...), of a (...) (...) it* that will not (...)* (...) (...) your
(...), and one that will be glad to receive such honor at your harms: Now if
it may please your highness; his return may be at your pleasure, which not
^ffecting* your expectation, may have favor at your pleasure* The Duke
Ordillo, you know (...) a man of a stou^ courage, and (...) (...) such
spirities meet, God knows that will fall out* (...) (...) (...) be otherwise
then well with him* your Majesty may at your pleasure revenge: In the mean
time, that your Court (...) (...) may take exceptions, at your either (...)
his* good deserving, nor disfauouring his worthy virtues* that your daughter
may not suspect the least looking into her affection* nor Rantifo imagine his
service in any such nature suspected, but in being so graced may hold
himself well pleased, I think your Highness shall not do amiss in this
devise.

Signor Sperto (quoth the Duke) I will not flatter thy wit, though I will
love thy counsel, and follow thy advise, which shall he known only to our
selves: To morrow we will grace him in all we can, both in word and
countenance, so that he shall mistrust nothing of our meaning, and forth with
we will (...) furnish him forth in this embassage: and so Signor Sperto I will
bid thee farewell, I will for a while be private here in mine A^our, I pray
thee give commandment to the Porter, that no man come to trouble me, till I
return into my chamber. With which command, Signor Sperto taking his leave
left the Duke ^one in a close walk, using these few words to himself: Oh the
misery of time, what does this wicked world bring forth* nothing but sin and
iniquity: virtue more pitied then beloved, honor more envied then
accompanied, valor more commanded then rewarded, and charity more vanished
then embrased* Strangers should be relieved, virtue honored, honor (...) (...),
and charity beloved, but that good world (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) feared,
or hated, virtue scorned* honor disgraced, valor unrewarded, and charity
unseen. Princes cannot be themselves, for the greatest powers have not (...)
greatest peace, a (...) will trouble a Lion, a Louse an Eagle, a Mous^ an (...)
a (...) (...), (...) ^ ^anker a man* (...) (...) (...) be (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) she burst for her laboue, Enoi^ is a (...) (...) of the spirit
(...) spi^ all her venom against virtue. Oh Sp^o, though the (...) of thy
devise I will follow, for the quietof my Court, ^et mu^ I needs ^aie. I find
thy (...) against Rantifo* (...) (...) reason is I know not, but that an (...)
(...) (...) (...) an Eagle; I know my daughter cannot affect the^ howsoever she
favor him, but would to God my son (...) (...) ^ome: And with that word
using no more speech ^ose up from the seat; and r^tired himself into his
palace, where I will (...) him to determine of his embassage, and Rantifo to
(...) (...) of the (...) of his close enemy; and I will return again to
Penillo, son to the Duke Feronte, whom I left in the Court of Ordillo his
fathers enemy, fast by the heart in love wish his (...) (...) young Princess
Bilanta.

Penillo the young Prince (...) to (...) ^he Duke of Balino, after a few days
of royal entertainment in the Court of Ordillo, wish much contentment in the
honorable secr^ kindness of his love the Princess Merilla, receiving a
favor of her which he swear to wear in his (...), ^en he was in the field
against the enemy, lea^ing ^th (...) a heart of gold, set full of Diamondes,
took his journey toward the Emperors Court, and so with him toward his
wars against the Turk, where in the face of the ^hole Army, he won such
honor by his valor, that the Emperor to show his ^oue unto him, embraced him
in his arms* calling him (...), and wishing that he were so happy as to have
a daughter (...) such a Prince. Well to be short, such ^ so honorable was his
(...) with the Emperor, as well in his wa^re, as his Court, that with his
valor he won she love of the Emperor, and wi^h his kindness, the good will
of all his followers, in the predicamen^ of which happiness, after his royal
entertainment (...) (...) (...) ^he Court as all other places of the Emperors
(...), ^uing received from the Emperor two rich jewels, (...) (...) a jewel
of great value, which the Emperor himself (...) out of his own hatte; the
other a (...), the (...) of (...) there of (...) lately taken from the (...) in
that service, with all humble thankfulness (...) making homewards with all the
speed he could, (...), but that he would take the Court of Ordillo (...)* where
unto his mistress he would first recount the (...) of his fortune* (...) sweet
soul as one languishing for the lack of her new love did in his absence
spend the most part of her time in prayer for his prosperity. But I will
leave further to te^ of their fortunes for a while, and I will re^ (...), now
called Rantifo, in the Court of Feroute the (...) of Balino.

(...) (...) having set down his determination for the sending away of
Rantifo in his embassage, according unto the advice of Signor Sperto, walking
one date into his garden, certain of his Counsel (...) with him, among whom
Signor Sperto cou^ not be spared, caused Rantifo to be called before (...)
with a pleased seeming countenance, he uttered this speech; Rantifo, the love
that I have long borne she, the faith that I and in thy service, and the much
good, that I many ways note in thee, have made me desirous to advance thee to
that honor, that I know thou will deserve. I am determined to send to my
unkind neighbor Ordillo, the Duke of the Islands of Cotasi, he has been
long in my debt, and I think means to laugh me (...) with my money: a million
of crowns will maintain a pretty Army, for a sudden piece of service: and
since he (...) not (...), bu^ makes delays the excuse of his (...) (...) I
(...) ^ende thee to him, with this resolution, either to (...) my money, or to
(...) him know my mind which in brief shall ^e this, that I will fet^ (...)
perforce, or set fire of his palace: now though shou ar^ a stranger in our
Court, yet being beloved of o^ selves, if thou (...) take it upon thee, let us
see who dare (...) at ^ur (...).

Rantifo (...) (...) to ly^g under a p^le, the devise of this pl^t in the
park, (...) the Duke and Signor Sperto, seeming not to know any thing thereof,
and fearing the Dukes displeasure, if he should refuse it, made him this humble
answer: My Gracious Lord, though (...) of your own honor, proceed so much
goodness, a^ (...) so ^xtende your favor upon so small desert, as I cannot but
blush to confess (...) let not the honor of your favor toward me, be a
cause of your N^bles ^eartburning against me ^for though my study has been
somewhat in the languages, yet has my travail been so little in (...) so
courses, as I rather fear ^o d^eiue your expectation, the i^ discharge the
desire of my duty: ^et if it please you to i^ose this charge upon me, though
it were with the loss of my (...) I would think it well laid down in your
service.

Well (quoth the Duke) let it suffice the^, that my love unto thee shall put
off all causes of coffeehouse, that ma^e be in this service; if I favor
thee, which of my Court, that will not befriend thee? and therefore prepare thy
self for this journey, for I will make choice of no other: and thus ending his
speech rose up from his seat, and walking into the garden m^t with his
daughter the Princess Me^illa, accompanied with diverse Ladies and Gentlemen of
the Court, whom saluting very graciously he passed by them, and taking his
daughter by the hand walking aside with her into an open green walk, fell
into this talk with her.

Merilla, my love to (...) I know thou doubtest not, and my care of thy well
doing is not the least charge of my love, and the effect thereof not the least
happiness of my life: thy brother* thou know is travailed, God knows
whither, (...) ^hen to return, if God bless him not the better: now if the
perish either in the seas, or the wars, what comfort have I on the earth?
but in thee, and in thy well doing. Thou ar^ now of years to make choice of
thy happiness in placing thy affection, and is there none in our Court that
can please the^ in that point^ make thy choice where thou will, I will leave
thee to thy self, and will not cross thee in thy comfort* only be not base
in thy affection, and thou shall be grations in thy kindness.

The Lady (as it should seem) having had some private conference with her
servant Rantifo, of whom she had some noti^ of her fathers talk with Signor
Sperto, about the dispatch of him from the Court, made him this humble answer:
My Gracious father, your careful love of ^e does so far bind me to you,
besides the duty of nature, that if I should not be obedient to your will* I
should think ill of mine own; and to be a discomfort to your kindness, I
wish I had rather never been borne; for my brother, so long as you hear no
ill news, hope of the best of him: and for the placing of my affection, it
shall be only* governed by your favor. But I am glad to hear you give me
warning to beware of baseness; for Signor Sperto would have persuaded me not
long since, that I could not be better graced then in gracing y^ ungracious,
with a world of ^dle words spent to very little purpose: for indeed father,
his wit may be full of cunning, but I fear he is like a false apple, rotten
at the heart: for assure your self he is not ^ound to you in love, that seeks
to rob you of my service: but wheresoever it shall please your Majesty to
command my content; in the heavens and your honor shall be the direction of my
affection: thus having a little quitted Signor Spertocs kindness, she ended
her speech.

When the Duke in some kind of coffeehouse, to think of Jack an Apes his
moris*dance, thus replied to his fair daughter: Well Merilla, regard every
man in his kind, and for that I find him fit for some services, I will not
suddenly put him out of favor, though I will think of him as I have cause,
and find a time to use him accordingly: in the mean time laugh at his
folly, and keep thy affection for a better friend, I will a ^le leave thee
here among thy kind friends, to sollace thy self in this garden: and I will
walk a little about my park, with some of my counfatle. So will I leave him a
while gone into the park, till his return again, into the palace, and I
will tell you what fell out with the Ladies in the garden.

There were three young gallantes of the court that had determined to try
their wits to la^e this lady aboorde for her love; upon this agreement betwixt
them that he that won her favor should command the other as his servants,
and so ever after should call them. Whereupon finding now a convenient time to
try the fortune of their adventures, singling themselves one from the other*
one of them ^hinking himself not the worst witted, began thus to salute her.
Fa^re Princess how well to entitle your worthiness I know not, but if my
unworthiness may have favor in your patience, my service should be made happy
in your emploiment.

The Lady not making any show of disdain, with a modest smile made him this
answer. Truth needs no eloquence; for your kind offer of your service, I
wish you a better preferment, but if I should be so vain as to trust you,
wherein would you give me leave to command you? The gentleman with this sweet
seeming speech half persuaded of nothing less then her favor, with all
humblenes fell into protestations so far of his affection, that if he disobeied
her command, or not fulfilled her request, let him die with his ill fortune, or
be disgraced in her favor: whereupon with great thanks she made him this
answer. Sir, for that finding the greatness of your good will, I would not be
thought unkind in my requit all, mark well what I say unto you. You shall
neither draw your purse for a penny, your sword against an enemy, nor your
foot from this place, so that you shall be neither at cost, in fear, nor
danger for me, and yet perform my request, and you shall be assured of my
favor.

The gentleman fearing that she had mocked him with some matter of small
importance, made her this answer. Madame though by the slightnes of this
service, I fear the weakness of my fortune, yet express your commandment, and
consider of my desert: for be it hard or easy, I will either die or do it.
Then (quoth the Princess) without further talk, you see yonder is a dial
upon the wall of my fathers window: you see the shadow upon the dial, stand
here till you see the shadow move, and then call me to the sight of it, I
desire no more for your service.

The poor gentleman there bound by his oath to perform his protestation, fell
to stare out his e^es, and nere the better for his looking: whom she had no
sooner left in that poor taking, but she was set upon by the second, whom
after a great deal of idle talk to little purpose, she took up in this
manner. If I should think that you could not dissemble, I should think you
lacked wit, and if I should trust you without trial, you might condemn me of
folly, but if in regard of your protestations I should make proof of your
affection, might I presume of your performance, in making proof of your
sufficiency.

The poor man as proud of his hope, as his unhappy friend, would refuse
nothing, make no exceptions, but command and it was done, or let it cost him
his life: whereupon to abridge the tediousnes of their discourse, the put him
to this piece of service. Sir (quoth she) you see this Apple Tree before you,
I pray you watch the ripening of them, the heat of the Sun I hear will
change their color, and fill them full of read streakes, I pray you when you
see them begin to change color call me, that I may see it, and I will
require no more service for the assurance of my favor.

The poor gentleman sworn to his task, took him to his work; where loss
of his labor could get him nothing but repentance: but in that gazing maze he
had not stood long, but the third followed his fellows, whom after much
needles talk, she put likewise to this service. Sir (quoth she) I am easily
persuaded that upon easy points you would perform an easy piece of
service, but had I need of your help in any matter of difficulty, I may
perhaps fail of your performaunce: he poor man as well deceived as the rest,
in the pride of his opinion, making the world but a walk, the seaes but a
brook, and wonders but trifles, in respect of that which he would do for her,
received this commandment for his emploiment. Sir (quoth she) you see here
this tufte of grass, watch the shooting of any one of them, and call me that I
may see the growing of them: and it is all the service, that I mean to put
you to for all the favor that I can afforde you.

The gentleman forced either to falsify his faith, or to pr^u^ the third
fool, took him to the ground where he sat down in vain, to see that was
not possible. But while they were thus standing either in muses or mazes
returned the Duke into the garden, where marueyling to behold those gallantes
in those tunes, having heard ye cause told his daughter, it would be some
disgrace to her greatness to offer such discourtesies, as to charge her
servants with impossibilities* yet smiling at their follies, desiring her to
rolease them, which she soon granted: he called Rantifo unto him not far off
walking with a gentleman of his chamber; to whom being come before him, being
disposed to be merry with him, told him of his danghters handling of her
suitors: but (quoth he) let me entreat thee not to make report of this quality
in her, least it be a hurt to her great happiness, when such as may be
worthy her favor, may take dislike at her unkindness.

Rantifo not a little pleased to see her so put off her gallant suitors, and
yet much discomforted in conceit of his departure, told the Duke, that such
trials of her wit, would increase the titles of her honor; and for himself,
he would not wish to live, but to honor the roialtie of his house: which the
Duke seeming to take very well at his handdes, after a few ordinary Court
words, leaving his daughter with her friends and attendants, in the garden,
retired himself into his chamber and so into his closet: where I will leave
him for a while, at his study, and his danghter in the garden feign into some
talk with her servant, whereof I will speak hereafter, and I will return to
tell you what followed of Penillo and his fortune.

In this time of Penillo his being upon the sea, coming from the Emperors
Court, he met with a ship going for Balino the chief city of his country,
and in the ship found one Mario Doronte, the Merchant that first brought over
Rantifo, the Duke Ordilloes son into that country, of whom, making the
ship a while to attend him, after that he had enquired of him of the health
of the Duke Ordillo, and his fair daughter the Princess his mistress, writing
a few humble lines to his father, with a token of kindness to his sister,
giving somewhat to the sa^lers, and like wise to Mario Doronte making himself
toward the Islands of Cotasi, left them to the heavens blessing. This Mario
Doronte being by misfortunes at sea decayed, and having some sums of money
due unto him, in the Ilances of Balino, with his wife and two children,
determining to leave his own country, and so take his habitation in some of
the cities of Balino, put to sea in the ship then going for the chief city
in the Islands: not to stand long upon needless points, the wind and tide
serning well, within a few days they arrived at the Island, in a haven near
unto the city Dolno, near unto the Court of the Duke Feronte. Where they had
not lodged many days, but the decayed Merchant having occasion to make
petition to the Duke, for means to come by his money of his Cxeditours, taking
his wife and children with him, as well for comfort of their companies, as to
move pity in the Duke the more for their sakes, met at the Court gate with
Rantifo going abroad into the park with his mistress the young Princess; who
looking well upon the old man, and his little family, after a few questions
of his fortune, and the cause of his coming thither, took his petition, with
promise not only to deliver it to her father, but in what her power could do
with him, to effect the speed of his suite; and in the mean time for his
relief gave him a purse with two hundredth crowns. Rantifo not a little
commending this gracious bounty in the young Princess, calling to mind the
cruelty of his own fortune, and noting the misery of his; not willing to
make himself known unto him, gave him yet these words to comfort him:
father, if I were not suddenly to depart hence into the Island from whence you
came, I would assure thee, much of my friendship, but I will entreat this Lady
in mine absence to follow and effect your comfort: which she willingly
promised, and after happily effected. But ere I go any further with the
discourse of their fortunes, I will leave them for a while, and return to
Penillo, the Duke Feronte his son.

This gallant young Prince was no sooner landed at the coast of the Islands,
but with great rosaltie he was attended, and with great loie welcomed to the
Court, where, how his nustris reiosced let the hearts of true lovers conceius,
for I can not express: but let it suffice that, though both their contents met
in one conjunction, yet fortune the sworn enemy to all felicity, fell now to
devise crosses to their comforts: for not long had he been there making merry
with his fair mistress, but the Duke his father having by the decayed Merchant
received a letter of his sons making toward those Islands, whither he was
forthwith to send Rantifo upon a discontentiue message, wrote a letter in all
post to his sanne for his speedy return into his country: upon the sight
whereof, not a little agrieued to leave the Court, where he was so kindly
entertained, and especially his fair mistress the young Princess of whom he
was so dearly beloved, and yet preferring his fathers favor before his own
pleasure, concealing any cause of discontent, with thanks to the Duke for all
his Royal kindness, and secretly assuring the young Princess of his kind,
and constant affection toward her, took his leave of the whole Court, and
returned home to his country. But I will leave him upon his tourny homewards for
a while, and return again to Rantifo, who was sent ambassador to his own
father.

Rantifo taking leave of the Duke his master, and the fair Princess his
mistress, was now put to sea, for the Islands of Cotasi, leaving the decayed
Merchants suit to the favor of his before said mistress: but ere I tell you any
further of the Merchant, and his suit, I will tell you what became of Rantifo,
and his fortune.

Rantifo being now come to the Islands, and so to the Court of Ordillo, at his
first coming was honorably entertained, but after the delivery of his
message, not so kindly welcome, yet whether for fear of a further mischief,
or hope of unlooked for kindness, all coffeehouse was concealed, and he
brought unto the Duke, who setting his eye well upon him, began in himself to
find some what in his aspect that did so much content him, that his embassage
did not so dislike him, but his presence did much more please him: whereupon he
gave commandment to have him well lodged and to his place in all duties
entertained. But Rantifo after that he had delivered his embassage, being
answered that the Duke desired time to determine of his answer, writ home to
his master of the Dukes answer to his demand, and upon answer that he should
stay the limits of his delaie, he took his lodging as near as he could to the
Court, where he might see out of his window the Lady Bilanta his sister the
young Princess, walking in the garden of a Lady that had a house near
adsoyning to the Court, whose door opening into the garden of the house where
he was lodged, he took occasion one fair evening to stand in the door where
she passed by, and noting a kind of gracious glaunce toward him, he adventured
to sa^ute her with this kind of greeting: Sweet air, sweet flowers, and so
sweet a creature, is not this a Paradise if there be any on this earth?
Indeed my Lord, answered the Princess, a sweet spirit in a sweet nature,
can find sweet humor, but I pray you what has moved you to this sweet
kind of salutation? Her unknown brother, not minding yet to be known,
replied again, Madame, your self is the grace of all the good that I speak
of: and if you would let me flatter you with particulars I would tell you as
much as you already know; but if the word of a stranger may go current in
your Court, will you vouthsafe my service the favor of your entertainment? The
Lady smiling at his plain kind of love making, and yet loath to put him to
silence with a sulle in kind of answer, told him, that men of his place had
their wits otherwise employed, then in trying the weak humors of weomen* yet
quesh she, my Lord, if I were worthy such a servant, I would not do
dishonor to a stranger; but is it possible that your Lordship can spend thus
much breath, but to pass away idle time? Truly Madam, answered the
ambassador, though I desire not to be thought a wanton, yet I assure you for
my unfeigned affection to your worthiness, since the first hour that I saw you
I have not left to think of you, and am so glad here to see you, that wherein
my service mate purchase your content, it shall not be slack in your
commandment. My Lord answered the Princess, Cupid has but a blind sight,
and hot affections are soon quenched, but if your word and thought agree, you
may in time be quited in your kindness. When as the Lord ambassador was about
to reply unto her speech, a messenger came suddenly unto her from the Duke
her father, presently to come to him, whereupon with humble thanks for her
kind favor they brake off their talk for that time, she going to the Duke,
and he back again into his lodging, where I will ^raue them for a while, and
return again to tell you what fell out in the Court of Feronte the Duke of
the Ila^ds of Balino.

The young Princess glad that this decayed Merchant had such a suite to her
father, told him that if upon ^he dispatch of his petition, and receipt of his
money, he would return into his country, and conuaie her over with him as a
servant to his wife, she would effect such expedition as should be fully to
his content: The poor man having received such bountiful relief at her
hands, as bound him much to her service, putting all fear aside of what hurt
might befall him, if it were descried, promised her to do his best in all the
service he could devise her: whereupon to be brief, she became a suter to her
father for the Merchant, and by her humble importuning his comfort, gat his
grant dispatched, which no sooner was effected, but with all the speed that
might be, carrying crowns enough to defray all charges, in the apparel of a
prentise, that the Merchant had got for the purpose, finding a ship ready to
put to sea for that country, stole away in a night tide, and with a merry
Gale soon gat to the shore that they made for. But now will I leave to talk
further of them, for a while, and I will tell you a few words of the
occurrents in the Court of Feronte the Duke of the Islands of Balino.

The young Prince being now returned home, and with great joy received of the
whole Court, the Duke in no little marvel that his daughter was so long
absent, sent unto her lodging to know the cause of her stay, but the
messenger returning with no body there, and now fearing that his strange
ambassador had stolen away his fair daughter, caused present search to be
made for her in all his province; but hearing of no word of her, grew into such
a rage, as not able to have patience to hear his son touching the Roialtie
of his entertainment, swear presently to levy an Army, and in regard of his
indignity to be revenged of the whole country: and with this resolution went
forward. But I will leave him in his choler now bent to nothing but revenge,
and I will tell you a few words of the merchant and his company.

The decayed Merchant now by the means of the young Princess having made a
happy voyage, coming on shore with his family, and this new page or rather
prentise, met by great hap with the Lord ambassador that was sent from the
Duke Feronte, in a disco^tentiue message, walking with the Lady Princess his
sister, and an attendant or two of hers only going forth of a Castle of the
Duke her fathers near that place, only to take a little pleasure in seeing
the coming in of the ships: and doing reverence to the whole troop the
young Prineesse called the Merchant unto her with these words.

Alas good Mario, how do thou, how have thou sped with thy business: what?
did thou carry thy wife and children with thee, how daredst thou to
adventure them? Truly I am glad thou art come home safe again with them, I
know thou art poor, and for my self thou know I am yet not my self, but
if I live I will do thee and thy kind wife some good, for I have known ye
both of a child, and have had many a pretty jewel of ye, for which, I hope
one day to requite thee: Thine honesty will be pitied, and shall not be
forgotten, my remembrance may do thee good; and for that I know not how thou
art furnished for money hold thee, take this purse at my hands a h^dreth
crowns will do thee no hurt, though not the good I wish thee. But what
pretty boy is that thou have with thee? The merchant with tears of thankful
kindness receiving her bounty, told her that it was a pretty youth of the
Islands of (...), (...) having a desire to see that country came with him in the
(...), desiring him to put him to some good master; at which wo^s, ^he
ambassador looking steadfastly upon him, and remembering his ^stris, asked of the
Merchant if he would bestow him upon him. The Merchant knowing the Pages mind,
was very well content with his demand, and asking the Page if he would make
choice of him for his master, seemed very willing to agr^ thereto, when the
Lady no less firing her eye upon the P^ge then the ambassador, and no less
affecting him then he did, with a modest countenance made this speech unto him.

My Lord, you know your aboade in this country is not certain, and this
pretty wagge coming hither, either to se^ ^he country, or to learn the
languages, if he should return with you, he might be little benefitted by his
travail; but if it (...) please you to bestow your good will on me for him, I
will ta^e that regard of him, that he shall not repent him of his service.
Madame (quoth the ambassador) if I should deny you so small a request, having
so great an interest in my service, you might well mistrust me in a matter of
more importance, if I should fail you in this. The page unknown to any but
the merchant and his family, who had sworn secrecy in her behalf, having no
time to meditate what to do, and seeing her servant the ambassador, now as
it were in love with an other Lady, was content to accept the Ladies kind
offer, and so leaving the merchant well recompensed for all his kindness;
attended them to the Dukes Castle: where I will leave the embassadoure after
leave taken of his mistress the young Princess his sister, yet unknown, going
to his lodging, and I will tell you a little of the Lady and her new page, as
great a person as her self.

The Princess looking of tentimes upon her page, and finding in his feature a
great resemblance of her love her brother, willed a tailer to be sent for,
whom she commanded against the next morning, to bring her a piece of white
satin, of which should be made a suit of apparel for the page, and so
commanding the boie to attend her unto her chamber, she called for a lute,
which, hearing of him upon demand of his qualities, that he had some little
skill in, willed him to make her a little music, which both in his touch, and
voice, she liked so well, that she began exceedingly to favor him: but after
music done she willed the boie to walk into the garden, and there gather
such flowers, or such fruits, as best might like him, and in the morning she
would put him out of his prentice su^e, which he willingly did, and having
gathered a handful of roses, and plucking off an apple called a Pome^roie; he
returned in to his mistress the Princess lodging, who at a window noting his
solemn kind of walking, and the fruit that he gathered, after his coming up
called him into her chamber. But first let me tell you a little of the pages
speech that he had to himself in the garden, per he went up.

Oh poor Merilla, what a misery art thou fallen into? left thy country, thy
father, thy friends, and all thy home fortune, to follow a stranger, who has
betrayed thy affection, and abused thy favor: women are said to have their
wills waver as the wind: but oh false Rantifo, no sooner come to the Sea, but
thy love is gone into an other world; Rantifo, no thou art Fantiro, the Dukes
son, whatsoever be shy conceit to conceal it from thy father, and Bilanta is
thy sister, howsoever thou have made her thy mistress. But alas, what will
become of thee? when thy mistress shall know thee to be thy self, how will she
use thee? if I reveal what I am, can she other then disdain th^e? our parents
being scarce friends, if thou reuealest the cause of thy coming, will she not
laugh at thy foslie, and make it known to the world? if she do not, it is
more of the heavens blessing, then thy merit, and of her good nature, then thy
wit. Say that now she does somewhat like of thee, she may be then out of
love with thee: and yet it may be that for her love to her brother she may be
kind to me, and at my humble entreatie, conceal my folly from the world:
well, I will hope the best, till I see the worst* And so determining to make
her self known to her mistress, she went up into her lodging, where being come
to the princess she fell again to her music, wherein she did so please the
Princess, that she thought every hour a year till she had some private
conferance with him, for which she stated not long; for after that she had
commanded all her attendants out of the chamber but the page, willing him to
lay down his lute, (...) (...) aboore with him in this manner. My pretty wag,
if thy (...) should have occasion to employ thee in a secret paece of service,
would thou so late it up in thy bosom, that no man should perceive it?
Madame (quoth the page) for my secre^e, I hold it not the least part of mine
honesty, and therefore make you no doubt of it, but if my sufficiency answer
not your expect^on, I beseech you let me entreat your pardon, assuring your
honor that I shall hate my self in slacking my duty in your service: but
good Madame be not angry if my good will be not fortunate; for my heart I
protest, you have bound it to you, in the faith of much affection.

The Lady not a little pleased with this speech gave him this hind answer.
Thy affection is the best part of the service that I will desire at thy hands,
for to tell ^hee truth, I never same the face, but one that I liked so well,
or could think to love but thine, and for him, he was a noble personage, son
and heir to the Duke Feronte of the Islands of Balino, who is lately gone
home, and I fear will never come again; such heartburning is grown betwixt
our parents, upon the payment of a little monte, ungodly kind of dross, the
cause of much mischief in the world; therefore I must have patience with my
passion, for ever hoping of comfort at his hands: but for his sake whose
feature me thinks I behold in thy face, I did first affect thee, and do now
for his, and thine own sake I must confess entirely love thee: be wise
therefore I charge thee, for in revealing my love it may endanger thy life,
and in concealing thy comfort, thou shall find the honor of thy fortune.

The Page with a great sigh at his brothers absence, but more agrieued at the
discord of the two Dukes, with her eyes ready to shed tears, made her this
humble answer: Good Madam, shall I humbly beg this favor at your hands,
that you will vouchsafe to keep secret, what I will commit unto the only
care of your honorable kindness, wherein you may either save my life, or
procure my death? Sweet boie, quoth the Princess, let me not live, but I will
do more for thy love then I will speak of: and for my secrecy, suspect
nothing that may hurt thee, and speak freely, wherein I may do thee good,
think I cannot use thee unkindly. Then good Madam, answered the Princess, I
will tell you a strange yet true tale: The ambassador that seems to be your
lover, is your brother, son to the Duke your father, his name is Fantiro,
sought to be slain by a murderer hired there to by your uncle lately dead,
but to save his life sought by the malice of your ungodly uncle, was delivered
unto the decated Merchant Mario, who brought him as a Page to our Court, I
mean the Court of Feronte, the Duke of Balino my father; whose daughter I am
brought over in this habit that you see, only to come to the sight of your
brother my only beloved Lord on this earth. Your brother for my love, was by a
wretch in our Court wrought hither to this embassage, but such was his carriage
in our Court, as from his first settling foot into favor, he daily increased
it, by his much well deserving; so that there was no man of good spirit, but
loved him, and were sorry to part with him, and for my affection to him, let
my travail witness my truth: Now for the love that in nature you bear your
brother, for the kindness that you may find requited in my brother, for the
honor that you bear unto love, and for the love that you bear unto honor;
let me humbly beseech you to conceal my folly, and in what you may to be a
friend to my affection.

The Princess with a modest blush smiling at her discourse, made her this
kind and gracious answer: Sister, for so will I love thee and esteem thee,
as I cannot be happy in any thing under heaven, but in thy brothers love, which
I hold as dear as my life, so if my brother do not in all honorable service
either requite or deserve this thy kindness, I protest to renounce him for my
brother, and detest him as mine enemy: be therefore of good cheer, an^ fear
no evil: thy fortune shall be mine, my bed, my table, my purse, yea and my
heart shall be all at thy disposing to do thee good. And thus will I leave
them together in their kind talk, and I will tell you a little of the Duke
Feronte, and his son.

The Duke Feronte, in no little rage to think of the loss of his daughter,
notwithstanding that he had heard his sons report of his Royal
entertainment, followed on his determination, for his intended war against
the Duke Ordillo, where his ambassador was too well to return, and his fair
daughter was taken loves prisoner, and therefore calling his son before him
used these words unto him: Penillo, I have made thee acquainted with my
resolution for my revenge of y^ wrong, that I have received of Ordillo; out of
whose country, I will fetch my fond daughter thy unhappy sister, either dead
or alive, and therefore prepare thy self to put off all conceit of his
kindness, and gain the increase of my love, by the honor that thou shall get
upon mine enemy.

The young Prince, sorry to have such cause to carry arms against the father
of his fair mistress, and yet unwilling to be disobedient to his father, though
it were the adventure of his death, did humbly frame him this answer: My
Gracious father, I would be loath to dissuade you from your settled resolution,
but yet let me tell you, that although love has in my sister wrought a folly,
shall the malice of a wicked spirit so poison your ear, that such a fury
possess your heart, that no spark of patience can have place in your conceit?
It will be thought to the greatest part of your Court, yea and almost to your
whole country, that Signor Sperto has been the kindler of all this fire, and
the breeder of all these wars: I wonder not a little that your Grace could
endure to hear of his presumption, in making love to my sister; who I think
be rather run into another country to try the fortune of her affection,
then to live at home to abide the unfitting suite of so ill-favored a creature:
whom, but that he has the name of a man, if I did not the better know him, I
should surely take for a monster. But if I may beg so much favor of your
Grace, as to grant me my humble suite, I beseech you begin justice at home,
and I hope we shall prosper the better abroad: Let Sperto in regard of his
malicious practice against a stranger, and presumption in troubling the
patience of your daughter, be openly called before you, reprehended for his
folly, and banished your Court for his offense, and I doubt not but your
majesty shall see the venom of his vile nature drop out in his right kind,
my sister honorably returned to your good favor, and your wars turn to
such a peace, as all that love you shall be glad of. I speak not this like ye
Prince of Pigmeies that should be afraid of Cranes, but that I will attend you
in your wars, where I hope an honorable triumph will be better then a
bloody conquest: but fall what will, I will not live but to be obedient to
your love: and therefore will be ready, when it shall please you to attend
you.

The Duke not a little noting the good counsel of his discreet son, willing
his son to be in readiness, against a day shortly after appointed him, caused
Sig. Sperto forthwith to be brought before him, to whom with a stern
countenance he used this speech: Sperto, I have long given ear to thine
unsuspected subtlety, but of late having sounded the reach of thy conceit, I
will lay open thy cunning: in the time of Rantifoes being in our Court, thou
could never cease to ring in mine ears some couse of dislike in him, which
I took well at thy hands, in regard of thy imagined care of my good; but
now I find the ground of thy ungracious working grew from the malicious
fear in thee, of his favor from my fair daughter, whom thy unworthy self
would have bewitched with wicked eloquence, let me tell thee, for that I have
in some occasions of importance, made good use of thy service, thou shall not
be unregarded, for I will make thee receiver of my customs: but for thy
saucines with my sweet daughter, driven out of our country by thy dogged
means, I will out of hand, have thee made an ^unuch; and so commanding one of
his Surgeons, to take him to his charge, to dismember him of his implements,
fell in hand presently with his Counsel, to go forwards with his
resolution for his wars: while Sperto with the conceit of his misery,
craving leave of the Surgeon to spare him till the next morning, when his
grief being put a little over, he should with the more strength endure his
torment, rather desirous to go to hell quickly, then to hope for heaven with
repentance, with a pair of his own garters hangde himself in his own
chamber. But leaving thus the wicked wretch to his woeful end, and the furious
Duke in his inerorable anger, proceeding onwards with his wars: I will tell
you a few words of the two Ladies Merilla and Bilanta, the imagined page that
I left together in their chamber within a Castle of the Duke Ordillo.

The Lady Bilanta, after she had secretly conferred with the Lady Merilla,
touching both their loves, minding to make her self merry with a pretty
conceit, after that they had past a night or two in private talk together how
to bring all matters about to their best contentment, sent for the ambassador
her brother, in all kindness speedily to come to her; who no sooner received
the message, but laying all business apart, came to his sister, whom he then
called mistress, little thinking indeed to have found his true beloved, and
loving mistress so near. But being come into her lodging and well entered into
her chamber, commanding apart all her attendantes, she thus fell into talk
with him.

Servant, though perhaps it may seem immodestie in a Uirgin of my sort to
give such entertainment to a stranger of what sort soever he may be, as I am
persuaded your honorable kindness will deserve; yet let me entreat you one
favor to tell me without dissembling, if I am the first object of your dearest
affection, or whether you never have had any mistress that you have held any
especial account of, and has worthily had the promise of your love? Truly
Madame answered her brother, as he thought unknown to her, I must confess I
had a mistress whom I so dearly loved, and so duly served, that had I any
possible hope to enioie the fruit of her favor, I should hate my self in the
love of any other, but she being so far from the comfort of all such
conceit, I think it no dishonor to my love, to do service to the virtue that
I find in you: for if I could be so vile as to think you a base thought
death be the reward of my desire, and to presume further in the best nature
of honor, then may stand with your good favor, might condemn me of
folly, and perhaps overthrow my fortune, but in such good terms to do you
service as may please you to accept, I think it a duty in Chivalry: but
for my mistress I protest had you ever seen and known her, you would have
thought as much good of her as I do, and wish her as much happiness as I want.

The Lady smiling at this answer, would needs know her name, and whence she
was: who told her that she was the only daughter of his master the Duke
Feronte, her name was Merilla, and she was the likest unto the Page that she
lately had from the Merchant, that ever she saw: Well (quoth the Lady) no
longer my Lord ambassador, but dear brother, I am glad to see thee here, for
thou art my brother, and that shall my father know ere long: thy mistress is
more worthy of honor, then our whole country and thy life can give her: and
with that word, Page quoth she to the Lady Merilla, I pray thee take thy
lute and play and sing thy wish: which she being in the chamber unseen by
means of a curtein of Crimsin damask drawn betwixt them, took her lute and
played a note to a dittie, which she sung as follows.

The song.
I Would thou were not fair, or I were wise:
I would thou had no face, or I no eyes:
I would thou were not wise, or I not fond,
Or thou not free, or I not so in bond.
But thou art fair, and I cannot be wise:
Thy sunlike face, has blinded both mine eyes;
Thou can not be but wise, nor I but fond,
Nor thou but free, nor I but still in bond.
Yet am I wise to think that thou art fair,
Mine eyes, their pureness in thy face repair;
Nor am I fond, that do thy wisdom see:
Nor yet in bond, because that thou art free.
Then in thy beauty only make me wise,
And in thy face, the Graces guide mine eyes:
And in thy wisdom only see me fond:
And in thy freedom keep me still in bond.
So shall thou still be fair, and I be wise:
Thy face shine still upon my cleared eyes:
Thy wisdom only see how I am fond:
Thy freedom only keep me still in bond.
So would I thou were fair, and I were wise:
So would thou had thy face, and I mine eyes:
So would I thou were wise, and I were fond:
And thou were free, and I were still in bond.
The song was no sooner ended but Fantiro (for so will I henceforth give him his
right name) oftentimes changing color, as one in many passions at the hearing
both of her voice, which was so like his mistress the Lady Princess Merilla,
as might be; and remembering the dittie to be of his own compiling, and that in
secret he had given it unto her when he first perceived her favor, alter he
had commended her voice, as he was about to speak somewhat of his passion, his
sister upon the sodeine caused the curtein to be drawn, when he might see
in a rich suite of her apparel, the imagined page; but in deed his mistress
standing by a window, with her face toward him: when his sister seeing him
stand as one amazed, used this speech unto him. Why, how now brother? does thy
heart fail thee? how do thou like this sight? thou have I know often heard
that a girl will turn to a man, and is it then impossible, that a boie may
as well turn to a woman? What ailest thou, do thou fear thou see a
shadow and not the true body of thy mistress? or have thou been false unto her
in thy faith? and therefore art fearful of the heavens displeasure to plague
thee, with some worse spirit, then thine own? for shame go to her, bid her
welcome, it is thy mistress, I do not dissemble, be thankful for her kindness,
and deserve her love.

The young Prince ashamed any longer to stand in his maze, seeing his mistress
in little better tune, to behold her servant, ^ assured lover so strange unto
her, as if he either had not, or would not have known her, went unto her with
these words. Madame, think it not strange to see me in this perpleritie of
mind, that I am in, so much is my unworthiness of this, and many your
honorable favors, but especially this trial of your affection has so
bound me to your service, as if the adventure of my life may make proof of
my love, let me die like a villain, if I do not honor your virtue.

The sweet Lady with modest kindness as much as she could concealing the
greatness of her io^e, as well in beholding her love, as hearing his undoubted
true protestations, made him this sweet reply. My dear love, for so dare I
here term you, when I had no knowledge of that title of honor, that now I
hear and am glad to understand duly belongs to you, my love was in the same
nature that now it is: your virtue won my affection, and your kindness
continued my content, your noble carriage assured me of your constancy, and al
together have brought me hither to receive my comfort, not caring to loose
the love of father, brother, and friend, honor, wealth, ease, and all other
worlds happiness, that Balino could have procured me, to adventure the Seaes,
in the poor habit of a Prentise, in the service of a poor decayed Merchant,
to come into a strange country, to abide what fortune soever might befall me,
only to acquaint your kindness with my love. Now if your greatness have not
altered your goodness, nor my immodesty have withdrawn your affection, thank
your honorable sister for her kindenes toward me, and be your self, your
self unto me.

The young Prince with as much adoo as could be to abstain from tears of
kindness, to think of this seldom seen faithful affection in so fair a
creature, made her this comfortable reply. Sweet Princess, in whom nature
under the heavens has showed the pride of her perfections: how should I live
to counteruaile the least part of this your exceeding honorable f^uour. Had I
ten such Dukedomes, I would lay them al at ^our feet, and were I the greatest
Prince on the earth, I would (...) glad to be your servant: but as in
regard of your first affection, I am bound to honor you with my service: so
for (...) your last honor, my love I vow shall ever serve you: (...) (...)
lay by all thought of strangers: this land is youres, my father I know will
rejoice in you, my self under heaven, will have no ^oie but you: for I protest
without dissembling my (...) joy is wholly in you. And thus will I leave these
lovers with the other Lady in this their secret hind conference, (...) I will
tell you, what followed of Mario the decayed Merchant.

This Mario the Merchant, hearing news in the City, that the Duke Feronte was
coming from Balino, with a great Army against the Duke Ordillo and his
country, thought good no longer to conceal the Embassadoure his son from
him, and therefore coming to the Court, and having obtained means to have
some private conference with the Duke, in few words delivered the discourse
of all that I before have recited, both of his escape from the intended murder
of his malicious Uncle, of his carrying him over, of his preferment in Court by
him, and of the cause of his coming thither in Embassage: all which recounted
truly as it was, with the coming over of the Lady Merilla in the attire of a
Prentise, for the love of his son Fantiro, so pleased the Duke, that he not
only kindly gave him thanks, but richly rewarded him for his good news, and
rosaltie considered all his honest, and kind dealing: and presently caused
his son the Ambassador to be sent for, whom he welcomed with such a soie, as
such a father might such a son. Who having recounted all his fortune, his
father the Duke caused his sister the young Princess to be sent for, to whom
he not only gave thanks for her careful, and kind usage of the young
Princess Merilla, but charged her upon his blessing to continue all kindness,
that might give her knowledge of the ^oifull love that she should find both
in himself, his Court, and his whole country: and that for a few days she
should seem to conceal it from her, that he knew of her being in his Court,
till he had made preparation every way fit for the entertainment of her
presence. And thus will I leave the Ladies passing their time together in
private conference of their thiefest comfortes, and I will return to the Duke
Feronte now having gotten his forces together, marching with his whole Army
toward the sea, minding to make for Cotasi, where nothing should content him
but a conquest.

The Duke resolved upon his determination, either to leave his blood, or take
his revenge, dispatching away a post with letters to his ambassador for the
defiance of his termed enemy the Duke, and proclamation of war with him and
his whole country, calling his son unto him, upon a rock on the sea side in
the midst of his Army made this speech unto his people. The long injury
that I have borne at the hands of my unfriendly neighbor Ordillo, besides
the debt that he owes me, and never intends to pay me, together with my
extreme grief for the loss of my only daughter, that only through a fond
affection carried I know not how; to a stranger I know not whom, co^ueied away
by a banbrout, or decayed merchant, if I may better term him into that
ungracious piece of ground where Ordillo has his government: these I safe with
many other just causes of coffeehouse conceived against y^ proud Prince
and his stubborn people, have caused me to put on the resolution either of
death or revenge, which shall no way end but in conquest or submission; as
many therefore as either regard our love, or have any hope of our favor,
let them with willing hearts follow the honor of my resolution, protesting
that whatsoever he be, that shall in the least show of fear turn his back
unto the enemy, if he were as dear to me as mine own son, he shall die in
the place where I find him: but he that shall with the fortune of his
forwardness, bring me the Duke or his soune either dead or alive, I will so
regard and reward him, that he shall leave honor to his posterity: the wind
serves well for our passage, and we shall find them perhaps unprovided for
our coming, so the easier will be our victory and the shorter our wars, if
not the sharper our fight, the greater will be our honor, and since fear is
the badge of villainy, let us avoid the shame of such condition and as many
as love either our crown or country, hold up their hands with me: who then
in the whole camp, that had a hand, but he would hold it up? Well to grow
toward an end, as the Prince said, so said the people: the Duke set foot
aboard, and all the Army followed him: the wind served, the sa^les were
hoised, and the anchors weied, and away they went where I will leave them for
a while, and return again to Ordillo the Duke of Cotasi and his son,
Feronte his ambassador.

The post having been with the ambassador as he thought, but now rather an
enemy then a friend, if this quarrel should go forward, perceiving the
intent of the Duke his late master, rather choosing to be an unkind servant,
then an unnatural son, wrote unto him, that the case was altered, he had
now chosen an other master, whose love he knew was such unto him, that
serving him faithfully, would not use him unkindly: his embassage was
delivered, and now this must be his answer, as in kindness he might
command much, so by the contrary as little; his coming was more expected then
feared, and his welcome should be as he deserved: and for himself, if his
fortune were to his hope, he should find a kinder servant, then he had done a
master: with these and such like conclusions, dispatched away.

The young Prince, presently went to his father the Duke Ordillo, with whom
and his Counsel conferring upon the service speedily to be had care of,
taking order by virtue of his Commission, to levy a great Army, as well to
encounter the enemy, as in diverse places of strength to stand for defense, if
any occasion should be offered, being secure for any fear, or doubt to be
overtaken, hearing by a Pinnis, that being at sea deseried the fleet so far,
as by means of cross winds, and ill weather, they could not in five days
come near the shore of their country, after he had a little reposed himself,
after his travail, considering the great discomfort that his mistress the young
Princess might take upon the rumor of these wars, making all the means he
could to have it kept from her hearing, took a convenient time to go to his
sister, with whom his mistress as yet remained. But as such kind of persons
most inquisitiue of news are not without their intelligencers, so fell it out,
that the post was scarce at the Court, but his message was known to the young
Ladies, those private conference upon the same, before Fantiroes coming to
them, was as follows.

Merilla considering the many sorrows that were now like to fall upon her,
the assurance of her fathers displeasure, the doubt of her brothers love, and
the fear of the young Prince her servants death in the service, was even so
appauled, that (following the humors of women) first to sigh for a little
grief of disobedience in nature, then enfolding her arms, as lamenting the
doubted loss of her brothers love, and last of all, weeping with fear to
loose the comfort of all her worlds hope, in her dear beloved and kind
loving Lord, in the misfortune of the wars, was by the young Princess her
servants sister comforted with these words.

Sister, so will I now term thee, for so do I hold thee, and so do I hope
to have thee, and so will I ever love she; take not too much grief at
anything, that either fear or doubt may put into thy head, let this comfort
thee, that thou art not alone in thy misery: if thou have left a father, thou
have found a friend, and if thou have lost a brother, thou have found a sister,
choler and melancholy gouernes the spirits of the aged, but kindness and
mirth should be the humors of our years: nature biddes you love your father,
so you may though you do not live with him; but love biddes you live with your
friend, which you can not if you be from him; and let me tell you, that a^
well as I seem^ to bear it out, I am stoong at the heart as well as you. I
love your brother as dearly as I can devise, but for his affection, I had
little time to hope of, and too little time to en^oie. Now my father I love,
as you do yours, but your brother I cannot love as you do mine, for I cannot
enioie his presence, as you do my brothers: you fear the fortune of the
wars, and I both fortune and the wars. I would my case were yours or as
yours, that fortune would do her worst, so I had but my love to look on: be
therefore content, put off this mourning, this war may breed a blessed
peace, for when the Princes are both in the field, my wits shall fail me, but I
will plot such a piece of service, as has never been heard of before, and I
believe once executed, will not be forgotten in have. The other young Princess
much comforted to have such a companion in her crosses, and that the heavens
did favor her affection, or else fortune would not have bin so kind to her in
her adventures, taking a little heart of grace, loath to die with conceit, without
greater cause then she yet had, for though her head was much troubled with
imaginations, yet nothing came so near her heart, but a look of her love
would put it quite out of place, yet with a little kind of heau^nesse made her
this answer. Good Madame, if the miseries were far greater that I endure, then
I hope they ever will be, yet of such force are the persuasions that you have
used unto me, that I should bear them with such patience, that I should forget
much of the pain: but yet so many are the thoughts of grief in my head,
that but for the comfort of your honorable kindness, would do me but a
little good in my heart: I must confess love is the life of the heart, but
what is the day that comes but like lightening? little better then dark
night. You cannot mourn so much for the lack of your hope, as I for the loss
of my happiness; your love may be forcible for the time, but it is not of so
long continuance as mine, and for that the eye sees not, the heart grieves not;
you fear the fortune of the wars, and I wish for nothing but peace. But
sister, since you will have it so, and I would it were so, every way that you
wish, till the wars be determined I can be at no quiet, for if my brother
die, you loose your love, if your brother perish, what joy have I in the
world? if fortune favor my father, my comfort will be little with my
affection, and if your father have the field, down goes the honor of my
house: so that I can no way see how it can go so well, but woeful will be the
issue of what fortune soever befall: but good Madam, if there be any humor in
your head, that may give comfort to my heart, I beseech you acquaint me with
some little spark of your conceit.

I will quoth Merilla her sworn sister: and as she was beginning to utter some
part of her mind, her brother Fantiro the young Prince came in, who with a
kind Congee, lacking no Grace to entertain time with such Gracious creatures,
finding them in alike tunes for their humors, some what too near maidens
melancholy, hoping to remove it with a Corpus habeas, fell aboard with them
in this manner: Ladies all, fair fortunes befall you, what foul weather do
you dream of, that makes you droope so in your countenance? I hope sister, you
are not afraid of sparrow-blasting, and for my sweet mistress, I would I knew
the cause of her discontent, I would soon procure her comfort.

The Lady with a merry go sorry not yet having fully acquainted him with
her love to Penillo, the Duke Feronte his son, now coming in Arms against
her father, made him this answer: Brother, my sister and I am both sick of
one disease, I would we might both alike have remedies: but these wicked wars
have put us both in such a flight, that till they be at a point, we are not
like to be at rest: her brother as dear to me, as she to you, I have no cause
to hope ever to enfoie, so many are my persuasions thereto, you are not yet
possessed though beloved, and may be lost though never enioied, so our cross
carding gets nothing but sorrow, our heads are so full of doubts, and our
hearts so full of fears, I speak for my sister as my self. Well answered
Fantiro, for my mistress let her be comforted with this, that my life I mate
leese, but she my love never; and for your fears and doubts, they are
incident to your natures, and therefore you may the better away with them.
But dear mistress, quoth he, turning to Merilla, be not dismayed at any
thing, fear nothing, the prayers of a Uirgine are exceedingly effectiue, I am
persuaded, if any live in the field, the lot would fall to me and your
brother: for our loves and your prayers cannot but prosper together. And for my
love thus much will I say to satisfy all conceit of your imagination, that so
honorable is the nature of my affection, and so gracious the honor of your
virtue, that I should hate my self, if I should offend you; but in doing you
service, shall be my resolved happiness. Time gives me not leave to solemnize
the rights of our desires, and therefore will I attend the issue of my fortune*
to perform the care of my duty, ere with the hasting of my happiness, I may
displease the honor of your patience: (...) mean time, assuring my self,
that my sister will be to you as a second self, I will leave you to her kind
company (...) you may hear further of my wished comfort.

His mistress the young Princess not a little pleased with this speech of his.
wherein taking her chief notes in the assurance of his never dying love, the
prosperity of the Uirgines prayers, and the patience of his affection to
attend the issue of his fortune, with a heart as full of grief, as her eyes
weeping (...) could conceal, made him this short answer. My dear love, in
the midst of extremities hope is the comfort of the (...) (...)* and though I
see no persuasion of comfort in the issue of these wars; yet will I not
despair of the blessing of a peace* let my life march with thy love, and my
prayers with thy act^s, and if the fates be not too froward, I will hope the
best of thy fortune: and for your patience, it is a proof of your constanci^;
and for your care in committing me to your sister, it is the true witness of
kindness in your self. What shall I say? if we were not women, we should
have hearts like men; but as we are, give us leave to show our weakness, till
we be comforted with your happiness: and for that I know, your careful
experience is not a little comfort to your father, in this action, I will
entreat you if it may be, not to think of me, till I may come to you, which
in the wars is unfit, and in peace is yet unlikely.

His Sister withal came in with her five pennie-mo^ice in this manner.
Brother, though you cannot be out of love, yet now you are in hand with other
matters, trouble not your self with thinking of us, till need be: forget not
your self, and we will not forgette you; follow your business, let us alone
with your humors: the powers of heavens bring all to a good end.

The young Prince with a thankful Amen to their prayer, took his leave of
them both and returned to the Court, where I will leave him with his father,
preparing for his Army, and the two Ladies in their chamber, parting stakes in
conceits, and I will return to Feronte the Duke of Balino, and his son
Penillo, who with a great Army were in sight of land, but for some politic
occasions to take the benefit of time, did anchor all night in the Road before
the Harbor; at which time the young Prince desi^ous, by some resolute
adventure, to gain some especial honor, humbly be sought the Duke his
father, that he would vouchsafe him leave, to have the leading of the
Uanguarde, the first day of service, and the first night to have the selting
of the watch: both which in regard, as well of his earnest suit, as for the
skill that he saw in him, and the honor that he had gotten in the Emperors
wars against the Turk, was granted him. But after a counsel held by the
Duke himself, his Son, and all his honorable followers, for the pitching of
his Camp, and determination of his service, taking some little repose, till
the first breaking of the morning; as soon as they had light to serve their
turns for landing, they made all the have they could a shore: where I will
leave them for a while pitching their Tents, and providing for their wars, and
I will tell you a word or two of the two Ladies, that I left in their chamber.

Bilanta having received news that the enemy* was landed, and that the Dukes
both in their Tents, there was like to be a battle out of hand; began thus to
talk to her sister Princess. Sister did not I tell thee that I would play a
mad part* will thou do as I do? venture our lives for our loves? if we shall be
sisters let us join hands, and hearts to take part alike in our fortunes: I
will not stir a foot from thee: what say thou?

The Lady amazed at her manner of speech, and yet know ing the nature of her
love, made her this answer: Say and it is done; for I am no more then you
will have me, if I fail in my love, let me fall with my life: I will make no
exception knowing the honor of your discretion, but stand upon this
resolution, our fa^stes of one feather, let our loves ^lie together* what you
do I will do, if I die for it I care not. Then quoth Bilanta, ten to one, but
Penillo will be the foremost man in the fiel^, and perhaps to strive for honor,
may step upon a stone of dan ger, where if his foot slip; he may happen
be taken up ^er he rise. My father and my brother are I am sure in their Tent*
before whom every man must come that will seek preser^ in this piece of
service. Now let us play the gallantes (...) Armor, and furnishe our selves
with Armor, sword, and Pike, and let us with our burgonettes close covering
our faces, as strangers unknown, make suit to the Duke my father and my
brother, to have leave before the battle, to do some p^e of service in his
honor: and say that we are young Knights that will not be known till our
actions be performed, but that we come from two Ladies (I mean our selves) who
were sent by them, with this chain of Pear^e to gratify the Duke, and this
Jewel my brother, the better to obtain leave for the e^cution of our
attempt. Now if we get leave as I doubt not it may be, we shall be happier
then we look for.

Good sister (quoth Merilla) agreed, I am for you: if I (...) adventure the
danger of the Seaes, to follow my friend, shall I fear any course in the
company of my kind sister? No, beside me life, or death, I will take part
with you in your fortune. Then sister (quoth Merilla) we two will arm our
selves like to gallant young soldiers, and being unknown when our Uanguards
are put down, we will go to the Duke my fathers tent, where ten to one, we
shall find my brother with him, to them will we present our selves, by a
friend that I have made for the purpose, who shall not any way reveal us,
but make report, that we are two strange knights, that for our honors have
auowed to fear no dangers, nor slip any occasion of adventure: and hearing
of late, of this Larum of the arrival of the Duke Feronte, and his Army, will
upon him or some of his chief Generals perform some such resolute piece of
service, as may well approve more love, then we will protest both to his
Majesty and his country, which performed, we will then reveal our selves,
our names and conditions, only we will entreat but this favor, that we may
alone without further company have leave to march this night toward the
enemy, upon whom we hope to gain such honor, as may be to the Dukes
content, and the benefit to his whole country; and the better to procure this
favor, I will carry this chain of pearl, that with a letter to the effect
of this suite I will carry, as written from me to my brother, which with this
chain of pearl shall be given him as from me: now if we obtain our suite
we will to the field, and through the dark, try our fortune. It gives me in
my mind, the young Prince your brother will be some what gallant upon the
spleen, and step further then he is aware of: which if he do, and we light
upon him, it may be it will make a short war: howsoever it be I am
resolved, if we be taken prisoners, we shall receive no great hurt, and if we
die, our sorrows are at an end.

The Princess Merilla smiling at her invention, and having past her promise to
follow her in her enterprise, was as good as her word, went with her into a
private chamber with her sister Bilanta, where they fell to confer with a
secret friend, for the better effecting of their intent, where I will leave
them like Amazones, fitting their armours, to play the par^es of mad people,
and I will tell you a word or two of the Duke Ordillo, and his son Fantiro.

The Duke making preparation for the next day to answer the enemy both horse
and foot, and after good order taken for every thing according to his desire,
calling his son unto him, with certain of his Lords, and principal men of
Arms, used this royal speech unto him: My good friends and followers, the
matter that we have now in hand, is of no little moment, when the lives of our
selves, wives and children, our liberty, our lands and goods, and our honor,
and reputation for ever in this world, stands upon the issue of one days
service, wherein the triumphant shall be blessed, and the vanquished in a
manner utterly confounded: our enemy is angry, and f^erce, now it becomes
us to be patient and valiant: for nothing more daunteth fury, then the
banishment of fear, which in a field is commonly the cause of the overthrow:
Rashness may be hurtful, but cowardice is the shame of reason Let us therefore
put on resolution, to be ready upon the first summon, to answer the enemy:
ours is the better quarrel, he would have that he has no need of, and we
cannot spare that he will command; now our poverty has made his pride to
swell to such a height, as I hope will come down: for if every one be of my
mind, he shall have a sharper breakfast, then he had a supper: which if he
digest not the better, may hap stick in his stomach till his heart ache:
our strengthes are well fortified, but shall we look on him a far off? and
be afraid to take him by the hand? no, I am old, and first to thee my son I
speak, and so to all my friends, I will never return to my Court, without
great contentment to my country: and he that loves me or himself let him
lay down his life with me in this service: I will lead you, follow me that
will, and let him die quoth his son, that will not: to which prayer was such
a general Amen, that with the cheerfulness of every one, it seemed they
rather thought of a banquet then a battle. But not long they were in this
resolute consultation, but the two Ladies, before spoken of now armed at all
points like soldiers, were brought before the Duke and his son, who after
the reading of the letter, and delivery of the chain of pearl, with much
ado obtained (...) ^t suite, without the company of any more then
themselves; to try their fortune in gaining honor upon the enemy, who
leaving the Duke with his son in their tents, in the dim night marched
toward the enemy, and upon the sudden fearing to be descried by some
soo^te, ambus^aded themselves, in such sort, that they would be sure of their
purpose, ere they would put their honors in adventure, where they had not long
rested, till they met with the happiness of their whole hope: but I will
leave them there close waiting for their fortune, and tell you a few words of
Penillo the young Prince, son to the Duke Feronte.

This royal spirited youth, ever spurring for the best fortune, and having
that night obtained of the Duke his father, the charge of the watch for that
night, and the leading of the vanguarde the next morning; looking round about
him, and seeing no cause of fear or doubt of enemy, the moon though dimly
shining, yet giving so much light, as might deserie a less shadow then a
soldiers, with his trun^enin his hand, and his rapier at his side, walking as
it were careless of all fortune, thinking none within the hearing, tell thus
to talk to himself: Oh poor Penillo, the most unfortunate man living, to
come with honor from the service upon the Turk, and now to make a quarrel,
with alas too weak a Christian, what shall I do? I must follow my father, to
fall out with my friend: Ordillo used me like himself, and shall I be
ungrateful, in the greatest unkindness? but Bilanta my love, what will she
think of my faith, to she we such fruits of my affection? Oh I am not my
self, that cannot be hers, and yet in my heart I am hers, how hard soever be
my hap: but I must not be unnatural, and I would not be unkind: what is to
be done? Oh heavens do that which I cannot devise, love is divine, and as the
stature is of my affection, so let me prosper in my fortune. Which word was
scarcely out, when the two unknown soldiers laid hold of him, and carried
him prisoner to the Duke Ordillo: before whom (...) they had brought him, the
Duke had them for reward of their service, ask any thing whatsoever his
court or country could affoorde them, with protestation upon the sword of
honor, not to deny, nor to delaie them: but before the dem^ of the soldiers
for their promised reward, passed these few words betwixt the two Princes.

Fantiro the young Prince seeing the son of his enemy prisoner, the more to
abate as he thought, the pride of his spirit, entertained him with this
welcome. Your fortune is like your quarrel, no better then I wish, and as it
begins, so I hope will be the end: disgrace at the first, think what will
be the last. Well (quoth Penillo) I am now not my self, had not fortune thus
thrown me into thy hands, thou would never have dared to have uttered one
of these words; and had I my liberty, I would make thee shake for this
presumption. Who, ^e (quoth the Prince Fantiro?) Thou art deceived, thou shall
see how little account I make of thy too great mind, go take thy liberty;
see what thy second fortune can do upon me. but had thou me at this
advantage, what would thou do to me? Use thee^ (quoth the Prince) now
prisoner, as thou do me, give thee thy liberty for charity. At which
words the young Prince Fantiro smiling at the greatness of so royal a
spirit, with better words persuaded him to patience.

When the two Ladies taking off their Burgonets, descrying themselves to the
great admiration of the Duke, the young Prince, and the prisoner, and all the
beholders near them, demanded their rewards in this manner. Merilla by her
tra^e through the Seaes* loss of her fathers love, her brother, friends, and
country, desired to have for her reward the young Prince Fantiro, whom the
Duke with no little gladness was content to yee^ unto. Bilanta in the adventure
of her life, in y^ atchieuing of this honor, pleaded a blessing of the heavens
for the enjoying of her love, which was the prisoner. The other young Prince,
whoseeing his fortune no worse then to fall into such fair hands, was nothing
unwilling to have the Dukes word performed. But I will leave them awhile
determining of the event of these fortunes, and I will speak a little of the
duke Feronte and his passions.

Now the morning following the duke expecting his sons coming to his Tent, to
take the charge of the vanguarde for that day in the service intended, but
neither seeing, nor hearing of him so long that he grew into some fear,
least some mishap or other was come unto him, fell at last into this speech
with himself. Oh Feronte, under what planet were thou born? or what offense
have thou committed against the heavens, to have these heavy fortunes befall
thee, in thy aged years, thy only daughter as full of virtue, as honor
could wish, to be stolen from thy Court, by a stranger, and perhaps thine
enemy: thy son more dear to thee then thy self, having won honor in the
service of the Emperor, to loose it in the government of a mean Prince: naie
more do thou not rather doubt of his death, then hope of his life, having no
notice what may become of him. Oh too much valor I fear has made thee too
forward: Is it possible that thou live, if thou have lighted into the hands
of thine enemies? No, thy spirit is so great, that it will not let thee yield
but to death; and if thou do live how can thou hope of any thing, but
(...)* knowing the condition of my coming? Well, all things are at the
heavens disposing, to whom I will refer the hope of my comfort: I^ thou
live Son, I will redeem thee; and if thou die, I will follow thee. And
thus in extreme passion, determyning the adventure of his own life, to take
revenge of his sons fortun^, upon the sudden can^e a Herald of Arms from
Ordillo the Duke, with this Embassage unto him, that if it would please him to
remit all injuries, and to accept the submission of much love; the intended
war should turn to a continual peace: he should have the demand of his
desire, and more contentment then he could expect.

This message in the midst of his many griefs, so pacified his wrath, that he
^ad y^ Herald tell his master, that his words were current weight with him,
and that if he would in person meet him between both the camps, he should
see what comfortable effect his kindness had wrought with him: with which
words, and a bountiful reward for his good message, he returned to the Duke
his master, who upon the receipt of the message, came presently out of his
tent, and met with y^ Duke Feronte, according to appointment, to whom after
akind of humble greeting, he recounted all that happened of both their
children, and that in regard of the debt that he confessed due unto him, he
would if with his favor he might endowe his daughter with his whole Dukedom,
which discourse, and profer so pleased his much appawled mind, that causing all the children to be brought together on either side, in steed of sharp
intended war, made so blessed a peace, that the houses united in marriage, lived
ever after in much love, and the soldiers al commanded to lay by their Arms,
after much feasting, and many triumphs returned home with no little joy.

FINIS.

