THE UNCASING OF MACHAVILS INSTRVCTIONS to his Son: WITH THE ANSWER to the
same.

LONDON Printed by E. G. for Richard Higgenbotham, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Cardinals Hat without Newgate. 1615.

CONTENTS.
MAchiauels rules do whet the purest wits,
And do expel them from their idle fits:
To wise men they show the worlds folly,
With notice of preventing deeds unholy*
Which is the true intent of the Authors meaning,
How ever fools their judgments are bestowing.
Though the beginning do of harshnesse taste,
And many things are hudled up in have:
And though there be instruction to ill,
Good understanding the same does kill,
And turns those words unto the truest sense,
Which for those faults does make a recompense,
As the answer by degrees plainly shows,
What duty to virtue each creature owes,
Condemn not all till all be thoroughly past,
If first be worst, the best is kept till last.
THE UNCASING OF MACHAVILS INSTRVCTION TO HIS SON.
COme hither Son, and learn thy Fathers lore,
It is not now as it has been before,
For in my youth would no man read to me
That now in age I can deliver thee,
If thou will be a man of much esteem,
Be not the same what ever so thou seem,
Speak fair to all, be gentle, courteous, kind,
But let the world know nothing of thy mind,
Let slip no time may be for thine avail,
Nor trust no friend, for faith begins to fail:
Refuse no gift to fill thy coffers full,
The wisest poor man passes for a gull.
Be temperate in affect, so ber in talk,
And often make a solitary walk,
Tickle conceits commit to memory,
For written lines may lie in ieopardie.
Affect no follies, do not quarrels move,
And if thou love thy self, fall not in love,
Have ear for all men, confer with few,
And count fair words to be but as a dew.
Follow the time, find humors, flatter pride,
And praise the Croome; but only please the Bride.
Promise enough, but not perform too much:
But with thy betters evermore keep touch.
Strive not with great ones, meddle not with small,
For trifles trouble not thy self with all.
Frequent the Church make show of great devotion.
And be not bashful to receive promotion.
Look big at Beggars, wear thy clothes neat.
And spend not too much money at thy meat.
Save thy Horse charges at thy Cozens stable,
And take thy trencher at another table.
Break jests on Cowards, but take heed of Knaves.
And love no Bawdes, for they are beastly slaves.
Be perfect in Arithmeticks close Art,
In all accounts to make a saving part.
Stand not to stare upon a Peacockes tail,
Who if he see his legs will stoop his sail.
When Iack-dawes chatter, let their language go,
Better be silent then to prattle so.
Observe the Lion, but do not stir the Bear,
And love the Wolf, but only for his hair,
Learn of the Ass to bear, the Dog to wait,
And of the Ape to counterfeit conceit.
Catch not at flies, they are but Swallows food,
But love the meat that nourishes the blood.
Feed like a Wolf on blood, while it is warm
He is a fool that feels another harm.
Yet seem as kind, as she that seems to cry
To see him sick, that she could wish to die.
Take heed of interest, gage no land,
And from assurance ever keep thy hand.
Take no man's word, for coin is hard to get,
And it is a custom now to pay no debt,
Learn to get riches by the beggars purse:
The Fox fares best when Geese begin to curse,
Work all the week for profit every way,
Keep conscience only for the holy day.
Pry into trades, to traffic, train and trick,
And live not by the dead, but by the quick,
And if thou be a Courtier, know thy place:
But do not serve for only show of grace,
But let thy profit answer thy expense,
Least want do prove a woeful patience,
And thou do prove the proverb often told,
A careless Courtier young, a Beggar old.
If that thou be a Scholar and can preach,
And know how the unlearned sort to teach,
Let never conscience at thy profit knock,
But share thy Sheep, and fleece another flock,
For be thou poor, what e're thy preaching be,
Thy Parish will not care a pin for thee.
If that thou be a Soldier, serve for fame,
But let thy golden pay maintain the same,
For he that spends more then he gets in fight,
Will be a beggar though he be a Knight.
If that thou be a Lawyer know thy right,
But keep thy Client in a cunning plight,
For how can thou a hearty pleading hold,
If that thy tongue be not well tipped with gold,
And rich attired, thou shall have room to stand
To plead thy case, what e're thou have in hand,
But barely clad, and in a poor array,
Thou may perhaps have hearing at doomes day;
For though the Law be right, and Judge be just,
Yet with the rich, the beggar must not thrust.
If that thou be a Merchant know thy trade,
And of thy wares what reckning may be made,
And be not lavish in a leude expense,
Least bankrupt prove a bad experience.
If that thou be a Crafts-man know thy pains,
And let no Alehouse eat out all thy gains,
For if expense above thy gettings go,
Thou will be quickly in the beggars roe.
What says the crafty Clown in clowted shoes,
Time was ordained to get and not to loose.
What though the poor lie staruing in the ditch?
It is the dearth of corn makes Farmers rich,
Wear not thy shoes too short, nor cloak too long,
Use thy friend well, but do thy self no wrong.
Abandon fools, make much of cunning wits,
But favor most, that most thy profit fits,
Sit not up too late, except it be for gain,
For want of sleep is hurtful for the brain.
Go not to Sea, whiles thou may live on land,
Least scaping rocks, thou fall upon a sand.
Be sociable in every company.
But have no hand in any villainy,
"If thou find humors to pass reasons race,
"Depart in time, let others take thy place,
"Such companions better lost then found,
"Vain humored wits cannot be very sound,
"Though for thy gain, thou kindly do entreat them,
"Yet know thy time, when and how to reject them.
Be conversant with strangers, learn languages,
Sound their estates, and note their carriages,
Know their several wars, their worth and prizes,
But trouble not thy head with vain devices.
"Do thou severely look to every action,
"And let their errors yield thee satisfaction,
"That thou by them may easily seek to rise,
"In doing this the rich will hold thee wise.
Aim still at profit, howsoever it grows,
Make the wind serve wheresoever it blows,
"Then clearly hoist up sail, and on apace
"Laboring so that thou arrive with grace.
"Then welcome home, if crowns thou have good store,
"But wanting that respectlesse evermore.
"No penny no pater noster men cry,
"And that poverty parts good company.
"These proverbs old, thou see are very true.
"If thou have wealth, what misery can ensue?
"All men will then grace thee with cap and knee,
"and praise thy life, who vile so ere it be,
For it is this wealth this profit and this gain,
That dies the color evermore in grain.
Learn thou the Physician, and the Lawyers fee
And for thy profit speak as fair as he:
Promise the one good speed, the other good health,
In any course it is good to gather wealth.
"Men must not live these days by foolish pity,
"In getting coin, accounted very witty,
Learn all diseases and their several cures,
And care not what the patient heart endures,
But give him one day grief, another ease,
Not as his patience, but as his purse does please,
"It is not sighs, nor sobs, nor pinching pain,
"Thou must respect, when that thou seek'st for gain,
"Let them greiue, chase, and evermore be fretting,
"So thou by them mai'st happily be getting,
Learn cards and dice, and every cheating play,
That may bring in thy profit any way.
Learn thou to stop a card, or cog a die,
But shift it clenly from the gamesters eye,
At ruff and trumpe note thou the dealers rubs
There is no pack without the Knave of Clubs.
"Pity not when thou have caught the connie
"Oh! how sweet it is to share the money?
"It makes good cheer, and welcomes many a guest
"Unto a stately house, a stately feast,
"And brings content, whiles pity sits and pines
"In grief and pain, and many hungry sines,
"When lovely wealth in Iouiall spirit sings,
"Soring alost with richest golden wings,
"Commanding all those vassals poor and base,
"And ever seated in the highest place,
"With pleasure feeding on the daintiest fare,
"And all delights accounted very rare,
"With music sweet, much mirth and iollity,
"With gallant sports and merry company:
"Think on these, and do but rightly weigh them,
"Thrice happy he, so happy has them.
"Be careful then, that something may come in,
"Though some repine thou need'st not care a pin;
"For when those means unto thy coffer sends,
"A pot or a pint makes a fool amends;
"Yet bestow not this, nor any else upon him,
"Except to gain some greater matter by him,
"Seek any means or course, that may enrich thee,
"The richest sort then kindly will embrace thee.
Dandle the child, grow inward with the Nurse,
And think no beggerie base that fills the purse.
"Be not over nice, nor coy* among proud ones,
"Humor them, and flatter thou the small ones,
"That they as instruments may serve thy turn,
"Stand farther of when thou begin'st to burn.
"Have conference with as many as requires it,
"And be merry with those that desire it,
"But still be sure, to keep thy tongue from prating,
"Which is most base, and breeds ever hating,
"Trust not to far, though promises be made,
"Least that the substance turn unto a shade.
"Great dangers lie in shows of seeming kind,
"He is a fool lets all men know his mind:
"First try, then trust, according to thy pleasure,
"Be pleasing to all, yet all within a measure.
Laugh with the Letcher, at Maidens bashfulnesse,
And with the chaste, at fleshes filthiness,
And with the Spend-thrift, at the Misers bags,
And with the Miser, at the beggars rags.
"And with the Glutton, at poor hungry cheer,
"And with the hungry, at a plenteous year.
"And with the learned, at a simple wit.
"And with the foolish, at a frenzy fit.
"And with the crafts-men, when they are deceiving,
"So that something to thee may be sharing,
Learn all Religions, be of every Sect,
And chiefly to thy profit have respect.
"Let conscience knock, care not for that at all,
"If thou have coin, no matter who do fall.
For this same conscience is so poor and bare,
That most she shifts amongst the beggars share,
"Enduring hunger, cold, and bitter storms,
"Reproachful terms, with many hurts and harms,
"Coursely clad, all rags, and worn a sunder,
"And worst of all, basely still kept under:
"In mean estate, help-lesse still remaining,
"Of better sorts evermore disdaining.
In sum, of what estate so ere thou be,
Learn to be rich, for that will hold with thee:
"What matter though men point at thy folly,
"Thou mai'st with the purest seem as holy:
"With yea and nay, verily and indeed,
"With demurest looks wish them good speed,
"Which is a cloak sufficient for thy evil,
"Almost able to deceive the Devil,
"And accuse them, that say thou offerest wrong,
"Such cruel deeds to wicked does belong.
"This is the course, in humoring every sect,
"A better means thy profit to respect.
"Of these pure-ones, learn to dissemble so,
"Thine shall be the profit whose're the woe,
Persuade a Slave he is half a Gentleman,
Though he drop out of a dripping pan:
It is no matter if his purse can bear it,
His rascal pride will never blush to hear it.
"Extol a fool, and he will still be grinning,
"No matter what, so thou by him be winning.
Persuade a Clown, that he is half a Knight,
And that his wealth deserves the place aright;
And his Maid-marrian with her wain-scot-face,
Might be a Lady but for lack of grace,
And make her think that she is half a Queen,
Or scarce on earth is such another seen,
For virtue, beauty, wit, shape and feature,
Though God he knows that she is no such creature:
But if she do applaude it it is no matter,
He is a fool, for profit cannot flatter.
Time is not now to trifle or dandle:
For gain, fore the Devil hold a candle:
And hold it as a deed that is wisely done,
Or as a prize that is bravely wone,
Commend a Soldier when he is in crowns,
And swear a Knight must govern over clownes,
In many a camp how he is Caske did bear,
Although poor Coward he did never come there.
But yet thy flattery be sure so to frame,
Thine may be the gain, though his the shame.
"If thou find him simple with money store,
"I hope thou will find wit to make him poor.
"Then smiling say, I pity your estate,
"It is not with you now as it was of late:
"But be content no doubt but God will send,
"With this depart, his moneys thine to spend,
"Then see thou meet him not in any case,
"Nor come not in where he shall be in place,
"Least to expense, he after seeks to drive thee,
"Or by some means borrowes money of thee,
"Tut: let him shift, say thou thy mon'ies gone,
"Care not thou at all, though he make his moan:
"But wish him well, as most men now do use,
"Find any means that may thy purse excuse:
"Let men be lavish, and commend them too,
"Say it is bravely done, but feed on them too.
"Be sure of this, and do it in any case.
"Look well about, that thou have time and place,
"Least that some Machiauill chance to spy it,
"Discloseth all, to gain something by it.
Commend the Lawier, and his studious reading,
Admire his judgments and extol his pleading,
But flatter so, that if he get a fee,
Thou mai'st have out a share as well as he.
"Be plotting so that still thou mai'st be getting;
"Few Lawyers griue at their Clients fretting.
"To sue in Forma pauperis it is in vain,
"When (most Lawyers) poor suitors do disdain.
"They must be humored, sued and sought to still,
"And all things else obedient to their will:
"That this is true, thou daily mai'st behold,
"How dearly they esteem a fee of gold.
Follow a Bishop with a world of praise,
And make him as the load-starre of the days,
Admire him, and extol him to the skies;
But so that thou mai'st get a Benefies,
A good Vicarage, Cure or some such
As will return thee profit small or much.
"Look to it in time, strike whiles the iron's hot,
"Use no delay where wealth is to be got.
"You know that service is no heritage:
"What boot's a man to stand on parentage?
"But look to the maine chance, it is that must hold,
"He Is accounted well borne, that has much gold,
"To serve in hope, is but a Beggars fee,
"And such rewards most Masters use you see,
"Or after two or three years service turn thee off,
"And for thy service done, bestow a scoff.
"Or if perhaps, thou serve till thou grow old,
"Happy if an Almes-house thine age can hold,
"This is the flinty course of this our age,
"This is the time brings humors in a rage:
"Then list in time, serve not except for gain,
"Let Masters feel the toil of servants pain:
"Serve not those, whose senses have no feeling,
"Or those that with leaden hands are giving,
"Applaude them not with courteous reverence,
"When they are so far from due benevolence.
"Scorn his blew coat, his cogniscence and all,
"That shall rejoice in a poor servants fall.
Commend a Merchant, honor his adventure,
Who gets his wealth by danger, not indenture.
Commend his trade, his traffike and his truth,
The honor of his age, and toil of youth:
"Say how you have heard him much commended,
"And with worthy art himself defended,
"Against foreign foes, by Land and Seas,
"And smoothly slipped it of himself to please:
But withal be sure to flatter so,
That to thy purse, some piece of money groe:
Or on his board, thy trencher to be laid,
Or borrowed money never to be paid.
And tell (what-lack ye) that he lackes no wit,
And for his head that he deserves to sit
On higher seats then Churchwardens stools,
For he has more wit, then a world of fools;
But yet in feeding of his idle vain,
Be sure to pick out some od privy gain.
"It is a folly then to stand on niceness,
"For that, at such times is counted baseness.
"Thou must boldly look up and seem merry,
"When profit comes in, who can be weary?
"Refuse nothing that comes in any way,
"It is a bad thing serves not another day.
A Rapier, Dagger, Stockings, Boots or Shoes,
Somewhat does well though beggars must not choose,
"If one give thee Venison, what need thou care
"How he came by it, so it mend thy fare?
"Stand not to question in any case,
"He may think thou mean to seek his disgrace,
"By telling abroad to strangers unknown,
"How he had Venison, though none of his own:
"Always look to thy tongue, no more but mum,
"Ever be silent, so any thing come:
"Yet know thy time, when to speak, when to spare,
"Keeping this course, accounted very rare.
Tell Mistress minkes, she that keeps the shop,
She is a Ship that bears a gallant top;
She is a Lady for her lovely face,
And her countenance has a Princes grace,
"And that her beauty has inthrald thee so,
"Except she yields remorse, she works thy woe:
"Then cast thine eye upon her beauteous cheek,
"Protesting that thou never saw the like:
"Her smooth forehead, and her comely dressing;
"Her lovely Breasts, cause loves increasing;
"Her Iuorie teeth, her lip and chin;
"Her snow white hand, the like was never seen;
"Her leg and foot, with her gate so comely;
"Her apparels worn so neat and seemly.
"Thus over worn with care, thou mai'st seem to be,
"Till thou have made her proud herself to see.
"Then she nods the head with smiling favor,
"That thou should bestow, such love upon her;
Then bite the lip, wink and hang the head,
And give a sigh, as though thy heart were dead;
And show strange passions of affections sense,
That she may pity love sirreuerence:
"Wishing her self worthy of thy favor,
"Which is a means to gain some thing by her.
Thus let the issue of this cunning be,
That from her purse some profit come to thee,
A piece of Satin, Fustian, or some Stuff;
A Falling-band, or a three Double-ruffe;
A Hat, a Shirt, a Cloake-cloath or a Ring,
Knives, Purses, Gloves, or some such pretty thing,
Somewhat has some savor, it is this gain,
That still invention gives his sweetest vain.
"It cheares a body weak, and comfort sends,
"To any one that is ill or void of friends,
"It brings the infant up, for want might pine,
"Else, Charity small comfort would resign:
"To middle age, it nourishes the blood,
"And gives them all, and all that may be good:
"And aged men, it luls them fast a sleep,
"Whose youth took care, this precious gem to keep.
"Be careful then how thou keep this by thee,
"Least when thou want, it quite forsake thee,
"And leave thee to wander, still rejected;
"My Boy look to it and seek to prevent it.
Why tell a Cobbler he is half a King,
When on his patches, he can sit and sing,
And knock his last, and whet his cutting knife,
There is no Kingdom to a merry life.
"A light heart lightly bears the bell away,
"When mighty men finds cares, though clothed gay:
But yet in telling of this idle tale,
Be sure at least to get a pot of Ale;
"Or something else that has a feeling sense,
"Take any thing as part of recompense:
"And seem very thankful, till better comes,
"Since many small things ad to greater sums.
For this same nothing, brings no world about,
Better play small game then be clean shut out.
If that thy Wife be fair, and thou but poor,
Let her stand like a picture at thy door:
Where though she do but pick her fingers ends;
Fair eyes, fond looks, will gain a world of friends.
"Task her not to work, if she be pretty:
"Bid her forbear, her toil makes thee pity:
"She may with ease, have means for greater gains,
"With rich rewards, and pleasure for her pains.
Play at bo-peepe, see me and see me not;
It comes off well that is so closely got,
And evermore say, aye? well fare the vent,
That paies the charges of the house and rent.
"Come, come, it is no matter, berul'd by this,
"The finest Dames does some times do amiss:
"Yet walk demure, like Puritans indeed,
"And early rise to a Sermon for a need;
"And make great show of deuoutest prayer,
"When she only goes to meet her lover,
"Turning back, poor fool defires the text,
"She tells him any thing that comes next:
"And turning over the leaf to read the verse,
"Scarce for laughing, one word can rehearse:
"But prettily turns it off with some jest;
"He bears with all, he knows it is his best.
"If that thy wife be old, thy Daughters young,
"And fair of face, and of a fluent tongue:
"If by her suitors silver may be had;
"Bear with small faults, the good will help the bad.
"Be not too severe, time may mend their faults;
"He is a fool before a cripple haults:
"Or he that finds a fault where gain comes in,
"It Is pity but his cheeks should e're look thin:
"What though thou know that vice do gain it all;
"Will virtue help, when thou begin'st to fall?
"This is no world for virtuous men to thrive;
"It Is work enough to keep thy self alive.
"Let Wife and Daughters love to make thee wealthy;
"Thou know that gold will seek to make thee healthie.
If thy Maid-seruants, be kind hearted wenches;
And closely make kind bargins on the benches,
"Let them have liberty, love and pleasure;
"All these are helps to bring in thy treasure:
"Let them laugh and be merry, it yields content;
Theil'e humor all, till all their coin is spent.
If by their pleasures, may thy profit grow;
Wink at a wanton, who has not been so.
Make love to twenty wenches in one day;
But let no poor less lead thy heart away,
"For that is in vain, thy labor then is lost;
"Such idle love, can never quit thy cost;
"It brings a charge and sends a heavy clog,
"And makes thy life, as servile as a dog;
"From house to house, thou shall be haunted then,
"And clean exempt, from the Love of men.
"A plague that is worse, she is jealous euer-more:
"This is the true course of a love that is poor:
"Or if by chance, her Husband wealth does gain,
"She straight grows proud, which is a beastly vain:
"Thus wealth and ease, cannot with such agree;
"Then let them pass my Son, be rul'de by me:
But where thou find'st, good store of land or gold;
There lay closely to purchase a freehold.
"Clap her a board, and bravely hoise up sail,
"Shoot her in the poop, Duck have at thy tail,
"The prize is thine own, thou have got it fair,
"Thou must be brief then in getting an heir.
And be not squemish, at a nice conceit,
That may persuade thee from a pleasing bait.
"Stand not like a Woodcocke sneking in the cold,
"But set it out, with a grace and be bold:
"To make thy self simple, with show of want,
"Or that thy means at all, grow very scant,
"Godnight Nichole, thy friends will be packing;
"Or by vilde disgrace, thy credit racking.
"These are the pleasures of a poor estate,
"Be rich then if thou can possibly hate,
"Keep good clothes on thy back, and neately wear them,
"What want soever comes, do not pawn them:
"For once being gotten in the Devils jaws,
"He will surely keep them in with his paws.
"If thy Apparel be something clenly:
"Though in thy purse thou have neu'r a penny:
"Men may in some measure yet esteem thee
"And a farther grace, happily give thee.
"Do not seem base, though penilesse thou art:
"But look about, of whom to get a part.
"Then make much of that, and keep it closely;
"Seek for treasure, and keep it wisely:
Get all contentment that the world can give,
For after death, who knows how we live.
Strange things are spoken, and believe the best,
And leave the worst, I leave thee to the rest.
"Stumble not at a straw, nor leap over a block:
"Leave not things at random, keep all under lock:
"Things may be missing, but when it is gone,
"It is a common speech that they saw none;
"Be finding still, but let thy loss be small,
"Yet have respect unto thy self with all.
"Be not among'st Thieves, but when thou find'st them sharing:
"Nor with a miserable wretch that is sparing.
"Come not near a Brothell house, for letchery,
"Those damned Queanes are full of treachery.
"Part not a fray, except thou find'st great reason.
"Go not ill sh^d in a winter season.
"Be not to forwards to go in the rain,
"Except it be for profit or thy gain.
"When sickness comes few friends are ever found;
"Look to thy self that thou be whole and sound,
"And be not careless which way thou do walk,
"Nor care too much with idle brains to talk.
Come not within the verdict of a Jury,
Nor yet near a Tyrant in his fury.
"Give fair words to the watch, the'il let thee pass;
"Give the Constable thanks, think him an Ass.
"Promise money when thou passest through the Gate;
"But on my blessing never let him h'ate.
"Bear with a Tapster, though his cans be frothie;
"But rail on a Broker whose clothes are mothie.
"Carmen and Porters are -- approved,
"And most Watermen are very dogged,
"Yet give them fair words, if thou can gain them,
"Else bid Deri -- say Lord have mercy on them.
"What though thy Horse, by the Hostler is nipt,
"It is a true Hostler, that has not so been tript.
"But to make him amends, run in his score
"If thou pai'st him i will counsel thee no more,
" Bailiffes and Seriants, keep without their reach,
"And without the verge of a privy search.
"Avoid warrants, they are dangerous things:
"Look to thy profit, that some comfort brings,
Plot for a pudding or piece of souce:
The sly Cat would not watch but for the Mouse.
The Fox would never hunt, but for his prey?
And workmen but for gain, would play all day.
It is this wealth, this profit and this gain:
That makes the Labourer sing away his pain.
"It makes Widows forget their Husbands lately dead,
"It is the cause they so soon again do wed.
"If thou wo'st a Widow, in time begin:
"Or else thy woing is not worth a pin.
"If thou be slow to speak, as one I knew,
"Thou would assure thy self, my counsels true,
"He (to late) finding her upon her knees
"In Church where yet her Husbands coorse she sees,
"Hearing the Sermon at his funeral,
"Longing to behold his burial.
"This Suitor being touched, with inward love;
"Approached near, his lovely suit to move,
"Then stooping down, he whispered in her ear
"Saying he bore her love as might appear
"In that so soon he showed his love unto her,
"Before any else did approach to woe her.
"A less (says she, your labor is in vain
"Last night a Husband, I did entertain.
"Yet your kind offer, I take in good part,
"And had entertained you with all my heart,
"If you had come, in any time unto me,
"But he at my Husbands death did woe me:
"Then speak in time, if profit comes thereby,
"Or else many dangers therein may lie.
If thou be rich, and hat'st another pride:
That he may go on foot, while thou do ride.
Find means to feed, his swelling humor so,
That high conceit may above compass go;
Till Fortunes frowns, his folly so does check;
That Malcontent may after break his neck.
Then lay in for his Lands, his goods and place;
But still be sure to keep thy self in grace.
"There are many rubs twixt thee and the Jack,
"Therefore throw home thy cast and be not slack:
"Yet out-throw it not, least thou loose the cast,
"So Standers by will rejoice at thy have:
"And betting say, that thou shall loose the game,
"Which is to thy disgrace and utter shame.
"Look to thy self, thou be not wronged by any.
"Promote thy self, though thou displace a many:
But if thou be'st not up, but seek'st to rise,
Step by degrees, and in thy steps be wise:
"Do not desire to stride two staiers at once,
"Diverse men will suffer thee for the nonce,
"And will rejoice to see thee break thy shin,
"Then think how men rejoice when that they win:
"Standers by, discern more then gamsters can,
"Disdain not the kindness of any man.
"Thou may as easily, speak fair words as foul, not?
"Be not a fool, when that thou make the shot:
"Foul words corrupt good manners it is said;
"Of backe-biting slaves ever be affraide,
"Regard not their kindness, though it be great,
"That shall hit thee in the teeth, with a meals meat:
"Think him not true, that such baseness does hold,
"Who secrets in corners loves to unfold.
"Avoid them in time, their hate is much;
"Yet they will seem, as though they were not such:
"And no doubt give fair words unto thy face;
"Alas, alas, it is a heavy case.
"Prevent them then, and care not for their hate,
"It boots not to see the form where she sat;
"Haddie-wist comes to late, hold time before;
"Run not to deep in thy Hostesses score:
"Depart in time, when she the shot is making,
"And feign some business at thy departing:
"It Is good to offer to pay, when that thou have it:
"If once offered back, look that thou keep'st it,
"And give him thanks, until the next meeting:
"Thus by degrees still thou must be getting.
Refuse no service be it never so base:
By any means may bring thee into grace,
And make no conscience to attend on sin,
To keep the door, where Devils dance within,
"Mong'st all kind of people (for gain) men thrust,
"Love no Iron blades they will but rust,
"And turn the edge, when thou should use them,
"I prithee be wise, and learn to refuse them.
Find a rich Sier, and note his disposition,
How he is given to baseness or ambition;
And with thy bending lay his Land aboard,
That he may be thy slave, thou his Lord.
"Yet bear in hand as though thou wished him good:
"There Is more ways then one, to go to the wood.
If that thy friend do lack a little wit,
And in his humor frame an idle fit.
To take a Wife, and use thee for his wooing,
Speak for thy friend, but for thy self be doing:
"If thou find'st her worth the catching take her,
"If not, let thy friend be sure to have her.
For every friend, is to his friend a debtor:
To love him as himself, but not no better,
But for thy self, if thou have got a Wife;
Make show to love her dearly as thy life.
Though for thy quiet, thou could be content
A little money were at her burial spent,
And let that charge, be of thy grief the ground,
For many wives, are better lost then found.
"Take heed (my Son) how, and where thou do woe,
"For Widows are wanton, and Maidens too.
"She that has had many Husbands cannot love,
"She that never had none who knows how she will prove?
"Great chance, but young wenches are tried before,
"And middle age, must needs pay the old score.
"Old women hold out whiles a stumpe does last,
"Sweet meats to old folks have a gracious taste:
"But if thou come unto the second matching:
Have careful heed, for fear of conicatching,
Who in their hole, will undermine so fast;
The'ill leave their Lordship like the Land of wast:
"For many privy banquets, must be had,
"Which being known, would make a man stark mad.
"They must have pleasure, tut, let the world slide
"Sit fast for falling, when thou mean to ride,
"It is no jesting matter my friend, quoth he,
"To ride a gauld Cut, Iaded thou shall be,
"Who will wince and kick, and lie in the dust,
"Follow not an old Jade that loves lust.
"That is a plague that is worse then all the rest,
"Though she be rich, yet her filth detest,
"Do not delight, in an old gresie Slut
"Whose love is to fill a greedy gut.
"She Will never be satisfied, until the earth;
"Receives her corpse, and stops up her breath,
Suspect thy will be weary of thy will
"Then learn to spare, but never learn to spill,
Part with no coin but upon condition,
With humble countenance shadow ambition,
"Muffle thy self sometimes to keep unknown
"For by a knave thou mai'st be overthrown,
"Take heed of the Counters, it is a great grief
"To lie in prison without relief,
"Be not a Pandor, for then thou art shamed
"Take heed of a wild Coult that is never tamed
"Yet of all these, if thou can gain by them
"Have ear unto, but be not seen in them
"Let simple wits carry away the blame.
"The reproach, the rumors and all the shame,
"When thou with sly countenance mai'st be sure
"Of some profit let them the pain endure,
"Let all be done, with show of humbleness:
"So shall thou receive profit with thankfulness.
Creep, Crouch, and kneel, until thou be aloft.
But then, sit fast, for fear thou fall not soft.
"The stately Streams that kindly begins to flow
"Affords content, in spite of whom says no,
"The pleasant Spring, fair morn's of pleasure sends
"And to each Creature pleasant gifts extends:
"The lovely Birds, on branches sits still singing,
"Reioicing at those stately flowers then springing,
"But see how time turns back, and crosses all
"Those dates expired, begins a heavy fall,
"Those flowing streams, that gave that kind consent
To ebb is turned, and all their strength is spent.
"Those mornes of May, where Flora shined so bright
"Are now forlorn, made dark by winters night,
"Those Birds whose cheerful tunes did pleasure give
"Are now inforst to seek them holes to live,
"Where mournful tunes, records their heavy state.
"That envious time, has altered thus their fate:
"Beloulde in this, and all that is called pleasure,
"How it is crossed by times evil measure.
"Who would seem rich, although he has store,
"But closely keep his treasure evermore.
"And to himself, be ever such a friend:
"That to himself he may his money lend,
"Be circumspect still, when thou art in grace,
"Let not vain toies, thy honor then disgrace.
Be rich I say, nay Boy be rich, and wise:
Gold is an actious mettle for the eyes,
Why? rich men have much money and gay gear:
And goodly houses, and most dainty cheer;
Fair Wives, fine pictures, plays and morris-dances;
And many cheates: that come by many chances.
Fine Ciuet boxes, sweet perfumes, and waters,
And twenty other such kind of matters.
While the poor man, that pines for want of friends:
May sit and sigh, and pick his fingers ends,
And every morning wash his face with tears
And wipe his blubberred cheeks with sheualed hears,
"It is a heavy sense, where coin is wanting
"At such a time of care, friends are scanting,
"When needy guests comes to a feast to dine
"They must content themselves and drink no Wine,
"Small beer must suffice, aye? and say it is well,
"Wine must be kept, for Dives going to Hell,
"This slender care of poverty is had:
Which does enforce them ever to be sad,
And walk abroad, for sorrows recreation
Or starve himself, or feed on contemplation:
"Sorrows companion, and all forlorn.
"And of every Creature held in scorn,
"His head hanges down, his arms locked one in one:
"To none but hills and echoes make his moan.
"Resounding care, a heavy doleful breath.
"No better pillow then his mother earth,
"Speaking to the air as to a friend:
"That should his misery some comfort send.
Make cursie to the shadow of any food,
And glad to get a look or half a word,
Blush and fall back, when gaie folk comes in place
And start to look a Lady in the face,
Talk to the air, where no man list to hear him,
Or plod alone, where no man will come near him,
"Despair is all his food to nourish blood
"A fearful state, hard to be understood
"What grievous hell is want affecting still:
"A hungry heart, a hungry soul to kill,
"What woe is want, where no man will relieve
"A poor distressed soul that still does grieve.
And thus recording of a heavy care,
He feeds perhaps upon a hungry fare,
Till that some good Knight or learned Gentleman
That will not be a Machauillian,
But can make use of afflicted brains.
And gather profit from their toyling pains,
May hap to grace him with his countenance
Give him a blew coat and a cognizance,
An old cast doublet, or a pair of boots.
Feed him with brown bread small beer herbs and roots:
And now and then perhaps a piece of meat,
That scarce a man would give a Dog to eat.
Or after happily some good service done,
Make him Tutor, to his youngest Son.
Laugh at those Beggars, speak in scorn of pelse:
Care thou for nothing but to enrich thy self.
For truth reports, that dolts of thriftie entreat,
If thou be rich, thou quickly mai'st be great,
"Why? then thou shall be sought unto and praisd',
"And many ways to dignities be raisd',
"Thy name shall be extold by Poets Pen;
"And bravely attended on by Seruing-men.
"Books shall be dedicated to thy worth:
"To advance thy glory, thy fame set forth.
"Thou shall be wise, and plac'st in Justice to,
"Though thou want will, all this thy wealth can do.
"Think no man wise but he that gathers wealth,
"And keep the diet that preserues the health.
"Do not with Gluttons feed, though they woe thee,
"Nor with Drunkards use, though they pay for thee,
"If thou be with a Glutton at a feast,
"He Will wish thee choked, if thou feed on the best,
"And eye thee too, and think thou do him wrong.
"To eat one bit, that to his chops belong,
"Let Gluttons grease their dogs alone for thee
"They are not for thy profit, take that of me,
"Drunkards are vilde, but not so ill as those
"He like a brave Bully cheares up his nose
"With a rich color, set with pearls and stones,
"Whiles Gluttons hungry chaps make clean the bones.
"He Will call his neighbor in, and make him drink,
"A Glutton like a beast, does beastly stink,
"Of any ill, the least is to be chused:
"Yet best of all, when all is quite refused
"With good advice, menage so thy doings:
"That thou be not troubled much with loosings.
Travel with ease, take heed of taking cold,
And next to God take comfort in thy gold.
Commit no secrets to thy second self*
For never yet was Ape but plaide the Elfe:
"To women's trust, it is pain to trust upon,
"Greatest secrets, from them are soonest gone:
"Their closets cannot hold a thing forbidden;
"Yet desires to know a thing that is hidden:
"Their nature's very weak, their frailties much;
"Thei'l love him very well that is exceeding rich.
Set snares for Wodcocks, pitfales for small birds,
And catch a fool with nothing but fair words.
Kill not a fly and let a flea alone,
That sucks the blood, and never hurts the bone.
File not thy fingers with a filthy slut,
And ride not often on a gald backed Cut.
"Keep not a Curre, that no good profit yields:
"A lurching Dog will range about the fields.
Fear not a shadow, but avoid a danger:
And keep not a Jade at rack and manger,
"Which will quite eat thee out of house and home;
"Thy self remain a dunce, a very mome,
"With ridiculous terms thou shall be scoft,
"Thy lodging cold, in the streets very often.
Persuade no Prince, from his choice of pleasure,
Nor a rich man from his love of treasure.
"For if thou with Monarkes meddle to far;
"It must perforce procure a mighty jar,
"Or if thou pry but near a rich man's chest;
To him thou shall be an unwelcome guest:
But if he be rich, whatso'ere he be,
Seem in thine honor, to be just as he.
If he be poor, then let him beg alone,
It is a trade that few grow rich upon.
"The best Beggars are accounted idle;
"Riding a stumbler, hold fast the bridle,
"A Soldiers wants these days has seldom aid:
"To follow wars it makes men much dismaide:
"Though ventering life and goods, with loss of limbs:
"What rich Domestical a man esteems,
"At this return, his worth though were so great;
"Scarce give a look, or scarce a bit of meat,
"If such worthy men shall want, deserving this;
"Look not thou for comfort in distress.
"Keep thou at home, as homebred slaves do use,
"Whose cankered hearts, bright honor does abuse,
"And feed on fat, like Lubbers take their ease.
"Let those that list attempt to cross the Seas:
"When Dives love, is only in his wealth:
"When toiling Lazers counted naught but filth:
Greiuous unto all horror it is to see;
"Delight in gold as these else shall thou be.
Learn to know Kingdoms, Nations, and their natures,
Their laws, their judgments, Male and femall creatures,
And how their wealth does grow, by War or peace,
And how their quarrels grew, and how they seace.
How they may be offended or defended;
And how their states begun, and which way ended;
But in all noates, noate this of all,
How thou mai'st rise, whoeuer hap to fall.
"Let thy Religion be of what sort it will,
"Be thou of that Sect, seek to humor still.
"Do not with a shamefa'st bashfulnesse do it:
"But with a manly courage run through it:
"As if to such Sects, thou had been ever bred,
"By which means thou mai'st be the better fed.
If thou have a partner in thy stock,
And both your wealths, do rest under one lock:
And if thy partner ride abroad for pleasure,
And put thy faith in trust with all his treasure:
At his return, do upon quarrels stand,
When thou have got his wealth into thy hand:
Say in accounts, he has deceived thee
Although thou know no such matter be:
"Seem exceeding earnest and speak aloud:
"No marvel though of late you were so proud:
"Must my purse needs be thus at your command?
"It Is very true? you have made a fair hand:
"Thus rail at him that he may shame to hear thee:
"Act it well, he may begin to fear thee:
When if he will not take what thou will give him;
To course of law, for his best comfort drive him;
Where whiles he railes on thy ill conscience,
Thy patience closely will put up his pence.
"Rail thou still on his ill Husbandry,
"So men may think, he spent lasciuiously:
"Commending thee that thou look to it in time
"Raising on him abroad, a grievous crime.
But whatsoever honest minds surmise,
Wealth with the wealthy, makes the wealthy wise.
Be rich therefore I say, be rich my Son
For wealth will sway the world when all is done.
"If these counsels will not make thee rich
"Nor procure thy further profit small or much,
"By preventing mischiefs that may befall thee
"What counsel then shall I farther give thee,
"The courses of the world, I show thee plain
"As in a Map, all dangers to refrain,
"Which had they been in time foretold to me
"I might avoided that which now I see,
"Head strong youth in promotion cannot sit
"Their fickle age has many an idle fit.
"Following those humors that please them best,
"Which is a hinderance to their quiet rest:
"But things foretold, may easily be past.
"It is not good to thrust things up in have,
"Be happy then in learning of this good:
"Want is the means that parts kind brotherhood.
"Thou see enough, if reason may suffice,
"All is laid open here before thine eyes,
"As in a glass thou rightly mai'st behold,
"How thy state stands, if thou want gold:
"Then on my blessing learn these rules of mine;
"Another day surely it will be thine.
FINIS.
THE ANSWER TO MACHIAVELS uncasing.
But now my Son, that thou have learned this lore,
Upon my blessing look on it no more,
Except it be by ill to know the good:
But yet take heed it be misunderstood.
Be that thou seem to be in word and deed,
Least pater noster put thee from thy Creed.
Fair speech is good, but keep not a foul mind,
For hollow hearts are of a hellish kind.
"Backbiters and dissembling tongues are vilde,
"From heavens happiness by heaven exilde,
"Against such horrid deeds is woe pronounced,
"A woeful state from blessedness renounced.
A good beginning makes a blessed end,
And hold him for a Dog that has no friend,
"His case is ill when no man will respect him,
"But worst of all, when virtue does neglect him,
Receive no bribes to fill a rustie chest,
A quiet conscience is a kingly feast.
"Content does shine where virtuous men do dwell.
"A vicious life deserves naught but hell.
"Labor not by unlawful means to gain,
"When means unlawful breeds a woeful pain.
And it is a heavy sense in sorrows roll,
To save the body, and to kill the soul.
Affect the wise, and with the learned talk,
And with the learned often make a walk.
"And such as thy companions shall be,
"Even such rewards shall be bestowed on thee.
"Where gravity remains, there still resort,
"Where modesty does dwell, with such consort:
"So shall thou be, beloved still of all,
No scandals then shall seek to work thy thrall.
Remember nothing that thou do not write,
For danger does but fearful hearts affright:
"And with charity love thy neighbor so,
"That by no means thou seekst his overthrow:
"Have careful ear, to every man give right,
"Regard kind words, in kindness have delight;
In honors cause maintain thy reputation,
And hold love good for reasons recreation.
Sooth no ill ears with idle flattery,
Honor the Bride, but do the Groom no rye.
Perform thy word, but promise not too much,
With rich and poor, be careful to keep touch.
With great and small be sure to keep measure,
And scorn no trifle, that may do thee pleasure:
"For he that scorneth much, deserves hate,
"An infamy that never expireth date;
"Such long lasting evils ( my Son) refrain,
What loss so e're it be unto thy gain.
Frequent the Church with faith and true devotion,
And do not step too fast into promotion;
For far more grief is in a headlong fall,
Then if thy care, had never climde at all.
"Be content with such means that God does send,
"A patient heart does gain a happy end.
"Why should thou toil thy self for pelth,
"When death ends all approaching still by stealth,
"And crops the blossoms of our whole delight,
"By winter storms, by time and darksome night?
"What bootest then to burden thus thine age,
"With heavy clogs, for which thy soul's at gage,
"Where in woe and thraldom still remaining,
"Except by Christ thou purchase thy redeeming.
Be wisely kind to every quality,
And ever keep good hospitality.
"A miserable house is vilde men say,
"Ill gotten goods are quickly spent away:
"Those that so nearly scrape their wealth together,
"Another throws it about, and cares not whether.
At thy own charge, keep thy Horses stable,
And seek no banquet at a beggars table:
For a true mind had rather starve then eat,
Where Churles and servants grudge a stranger meat.
"Come not to a hungry house for diet,
"Where spies and teltales bring all out of quiet;
"Rather for thy quiets sake, live with bread,
"Then mo^gst talemongers seek to be fed.
"What is thine own to eat, none can grudge,
"A backebiter must needs be a drudge,
"Whose own reports disgraceth him at last,
"Cause he himself has made the greatest wast.
"Be free from this; great danger lies therein,
"To men offense, to God a grievous sin.
Jest not with Cowards, for they will but cry,
And, as for Bawdes pity their beggerie:
"Lament the woeful state wherein they stand,
"And rightly note, the poison in their hand;
"Which soon breaks forth, and makes the body foul,
"But teene times worse, it putrifies the soul.
Arithmeticke is in every trade,
But true accounts are to be made:
For when the last count reckning is cast up,
Then shall the crafty take their poysned cup,
"And taste the juice of that they have deserved,
"For which deeds, by doom it is reserved:
"Where no woe or horror shall be wanting,
"Though gold to them on earth was not scanting.
"Desire no gain, where vice does lead the ring,
"It is a profit that thy pain does bring.
For Lions, Bears, Wolves, Apes, and Asses,
Learn them to figure honors looking glasses,
And have a care to carry so thy self,
No storm may drive thy ship upon a shelfe.
"Many dangers lies hid to thee unknown,
"No corn comes up sometimes where seed is sown.
"Envious men sowes tares the Scripture says,
"A uoide them then and quite forsake their ways:
"Let not earths pleasures lead thy heart away,
"Which is transitory, will soon decay,
"And still does pass on earth, from hand to hand,
"Never constant, nor never firm does stand.
Swallows do feed on flies, but light they fly,
Whiles Epicures in too much feeding die,
"Wallowing in the sink of sins filthiness,
"Loathsome to behold, over grown with beastlines:
"Spuing out the rankor of self delight,
"Which has bred a cankor of endless spite.
By others harms seek not thy private good,
A bloody feast, is an unkindly food.
And to dissemble love is such an evil,
As nearest shows the nature of the Devil,
"To feed on blood a Murderers delight,
"If thou dissemble, thou yields no man right.
"To gain by others fall a curse grows on,
"A heavy case when infants make their moan.
"The widows note is heard, revenge she cries,
"For those ill gotten goods, which made thee rise.
To help thy friend, do not forbear thy hand,
And for thy credit, sell both goods and land:
"For he that helps his friend in time of need,
"It is in heaven inrold a friendly deed.
"When that with truth of heart it is freindly done,
"No deed on earth is like to that my Son,
"Be constant still in friendship evermore,
"And of a true friend make thy chiefest store,
"What end were thou inricht, with goods and lands,
"But to the end thou should be free from bands:
"Respect it not above the heavens pleasure,
"Which is the chiefest chief of all thy treasure.
Deny no friend when he does friendly crave it,
For honest minds will pay when that they have it.
"A small matter sometimes does help so much,
"That by such means a poor man may prove rich,
"Which else might bring a man unto despair,
"When for his help, he finds naught but air,
"At wants instant, be helpful evermore,
"And God will-giue a blessing to thy store.
"Be doing this, but do not boast a whit,
"For that dimmes all, and shows thy lack of wit:
"Or how can thou have grace, for this thy good,
"If thou backbitest in any angry mood?
"Reporting this thy kindness done to any,
"It is not worth a pin though nere so many,
"And those that hear it will think thou mai'st lie,
"When that thou whisperest things so privily.
Let care of conscience guide thee every way,
To give thee comfort on the holliday.
"Pry not at all in trades to offer wrong,
"Such baseness unto Rascals does belong:
"Those men deserving it, are fit for gain,
"And fit'st of all to reap the pleasure of their pain;
"The dead in peace does rest, yet live they may;
"In endless comfort, and in endless joy.
"Kind charity amongst men, and love to all,
"May make us ready for this heavenly call:
"That living here, we die to live again;
"In heavenly bliss, everlasting to remain.
And if thou be a Courtier know thy grace,
And seek in heaven to have a dwelling place.
And if on earth, such service profit brings,
What shall he have that serves the King of Kings?
"Let virtues care, so guide thy conscience still,
"Thou nearly look to all, but none to ill;
"What though the proverb old be proved true;
"Or that some crosses on this earth ensue;
"Or that the destinies do frown on thee,
"Or that no rich reward will come near thee?
"Yet if thou be free from vices folly,
"Thou art in heaven as pure a Saint as any.
"Which is a Court, where thou shall have a place,
"Where none shall seek thine honor to deface.
And if thou be a scholar and can preach,
With simple truth thy simple audience teach:
"With feruencie of heart seek to woo them.
"To Gods true knowledge, seek still to bring them:
"Be not careless of a charge so weighty;
"Given thee by thy God Almighty.
But feed thy flock, thou have in hand to keep,
Least that thou prove a wolf unto thy sheep.
Feeding on them, that should have food from thee;
"In bad estate their case is like to be.
"Attempt not thou at all a labor so divine,
"Except thou can this earthly state resign;
"And live to love thy God, thy flock, thy sheep;
"So will thy care be good thy flock to keep.
But whatsoever here be thine estate,
There is none poor, but he that God does hate,
"He Is poor indeed, his case of all is worst;
"No ill so vile, of all ils most accursed.
If that thou be a Soldier suck no blood,
To knightly minds, vnknightly food;
"With conscience let poor Soldiers have their pay,
"Then they will follow thee with love and joy:
"But if too nearly thou do pinch or poule,
"It may be burdensome unto thy soul,
"And want of pay, is the death of many,
"Yield them due, and near accusd' for any.
Of honors title, who does truly hold,
Shall find it in mercy, not in gold.
If that thou be a Lawyer judge the right,
And let no briberie blind a blessed sight,
For thou shall find it written in mercies roll,
Better a thredbare gown, then a thredbare soul.
"It Is pity that right should be overcome,
"Or poverty to plead to want a room:
"Alas how heavy is their case in this,
"For want of fees, a rightful case to miss?
"Yet have (thou) some conscience, be ruled by me,
"Pity poor Suitors in necessity.
"Let not mighty men oppress their right,
"Nor overthrow their states by power and might.
"In doing this, thou shall have double fee,
"A heavenly Paradise thy reward shall be.
"Besides on earth thy fame shall spread abroad,
"What courtesy to poor thou did afford,
"This cannot choose, but bring thee into grace,
"And by desert obtain a higher place,
"The law is just, on reason wisely grounded,
"Wanting it our state is soon confounded.
And if thou be a Merchant, know thy cares,
And do not wound thy conscience with thy wares,
Least in repentance all too late thou find,
The gain is lost that feeds a greedy mind.
"What boots thy toil and traffic on the Seas,
"Thy hazard of life, disturbing of thine ease,
"Thy boisterous blasts, and storms so cold,
"Which thou indur'st, thy self by time made old,
"Thy riches, when happy returns are made,
"Those precious pearls, whose colors never vade,
"When that thy conscience shall be working so
"How thou may work thy brothers woe,
"By thy ill wares, trusted at such a rate,
"By which means his payment often proves late.
"Then to suit of law thy conscience cries,
"He Is in a heavy case in such danger lies.
"But far more worse is thine in time to come,
"When that thou do cast up the total sum.
"When all deceiptfull gains to loss shall turn,
"Where vicious pleasures shall have time to mourn.
"A measure in gain with Quiet truly got,
"Is a perfect treasure that fails not.
"For truth: light gains does make a heavy purse,
"Unconscionable gains a heavy curse.
"Then take thy choice, but wisely choose the best:
"Corrupted hearts evermore detest,
"Their wares are braide, yet fairly shows to the eye;
"But he that is rotten at the heart must die.
In brief of what estate so ere thou be,
Let truth and conscience ever govern thee.
Let Clownes clap on their clowted shoes,
Seek thou no earthly gains the heaven to loose.
Let garments fit thy body, not thy mind,
And to thy friend, as to thy self prove kind,
"Look so wisely to every action,
"That it may be thy souls satisfaction.
"And do not seek to rise by others falls,
"Be well prepared when the Angel calls;
"Do not thou stand on rich men's favors here,
"But love thy Christ, his love is passing dear;
"And make the wind serve to a good intent,
"And know to what end thy riches are sent.
"Hoyse up sail to heavens happiness,
"Where thou shall arrive with great blessedness;
"There thou mai'st be welcome though wanting gold:
"And not by earthly wants thy joys controld:
"No poverty shall part thee from that society,
"But bring thee to thy joys eternity:
"Though wealth does die the color here in grain,
"In heaven it is held most base in great disdain.
"Physicians and Lawyers are men of fame,
"And experience does aver the same;
"Whose labors does deserve their proper gain,
"No patient can be cur'de without some pain,
"If thou do learn diseases and their cures;
"Be careful what thy patient endures:
"Have due respect unto thy cures and be free,
"From corrupted thoughts, then happy shall thou be.
"Delay no cures, but do thy best for ease,
"Which both thy patient, and thy God does please:
"Pity the heavy cares of those in pain,
"And be not too greedy to seek thy gain:
"Let measure guide thy hand in all thy deeds,
"Think on the grieved heart with pain that bleeds.
"Think upon his case, say that it were thine,
"How hard it were, for want of help to pine.
"Learn no unlawful games thy state to raise,
"That by deceit may profit thee any ways,
"What though thou shift it from the gamsters eye?
"It is beheld by him that sits on high:
"He does behold your dealings every way,
"How securely so ere you think you play.
"Goods gotten by deceit, is quickly gone,
"By getting so, better nere get none:
"But rather well to keep thine own first learn,
"The better how to gain thou mai'st descerne,
"What though this vicious gain, so vainly got,
"With plenty seems to replenish the pot?
"It is but a feast, or sport that is passing away,
"And the least cross of all brings it to decay.
All Cards and dice, and all such idle play;
From thy delight, discard and cast away:
For deal or rub, whose hap so ere it be to have
The knave of Clubs will ever be a Knave.
Flatter no Mistress Fubs, or Ione a nods
Nor honor golden calves nor wodden gods:
Nor puff a pesant up with rascal pride,
A rascal will but like a beggar ride.
Be careful of the words that thou do talk,
"And be not desirous with a Knave to walk:
"Be careful how thou do thy secrets disclose,
"Backbiters are full of wrong thou mai'st suppose:
"Do not with the Letcher seem to rejoice,
"It is but a loathsome and hateful voice:
"But rather persuade them from their folly,
"And from the love of a deed so unholy.
"Do not with spend-thrifts smile at poverty,
"Least thou thy self come to necessity.
"Do not with Epicures rejoice and say,
"With meaner fare thou could not well away.
"Nor do not triumph over simple wits,
"And lament the state of those franzie fits.
"Do not by any means learn to deceive,
"That will but virtue from thy conscience drive,
"And disanull-thee of thy quiet rest,
"Exceeding joys, of all things else is best.
Aim at no profit with a poisned breath,
Left it be paid thee in the second death.
"Though conscience here be poor and meanly clad,
"No means but from the Baggers to be had;
"Yet time shall come, it shall be well respected,
"When prodigality shall be neglected.
"There shall she find a house adorned with state,
"When Dives repents but all too late.
"There shall she find fine and dainty cheer,
"When Gluttons in horror shall appear,
"Her raiment then shall be everlasting,
"When her foes their bitter cup are tasting;
"Then let conscience govern thy state aright,
"That thou mai'st behold this everlasting sight.
An honest mind in every trade does well,
The wind blows ill that blows the soul to hell.
"Do not before the Devil a candle hold,
"Seek no corrupt means for silver or gold.
If that thy Wife be fair, be thou not foul,
To let her play the Ape, and thou the Owl.
"Wink at no faults, it is but misery,
"By bestiall means to relieve necessity;
"If thou be a Husband govern so thy Wife,
"That her peevish means work not thy strife;
"Give her not too much law, to run before,
"Too much boldness does bring thy overthrow:
"Yet abridge her not too much by any mean,
"But let her still be thy companion.
And to thy Daughter prove a better Sire,
Then like a hacknie let her out to hire.
"What a greiuous case were this for thee,
"To extol thy self to prosperity,
"By such insatiat means, a heavy sense,
"Deserving naught but hell for recompense.
"Like a kind father love thy children dear,
"Yet to outward view let not love appear,
"Least too boldly they presuming on thy love,
"By audacious means do audacious prove,
"Seem not a companion in any case
To thy children, learn them know who is in place;
"That due obedience to thee be done,
"The end must needs be good, that is well begone.
"Thus may thy children be at thy command,
"With willing heart, still helpful at thy hand,
"Familiarity contempt does breed.
"By no means do thou stoop unto thy seed:
"While the twig is young, bend it as thou list,
"Once being grown, they will stubbornely resist;
"Caring not for parents nor their talking,
"Commending their own wits, age is doting.
"Look well to youth, and how their time is spent,
"Least thou by leisure afterward repent:
"What though thy child grow rich, thy self grow poor,
"Will thou afford him reverence therefore?
"Imperfection to thine age that does show:
"Let children express what duty they owe,
"And not be blinded with a self conceit;
"To wise men hate, to fools a pleasing bait.
"Let thy care be great, for Childrens good,
"It is a charge that is hardly understood:
"Use no corrections in an angry vain,
"Which will but vex thee much, increase thy pain:
"And rashness evermore repentance cries,
"Give due correction, therein be wise:
"The grief is thine, when children go astray:
"Give them not too much liberty to play,
"Least that they do to a custom bring it;
"And ever after forbear to leave it.
"Urge not with violence thy childrens woe,
"As cruel parents many times do so;
"Which to despair may carelessly drive them,
"When that their care does carelessly leave them,
"To run at random shifting as they may,
"Alas, it is a heavy case I say.
"Let not children urge their parents unto ire,
"But with duty do what they shall require.
"With obedient hearts obedience show,
"Such true obedience to them you owe.
"Think it not a trifle to forbear it,
"When Gods commandment does require it.
"A blessing great, besides he has reserved,
"Whose duty has this due deserved.
"Honor thy parents, long may be thy days,
"Happy in all, and blessed are thy ways.
"Be not stubborn at all, it breeds disdain,
"That which they forbid thee that refrain.
"This is the course, that thou their love mai'st have.
"Wise parents, childrens hurt will never crave.
"But with fatherly care admonish them so,
"That self conceit, work not thy overthrow:
"Which now adays does reign too much in all,
"No marvel then so many youth do fall,
"When parents counsel is thus rejected,
"And their hourly care so much neglected.
" Solomon says, smile not on thy daughter,
"Least thou repent it ever after.
"Then to sons and daughters let care be such,
"That thou and they in virtue may be rich.
"Seem not to laugh at any unseemly jest,
"A mean in all, in all is ever best.
"And for thy servants, let no Belly swell,
"A baudie house is but an earthly hell.
"Keep not an eye servant within thy door,
"Which will but seek to vex thee evermore.
"And scoffingly answer with taunting words,
"A beastly trick is all a Jade affords.
"If that thou find'st a tell tale in thine house,
"Be watching still as a Cat for a Mouse.
"Such servants can never be true nor just,
"Who backbites in secret, such never trust.
"Much discord by such is bred often times,
"When most themselves deserves greatest crimes.
"Be not familiar with servants in any case,
"But let them with duty respect their place.
"Give but an inch, they will quickly take an ell,
"A wise tale to a fool, it is vain to tell.
In Law and Physic have a conscience,
In making gain of thy experience.
Least that thy Clients cry and Patients death,
Do make thee cry out in the hell beneath.
"Where grievous horrors shall still affright thee.
"Let virtues love evermore delight thee.
"Which is a gain sufficient for thy store,
"A perfect joy delightful evermore.
By wicked plots do not proule for pelf,
Let thy souls care be nearest to thy self.
"So shall all thy ways prosper and be free,
"From thraldom want and great necessity.
"No woe shall once approach where virtue shines,
"What needs thou care, though vicious men repines.
"Their blasts as bubbles, soon does pass away,
"Themselves in little time comes to decay.
"If thou be rich abandon wicked pride,
And do not on the horse of Envy ride,
"Least he carry thee with an easy way,
"Unto thy overthrow and great decay,
Seek not the well-deseruing to disgrace,
Nor put the virtuous spirit out of place.
And sooth no humors in an evil mind,
For poisned breath is of a poisned kind:
And though to hurt a few to hurt a many,
Be good, yet better not the hurt of any.
"What boots small gains when greater loss does fall?
"By such measure, seek not to get at all.
"Be patient and wise in extremity,
"Thou mai'st the sooner come to prosperity.
"As gentle dewes, kindly cause flowers to spring,
"Patience gains content, though misery be long.
"Let truth in every thing be thy companion,
"And vice ore thee shall never get dominion:
"Thou have a bulwark that defends thee,
"And a trusty friend that treasure lends thee:
If that thy friend do trust thee with his love,
Unto his trust do not a Traitor prove;
Least he that sees thy ill gotten treasure,
Do pay thee home with an evil meaten measure:
"Though thy gains be small and travel great,
"Thou art certain to come to judgment seat,
"To receive a guerdon due to thy deeds,
"A blessed food, that blessed creatures feeds:
"Never wanting but still possessed with store,
"Which makes thee rich, though seeming never so poor,
Be faithful to thy Wife, firm to thy friend,
And constant in Religion to the end.
"Do not humor every Sect for private gain,
"It is a greiuous sin, a grievous pain;
"Against the holy Ghost a sinful deed,
"Then use it not, what ever be thy need:
"Religion is sacred pure divine,
"It is a heavenly map, a heavenly sign.
"It is that burning lamp that shines so bright,
"Being with truth received, a true delight.
"Seek not thou to deprave religious truth,
"Least thou increase thy pain and endless ruth.
"For chiefest learning thereon is grounded,
"And all errors from thence quite confounded.
Be rich and wise, in this good wit my boy,
That death nor hell, nor Devil can destroy.
"Let thy chiefest pleasure be to seek that gain,
"That afterward may never turn to pain.
"Who so, but for the present time does care,
"Often times is inforst to be poor and bear,
"And when those present pleasures past and gone
"As much the nere, if he had never seen none.
"Then Time to account does call that folly,
"Checking him for all those deeds unholy.
"How he his time, so loosely spent in vain,
"Which being spent, can never be had again.
"Then with ifts and ands he begins to say,
"Had I known this, fore time had past away,
I had prevented that which now I find,
But time is past, and thou tookst hold behind.
"Where naught remains but a scull death portraiture,
"(As Time does pass,) it is of all most sure.
"To spend this precious time it is a woe,
"Without regarding how the hours do go.
"When time makes full the hours of times account,
"Asking how much the total does amount.
"Then all ill times by time untimely spent;
"Shall by that time, have time then to repent.
"But all too late, since time was once refused,
"And time so dearly lost, so much abused.
"The date is out, it is true: the Clock has struck,
"Time kindly offered all when all forsook.
"This gem of worth most precious is to youth.
"But their selfe-wils hates knowledge of the truth,
"Which should bring their tender age unto bliss,
"The right way to that perfect happiness.
"Which would show then how they should spend the day,
"With due respect, how to spend the time away;
"Not by idleness, or foolish fancies,
"Subject to many vicious mischances.
"Which luls their age with pleasure fast asleep,
"Such pleasures they were better loose then keep.
"Tell thou the Clock, as hours does pass away,
"And think how time does turn all flesh to clay.
Serve God, thy King, be to thy country true,
Live till thou die, then bid the world adue.
"But live in that sort, that thou die with fame,
"That after death men give thee a good name.
"Which as Cronicles may last for ever,
"In living thus thy life ends never.
"Ifto thy King thou prouest untrue, unjust,
"Who will afterward give thee any trust?
"Then to thy Prince, give due obedience,
"And to thy betters seemly reverence.
"So shall thy fame on earth be had in store,
"And heavenly blessings given thee evermore.
"Ifto Country thou have a tretchers heart,
"Thy words are worse then a deep venomed dart.
"Swine eats the flowers, then nusles up the root,
"And none but beastly minds will surely do it.
"Or offer to spoil that, by which they are bred,
"Or betray the Country, in which they are bred.
"How manifest it is, of such men's lives,
"How their courses evermore basely thriues.
"Some themselves untimely death does bring,
"Others, in grief of conscience still mourning.
"Some wandering here, some there in woeful grief,
"Others pining in streets, and wants releife.
"Some stark mad does run, quite distract of all,
"Others, in vain, for comfort out does call.
"Some, in foreign Countries desires a place,
"But gnawing conscience brings them to disgrace.
"Some with audacious face does feign excuse,
"But God cries vengeance against so vilde abuse.
"Some to Magistrates will sue for favor,
"But poysned hearts does of poison savor.
"And all that to such vildnesse bends their courses,
"Are left comfortless without remorses.
Machiauels rules let Machiauels read,
Love to thy God, his spirit be thy speed.
"His love is richer then silver or gold,
"His home is Paradise the surest hold.
"His promise is sure, for ever just,
"And it is the surest hope that thou can trust.
"Thy Ancor being cast upon that shore,
"Thy cable will hold fast for evermore.
"Love not the world, to leave true virtues love,
"Least to thy destruction, it after prove.
"The worlds love, is but fair fancies flower,
"Though seeming rich, yet wanting richest power.
Tax no man's name in any evil matter,
But like a Christian pray for every creature.
"Charitably wishing well to men,
"The like rewards shall come to thee again.
"Let no man's name at all be wronged by thee,
"The worsest evil, ever thine will be.
"When infamies thou raisest on thy brother,
"Be sure, against thee thou shall receive none other.
"Such measure as thou meatest to thee is given,
"He lives uprightly that keeps all even.
"But by good endeavor it may be gained,
"Hate Vice, the only means it is obtained.
"To be free from evil speech, a Christians care,
"Be a lover of Virtue, Vice forbear.
Be sorry for the evil thou have done,
And go on with the good thou have begun.
"A heart that is penitent true comfort finds,
"To find remorse, the heavenly Laws it binds.
"If thou beginnest any good, then proceed,
"Thou shall find it to be a blessed deed.
Pray for thy faith, that it may fail thee never,
So if thou die, yet shall thou live for ever.
"Then shall thou be brough to virtues palace,
"To receive the true comfort of thy solace.
"And for thy pain thou did endure here,
"Thou evermore shall find a plenteous year.
"Where neither hunger cold nor any want,
"Shall hinder joys, or make thy pleasures scant.
"This is the benefit of a virtuous life,
"This is true virtues force, to end all strife.
"This is virtues garden full of flowers,
"Though on earth she had many pinching hours.
"This is virtues path, rightly leads to bliss,
"This is virtues gift, his friends does never miss.
"This is virtues harbor void of cares,
"This is virtues bounty who never spares,
"This is virtues palace, adorned with state,
"This is virtues gift, never comes too late,
"This is virtues Park, infoulds her Dear,
"This is virtues care, who will not loose a hair,
"This is virtues arms, incircling round,
"This is virtue, which now her right has found,
"This is virtues walks, whose aire's ever sweet,
"This is virtue her friends does kindly greet,
"This is virtues City, whose gates are fast
"Against all that of her name made spoil or wast,
"This is virtues banquet house, feeding all,
"This is virtue that hears the poor man's call,
"This is virtue that loved her parents kind,
"This is virtue that love to all resigned,
"This is virtue, releeuing friends in want,
"This is virtue whose love was never scant,
"To any one that poverty did respect,
"Who never will such kindness once reject,
"But kindly seek, such kindness to requite,
"And all her friends shall have their due and right,
"No cankered churles shall seek to cross her of her will
"But in her place, she remains as Empress still.
"Then seek ( my Son) to serve this Goddess pure divine,
"Be houerly offering gifts unto her sacred Shrine,
"Do not leave her service, for the worlds treasure,
"Esteem her pain above the chiefest pleasure,
"Her pains are short, her joys for ever lasting,
"Her love is dear, her hate to sorrows hasting,
"With reverence (my child) kneel for her grace,
"Sue by petition in any case.
"And never rest till thou have got her favor,
"And it will be double worth thy labor;
"For thou such a Mistress shall have of her:
"That for her servants good none comes near her:
"She gives her Servants old good means to live,
"When Vice her servants out of doors does drive,
"She helps her Servants in sickness and in health,
"On such preferments she bestows her wealth.
"Then be true Servant to such a Mistress,
"Who at all times with willing heart releeues distress.
"Be mindful of my words, given out of love,
"And happy to thy Father thou will prove.
"What in the beginning I did declare,
"Was but to show thee what vain courses are,
"That by the knowledge of them thou might beware
"How thou art caught in any vicious snare.
"Make use of them, and wrest them to the best,
"And thou shall find it yields thee quiet rest.
"By any means do not to vain humors grow,
"Least that it quickly seek thy overthrow.
"Yield praise to God, in his Laws seek to live,
"And at his pleasure he will all things fitting give.
"If thou find'st any thing written here
"That may to thy comfort any way appear,
"It Is all that I crave, or heart requires,
"Who only for thy chiefest good desires.
"If thanks thou will bestow thou seem kind,
"If unthankful, thou have a churlish mind,
"Since all my labor is only for thy good,
"Desiring that it be well understood:
"Which if thou do, thou shall be still my Son,
"Be true of heart what misery soever come.
"First to God give praise, to Prince and Country true,
"Thy Parents reverence, and so my Son adue.
" Machiauels rules deny, yet use them as thy pleasure,
"False hearted friends defy, in all have equal measure.
"Use all these to good intent, and boldly say,
"Thou may with Virtue, evermore keep holiday.
FINIS.

