THE GLORY OF THE LATTER TEMPLE GREATER THEN OF THE FORMER. OPENED IN A Sermon
preached at the Consecration or Restitution of the Parish Church of Flixton in
the Island of Louingland in the County of Suffolk; being sometimes the
Mother Church of the East Angles. 11. March. 1630. By JOHN BRINSLEY.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the Bible in Saint Laurence-lane. 1631.

REVERENDO IN CHRIS TO PATRI AC DOMINO FRANCISCO PROVIDENTIA DIVINA NORWICENSI
EPISCOPO.

Nec Non VERE VENERABILI VIRO IOHANNI WENTWORTH DE SOMERLEITON IN COMMIT.
SVFFOLCIAE MILITI ET RECTORIAE DE FLIXTON PATRONO DIGNISSIMO

MEDITATIONES HAS DE TEMPLI EVANGELICI GLORIA IN DEVOTISSIMI OBSEQVII
TESTIMONIVM D. D. D.

IOH. BRINSLEY.

THE GLORY OF THE LATTER TEMPLE Greater then of the Former.
HAGG. II. IX. The Glory of this latter house shall be greater then of the
former, says the Lord of Hoasts.
Works that are great, and good, ordinarily find great hindrances, great
discouragements: Of all works, what greater then the building of the walls of
the new Jerusalem, building the spiritual Temple of God? Now what hindrances,
what discouragements this work is ever like to meet withal; we may see it
typically shadowed out unto us in that history, recorded by Ezra and Nehemiah,
whereunto the words of the Text have a special reference: No sooner does
Zerobabel and Or Joshua.
Iehoshua, the one a chief Prince, the other the chief Priest, with the rest
of the children of the Captivity, after their return from Babylon, set upon
the re-edifying of the material walls, re-building of the material Temple in
the earthly Jerusalem, but presently stands up Sanballat and Tobiah, Rehum and
Shimshai, Tatnai and Shetherboznai ( brethren in evil) with the rest of their
confederates and associates, to hinder the work. What plottings? what
combinations? What secret underminings under color of furtherance? What
writing and posting of letters, even to the King himself? What retaining of
Counselors? What forging? what minting and coining of slanderous reports for
the time past? What Panick fears pretended for the time to come? A rebellious
people, and that upon record; a seditious work, fit to be stifled in the
birth, or smothered in the cradle, for fear of further inconvenience likely to
ensue. Such opposition they met with abroad. They wanted no discouragements at
home. Amongst others, the Temple they were about to build was mean and
despicable, a mean foundation, a homely building, in comparison of the former
but as a Star to the Sun, coming far short of it in magnitude, in glory. The
Glory of the former Temple had so dazzled the eyes of the ancient men who had
before beheld it in the beauty of it, that they could not now look upon this
without watering eyes, They wept when they saw it, says Ezra. 3. 12.
the Text. Against this discouragement it is, that the Lord goes about by his
Prophet to comfort the people in this Chapter, whereof the Text is a part. The
Sum and quintessence of that consolation you have it extracted in the words
which I have now read. That which disanimated the people, was the meannesse of
the house which they were about to build: A man child was borne; But ^ Sam. 4.
20. 21
she called his name Ichabod. The foundations of the work were raised, the
Temple was in some forwardness, but there was no beauty, no Glory in it; at
least none in comparison of what once it was, and what God had promised, and
they expected it should be. To animate them against this dis-heartning the Lord
sends unto them by the hands of this messenger this Prophetical Promise,
promising Glory, surpassing Glory to that work which now seemed so despicable
in their eyes: that it should not only match and equalize, but surpass and
transcend the former: The Glory of the latter house shall be greater then of
the former, says the Lord of Hosts.

In the opening unto you of this Prophecy, and that you may see how this
promise was afterward accomplished, I shall present unto you only these two
things. 1. The Glory of the former house. 2. The Glory of the latter house,
wherein it so far surpassed and outstript the former: The first was glorious,
but the latter more glorious.

To begin with the first of these, the Temple of Solomon, the wonderment of the
world whilst it stood. Glorious things are spoken of thee oh thou city of
God: Glorious things are written of thee oh thou Temple of God: Canaan the
glory of the earth: Jerusalem the glory of Canaan; this Temple the glory of
Jerusalem: Suppose the whole world a ring, this Temple might well have been
the jewel in it. The Glory of this Temple consisted principally in three
things: the building, the furniture, other appurtenances.

1. For the building, we shall find it stately and magnificent: 1.
What the glory of this building was, we may guess at it by those infinite
(had not the Spirit of truth recorded it) incredible masses of treasure
exhausted in preparation of materials. That huge Army of Overseers, Workmen,
Carpenters, Masons, Laborers, all employed about the cutting and hewing of
wood, digging, and squaring, and caruing of stones, amounting in all to the
number of one hundred and eighty three thousand three hundred men, besides
other curious Artizans for working 1 King. 5.
in gold, silver, brass, and the like, of all which we may read in that 1
King. 5. If ever Temple made with hands could have been worthy to entertain
the God of heaven, it had been this.

2. As it was glorious in the structure, so no less glorious 2.
in the furniture: the inside answerable and suitable to the outside. I can but
give you a glimpse of things. Do but look into the Sanctuary of God, what
ever you touch, what ever you see, is pure gold: look upon the vessels, the
table, the Candlestick, the Altar, the bowls, 1 King. 6.
basins, spoones, ashpans, tongs, snuffers, all nothing but pure gold: Look
upon the hangings, couerings, vestments, all other vtensiles requisite for that
ceremonial service; behold them all as rich, as curious, as art and nature
could make them.

3. Besides the glory of the structure, and the glory of 3.
the furniture, there was yet a greater glory in the Appurtenances, some
excellent rarities belonging and appertaining to this temple: of these the
Hebrews reckon ten: I shall content my self with five, and that to name them.

1. The Arc of the Covenant, wherein were the Tables 1. ^ King. 8. 6. 9.
of the Law written with Gods own finger: the rarest relicke that ever the
world was owner of: Here was ( The glory:) so we find it styled more then once:
( The glory) 1 Samuel 4. 22.
is departed from Israel, says the wife of Phineas: why? for the Ark of God
is taken: To whom pertains the adoption and ( The glory) says Saint Paul
concerning Israel: ( The glory,) that is the Arc of the Covenant, a Romans 9. 4.
special token and witness of the gracious, nay glorious presence of God in
that place where the Arc was, and therefore called The Glory.

2. Here was the sacred, the heavenly fire, that fire 2.
which Divines call diuino diuinus, altogether holy, not only in respect of the
use, but in it self: the fire which came down from heaven at the dedication
of that temple: an 2 Chronicles. 7. 1.
evident token of a special acceptance: God looked upon Abel and his
sacrifice, says the text: Aquila translates Genesis 4. 4.
it, He set it on fire: Howeuer that be only coniecturall, this we know for
certain, that God did thus look upon this first Temple as he had done upon
the Tabernacle before, Leu. 9. 24.
with an eye of special grace and acceptance: the sacrifices that were offered
up at the dedication of it, he set them on fire, consumed them with fire from
heaven. And this fire was kept in and preserved in this Temple Leu. 6. 12, 13.
for the daily use of the sacrifices: In imitation whereof the Heathen (who in
most of their ceremonies were but Gods apes) kept in their Vestall fire which
they falsely supposed came down from heaven.

3. Here was the Glory of the Lord himself: the glorious presence of God
manifested in some clear and visible tokens; a Transient, a Permanent Glory:
the former in the Cloud at the dedication of this Temple, which so soon as the
Priests were come out of the Sanctuary, filled the house (as you heard even now
read in that chapter selected upon the present occasion, so that they could not
1 King. 8. 11.
stand to minister before the Lord: for the glory of the Lord had filled the
house; the Glory of the Lord, viz. a visible cloud full of light and
brightness, a token of the glorious presence of God in that place. Besides
this, there was also a Permanent Glory, the Glory of God dwelling, appearing
Numb. 7. 89. 2 King. 19. 1^.
continually betwixt the Cherubins, and that in some visible, glorious
manifestation; insomuch that the high Priest (as the Hebrews tell us) when he
went into the holy of holies, which was but once a year, he carried with him
Inconse, and smoke to darken the place, that he might not behold the glory of
the Lord, for no man shall see God and live: Glorious must that place needs be
which was the habitation of divine glory, filled with the glory of God himself.

4. Here was the Urim and Thummim, an excellent ornament (as is generally
conceived) in the brestplate of Aaron, by which as by an Oracle God himself
did usually give answers unto his people. What this Urim and Thummim was, who
made it, of what it was made, when it was made, how and in what manner God was
wont to give answers to his people by it, they are things which God has
hidden, and therefore hidden that we might not know them. The Hebrew Doctors
have troubled themselves and others with variety of conjectures and opinions,
every one differing from other, and it may be all from the truth. Of them all
he spoke best, and (if I may cast in my lot amongst them) truest, who
ingenuously Kimchi in radicib.
confessed that he knew not what it was: Certainly we do not find it reckoned
amongst those things which were made by art, we may rather conceive it to be
some excellent ornament made immediately by God himself, (as the two first
Tables of stone were wherein the law was written) and given by him to Moses to
put into the holy pectorall, as some collect it out of that Leu. Aynsworth in
28, Exo. v. 30.
8. 8.

5. And lastly, here was also the gift of Prophecy; a continual succession of
Prophets: the Holy Ghost inabling some continually by extraordinary means, by
visions, dreams, secret inspiration, so making known the will of God to them,
for them to reveal to others: Never was this first Temple without a Prophet:
And here was the glory of this first house, this first Temple; it was glorious
without, and glorious within: glorious in the building and structure; glorious
in the vessels and furniture; glorious in the apurtenances, having in it the
five greatest rarities of the world: the Arc of the Covenant: the Heavenly
fire: the glory of the Lord in the cloud, betwixt the Cherubins; the Vrim and
Thummim, with a continual succession of Prophets: Let those Romish Templars
who pride themselves so much in the glory of their Temples show us their vast
and magnificent buildings: their rich ornaments and furniture, their rare,
precious and sacred relics, put them all together, what is all to the glory of
Salomons temple, and yet behold a greater then Salomons is here: The glory of
the latter house shall be greater then of the former, says the Lord of Hosts.

That is the second thing to be unfolded, opened; I may well say opened. Sure I
am, at the first hearing it is no less then a paradox, a mystery. What, the
second Temple more glorious then the first? Wherein possibly can we conceive or
imagine this transcendent glory to lie?

1. Look first upon the outside, the Building, we shall 1.
find it of rough and unpolished stones, every way falling far short of the
former: In height, in length, in beauty: It was King Cyrus his special command
to the Jews at their departure out of Babylon, (as Mr. Calvin writing upon the
Text observes) that they should not build this second Temple in the like pomp
and state as the former was; A command directed no question by God himself,
and that for a special reason, as I shall show you hereafter.

2. Look upon the inside, the furniture, we shall find 2.
(by the Hebrews own confession) many of the vessels imbased; many that were
before of pure gold, now turned into brass: King Cyrus indeed restored some of
the vessels belonging to the former temple, and that many, but many were yet
wanting.

3. Make inquiry for the Apurtenances belonging to 3.
the former temple. 1. Where was the Arc of the Covenant? lost, perished, (as
is generally supposed) in the Temples desolation: No mention made of the Arc
after their return from Babylon. 2. Where was the fire that came down from
heaven? put out, extinguished, not a spark of it left: It is but a Jewish
fable which we find recorded in that Book of the Machabees, that Jeremy and
some other of the Priests 2 Match. 1. 19.
took the fire off from the Altar, before the destruction of the Temple, and
hid it in a dry pit, where it was miraculously kept during the Captivity, and
afterward as incredibly renewed again at their return, at the command of
Nehemiah by sprinkling water upon the Altar. Not only Apocryphal, but
fabulous: such a passage as this we cannot conceive that Ezra that faithful
Scribe, and Nehemiah himself would have passed over in silence. 3. Where was
now the Glory of the Lord? His Glory in the Cloud? his glory betwixt the
Cherubins? No glory: the glory of the Lord God of Israel was gone up Ezekiel. 9, 4.
from the Cherub, and that before that desolation, as the Prophet Ezekiel saw
it in his vision. Here was no glory. 4. Where was the Urim and Thummim? Lost,
perished, Ezra. 2. 63.
perhaps buried in those ruins: God gave no more answers now to his people by
this oracle; sometimes indeed in this second temple they heard an Echo which
the Hebrews called Bath Kol, filiam vocis, the daughter of a (...)
voice, a voice from heaven, whereby God did impart some passages of his will
unto them; This was the voice (as is by some conceived) which gave that
testimony unto our Savior at his baptism: Lo a voice from heaven saying,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: Mat. 3. 17.
But as for that oracle whereby God did usually reveal his will to his people,
it was ceased; the latter temple knew not what it meant. 5. And lastly, where
was the succession of Prophe^s? Betwixt Malachi and John the Baptist there
stood up no Prophet: A long vocation. No more visions, dreams, extraordinary
inspirations of the Holy Ghost. After that the latter Prophets Haggai,
Zachary, and Malachie were dead (say the Hebrews) the holy Ghost went up, or
departed from Israel* it was true in respect of extraordinary inspiration or
revelation. In which sense (as some Divines with some probability interpret
the place) the D^sciples at Ephesus told Paul, that they had Act. 19 2.
Aynsworth in 28. Exo. v. 30.
not so much as heard whether there was an Holy Ghost or not. These were the
things which made the former temple glorious: what? not one of these to be
found in the second temple, and yet more glorious? The reading of this riddle
(as every prophecy is a riddle until it be fulfilled, and sometimes after)
has not a little perplexed and troubled not only the Hebrew Doctors, but even
our own Interpreters: Amongst the Hebrews, some of them are brought hereby to
dream of another imaginary temple to be built they know not when, by their
Messiah when he shall come: But that is but a dream. Others of them place the
transcendency of this glory in the duration and continuance of the second
Temple beyond the former. The former temple (according to their computation)
stood but four hundred and ten years, the latter four hundred and twenty. A
small ground (if true) from so small a difference in time to raise so great a
disparity of glory. Others amongst them, not knowing which way to turn them,
against the evidence both of Sacred and Ecclesiastical Story, peremptorily
affirm that this second temple built by Zerobabel and the rest of the children
of the Captivity, was every way more stately and magnificent then Salomons.
But then, why should the ancient men weep? To leave them, and to plow with our
own heighfers, to consult with our own Interpreters. Amongst them, some, and
those not a few, and those none of the meanest, understand the place mystically
concerning the Church of Christ under the Gospel. Thus Ambrose, Augustine,
Cyrill, with others, whose names I honor; Mayor erit Ecclesiae gloria quam
Synagogae: Greater shall the glory of the Church of Christ under the Gospel
be, then the glory of Salomons temple, or of the state of the Church under the
Law was. A pious truth, and perhaps here intended. But for my part, I have no
great delight in hunting after mysteries, where a more literal sense is
brought to hand. Not to hold you in suspense. For the true and full
understanding of this place (as with submission to maturer judgments I
conceive it) we must know that the Temple in Jerusalem was thrice built.
First, by Solomon. Secondly, by Zerobabel. Thirdly, by Herod. In the third and
last of these Temples was this promise fulfilled, this prophecy accomplished;
in Herod's time built by him in the place of the second temple, about seventeen
years before the birth of Christ.

Ob. ^y but (by the way) how can that temple be called this latter house? The
word seems to point precisely at that particular building whereof they had
then laid the foundations.

Ans. For the resolution of this, one Expositor (amongst the rest) instead of
untying the knot, cuts it, peremptorily denying that ever there was such a
Temple as this, which is supposed to have been built by Herod; confidently
affirming (though against all evidence both of Scripture and History) that,
that Temple which was standing in the time of our Savior was the same that
Zerobabel and the Jews built after their return from Babylon: Thus Eckius, a
bold, (to say no more) a confident Papist; for this very particular condemned
by Ribera and others of his own coat, under the modest terms of rashness and
singularity. Others to wave the scruple, they mince the matter; Herod (say
they) did not erect a new Temple, build it from the ground, but only repaired
and beautified that which was built. But we shall not need to seek a muse to
creep out at, the way is open. The phrase here used in the text, has no such
propriety in it, that it must necessarily be restrained to that particular
building, the second Temple, built by Zerobabel. Salomons Temple was not the
same with this second Temple, and yet we shall find it pointed out by this
Prophet by ye name of this house, Who is there left amongst you that saw (this
house) in her first glory, says he in the fourth verse of this Hag. 2. 4.
Chapter: This house, that is, the Temple of Solomon, in the place and stead
whereof this second Temple was built. By the same reason this third Temple
built by Herod in the place of this second Temple, may also be called This
house, This latter house. Forty and six years was this Temple Ioh. 2. ^0.
in building, say the Jews to our Savior. (This Temple.) Divines are at odds
about the interpretation, which Temple it was that is there spoken of. Some
understand it of Herod's Temple, which though it were but eight years in
building, as Josephus testifies, yet at this time, when this speech is
supposed to have been used, viz. in the year of the Baptism of Christ, it
had stood precisely forty six years; all which time it was still more and more
adorned, and beautified, and perfected, and so might be said to be so long in
building. Others, and that the greater number, refer the speech to this
second Temple built by Zerobabel, which as the computation arises, was just 46
years in building. Herod's Temple was built in the place, instead of this
second Temple, and that without any intermission of time, and therefore by the
Jews there, and the Prophet here in a vulgar speech, and that not improperly
called This Temple, This latter house. Ey, but the question still runs on. How
was this latter house more glorious then the former? How was Herod's Temple more
glorious then Salomons? Here Expositors run two ways. Some tie themselves to
the letter, to the history: interpreting the place of the structure, the
building, the outward beauty and glory of this Temple: Herod's temple (say they)
was of statelier building then Salomons, higher, larger, fairer, richer; Ribera
sperds a great deal of time in euincing and clearing of all these particulars.
For my part, I am not altogether incredulous but that it might be so. To grant
it (as if histories may be credited we must not deny it) yet where was the
glory of the furniture? There too, (says Ribera) most of the vessels of
Salomons temple were restored by King Cyrus at their return from Babylon; and
how ever many of them were afterward taken away by Antiochus Epiphanes, 1 Match
1. 23. 1 Match. 4. 49.
yet they were renewed again by the Machabees, and that as rich, as costly as
ever, all of pure gold. Suppose this too; yet where were the apurtenances that
belonged to Salomons Temple? Where was the Arc of the Covenant? Where was the
heavenly fire? Where was the Glory of the Lord? Where was the Urim and Thummim?
And where was the succession of Prophets? All these (by the Hebrews own
confession) were wanting in this third Temple, as well as in the second. What
shall we then think, that the life of this promise lies in the glory of the
structure, and of the furniture? Mr. Calvin, for his part, is loath in this
particular to go along cum crassis interpretibus, with blunt interpreters, as
he there calls them. I shall spare both the persons and opinion; yet the
argument which he there uses, seems to me more then probable. One maine
reason why God would not have the second Temple built in the like pomp and
state with the former, was, that he might thereby take off the eyes of his
people, and by little and little weane them from that Mosaicall pedagogie; that
they might not wholly rest in those external shadows of types, and
ceremonies, but that they might fix their thoughts rather upon the Messiah and
the spiritual glory of his kingdom. If so; what then shall we judge of that
pomp and cost which was bestowed upon this third temple by Herod? Surely as a
subtilty of Satan (and perhaps of Herod himself, who was but a halfe-Iew, a
Jew for his own advantage) that the eyes of the Jews being dazzled with this
outward pomp and glory they might look no further, but that their thoughts
might hereby be wholly taken off from looking for, or longing after the
promised Messiah. And if so, then was this cost bestowed upon this last Temple,
rather a profanation then an adorning of it: and to the Jews rather a token of
the vengeance of God upon them for their ingratitude, then a testimony of his
grace and favor. Surely there was something else which made this Temple more
glorious, then either the building or the furniture could make it: Why what was
that? To hold you no longer in suspense, briefly, it was Christ himself: the
Presence of Christ, the Preaching of Christ, the Revelation of Christ, his
manifestation in the flesh, the publishing of the glad tidings of salvation,
in, by, and through him. Here was the transcendent glory of this latter Temple.
When Christ the desire of all nations (as the Prophet styles him in the
seventh verse of this Chapter) was come, come in the flesh, then was this house
filled with glory. So it was foretold, and so it was accomplished. Then was
this house truly glorious, when it entertained him who was the truth of all
those types, the substance of all those ceremonial shadows which had made the
former house (the temple of Solomon) so exceedingly glorious: The time will not
give me that liberty to vnueile Moses his face before your eyes. That Temple
was but a type of his body. Destroy Ioh. 19. 21.
this temple, says our Savior to the Jews, He spoke of the temple of his
body, says the Text; of which that temple was a type. What ever there was in
that first Temple that made it so glorious, you shall find it all in this
latter house, all epitomized in Christ. Here was the Arc of the Covenant, the
Arc, wood within, ouerlayed within and without with pure gold. Christ, God and
man; two natures in one person, the humanity assumed into personal union with
the Divinity. Here was the heavenly fire; he that baptized with the holy Ghost
and with fire, he through whom the Father is well pleased, he in whom all the
sacrifices of the people of God find acceptance: Here dwelt the glory of God,
and that after a glorious manner. In him dwelt the fullness of the Godhead Col.
2. 9.
bodily, says Saint Paul. Full expressions. Not a glimpse of Divine glory, as
in the Cloud, and betwixt the Cherubins, but the fullness of the Godhead; and
that did not lodge in him for a time, as in the Tabernacle, as in the Temple,
but it dwelt in him, by an inseparable union, an everlasting inhabitation. It
dwelt in him, and that not (...) but (...), not in types and shadows, not in
clouds and ceremonies, as in the Temple, but in truth, in substance, really,
essentially: Again here was the Vrim and Thummim in the brestplate of this
high Priest of our salvation: light of knowledge, and perfection of holiness:
In him were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; Col. 2. 3.
And lastly, here was the gift of prophecy, a prophetical spirit powered out
after an eminent manner. Never prophet like this Prophet, the Father of the
Prophets, unto whom God gave his spirit not by measure: He that was in the
bosom of the Father from eternity, acquainted Ioh. 3. 34. Ioh. 1. 1^.
with all his secrets, his eternal purposes before the foundations of the
world were laid. Behold all the glory of Salomons Temple comprised in a little
room. And if the type was so glorious, then what is the truth? If the shadow,
what the substance? If the picture be so amiable, then what is the person whom
it represents? Needs must that place be exceedingly glorious which was honored
with the presence of him, whose presence makes the heavens glorious. Christ
was there manifested in the flesh; Ey and in the spirit too. There did he show
his almighty power in conuincing the Doctors, in whipping out the buyers and
sellers, in working of miracles: More yet; there was he preached, there was he
published, there were the glad tidings of salvation proclaimed and made known
to the world, by Christ himself, by his Apostles and Disciples, men endued
with eminent and extraordinary gifts for that purpose. This was the surpassing
glory of this latter house, wherein it so far excelled the former; Christ was
here revealed, manifested in the flesh, in the spirit, preached and published
unto the world. And herein stands the true glory of all our Temples and
Synagogues under the Gospel, even in the presence and revelation of Christ.
This is the kernel about which I have spent so much time in cracking of the
shell. Now that I have it, I would be loath through straits of time to cast it
away without some small improuement. I shall be brief, and only propound what
my purpose was to prosecute.

The glory of our Temples is the presence and revelation Doct.
of Christ. How dreadful, how fearful is this place, (says the Patriarch
Jacob) surely it is no other but the Genesis 28. 17.
house of God, the gate of heaven. What was it that struck the holy Patriarch
with such an awful dread and reverence of the place where he was, being but in
the wide open field? Why, it was the presence and manifestation of him whom
that ladder signified; the eternal Son of God the Mediator of the Covenant,
whose office it is to reconcile things in heaven, and things upon earth, God
and man, as that ladder united heaven and earth: He it was who was pleased at
that time and in that place to manifest his presence by some visible tokens,
and that manifestation it was which made that place (though in the open field)
dreadful, fearful, glorious: It is this presence of Christ that makes a
place first to be the house of God, and then that house glorious. Ey but how
Quest. Act. 3. 21.
is he present now upon earth whom the heavens must contain until all things
be restored? How is Christ present in our Temples, our Synagogues, our
Churches? Why he is present after a spiritual manner, in the midst of his
public ordinances; in the Word, in the Sacraments. Where Christ is truly
preached, there is he truly present: present with the Ministers, present with
the people. With the Ministers: I will be with you to the Mat. vlt. vlt. Mat.
18. 20.
end of the world, they are the last words of our Savior to his Apostles and
their successors. With the people: Where two or three are gathered together in
my name, etc. Christ is truly present in all places, but in the midst of the
seven golden candlestickes he walks, he is present after a special manner,
with special assistance, with a special evidence of his Spirit, a special
declaration of his power, there is his arm revealed. As in the Word, so in the
Sacraments, there is he present, though not locally, yet truly, yet
spiritually, (pardon the word) really present to the faith of the receiver: And
this is the glory of our Temples, a spiritual glory, consisting in the
spiritual presence of Christ in the midst of his public ordinances.

It must needs be so. Glory (to speak properly) it is R.
nothing else but an opinion of some excellency or worth, conceived by others
to be in such, or such a thing: Now if glory be measured by opinion, then is
this spiritual glory ( The Glory.) It is so in the estimation both of God and
his Saints.

First, For God himself, there is no Temple glorious in his eye where this
Spiritual glory is wanting. Be the building, the outside, the inside what it
will, he regards it not, he dwells not in it. So much in express words Saint
Paul tells those superstitious Athenians; Act. 17. 24.
where beholding their blind devotion in erecting of Altars, and such other
ceremonial external obseruances; he tells them plainly, that God who made the
world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, he
dwells not in temples made with hands: Be the Temple what it will, if there
be no more in it but the work of men's hands, God dwells not there, he
delights not in it. True indeed, God did once dwell in a material temple
betwixt the Cherubins, but wherefore was it? the Ark was there. God does at this
day dwell in the places of his public worship and service, but wherefore is it?
Why, the Assemblies of his Saints, his public ordinances are there. It is
this spiritual worship and service which God delights to be entertained with.
Time was indeed when external rites, and ceremonial obseruances seemed to be
in great request with God. They were not only a means, Ioh. 4. 23.
but a part of his worship; under the Gospel it is not so. The time comes,
and now is (says our Savior) when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and in truth; for the father requires even such to worship
him. It is this Spirit and Truth in holy performances, the spiritual manner of
worshipping God, that makes services, persons, places to be accepted of him:
And this it is that made not only this Temple, but every Synagogue in
Jerusalem, nay that makes every Temple under the Gospel more glorious in the
eyes of God, then the Temple of Solomon was; Solomon in all his royalty is not
as one of these (says our Savior concerning the Lillies) his beauty was
artificial, theirs was natural. Salomon^ Temple in all the royalty of it was
not as one of these, these Temples, these Synagogues, these Churches, where
Christ is plainly and powerfully preached, published, offered, applied in the
word and Sacraments. There was a Ceremonial, here is a spiritual glory.

And secondly, As in the eyes of God, so in the eyes of his Saints, this
spiritual glory is ( The Glory) what so glorious an object in the eyes of a
Christian as Christ himself, especially when he is revealed? A light to be
revealed Luke 2. 32.
to the Gentiles, and (the glory) of his people Israel; so old Simeon styles
him. This is ( the glory) in the eyes of a Christian, when Christ is revealed
to his soul powerfully, effectually in the public ministry of the word. So
great is the glory of Christ crucified in the preaching of the word, that Saint
Paul cannot but wonder, that his Galathians before whose eyes Christ had been
thus crucified in his Preaching of him, should be so far bewitched as to
look off from it, as to look after any thing else, Gal. 3. 1.
but Christ and the doctrine of Christ. O foolish Galathians who has bewitched
you? Gal. 3. 1. No glory like unto this, when the veil is taken off, not from
Moses his face, but from the face of Jesus Christ himself in the public
Ministry of the word: This (blessed be God that we may speak it without either
fear or flattery) is the glory of our Temples. Children it may be are in love
with their books for the gilded couers, for the babies and pictures sake; it
is the matter that men of understanding look at. Poor, blind, ignorant
souls, whose devotion is nothing but superstition, may be in love with the
Temple for the painting, caruing, guilding, decking, but that which makes it
truly glorious in the eyes of God, and his Saints, is the glory of the latter
Temple, y^ spiritual worship of God, the presence and revelation of Christ in
his public ordinances. The time concludes me, I must obey. That which remains is
a word of application.

I might in the first place from this ground take a just Use 1.
occasion to discover and tax that childish superstition of the Church of Rome
in their preposterous adornations of their Temples. Let none anticipate my
intentions, or through prejudice either mistake my words, or misconstrue my
meaning) I have nothing to say against the decent beautifying of the places of
Gods public worship. In this case I should rather make use of a spur then a
bridle, if the time would permit; It is the shame of our nation in many parts
of it (if I could hide it, I would not discover it) the houses of God seem to
lie neglected, waste, ruinous, as if neither God nor man dwelt in them, or had
any reference to them; we may without any injury write upon the doors of them
( Ichabod) there is no glory, no beauty, no decency, neither in the outside,
nor yet in the inside. I would to God the foul mouths of the Romanists were
not too justly opened against us in this quarrel; but yet our negligence is no
plea for their preposterousnesse. What is it that they account the greatest
glory of their Temples? Stately and goodly edifices, vast and magnificent
buildings, built rather for the eye, then the ear; state then use; Rich and
costly furniture, Curious pictures, Images, Crucifixes, Altars, Chalices,
Vestments; rare apurtenances, shrines, monuments, relics. This is the glory
which the eyes of the greatest part amongst them are dazzled with: Little
account in the mean time do they make of this glory of the latter Temple, the
Preaching of Christ. Perhaps a little in this Lent.
season of the year, to which all their holiness is confined: The Passion of
Christ shall be acted now and then in a pulpit, rather then preached. All the
year after their Churches may preach to the eye (as indeed all their service
is but eye-seruice) but little to the ear, less to the heart. For our parts,
far be it from us to envy them this their glory. If it must needs be so that
the golden Chalices and the golden Priests must be divided, that they cannot go
together, let them take the Chalices so we may have the Priests. They were
Saint Augustines three wishes to see Rome in her pride, Christ in the flesh,
and Saint Paul in a pulpit; give us the two latter of these in a good sense in
our Temples, let Rome still keep her pride to her self. Salomons Temple I am
sure might compare with the best of theirs in their own kind, and yet the
glory of the latter house was greater, then of the former.

To leave them; a word for our selves, and but a word. Use 2.
We see wherein the true glory of our temples lies: far be it from any of
us, now that we have found out wherein the strength of Sampson lies, to go
about to cut off his lock: Now that the Lord has made known unto us where it
is that his glory dwells, far be it from any of us herein to imitate the
high Priest of whom I spoke even now, to carry smoke in our hands, to use or
attempt any way or means for the darkning, for the obscuring of this glory. But
Charity bids me hope better things of you. And therefore let me turn this
Caution into a word of Exhortation. And that is briefly,

To stir up and excite every of us here now present Use 3.
before the Lord, that in our several places and stations, we would put to our
hands to this work, to this beautifying, this adorning of the Temples of God.
To erect, build, rebuild, repair, beautify Churches, is a thing that hears
well at all hands, and it deserves no less (I would to God there were more
hands in works of this nature; so they may be free from vain ostentation, and
as free from all opinion of merit; two leaves of Coloquintida, which in former
ages were wont for the most part to imbitter all these services) but yet
whilst we have a pious respect to the outside, let us have a greater regard
to the inside. The windows in Salomons Temple were broad and narrow, says the
Text: broad within, narrow without, says the 1 King. 6. q.
margent of the new Translation (even as these are here before our eyes) Such
should the light, the beauty, the glory of every Temple under the Gospel be,
inward, greater within then without. Outward, external ornaments in the house
of God, so they be decent, comely, not subject to occasion superstition in the
beholder, or distraction in the hearers, they are not only lawful, but
laudable. But the chief ornaments in which the glory of our Temples lies, are
the special ornaments. Will you know what they are in particular, go along
with me a little into the Sanctuary of God. There we shall find three
principal pieces of furniture; A Table, an Altar, a Candlestick: A table for
the shewbread, with twelve loaves upon it, signifying the twelve tribes of
Israel presenting themselves before the Lord. An altar for the incense
signifying the prayers of the Saints, which being offered up unto God in and
through the mediation of Christ, ascend up as the incense, even a sweet
smelling savor unto God. The Candlestick, signifying the Word, which is a
lamp, a light for the guidance and direction of the people of God. Behold here
the principal ornaments wherewith the Sanctuary, the house of God should be
furnished, when the Tribes come up and present themselves before the Lord, when
the people of God assemble together in a solemn manner: An Altar, a
Candlestick: Prayer, The word: the word Read, Preached. For my part, I dare
not take away the Altar from the Candlestick. Let none dare to go about to
take away the Candlestick from the Altar. Prayer and the Word, God has joined
them together, let no man divorce or put them asunder. Other apurtenances there
were; amongst the rest, the Pincers, the Snuffers. The one to pinch of the
mould from the loaves; the other to snuff the lights. The Censures of the
Church are also sometimes useful, needful, and that to be applied to the
Ministers as well as to the people, as the loaves have need of the pincers, so
the light of the snuffers, to make them burn the clearer. But the chief and the
principal pieces of furniture in the house of God which are of continual use
when the tribes meet together, are the Altar and the Candlestick; Prayer and
the Word read, preached: To these two add but a third: viz. the seals of the
Covenant, the Sacraments of the New Testament, the one of Initiation, the other
of Confirmation; Baptism, the Supper of the Lord, rightly and duly administered
according to Christ's own institution, then have we the house of God in respect
of the spiritual ornaments compleately furnished. In these three lies the
glory of our Temples. And where these three are most purely, most powerfully
administered according to Christ's own institution, though the building be of
rough and unpolished stones, mean and despicable, though other accoutrements
for pomp and state be wanting, yet there is the glory of the latter house, a
glory far greater then the glory of Salomons Temple. Let every of us then who
desire to promote the glory of God upon earth, and to partake of his glory in
heaven, show our selves forward, earnest, zealous, for the upholding,
establishing, enlarging, propagating of this glory. The exhortation reaches to
all. They that can do nothing else may yet help forward this glory with
prayers, presence, countenance, maintenance. These, al of these, or some of
these, God looks for at the hands of every private Christian. For others,
into whose hands God has put any especial advantage this way in respect of
place, authority, estate, friends gifts or the like, from them God expects
according as he has given to them, a double portion: double zeal, double
courage, double resolution, double endeavor, double industry. All the people
must put their hands to the building of the Temple of God, but Ieshua and
Zerobabel, the chief Priest, and the chief Prince after a special manner.
The Lord make every of us wise servants, faithful stewards in the improuing of
all those talents to the best advantage which our Master has betrusted us with
for this end. The time is past, let me only bring the text and the occasion
together in a word, I have done. We are this day by the providence of God met
together to the solemn dedication and consecration of a house unto God, a
place for his public worship and service. A work of which Nazianzen says,
that it is not only (...) but (...), not only an ancient, but a laudable
custom: the foundation of it being laid in God himself, who sanctified and
consecrated the seventh day from the beginning; imitated by Moses at the
dedication of the Tabernacle, by Solomon at the dedication of the first Temple,
by Zerobabel and Joshua at the dedication of the second Temple, renewed again
by the Machabees after that it had been polluted and profaned by Antiochus;
in memorial of which last dedication that solemn and anniuersarie feast of
Dedication was instituted amongst the Jews, which Feast our Savior himself
was pleased Ioh. 10 22.
to grace and honor with his own presence. If any shall plead that this smells
of Iudaisme; for their satisfaction, let them but consider that general rule
of the Apostl^, Every creature of God is good, etc. and is sanctified ^ Tim 4.
^.
(or consecrated) by the word and prayer. (Sanctified) that is set apart for
that end and purpose for which it was appointed and ordained. This house being
devoted and destinated unto the public worship and service of God, what could
we do less then inuit the word and prayer to the Consecration. That which
remains, is only a request, a request not in mine own name, but in the name
of God and his people; take it in a word, That, what is prophesied of here in
the text, may be accomplished and made good in this house, this temple wherein
we are now met together, viz that the glory of this latter house may be greater
then the glory of the former. What the glory of the former house was when it
was first erected, or when it was last used, I cannot certainly determine. The
name and memory of the supposed ^. Foelix at his entrance into England, whence
Felixton.
Founder, I deservedly honor; yet the blind^^sse of those times gives too just
cause of suspicion that it was dedicated and used in some sense as that
Athenian a^^ar was, though to the true, yet (...), to a God not clearly known
or truly worshipped. To pass by those times of ignorance which God neglected,
regarded not; God has made known unto us what is the glory which he looks
for, and makes so much account of in his Temples. As for bare walls, empty
seats, dumb pulpits, he cares not for them, much less images, crucifixes,
shrines, relics. It is the Incense, Altar, the Candlestick: Prayer, The
Wordread, Preached, with the Sacraments rightly and duly administered, which
must make this and all other Temples glorious in his eyes: Let this be the care
of those whom this work principally concerns, to provide for those best
ornaments. Then shall my prayers join with yours in the words of the Psalmist.
The glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon them: Prosper thou the works
of their hands upon them: O prosper thou their handy-worke.

Glory be to God on high.
FINIS.

