A TRVE, SINCERE, AND MODEST DEFENSE, OF ENGLISH CATHOLIQVES THAT SVFFER FOR
THEIR Faith both at home and abroad: against a false, seditious and slanderous
Libel entitled; THE EXECVTION OF JUSTICE IN ENGLAND.

VVherin is declared, how unjustly the Protestants do charge Catholics
with treason; how untruly they deny their persecution for Religion; and how
deceitfullie they seek to abuse strangers about the cause, greatness, and manner
of their sufferinges, with diverse other matters perteining to this purpose.

Psalm. 62. Vt obstruatur os loquentium iniqua.

That the mouth may be stopped of such as speak unjustly.

Psalm. 49. Os tuum ^bundauit malitia, and lingua tua concinnabat dolos,

Thy mouth has abounded in malice, and thy tongue has coninglie framed lies.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
ALBEIT the late pamphlet, entitled The execution of Justice, put forth in
diverse languages, for defense or excuse of the violent proceeding against
Catholics in England, and for accusation as well of them at home as of us
their fellows in faith abroad, passing forth without privilege and name either
of writer or printer (even thence where such matter is specially current, and
might easily have been authorized): and moving indiscret, odious, and
dangerous disputes of estate, replenished with manifest untruths, open
slanders of innocent persons, and namely with immodest malediction and
seditious motions against the chief Bishop, the Prince of Gods people; though
(I say) it might rightly have been reputed an infamous Libel, either to be
contemned, or with such freedom of speech refelled, as that manner of writing
does deserve: yet considering the matter, meaning, and phrase thereof to be
agreeable to the humor and liking of some in authority; The causes of answer.
and the book not only not suppressed (as diverse others of that argument
seeming over simple to the wiser Protestants, of late have been) but often
printed, much recommended, diligently diuulged, and sought to be priuileged in
In France.
foreign places, where for shame they durst not publicly allow it at home:
yea, and in a manner thrust into the hands of strangers, and therefore like to
proceed (though in close sort) from authority: we are forced, and in truth
very well contented and glad it has pleased God to give this occasion, or
rather necessity, to yield (for the answer of the said book) our more
particular account, in the behalf of our Catholic brethren dead and alive, at
home and in banishment.

Which we will do sincerlie as in the sight of Christ Jesus the just judge of
the world, and al his Saints: in such humble, mild, and temperate manner, as
beseems our profession, and the audience: which audience we crave with tears
of the whole Church and Christian world, and of all that are placed in power and
sublimitie over us in our own Country or else where: that so our cause may be
discerned both by God and man; and our unspeakable calamities, either by the
intercession of many, relieved; or by the general compassion of al our
faithful brethren, made to us more tolerable. Loath we are, and odious it may
be compted to speak in such matter as must needs in some sort touch our
superiors: but Gods truth and man's innoce^cie are priuileged, and may in
humble seemly wise be defended, against whomsoever. And our pen (God willing)
shall be so tempered herein, that it shall displease no reasonable reader, nor
surely skarce them (if it may be) against whom in our inculpable defense we
are forced to write.

We have in this case examples enough of Christian modesty in the ancient
apologies of holy Fathers in Christ his Church; as of S. Justin, Examples of
vvriting apologies for innocence.
Tertulian, Athanasius, Hylarius and other, writing to their Princes, that
persecuted either by error or infidelity, the faithful people. Whose style and
steps so long as we follow, we shall be blameles in the sight of al wise and
good men; and offend none, to whom the plain truth it self is not odious. As
on the other side, we have in our adversaries late books, for immodest
railing, The Protestants style.
contemptuous phrase, slanderous speech, blasphemous words, false,
reprochful, seditious matter, and al inhonest scurrilitie, what to abhor and
detest, and what to avoid in these our writings; which we would have most
unlike theirs, and not only allowable to our friends, but (if it were
possible, and so pleased our merciful Lord to give us grace in their sight) not
ungrateful to our persecutours: whose salvation (as Christ knows) we seek in all these our endeavors, together with the maintenance of truth, more then our
own defense and purgation.

Whereupon otherwise, for our own only honor and interest, we would not so
formallie stand, against so honorable adversaries in this world; if we thought
either their hearts (which are in Gods hands) were not upon evident reason and
remonstrance of our innocence, inclinable to mercy and better consideration
of their own state and ours: or that their accusation of us afflicted
Catholics, were not joined to the general reprehension of the whole Church
and the principal pastors thereof; whom by the law of our Christian religion
we ought to respect more then our own lives; and in causes of our soul and
conscience, to obey above any earthly Prince, by what other obligation so
ever we be bound unto him.

And as we would gladly pass in this our answer, with such equabilitie and
indifferency, that in defense of the spiritual power (which by our adversaries
importunity, we are driven in manner against our wills to treat of) we might not
justly offend the temporal, acknowledging in diverse respects al humble duty
to them both: so writing nothing that any man shall be able to prove untrue
either in fact or faith; we trust in the readers equity, be he Catholic or
Protestant, that in so faultles and necessary a defense of our selves, and of
our Superiors, as also of the common cause of our Christian faith and
conscience, he will not judge our writing seditious, slanderous or infamous
libelling (as the nameles author of this inuectiue, against whom we treat,
vnchristianlie and vncourteouslie calls other our brethrens books) recording
only the heavy persecution, torments and deaths of Catholics, in such
simple, plain and sincere sort, as indeed al things were done: The books of
English persecution most true.
and so as no man living can truly either charge the reporters of fiction or
falsehood, or of any evil intention of diffaming to strangers their superiors
dealings, in making relation of our dear Countries most doleful calamities.
For the things there done daily in public, cannot otherwise be hidden from
the world: and seeing they are passed by law and order of pretended justice,
there can be no cause why them selves should mislike the diuulging thereof;
except they acknowledge in their conscience some iniquity, and dishonorable
defect in their proceedinges, against the most innocent persons whom daily they
torment and make away.

We are not so peruerslie affected (God be praised) as purposelie to dishonor
our Prince and Country, The true causes of publishing our miseries.
for whose love in Christ, so many have so meeklie lost their lives: or to
reveal their turpitude, which we would rather cover (if it were possible) from
the eyes of the world with our own blood: but we set forth the truth of al
these actions, for the honor of our nation, which otherwise to her infinite
shame and reproach, would be thought wholly and generally to have revolted
from the Catholic faith, and consented to all the absurdities and iniquities
of this new regiment and religion, if none with zeal and extreme endeavor
resisted such pernicious innouations. Where now as well our own people, as al
strangers in the Christian world, perceauing the disorder to proceed but of the
partiality of a few powerable persons abusing her Majesty's clemency and
credulity; do glorify our Lord God, that in so great a tentation, all the
Clergy in manner, and so many of the laity of al sorts constantly persist
in their fathers faith, to the loss of goods, lands, lives, honors, and what
soever besides: and that the whole state (excepting the authority of the
Prince) may yet be rather counted Catholic, then heretical: this is the
honor of our nation in all places, which otherwise (for dooble revolt and
recidiuatio^ into Schism, and for extreme persecution) would be compted
remediles, hopeles, and of al other places most infamous.

Secondly; we set forth these things for the memory and honor of such
notable Martirs, as have testified the truth of the Catholic faith by their
precious death. See S. Cyprian.
Which was an ancient Canon and custom of the primitive Church, which
appointed certain special persons or skill and learning, to note the days of
every ones glorious confession and combat, that their memories might afterward
be solemnly celebrated for ever among Christians.

Thirdly; we do it to communicate our calamities with our brethren in faith,
and the Churches of other provinces standing free from this misery, both for
their warning, and our comfort, and to excite in them Christian compassion
toward us; that therbie and by their council and prayers, we may find mercy
and releef at Gods hand: by the example of the Oriental Churches afflicted by
the Arrians, See S. Basile. Epist. 69. and 70.
which as we may read in S. Basile, in their like distresses, made their
general complaints by often letters and messingers, to the west Churches,
standing more entire and void of that Heresy and persecution.

Finally; we are forced to publish these things so particularly and
diligently, to defend the doings of the said holy Confessors and their
fellows in faith, against the manifold slanders and calumniations of certain
Heretics or Politiques, unjustly charging them with treason, and other great
trespasses against the Commonwealth, to auert the eyes of the simple from the
true causes of their suffering; and to disapoint the holy personages (if they
could) of the honor done to Martirs in Gods Church. For, that is one special
cause among many, why they had rather make them away for forged treason, or
other feigned offenses, then for profession of the truth; which in their heart
they hate more then any crime in the world. S. Gregory Nazianzene lively
expresses the condition of al Heretics, in the behavior of Iulianus the
Apostata, thus writing of him: Oratione in laude^ Caesaris.
He openly and boldly professing impiety, yet by coulor of clemency covered
his cruelty; and lest we should atteine to the honors done customablie to
Martirs (which he disdeined to the Christians) he used namely this fraud and
deceit, that such as he caused to be tormented for Christ's cause, should be
thought and reported to be punished not for their faith, but as malefactors.

For discovery therefore of this sinful and deceiptful dealing of our
adversaries (who not contented with the death and torments of Gods Saints,
would punish them by ignominy after their life) we are driven to this dutiful
office of their and the holy Churches defense; whose honor and innocence we
may not bewray for a thousand deaths.

Wherein we are not much terrified by the vain and vulgar exordium of the
Author of this inuectiue which we now must refute: The Libellers vain and
vulgar Exordium.
who begins above al art (after their manner) with a common sentence, as
meet for us and our matter, as for him and his cause: telling us, that it is a
common usage of al offenders, and specially rebels and traitors, to make
defense of their lend and unlawful factes, by covering their deeds with
pretense of other causes. Which speech, as it might be used where any such
trespass could be proved; so is it fondly said where no crime can be
avouched: as in the process of this treatise, shall be (by Gods grace) most
clearlie convinced. And it might not only be applied by the old heathen or
heretical persecutors, against the first Apostles and Martirs of Christ, being
falsely charged with the same crimes as we be now, and answered for them
selves, as we do: but may much more be verified and found in public persons
and commonwealths, when they err or commit iniquity, then in any poor,
private, States Princes and common-vvealthes have more prete^ces for covering
their misdeedes the^ private me^.
or afflicted persons, be they never so guilty. For Princes and communities in
disorder have a thousand pretenses, excuses, and coulors, of their iniust
actions: they have the name of authority, the shadow of laws, the pens and
tongues of infinite at their commandment: they may print or publish what they
like, suppress what they list: whereof private men, be they never so wicked or
good, have not so great commodity.

For examples we need not to go far out of our own Country and memory.
For, when Richard the third, intending to usurp the Croune of England, slew
diverse of the Nobility first most cruelly, Richard Duke of Gloucester.
and afterward murdered unnaturally his own innocent nephews: what solemn
Libels, proclamations, orations, were put forth to justify his abominable
iniquity? When the last Duke of Northumberland, for the like ambitious
purpose, would have dishabled and defeated traiterouslie, John Dudly Duke of
Northumberland.
both the noble daughters of his own Sovereign and Master; and by the title
of his daughter in law, possessed him self of the Croune: what a number of
pamphlets and edicts were published on the sudden, for couloring of that foul
treachery and intolerable treason? When Orange Orange.
and his confederats revolted not long since, from their natural Prince; the
Scottish Heretics from their lauful Sovereign, Iamy, Murton, etc.
and other Provinces for the same cause, from the unity and common faith of
the Church; who has not seen the infinite Libels for their excuse in
wickedness? That therefore, that may sometimes fall in private men's causes for
covering their sin and shame, happens far oftener and much more
dangerously in powerable and public persons. And so it makes no more
against us, then this writer him self, whether he has published his Libel by
authority (as he will not seem) or of his own peculiar head and affection,
which rather we are content to suppose.

Howsoever it be, we will be bold to examine in the treatise following, with such
modesty and indifferency as is requisite in Gods cause, his whole reprehension:
and in the mean time til he can prove us, or our brethren guilty of any
crime, other then the exercise and profession of the Catholic faith: Ioa.
10.32 Act. 23.6. Act. 28.20.
we will say with our Savior, De bono opere lapidamur; and with the Apostle, De
spe and resurrectione mortuorum iudicamur, and propter spem Israel his catenis
circundati sumus.

THAT MANY PRIESTS AND OTHER CATHOLIQVES IN ENGLAND HAVE BEEN PERSECVTED,
condemned, and executed, for mere matter of religion: and for transgression
only of new statutes which do make cases of Conscience to be treason,
without al pretense or surmise of any old treasons or statutes for the same.
CAP. I.
NOw to the principal points of the Libel: we first affirm that the very
front or title thereof, (importing that no Catholics at al, or none of them
whom they have executed, were persecuted for their religion) is a very
notorious untruth, and contradictorie to the libellers own words in his
discourse following where he confesses underhand, A manifest falsehood with
contradiction to them selves.
that some be corrected otherwise for religion: or (if they will stand in the
contrary) we appeal to the conscience and knowledge of all the Catholics and
protestants within the Realm, who of their equity will never deny, that most
prisons in England be full at this day, and have been for diverse years, of
honorable and honest persons not to be touched with any treason, or other
offense in the world, other then their profession and faith in Christian
religion.

Secondly we say and shall clearlie convince, that contrary to the poursute of
the same libel, a number have been also tormented, arreigned, condemned and
executed, for mere matter of Religion, and upon the transgression of new
statutes only, without any relation to the old treasons, so made and set
down by Parliament in Edward the thirdes time: by which they untruly auouche
al our brethren were convicted.

And herein to deal particularly and plainly, we allege the worthy Priest
and Bachelar of divinity M. Cuthberte Main (who suffered a glorious Martyrdom
at Lanson in the province of Cornewale, M. Main. Ao. Dom. 1577.
for that the case or cover only of an Agnus Dei, and a printed copy of that
Bull now expired which denounced to the christian world the last Jubilee, were
found about him) condemned not by any old laws, (as is deceitfullie
pretended to abuse the simple of owre own nation, and strangers that know
not our lamentable condition) but by a late statute enacted the 13. year of
the Q. reign, which makes it high treason to bring from Rome, any beads,
sacred pictures, Agnus Deis, Bulls or (as the express words of the said
statute are) any writing or instrument vvryten or printed, containing any
thing, matter or cause whatsoever: by which words they may condemn a man to
death as guilty of high treason though he bring from Rome but letters
testimonial for a trauailers credit and commendation in journey: a thing unhard
of in all ages, not credible to forrayners, and a fable to the posterity, or
rather a warning to the world to come, into what misery and barbarousnesse a
kingdom that forsakes the Church, may be brought unto. And an honorable
gentleman of an ancient family, M. Trugio^.
for only receiving the said blessed Priest into his house, remains
condemned at this day to perpetual prison and has lost both lands and goods
of great importance for that fact.

Ao. Dom.
Likewise Thomas Sherwood a lay man indicted adjudged and put to death, 1578. At
London. M. Shervvood.
for questions of the Q. supremacy in causes spiritual, and other articles
made capital by the new laws only, two years at the least before this
fiction of conspiracy against the realm, or person of the Princes, was made
or heard of. The same year was a reverend Priest named M. John Nelson
condemned and executed for affirming (being driven thereunto by the
commisioners captious interrogatories) the Q. religion to be heretical and
schismatical: Ao. 1578 At London. M. Nelson.
which is made death not by the old laws of the realm, nor by any other of
any christian country, but only by a statute made in the said 13. year of
the Q. reign: providing by a special clause, that none shall affirm her
Majesty that now is (for it holds not in other Princes cases to come) to be
an here^ique or schismatique under pain of incurring high treason and death.

After these, M. Eurarde Hanse was indicted and ^o condemned to death (which he
constantly suffered, Ao. 1581 At London.
) only upon a statute made in the last parliament of al (by which it is made
a crime capital to persuade any man to the catholic religion) into the
compass of which law, they violently drew the blessed man by calumnious
interpretation of his speeches, when he ^ffirmed (being urged thereunto) that
the Pope was ^is superior in causes spiritual, and had in such matters
spiritual as good right, as he ever had in England, or has at this day in
Rome: for which words though enforced from him, he was there presently,
indicted, arrained, and condemned to death, and soon after most cruel^^e
executed, whose case together with that of M. Nelson which goes before,
declares what truth is in this libeller who writes here in one place. That
none are for their contrary opinions in religion persecuted or charged with
any crimes or pains of treason, nor yet vvillingely serched in their
consciences for their contrary opinions. And again within a lease after he
repeateth the same untruth saying: Without charging them in their consciences
or otherwise by any inquisition, to bring them into danger of Capital law, so
as no one was called into any capitalor bloody question upon matters of
religion, but have al inioyed their life as the course of nature would.

M. Lacie.
Here may be named also M. William Lacye a worshipful gentilman, who was
condemned to death not long since at York, for that he confessed he had
obtained a dispensation for Bigamie of the Popes holiness to be made Priest,
and that according to the same dispensatio^ he was made Priest, either of which
points by their late laws of religion are deadly: And the latter point they
make treason forsooth by this strange sequel, that when men take holy orders
in the Catholic church, they give their oath of obedience to the Pope, who is
a foreign enemy to her Majesty and to the Realm as these men affirm: and
could the world ween, we were in such thraldom of this barbarous heresy?
With this man was M. Kirkman M. Kirkeman.
an happy Priest also martyred, for that he acknowledged him-self to have
reconciled certain persons to the Catholic church. For which likewise were
put to death M. Thomson, M. Heart, and M. Threlkeld M. Tho^son. M. Heart. M.
Threlkeld.
afterward, in the same city of York, never charged nor suspected of any
other treasons, then of hearing Confessions, absoluing and reconciling sinners
to the favor of God and to the unity of the Catholic church again: which
both in the Priest that absolueth, and in the party that is absolved, they
have made to be the crime of les-Maiestie under this false and most unjust
pretense, that al parties so reconciled, are assoiled of there obedience to the
Q. and do adhere to her enemy, and admit foreign jurisdiction, power and
authority, which is exercised in Confession for remission of sins.

These be the treasons and none other for which the blood of Gods Priests is so
abundantly shed in our poor country these years.

Add to these the two famous confessors, Ao. 1583. M. Slade. M. Body.
M. John Slade, and M. John Body, who both by certain interrogatories being
driven to say their minds touching the Q. challenge of supreme regiment
ecclesiastical, (contrary to the asseueration of this libeller set down
before) for confessing their faith of the Popes spiritual sovereignty, and for
denying her to be head of the church of England, or to have any spiritual
regiment: were condemned to death in public judgment at two diverse sessions,
and that at twice, (a rare case in our country) the latter sentence being to
reform the former (as we may guess in such strange proceedinges) which they
perceived to be erroneous and insufficient in there own laws. Whereupon one of
them was executed at Winchester, the other at And over in the same province:
being never charged with disloyalty or old treasons, as not only by the
records of their arraignment and condemnation we are able to prove, but also
by their own speeches, and by the whole action of there Martyrdom, The book
is entitled: The Several executions of Slade and Body etc. imprinted in
London, by Richard Jones 1583.
which is put in print by one of their own protestants that was present, and
is witnessed by thousands of others, that both heard and saw their deaths and
judgment. I will (for examples sake) allege some thing out of the said printed
pamphlet of that which was said unto them by the enemy at their martyrdom.
Confess your fault (says one of the chief Sir VV. Kingsmel.
gentlemen and ministers of execution there present) for satisfaction of the
world, in the cause of your death: to which the holy confessor I. Body
answered, after protestation of his loyalty in temporal things: You shall
understand (quoth he) good people, that I suffer death for denying her Majesty
to be Supreme head of Christ's church in England in causes ecclesiastical:
other treasons, except they make hearing the holy Mass, or saying, Aue Maria,
treason, I have committed none. So his happy companion M. Slade condemned for
the same only cause, was thus spoken unto in the hour of his agony, The
cause why M. Slade and M. Body were murdered.
by one doctor Bennet a great minister of there new congregation: let not the
Pope (says he) that unworthy Priest be preferred before thine own natural
Princess, who is the lavvful supreme head of the Church next under Christ.
So said this minister, by whom we may not only perceive upon what statute and
treason they were executed, but also, (which in an other part of this libel is
without shame most boldly denied, Page 10.
) that indeed the Q. is commo^lie of protestants called, Supreme head of the
Church. So their preachers in pulpit do sound out daily as al men know: and
their writers in books dedicated to her, (as M. Bridges M. Bridges.
against doctor Saunders and D. Stapleton: and others) do term her
expreslie. Whereof the wiser sort (as we may see by this libel) are so ashamed,
that they would have it given out (to strangers specially, who wonder at the
monstrous title) that there is no such thing challenged of her, or given her by
the new laws of Religion in England.

The protesta^tes ashamed of their Head of the church.
For which cause, and for that they had an intention straight to publishe at
home and in foreign parts, that none were put to death for any such matter
of faith or religion, they suppressed the said printed pamphlet of these two
men's martyrdom, and punished the Author thereof, though he wrote in that point
the plain truth as he hard and saw, but not discretlie enough nor aggreable
to the politic practice they had then in hand, which was to persuade the
world, that none were put to death for their conscience, nor that the Q.
challenged any such title of Supremacy or Headshippe over the Church, Page 10.
which later point it seems convenient to the politiques of our Realm to
disauowe with such vehemency in this libel, as they give us the manifest lie
for that we reprove them of it, for thus they write: which title (of headship
of the Church) the adversaries do most falsely write and affirm, that the Q.
Majesty does now use, a manifest lie and untruth, etc. Wherefore of this
matter I am enforced in this place to speak a word or two by the way.

The truth is, that in the first year and Parliament of the Q. reign, when
they abolished the Popes authority, and would have yielded the same authority
with the title of Supreme head to the Q. as it was given before to her Father
and Brother: diverse specially moved by Minister Caluins writing (who had
condemned in the same Princes that calling) liked not the ^earme, and therefore
procured that some other equivalent but less offensive, might be used. Upon
which formalitie, it was enacted that she was the Cheef governor as well in
causes ecclesiastical or spiritual, as civil and temporal: And an oath of the
same was conceived accordingly, to be tendered at their pleasures, to all the
spiritual and temporal officers in the Realm, by which every one must swear
that in conscience he takes and believes her so to be: and that no Priest or
other borne out of the realm, can have or ought to have any manner of power in
spiritual matters over her subjects. Which oath is compted the very torment
of al English consciences, not the protestants themselves believing it to be
true: and of al true catholics, as before it was deemed in her Father a lay
man, and in her Brother a child very ridiculous: so now in her self, being a
woman, is it accounted a thing most monstrous and unnatural, and the very
gappe to bring any Realm to the thraldom of al sects, Heresy, Paganism,
Turcisime or Atheism, that the Prince for the time by humane frailty may be
subject unto: al our religion, faith, worship, service, and prayers, depending
upon his sovereign determination: a thing that al nations have to take heed of
by our example, for the redress of which pernicious absurdity, so many of
our said brethren so willingly have shed there blood.

The ridiculous variety of Heretics about the Headship of the Church.
In the first Parliament of her Majesty's reign, it was indeed in a manner
thrust upon her against her will: because otherwise there could have been no
color to make new laws for change of Religion: and this title, of Chief
gouernesse, was thought to be a qualification of the former term of Headship.
But in truth it is al one with the other, or rather worse: for in some kind of
improper speech, the King may be called the Head or cheef of the Church of his
country, for that he is sovereign lord and ruler of both persons spiritual
and temporal: al sorts bound to obey his lawful civil laws and
commandementes, and so in that sense is he Head of the clergy and of al
others.

But when in the new form of our statute it is expreslie and distinctlie
added, that she is the only Supreme governor even in all causes, as well
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical as temporal and Civil: and furthermore enacted
that al jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities and preeminences
ecclesiastical, as by any power spiritual have been or may be exercised, are
taken from the Pope, (to whom Christ gave them in most ample manner,) and are
united, or rather (as they say) restored by an old decree to the crown of
England: this can have no excuse, nether true or likely sense in the world,
Absurdities that in sevv upon making the temporal prince head of the Church.
making indeed a King and a Priest al one: no difference betwixt the state of
the Church and a temporal common wealth: giving no less right to heathen
Princes to be governors of the Church in causes spiritual, then to a christian
king: it makes one part of the Church in different teritoires to be
independent and several from an other, according to the distinction of realms
and kingdoms in the world. And finally it makes every man that is not borne
in the kingdom to be a forreiner also in respect of the Church: these and a
thousand absurdities and impossibilities more do ensue, which for brevity we
omit: only this which is in most men's memories we may not ouerpasse, that
the very same year that this new preeminence was given by law to the Q. and
th'othe accordingly ministered to many, some having remorse of the matter, for
to avoid danger, pretended for their refusal, that it seemed to them by the
words of th'othe and act, that the Q. might minister also the Sacraments,
whereunto they would not swear by any means.

Whereupon in her next visitation of the clergy, a special iniunction was
printed and published by her commandment, declaring that in truth she had no
such intent, Mark this circle in declaration of the title.
and that no such thing was implied in her title or claim of spiritual
regiment, nor no other thing, nor more then was before granted to her father
by the term of Supreme head: requiring al her loving subjects to receive
th'othe at least in that sense, and so it should suffice her highness. By
which it is now clear, by there own authentical declaration, that we speak no
vntrewth (as this libeller says) nor abuse not the world when we say she is
called and taken for the Supreme head of the Church of England: albeit (the
thing it self being far more absurd and of more pernicious sequel, then the
makers of the law, which were mere layme^ and most of them unlearned, could
then perceive) their folowers now, would disauow the same. For this article
therefore as the famous bishop of Rochester, Sir Thomas More, and a great
number more in king Henry the 8. his days: so did those two last named
martyrs, and diverse others before them most gladly and constantly yield up
their lives, and so consequently dyed for mere matter of religion only.

And to end this point, we lastly refer the adversary to the late
Martyrdom of Cartar a poor innocent artisan: who was made away only for
printing a catholic book De schismate: in which no word was found against
the state, the quarrel only most unjustly being made, upon a certain clause,
which by no likely honest construction could apperteine to the Q. person: viz.
that the Catholic religion should once have the upper hand of heresy, and
Judith cut of the head of Holophernes: which they in their extreme jealousy
and fear of all things would needs wreast against her Majesty.

And the place serves here to say somewhat of the cause also of their
racking of Catholics, which they would have strangers believe never to be done
for any point of religion. Fol. 20.
As for example, (say they, in the addition to the end of the libel) none is
asked by torture, what he believes of the Mass or Transubstantiation or
such like. Questions asked of catholics upon torture.
As though (forsooth) there were no question perteining to faith and religion,
but touching our inward belief. Whereas in deed it concerns religion no less
to demand and press us by torture, where, in whose houses, what days and times
we say or hear Mass, how many we have reconciled, what we have hard in
confession: who resorteth to our preachinges: who harboreth catholics and
Priests: who susteineth, aideth, or comfort them: who they be that have
their children or pupilles in the Society or Seminaries beyond the seas: where
such a Jesuit or such a Priest is to be found: where catholic books ar
printed, and by whom, and to whom they be uttered in England? which things
being demanded of evil intent and to the annoyance of the Catholic cause,
Gods Priests, and innocent men: no man may by the law of God and nature
disclose, though he be expreslie commanded by any Prince in the world, for
that God must be obeyed, more then man.

Yet these were the Interrogatories for which the famous confessor M. Briant M.
Briant.
was tormented with needles thrust under his nails, racked also otherwise in
cruel sort, and specially punished by two whole days and nights famine,
which they attribute to obstinacy, but indeed (sustained in Christ's quarrel)
it was most honorable constancy. The like demaundes were put to the blessed
martyrs Campion, Sherwin, and others upon the torture, M. Shirvvine.
and of this later namely was asked where F. Persons and Campion were, and
whether he had said Mass in M. Roscarockes chamber, and what money he had
given him. M. Thomson M. Thomson.
a venerable and learned Priest was put to torments only to get out of him
to what end he kept certain Superaltaries, and where he ente^ded to bestow
them. The said young man Cartar, Cartar.
of whose martyrdom we last treated, was examined upon the rack, upon what
Gentlemen or catholic Ladies he had bestowed or intended to bestow certain
books of prayers and spiritual exercises and meditations which he had in his
custody. Which may suffice to refute th'aduersaries asseueration: that none
have been tormented for other matter then treason.

But the words of M. Thomas Cotam, M. Cotam.
uttered in sense at the bar, and thus verbatim left in writing discovers
the case more plainly to the shame of this cruel heresy for advancement
whereof so shameful things be committed. Thus therefore he spoke and avouched
openly in the presence of the rack masters. In-deed (quoth he) you ar
searchers of secrettes: for you would needs know of me what penance I was
enioined by my ghostly father for my sins committed: and I acknowledge my
frailty that to avoid the intolerable torment of the rack I confessed (God
forgive me) what they demanded therein: but when they further urged me to utter
also what my sins were for which that penance was enioined me, (a lothesome
and unchristian question) I then answered that I would not disclose my offenses
saving to God and to my ghostly father alone. Whereupon they sore tormented me
and still pressed me with the same demand: and I persisted that it was a most
barbarous inhumane question, and that I would not answer though they tormented
me to death. Thus spoke M. Cotam at his arreignme^t, wherewith the enemies being
ashamed, the Lieutena^t of the Tower there present began to deny the whole:
wheru^to M. Cota^ replied again thus: And is not this true? Here is present D.
Hammo^ with the rest of the commissioners that were at my racking, to whose
consciences I appeal. God is my witness that it is most true, and you know
that Sir George Carry Sir George Carry.
did ask me these unnatural questions, deny it if you can? In truth al your
torture and demaundes every one were of no other treasons, but matter of mere
conscience, faith, and religion, or else of such folies as I have rehearsed.

As for the moderation, great pity, and courtisie, which by your Libel you
would have the world believe her Majesty's ministers have ever used, The cruelty
in racking Catholics.
in giving the torment to the persons aforesaid and other Catholics: the
poor innocents have felt it, and our Lord God knows the contrary. And we
can put you in remembrance, that you did it with extreme rigor and dispite
commonly upon no dew presumption nor reasonable suspicion of discovery of
any important matter thereby. Look in your records what suspicion of treasons
or great matters you could have in young Sherwood, who was the first in our
memory that was put to the rack for matters of conscience, then when no man
dreamed of any these feined new conspiracies?

See whether a portable Altar be a sufficient cause to give the torture to a
grave worshipful person not so much as suspected of treason or any
disobedience, other then in cases of conscience? Whether books of prayers and
meditations spiritual, or the printing and spreading of them be a racke-matter
in any common wealth Christian? Look whether your ordinary demaundes were of
that weight and quality, as were to be answered by co^straint of the rack?
Let the world see what one confession of treasonable matter you have wrested
out by the so often tormenting of so many, and what great secresies touching
the state (which you pretend so earnestly to seek for) you have found amongst
them al? No, no, nothing was there in those religious hearts but innocence and
true religion: it is that which you punished, tormented, and deadly hated in
them. If they would have in the least point in the world condescended to your
desires in that, or but once for your pleasures presented them selves at your
Schismatical prayers, al racking and treasons had been cleared and past.

Wherbie all the world sees, you did al for religion: not as for any
conscience that way (wherewith most of you are not much troubled) but because the
particular state of a number depends on this new religion. Remember whether
you laid not M. Thomson on the rack, against al good use and order, before you
ever examined him? what presumptions had you so pregnant that you must rack
the famous man father Campion about the Irishe commotion, or collection of
money for the maintenance of the same? or of any knowledge he had of killing
the Greatest, as you mistically speak in your book? Fol. 2.
Have you not ordinarily threatened men with the rackes and dongeons, and
sometimes brought them to the racke-house door, yea and laid some on the rack
without either cause or intent to touch the^, but only by those terrors to
drive them to deny their Faith, or to confess where they had said mass or
other like things which you desired to know?

How often have you by famine and filthy dongeo^s tormented the happy young
confessor M. John Heart, M. Heart.
which could not now be after his condemnation for any thing else but for his
religion, and because he would not yield to one Rainoldes a minister with whom
you appointed him to confere? For what other cause did you threaten the torture
to M. Osburne, but to make him confess that he had said Mass before the true
noble confessors of Christ, my L. Vaux and Sir Thomas Tressame? And which is
more intolerable, is not your rack used or threatened to force men by the
fear thereof to speak things against truth by your appointment, and
specially for false accusation of innocent gentlemen? In his epistle to D.
Alane set forth in pri^t. Fo. 10
John Nichols him self a protestant and one of your own instruments, has
acknowledged so much i^ public writing, affirming that Sir Owen Hopton
lieutenant of the Tower enforced him to accuse diverse gentlemen by name, of
high treason whom he never knew: which he did, to avoid his threatened
torments, as he writes.

Thomson. Borschoe. Henslovve. Clifton.
We speak nothing of the pitiful extremities you have brought diverse unto by
horrible Fetters, Stocks, Dongeo^s, Famine: Or of the death of welneare
twenty happy Catholics at once, infected and pestered in York prison, where
they perished by the unmercifulness of the protestants, of whom by no pitiful
complaints they could obtain liberty or fresh air for the saving their
lives, you not here again that for the more affliction of Catholics, (a
thing to be marked and lamented, Most barbarous cruelties.
of al christian hearts) that you have prophanelie made choice of So^daies and
great Holidayes to practice your torments upon them, after the old fashion of
the Pagans, rather then upon workedayes: that you bring other catholic
prisoners near to the place of torment, to hear their brethrens sorrowful
cries: and eftsoons lead some newly taken from the rack under their fellow
prisoners windows and to their doors, that by hearing their pitiful
complaints, sighs, and groans proceeding of infinite pains, they may relent
in religion.

Of al which inhumane dealing, we will not impeach the superior magistrate,
much less the Sovereign, but surely the inferior ministers of that pretended
Justice cannot be excused of most cruel and sacrilegions dealing toward Gods
Priests and other innocent persons. And as for the particular handling of
father Campion and M. Briant (whom the libellers make examples of their mild
and gentle intertainment upon the torture) we refer al indifferent readers to
the said Briants own latin epistle of that matter. In the end of the book of
the persecution in England.
And for the other, they say true indeed that after his first racking, and at
the time of the protestants disputes with him in the Tower, he was not so
bereaved of his hands but he might with pain write or subscribe his name: But
afterward upon his second or third racking he was so benommed, that he could
neither take the cup and lift it to his mouth, nor draw of his cuffe at the
bar: nor straight after his last torment, nor many days following had he
any feeling or use of his lymmes, as he confessed to his keeper asking him how
he felt his hands: Not evil (quoth he) for I feel them not at all.

The like we could prove of M. Pain M. Pain.
the Priests tormenting and diverse others: but this is enough to controlle
these shameless untruths of the libeller, and to make demonstration of the
pitiful viole^ces, Slanders and tribulations which our brethren have
constantly borne and yet do bear, for profession of their Faith: which to
some rebuke of our nation, we would never so particularly utter here and else
where, if our blameless defense drove us not thereunto. And specially for that
we would christianelie give warning to al Princes and Provinces, that yet
happily enjoy the Catholic religion and the only true liberty of
conscience in the same, A warning to other contries yet Catholic.
to take heed by our miseries, how they let this pernicious sect put foot into
there states: which by promis of liberty and sweetness at the beginning,
enters deceiptfullie, but when she is once in and gets the maistery (as
she often does where she is not in season co^stantlie resisted,) she brings al
to most cruel and barbarous thraldom, procuring her followers to hate and
persecute the Church, their own only true and old mother, far more deadly,
then the Heathens them selves do: and turns all the laws made by godly
Popes and Princes for punishment of Heretics and malefactors, to the spoil
and destruction of innocent men and Catholics, for whose defense they were
made.

Into which misery our country, to us most dear, being fallen, and having no
other humane helps to recover it and our Prince and Peers (excepting this case
of heresy of excellent good nature and clemency) with millions of souls that
there do perish: we will not fear nor fail to pray and ask it of God with
tears and blood, as we have begone, donec misereatur nostri: til he be
merciful both to us and to our persecutors.

Our days of affliction cannot be long, their felicity will have an end, both
sides shall shortly have their doom: where the dealinges of us al shall be truly
discussed, and the just shall stand with great constancy against them that
vexed them. Interim, in the testimony of a guiltless conscience in all things
whereof we be accused by our adversaries, and in joyful expectation of that day,
we will continue still this work of God to our own and our countries salvation;
Per infamiam and bonam famam, as the Apostle wills us; and through other
miseries, what so ever man's mortality is subject unto.

THAT F. CAMPIAN AND THE REST OF THE PRIESTS AND Catholics endited,
condemned, and executed, upon pretense of treason, and upon statutes made of
old against treasons: were never yet guilty of any such crimes but unjustly
made away. CAP. II.
HItherto we have made it clear that diverse (contrary to the drift of this
Libel) have been condemned and put to death either without al law, or else
only upon new laws by which matter of religion is made treason. Now it
follows and is next to be considered, whither such other as were accused and
appeached of old treasons upon a statute made in the days of Edward the third
in the 25. year of his reign, were indeed guilty of any such crimes.

The intent of that law is to register diverse cases that were to be deemed
treason: in which the first and cheef is; to conspire or compass the death of
the Sovereign, or to levy men of arms against him, and thereof can be by open
fact convinced. Upon which special clause father Campian (good man) and his
fellow Priests and Catholic brethren were, to the wonder of the world, The
enditement of F. Campia^ and the rest.
arreigned. Namely endited that at Rome and Rhemes the last day of March and
May in the 22. year of her majesty's reign they compassed the Q. death, the
subversion of the state, and invasion of the Realm: feigning (for better
coloring of the collusion) the forsaid places, days, and times when this
conspiracy should be contrived.

Which forgerie and false accusation, is now so clearlie discovered to al
Englishmen, of any consideration, protestants and others, that for excuse of
that soul sinful practice they have set out at length to strangers, as they
did with like luck before at home, this late Libel: by which God almighty,
the protector of his Saints and our innoce^cie, has marueilouslie confounded
them selves, and justified the cause and conscience of his holy Martyrs: as by
the declaration following shall appear.

When the Politiques of our country, The intent and drift of Politiques in
England.
pretending to be protestants, saw the Catholic religion, contrary to
their worldly wise counsels and determinations, and against their exquisite
diligence and discipline, and twenty years endeavor (in which time they
thought verelie to have extinguished the memory of our Fathers faith) to be
revived in the hearts of the greatest number, noblest and honestest sort of the
Realm: and that neither their strange, violent and capital laws for the Q.
spiritual superiority against the Popes preeminence, the power of Priesthood
in absoluing penitents, the saying and hearing of Mass, having or wearing of
Agnus-deis or other external signs of our society with the Catholic Church
of al times and nations; nor the execution of many by death and other penalties
and punishment, according to the said laws, would serve, nor were of force to
hold out of England the Priests of the Society and Seminaries; to whom Christ
had given more Apostolic spirit, courage, zeal and success, then of so small
a beginning was looked for: by whom the protestants began to fear lest great
alteration in religion, whereon they think their new state (that is to say) the
weal of a very few in comparison, depends, might ensue: they thought good
by their long exercised wisdom, to alter the whole accusation from question of
faith and conscience, to matter of treason. Which being resolved upon, they
went about by diverse proclamations, libels, and speeches, first to make the
people believe that al Catholics and specially Iesuistes and such Priests
and scholars as were brought up in the Seminaries or Colleges out of the
Realm, were traitors. And for their better persuasion gave out one while, that
by the said Priests and others in banishment, Hereof there was a special
proclamation published in Iulie 1580.
there was a marvelous confederatio^ of the Pope, K. of Spain, duke of Florence
and others for th'inuasion of the Realm. But that being shortly proved
nothing, they feigned that the said Iesuistes and Priests were confederated
with the Irish quarrel; and to give more color of somewhat, they sticked not to
rack father Campian extremely for search of that point.

But this fiction failing, they found out an other as foul: that the death of
the Q. and diverse of the Counsel was contrived (forsooth) in the Seminaries of
Rome and Remes, of which conspiracy in fin they resolved to endite them, as
they did, and pursued them to death for the same; with such evident
partiality, default of justice and equity, as was in that court (once most
honorable for justice) never heard or read of before.

Vagrant discourses of such as accused me^ of their lives at the bar.
Such as pleaded against them to make them odious in judgment, discoursed (at
this Libel now does) first of the nature and horror of Rebellion in general,
and then of a Rebellion in the North for Religion a doosen years before, when
the parties there accused were young boys in the schools and universities of
the Realm: of the Popes Bull of excommunicating the Q. a good many of years
before any of them came over sea, or ever saw Pope, Rome, or Remes; yea when
some of them were yet protestants in England: they discoursed also of the
Rebellion in Ireland by Stukeley, Sanders and others, none of which men, diverse
there arreigned ever saw or knew in their lives. Of their being made Priests by
the Popes authority, and of their obligation and obedience to him being the Q.
enemy: of their authority to absolve and reconcile in England, received from
him: of their coming in at the same time, when they were in arms in Ireland,
as though they had not entered their native country and exercised those
spiritual functious seven years before, or could not then exercise them but in
favor of such as took arms against the Q.

And when these generalities were uttered only to make them odious, and amase
the hearers with those that should have to judge of their guiltines or
innocence; the good Fathers and Priests, The most just exception and request
of the martyrs arreigned.
made just exceptions against such vulgar inuectiues as could not touch them
that there stood in judgment, more then any other Priest or Catholic in the
Realm; and many of the points such, as they were sure none should have been
arraigned of in K. Edward the thirdes time, upon whose statute nevertheless the
enditement was pretended to be drawn: humbly praying the Judge and bench that
they would more directly, plainly, and sincerely pass on them for their
Faith and exercises of the Roman religion (for proof whereof they should not
need to seek for so impertinent and far fetched matter;) which they openly
professed and desired to die for with all their hearts: or if they would needs
proceed against them as for treason, in the sense of the old laws of our
Country; that then would please them to aggrauate no farther to their
disadvantage and death either other men's faults or matter of pure Religion, but
to come to the indictment and to the particular charge of every person their
arreigned, which was of co^spiring the Q. death. Whereof if they could by any
proof or sufficient testimony of credible persons convict al, or any of them,
then their death to be deserved: if not, their innocent blood upon all that
should be accessorie to the shedding thereof, a crime that cries for vengeance
at Gods hand when it is done but by private malice and mischief; but committed
in public place of judgment, by authority and pretense of law (as in the
case of Naboth and of Christ our master) it is in the sight of God most
horrible, and never long eskapeth public punishment: from the which our Lord
God of his mercy save our poor country even by the prayers of these holy
Martyrs, for whose blood it is otherwise highelie deserved.

An evident conclusion upon the principal purpose.
Therefore al other idle and vagrant speeches, odiouslie amplifiing either the
Popes, Jesuits, Seminaries, Doctor Sanders or any other man's peculiar actions
for Religion or otherwise, set apart (whereupon as the Counselors then at the
bar, so now the writers of this Libel voluntary and vainly do only stand,
and make their rest) there is nothing in the world that can prove effectually
these men's lawful condemnation, nor auowe the justice of that execution (which
the Libeller takes upon him to do, but in truth no whit touches the matter)
saving only such allegation and testimony as may convince Father Campian and
his fellows with him arraigned, to have compassed the Q. destruction, or
invasion of the Realm.

What other thing-soeuer they were guilty of; or what affection so ever they
bear, in respect of their contrary Religion, to their Prince and state; or
what treasonable opinions (as they fondly call them) concerning the
Excommunication or depriving the Q. were afterward discovered in them; or what
other reasonable cause in respect of the adversaries fear and jealousy over
the state, or doubt of the times the^ troubled, the officers then, or the
Libellers now to satisfy the people or the world abroad, do allege for their
excuse; none of al these things can justify that execution, so long as the
matter for which they were only endited can not be proved, nor the statute of
K. Edward the third, upon which they pretend to have endited them, is
transgressed by them.

Therefore as the whole treatise of our adversaries defense is too to wide from
the purpose: so specially ar the four reasons, which for the readers ease,
Four reasons for the co^demnatio^ of Fa. Campion and his fellows.
(as they term it) and for the pith and sum of the whole discourse, they
have put at the end of their Libel in a ra^ke together: by which the discret
reader may take a taste of their deceitful dealing in the whole book.

Every reason should conclude that the Priests were executed upon no charge
of new religious treasons, but upon old statutes only for matter of
conspiracy, in which sense no one of them in truth does conclude.

And the first Reason The first reason.
comes only to this end; that her Majesty contemning the Popes Bulls for a
good while, at length spying them to be dangerous, revived former laws for
prohibition of them within her dominions. Which Argument being laid for the
ground of al, has nether the conclusion looked for against those Priests in
particular, nor truth of narration in the premises. For nether were there any
such Bulls and excommunications which (they say) were tolerated or contemned
for certain years; none at al (I say) of that kind published in her days
before that one of Pius quintus mentioned in the next argument following: nether
were there extant any old statutes (that we know) to be revived, against such
exco^munications in any such sense as they will seem to make them.

The second Argument proves only that Felton for publishing Pius quintus
his Bull, The second reason.
was by their laws condemned and put to death, and was the first that was
executed for matters coming from Rome: whereupon how substantiallie it is
inferred, that father Campian and his fellows were not condemned for Religion,
but for transgression of old statutes of treasons, let the wise consider: and
withal, let the learned in our laws determine whether the bringing in of a Bull
of excommunication from Rome were treason in the days and by the statute of K.
Edward the third.

The third reason.
Thirdly they reason thus, the people raised rebellion in the North; ergo her
Majesty can not be blamed for using force against them and punishing the
authors of the same: which makes little against the persons here named.

The fourth reason.
Fourthly, that the Pope stirred to rebellion and succored the Irish; therefore
she has great reason to search out al seditions persons, as Priests and
Jesuits be; and so to try, condemn, and execute them. Nether of which
reasons have any further sequel in the sight of any reasonable and
indifferent man, then to punish them that are by lawful trial, proved to be
partakers of these actions; which was impossible to do in any of the Priests
case arraigned: neither was any of the said commotions laid in particular to
any one of them al at the bar, though impertinentlie such matters were for a
deceitful flourish often (as in this Libel) touched.

A rhetorical prevention of the Libeller.
And whereas by prevention of some objections either made or that may be made,
that these poor religious Priests, scholars, and unarmed men could not be any
doers in the wars of England or Ireland; the Libel makes a solemn
rhetorical tale, for answer; that though they were not in the feeld to fight,
yet they might by their counsel, encouragement, and persuasion be partakers of
the same crime, and executed as accessorie to the other treasons: which needed
not so many superfluous words in so short a work; all the world confessing
that the ministers, messingers, espials, and abettours of offenders, ar often
no less punishable then the principal actors. But in sincere dealing it had
been to be proved that F. Campian and those other holy men were secret workers
and aiders of the Northern and Irish commotion, whereof nether now in this
book, nor then at the bar any one word is alleged.

Al is full of wild and wast words artificially couched to abuse the ignorant,
that knew not the state of this disputation: al running to this odd issue,
that her Majesty has reason to punish traitors; but no word to convince them
of these or any other old treasons for which they were endited, nor to reprove
us that boldly upon evident demonstration, yea and certain knowledge, do
testefie before God and man, that they were not guilty of those offenses of
which they were endited, and for which they were by unlawful calumniation and
violence cast away, as in the face of the world; but i^ the sight of our Lord
atteined a precious death, and the glory of Saints everlastingly.

When it came to the very point of the accusation, and al rouing and railing
talk against Pope, Rome, Religion, Seminaries, Bulls, Masses, Preachinges,
Reconciliations, Agnus deis and Beads, (with which they larded al their
evidence, though of such things they professed not to condemn them) was to be
set aside, and now by witnesses to be proved that they were guilty of the
forsaid conspiracy against the Q. person, The vvitnesses that gave evidence
against the Priests of God. Epist. 212.
etc. two or three such fellows were sought out and procured to give testimony
against them, as first professed them selves to be heretics, and therefore by
S. Augustines Judgment, were not to be heard against a Catholic Priest.
Secondly (seeing heresy makes no exception in England) they were known to be
otherwise common coosiners, lost companions, salable for a souz, and bought by
th'enimie to betray them and bear witness against them. Thirdly, some of them
charged in the face of the court with shameful adultery; with dooble or triple
murder; and other like horrible crimes pardoned for this purpose. Fourthly,
they were discovered both then and afterward of notorious falsehood,
incongruitie, and discord of times, persons, places, and other circumstances;
and their iniquity eftsoons disclosed by their own John Nichols in his letters
imprinted.
fellow.

And to see now the men of God, so many, so excellent for virtue, so famous
for learning, religion, zeal, and devotion, to hold their lives upon the
conscience of such notorious Atheistes and out-castes of the world; yea (as in
M. Pains case) upon the bare word of one of them only, A pitiful case.
against divine and humane laws (requiri^g two witnesses at the least): it
was surely very pitiful to behold, but not marvelous to us, that considered
the condition of our time, and easelie forsawe that these holy men's deaths were
now designed and thought necessary by our Politiques, for conservation of
their state; as the Libeller here subtly insinuates, Fol. 16.
that it was to be done in regard of the dangerous time when the Popes forces
were in Ireland and more in preparation to follow as well into England (as he
conningly faineth to make the necessity of this Justice more excusable) as
also into Ireland: as though he would say; that by some one pretense or other,
for terror and example, they were to be found guilty, and so dispatched.

Strange proceedings in matters of life and death.
Well, thus their good witnesses gave in evidence of things spoken and
contrived in Rome and Reims which were known to be most false of all that were
in either place the times and days by them named: and whatsoever was either
truly or falselie testefied to be done or said in either of the two places by
any English there dwelling, it was unjustly applied to al and every one of these
good men now standing in judgment; yea it served against some that were never
in either place in their life, as against M. Foord and M. Collington; as also
against Father Campia^ that dwelt a thousand miles of in Prage; occupied by his
Superiors in teaching and preaching, wholly estranged from al Englishmen and
English affairs, otherwise then in his prayers for above nine years together;
not ever seen or known to diverse that then were arraigned with him in
judgment, as conspirators in one and the same treason, before they met there
together at the bar, nor ever known to the witnesses them selves. The same
served against M. Shert that had not been in either place of many years before.
Against M. Briant also and M. Richardson that never had been in Rome, nor in
Remes of eight months before the time wherein the false witnesses fained the
conspiracy to have been there contrived. Yea and against father Bosgraue it
served also, that was neither Seminary man, nor sent by the Pope or Superior,
nor acquainted with any other English Priests that returned home, nor of the
cause of their coming; having been so long absent in the North-partes of the
world, that he had in manner forgotten his own language, repairing home him
self for his health only: and yet al or the most part of these men, being so
different amongst them selves, in age, life, state, calling, place of abode,
time of absence from their country, and in the cause, manner, and purpose of
returning, were condemned together at one bar, for one and the self same
particular treason; for co^spiri^g (forsooth) her Majesty's death at Rome and
Rhems, such and such days, which in it self has most manifest contradiction.

But yet when these things were, for the impossibility of the fact, laid down
and opened at the bar by the holy Co^fessors, them selves: it prevailed
nothing, though otherwise also the evidence were given by such persons and of
such matters, as it was nether possible nor credible that they could be
guilty. It was found sufficient for their condemnation that they had kissed
the Popes foot; that they were his scholars and had received Viaticum from him;
that they had seen or spoken with Cardinals in Rome; and were made Priests
either there or at other places; and finally, sent home by authority of their
Superiors accounted enemies in the present state of our Country. Which
things, together with the partial, unwonted, and unlawful dealing used in the
proceeding of that day of their judgment, and the known innocent quality and
trade of the persons; clears them against this Libel, and al other false
accusation whatsoever.

The protestations of the condemned at their deaths.
But most of al every ones sincere protestation, in the hour of their honorable
conflict and Martyrdom, that they were ignorant of al conspiracies, and most
innocent of that for which they were condemned in particular, clears the^
thoroughly in the judgment and conscience of every reasonable man; seeing it is
not probable that such men would against their consciences and against the
truth have avouched a falsehood at that instant to the present and ^uerlasting
perdition of their souls, which would not relent in any point of their faith
to save only their temporal lives.

And this is also an invincible proof of their innocence and that al was for
Religion, and nothing in truth for treason; that if they would have confessed
the Q. to be their Cheef in causes spiritual, or have relented in their
religion, they should have had life and perdo^; which was proffered to every one
of them, not only at the execution, but often before. Yea for once going to
their heretical service, any of those who^ they pretend to be so deep traitors
might have been quit with favor, as also with great thanks and goodly
preferments.

And plain it is, An evident reason.
that now at the hour of their death being past further fear of man's laws,
if they had meant any thing against the Q. person, or had received order by
their Superiors, or had thought it agreeable to their spiritual profession, to
deal in other matters then religion and conversion of souls by preaching,
persuasio^, prayers and other preestly means they might have spoken their
minds boldly now at their passage and departure from this world; M. James
Laborne put to death at Lancaster.
as since that time we understand that a certain worshipful lay ge^tilman did,
who protested both at his arreignement and at his death, that her Majesty was
not his lauful Queen for two respects; the one for her birth, the other for
the excommunication; her Highness having nether sought dispensation for the
first, nor absolutio^ for the second. But none of al our Priests made any such
answer: nor otherwise uttered any unlawful speech that might either offend her
Majesty, or the state present; irritate enemy, or scandalize friend.

Al their confessions both voluntary and forced by torments, ar extant in the
persecutors hands; is there any word sounds or smells of conspiracy?

They have al sorts and sexes of Catholics in prison for their faith,
Confessions of Catholics.
and diverse honorable personages only upon pretense of dealing and conuersing
with them: has any one of all the Realm in durance or at liberty, by fair
means or foul, confessed that ever either Priest or Jesuit persuaded them in
Confession or otherwise to forsake the Q? That ever they were absolved on that
condition? That ever they received Agnus-dei at their hands, or other
spiritual token for earnest or pressed to rebel and join with the enemy? as
this slaunderons Libel does not so much avouch (for that were intolerable) as
by guileful art insinuate, without al proof or probability.

Wherein, as at the place of their judgment, the Magistrate professing that
nothing should be prejudicial unto the^ that touched only their religion (yet
indeed had no other matter for their conviction but the functions of their
order and Priesthood) so this Libeller now, pretending their treasons to be old
and of an other sort, and acquiting them for their Romish tokens, ceremonies,
books, beads, and opinions (as he speaks): yet co^ninglie windeth him self
about in words, and only condemns them in the end for the same, not as
capital (forsooth) in them selves, but as serviceable to the Pope, and
appliable to the benefit of rebels at home or abroad: So co^ninglie they play
in such men's lives and deaths as our country was unworthy of.

But now when these innocent persons were condemned, and so many of them as
they thought was necessary for their practice, Machiauelia^ Policies.
executed: because they perceived great scruples and suspicious conceits to
rise in all men's hearts and heads about the fact and unwonted proceeding; no
man either so evil or ignorant as to take the^ guilty of those crimes whereof
they were appeached, and every man not so wise as to spy that it was done of
necessary policy without much regard of Conscience or divinity: knowing also
that one John Nichols a Minister and protestant (who gave the first false
ouerture of this sinful stratageme) touched by God, absented him self at their
condemnation and death, and afterward cried the innocent men mercy upon his
knees, In Roan. 1583.
confessing both by word and letter authenticallie recorded, that partly upon
his motion they had condemned innocent blood, and that him self was forced by
certain persons in authority (whom for honor sake we will not name though he
named them) to commence such a foul tragedy: considering therefore al these
things, and desiring to cover the foulness of the fact as much as might be,
as well in respect of their own people manifoldlie discontented, and specially
impatient of such injurious proceedings; as also of strangers, to whom the rare
virtues of father Campian and of some of the others were known: (besides other
violent means by severe punishments and proclamations to stay the hard
speeches and conceates of the people therein): They caused some of them that yet
were not executed, The substance and intent of the six Articles propounded to
the Priests before their execution.
to be examined upon certain Articles, six in all, clean of an other pourport
then their former accusation of killi^g the GREATEST (as our Libel speaks) al
which articles do concern only the authority and fact of Pius Quintus of
famous memory, in censuring the Q. by excommunication and deprivation for
Heresy): and what they thought, or how far they allowed of the same.

Whereunto, because they did conjecture their answers would be odious in the
sight of the simple, and specially of zealous protestants (as it fell out in
deed) they devised to publish and read them to the people at the martyrdom of
the rest, that thereby they might at least conceive that they were worthy of
death for other causes though not for that whereof they were condemned; and so
either less pity the^, or less mark the former unjust pretensed matter of
their condemnation.

And this co^ning course they have followed ever since in defense of that
pretended Justice, and is the whole conueyance of this Libeller now: who to
defend the execution of their cruelty toward these Saints of God, bestows
his labor only to prove, that they have been tried by the six Articles
concerning the Excommunication, and that there was found a note after Father
Campians death touching the same Bull procured for th'interpretatio^ and force
thereof and brought from Rome by father Persons and the said F. Campians suit:
that M. Heart confessed the Bull in such and such sort to bind, and otherwise not
to stand in force: Whereby only he goes about to persuade the world and
specially strangers unacquainted in our affairs, the said men to have been
traitors and justly punished, as though new crimes either found out or done
after the sentence of their death past, yea after the execution of the same
could justify their condemnation past before.

But the world looked for some justification of that former judgment and
verdict of court which passed with such great solemnity against those innocent
men before, upon transgression (as was pretended) of an old statute, for
compassing the Q. death. For as for all other declamatio^s and Inuectiues, be
they true or be they false, can not excuse the fact from plain murder; nor
condemn them after they be dead for other crimes then they were co^uicted of
in their lives. Which the Libeller him self confesses in these express words
after al his idle work and words: Upon refusal to answer to these questions
directly (says he) as they might have been justly convicted of treason, Fol.
18.
so yet were they not thereupon condemned: (Which yet is false, for they have
lately executed diverse Priests as M. Haddock, Priests nevvlie martyred in
England.
M. Hemmerford and others most cruelly only about the matter of
excommunication of the Q.) But upon their other former actions committed both
abrod and in the Realm. But what those actions were and how they were proved
to be committed particulerly by those, whom we avouch to be unjustly condemned
upon old treasons, and to be only killed for their religion; that should have
been your whole endeavor (Sir) to show, al other superfluous railing or recital
of pretended offenses (for which your self confess they were not condemned)
being not of force to maintain the defense of your pretended Justice, nor yet
to stay the Christian world and Church of God from accompting them Martyrs whom
you have murdered.

Against whose holy ashes and memories you can strugle no more, then the old
heathen and heretical persecutours did, to diffame those glorious men of the
primative Church whom they executed in pretense of like treasonable trespasses:
who yet (notwithstan^ing their enemies manifold endeavors to stay the ^onours
due to them after their deaths) by Christ and his Churches judgment have
gotten the victory ^uer their adversaries; and so remain as glorious in heaven
and earth, as their persecutors be infamous through all the world.

What worldly honor the two king Henry's of England had, The comparison of
the Persecutors, with the persecuted.
(I mean the second and eight) which ^n the days of their reign, no doubt
was great; or what esteem so ever the Princess present and her greatest
Ministers have now, by the height of their ^oome and fortune in this life; it
is but a very dream, ^hadow, or fantasy, to the glory of Thomas of
Can^urburie, John of Rochester, Chancellor More, Father Campian and the rest;
who^ fame and felicity follows upon their deaths, and upon such
contradiction of sinners seeking to disgrace them. As also in the contrary
part, the persecutors glory dies with their authority, if not before: and they
are commonly better known to posterity by executing of such me^, (though to
their shame) then by other their factes in their life whatsoever. And so does
God protect his Saints; A contradictione linguaru^, from the ganesaing of
tongues; and gives the^ victory of the world by the fortitude of their Faith
in him.

But of the six Articles concerning the Bull of excommunication, more shall be
said in the next chapte^ and other places following; that their innoce^cie
theri^ also may appear, and the slanderous Libeller repressed every way.

THAT WE NOW HAVE GREAT CAUSE TO COMPLAIN OF INIVST persecution, intolerable
severity and cruelty toward Catholics in England: and their Protestants
no reason to do the like for the Justice done to them in Queen MARY'S and
other Princes days, and the cause of the difference. CAP. III.
THE Libeller by-sophistical reasons and popular persuasion going about to make
men think the english persecution to be nothing so violent as is diuulged, nor
any thing comparable to the justice exercised toward the Protestants in the
reign of the late Q. Marie; tells of hundrethes for our scores, as also of
the qualities of them that then suffered, of their innocence in all matters of
state, and treason, and such like.

To which we say breeflie, clearlie, and to the purpose; that we measure not
the matter by the number, nor by the severity of the punishment only or
specially: but by the cause; by the order of Justice in proceeding; by the
laws of God and al Christian Nations, and such other circumstances; whereby we
can prove Q. MARY'S doings to be comme^dable and most lawful; the other
toward us and our Brethren, to be iniust and impious.

The difference is in these points; you profess to put none to death for
religion: you have no laws to put any man to death for his faith: you have
purposelie repealed by a special statute made in the first year and parliament
of this Q. reign, The difference of proceeding in Catholics and protesta^tes.
al former laws of the Realm for burning heretics, which smells of
something that I need not here express: you have provided at the same time
that nothing shall be deemed or adjudged Heresy, but by your Parliament and
Con^ocatio^: you have not yet set down by any new law what is Heresy or who
is an Heretic: Therefore you ^an nether adiudge of our doctrine as of heresy
nor of ^s as of heretics; nor have you any law left whereby ^o execute us:
and so, to put any of us to death for religion, is against Justice, law, and
your own profession and doctrine.

But nevertheless you do torment and punish us, both otherwise intollerablie,
and also by death most cruel; and that (as we have proved) for Agnus deis, for
ministering the holy Sacraments, for our obedience to the Sea Apostolic, for
persuading our friends to the Catholic faith, for our Preisthod, for studying
in the Society or Colleges beyond the seas, and such like which you have
ridiculouslie made treason; but after-ward (being ashamed of the foul
absurdity) acknowledge them to be matters of religion and such as none shall
die for. And therefore we most iustelie make our complaint to God and man that
you do us plain violence and persecute us without al equity and order.

On the other side Q. Marie against the Protestants executed only the old laws
of our country and of al Christendom made for punishment of heretics, by
the Canons and determination of al Popes, Counsels, Churches, and
Ecclesiastical tribunals of the world; allowed also and authorized by the civil
and imperial laws, and received by all kingdoms Christian besides; and who
the^ has any cause justly to be grieved? Why should any man complain or
think strange for executing the laws which are as ancient, as general, and as
godly against Heretics, as they are for the punishment of traitors,
murderers, or thieves?

Secondly we complain justly of persecution; for that our cause for which we
suffer, is the faith of al our Forefathers; the faith of our persecutors own
ancestors; the faith into which our country was converted and by which we are
called Christian; the faith of the Catholic Churches and Kingdoms round about
us; the faith that we promised in our regeneration; and therefore can not be
forced from it, nor punished for it, by any law of God, Nature, or Nations.

Why Heretics may be forced to the Catholic faith though born and bredd up
in Heresy.
Where contrariwise those that in our time or otherwise have fallen from that
faith which not only their elders religiously received, but them selves also
for most part were many years brought up in: or if not, yet had they promised
and vowed the same, by their parents and spiritual suerties (though
protestants) in their Baptism; wherein solemn promise is both made and taken
to follow the Catholic Church and faith with abomination of al heresies and
sects whatsoever: these men (I say) though borne of parents either Arrians,
Macedonians, Pelagia^s, Anabaptists, Zwinglians, Protestants or other sect or
opinion, are not permitted, and much less charged or bound (as the Libellerful
ignorantly surmiseth) to hold that profession of peculiar Heresy, Fol. 9.
wherein they were first brought up; seeing they can not be deemed to have
professed that sect in their Baptism, (or as idly this poor divine adds, in
their Confirmation) which was first taught them by their masters of error,
according to the time or place of their first education: but are to be
instructed, how that their profession in Baptism was of the true Catholic,
received and known Christian faith dispersed over the world in Christ his
Church; whereunto they afterward stand bound, and consequentelie by all law both
divine and humane may be enforced, albeit their actual baptism or education
were never so much amongst heretics.

So that, as no law of God or man can force us to be protestants; no more can
any reason be alleged nor just excuse made for either young or old, why being
baptized or brought up amongst Arrians or Caluinists, they may not be forced to
return to the Catholic Church and faith again.

And we may marvel in what age or world those people were borne, which the
Libeller notes to have been burned in Q. Mary's time; Fol. 9.
having never heard (as he says) of any other religion, then that for which
they suffered? For the sect which they pretended to die for, was not extant in
England above five or six years before in the short reign of K. Edward the
sixth, or rather of his protector; for before that, in K. Henry's days the
same profession was accounted heresy, and the professors thereof were burned
for Heretics and that by public laws no less then in the reign of Q.
Marie. But the truth is, that because we Catholic Christian men do justly
ground our selves upon the former profession of our faith notoriously known to
be, and to be called Catholic; these men apishlie would imitate our phrase and
argument in a thing as far differing as heaven and hell.

Thirdly we say that we have just cause to complain of this present
persecution; The manner of proceedi^g in persecuting protestants,
for that the manner of it is such and the proceeding so conformable to the old
Pagane, Heretical, and Apostatical fashion and dealing against Gods Church and
children, that nothing can be more like.

They hated al Catholics and compted them traitors, so do you. They
specially persecuted Bishops, Priests, and religious; so do you. They killed
them indeed for their belief, but yet pretended other crimes more odious and
specially matters of conspiracy and rebellion against the civil magistrate;
so do you. They drove the innocent by captious interrogatories into dangers of
laws that never offended the laws; so do you. They pressed men by torments
to deny their faith under color of trying their secret intentes against the
Prince; so do you. They punisshed and have put to death one Catholic for an
other man's fault of the same profession, and upon general supposals common to
al of the same faith made away whom they list; so do you. I refer the
indifferent readers to the persecution of Iulianu^ Apostata; of the Goths and
Vandals in Italy and Affrique.

It is not only the slaughter of many, and them specially the Priests of
God, which is most proper to heretical persecution; but the other infinite
spoil of Catholic men's goods, honors, and liberty, by robbing them for
receiving Priests, hearing Mass, retayning Catholic Schoolmasters, keeping
catholic servants, mulcting them by twenty pounds a month (which by their
cruel account they make thirtene-skore a year) for not repairing to their
damnable Schismatical service. By which a number of ancient gentlemen fall to
extremity either of conscience, if for fear they obey; or of their undoing in
the world, if they refuse. The taking of their dear children from them by
force, and placing them for their seduction with Heretics; (which violence
can not be done by the law of God to Jews them selves) the burning of our
Priests in the ears; the whipping and cutting of the ears of others; carrying
some in their sacred vestments through the streets; putting our chaste virgins
into infamous places appointed for strumpets; and other unspeakable vilanies,
^ot inferior to any of the said heathnesse persecutions.

They have pined and smothred in their filthy prisons, above thirty famous
Prelates; The sufferinges of Catholics.
above forty excellent learned men; of nobles, gentlemen, and ma^^ones a
number; whose Martyrdom is before God as ^lorious, as if they had by a speedy
violent death ^ene dispatched: every dongeon and filthy prison (...) England
full of our Priests and brethen; al Prouin^es and Princes christianed witnesses
of our banish^ent. In all this we yield them our bodies, goods, ^ountrie, blood
and lives; and nothing will quench their ha^red of our Priesthood, faith, and
profession. Thus in (...) causes we suffer, and yet they would not have us
^omplaine; they say al is sweet, clement, and merciful ^n this regiment. But as
we said, we no otherwise ^omplaine of this persecution against us, but as it is
exercised for that faith and quarrel which the laws of God and man approve and
justify in us; That it is done by the sheep and subjects of Gods Church
against their own Prelates and pastors, to whom in causes of religion they are
bound to obey by th'expresse word of God.

When the lauful magistrate bearing sword by God for punishment of offenders
puts thieves, heretics, or murderers to death; who accompteth it cruelty?
who complains of persecution? But when contrariwise by any violent disorder
the malefactors get head and take heart in a commen wealth, and kill a lauful
officer, judge, or superior; that is a cruel and horrible fact, though it be
done but in one or two persons in stead of a thousand wicked men executed by
just laws. So when the Prince and Prelate proceed together against such as by
the sentence and law of the Church of Christ ar adjudged to be heretics and
injuries to God, that is Justice: but when the temporal Prince or lay people
rebel against their own Bishops to whom in spiritual matters they are bound by
Gods word to give ear under pain of damnation; yea when mere lay me^ and
most of the^ wholly unlearned disorderly take upon the^ to prescribe unto
their own pastors what they should believe, how they should minister the
Sacraments, force upon them false and impious oaths and articles, and that in
Parliament, where the Bishops by the laws of our country having the principal
suffrages, and the rest of the whole Convocation representing the Church of
England, honorably and uniformly resisted; who^ these me^ afterward deposed
of their honors, took their pulpits, churches, titles and prerogatives from
them; imprisoned their sacred persons, and abused some of them, True
persecution.
namely the noble Confessor and Bishop of London by all sorts of vilanie; This
lo is a persecution indeed, where the sheep, subjects and inferiors violently
oppose them selves against them whom the the Holie-ghost has placed to be the
guides, governors and curates of their souls. Yea when they depose,
disauthorize, spoil, punish, imprison their own rulers Gods anointed
Priests; and give warrant by wicked laws to the temporal powers, to visit,
correct, judge, and discern of the doctrine of their Masters in religion:
that is a persecution, sedition, and rebellion in the highest degree.

And we may trewlie say hereof to our lost Country with the Prophet; Osee 4.
Populus tuus sicut hi qui contradicunt Sacerdoti: the state of the persecution
being wholly agreeable to the mutiny of Chore, Datha^, Abiro^ and their
confederats in the desert against their lauful Priests and Governors; yea
properly against the high Priesthood of Aaron, as our contries revolt now is
against the sea Apostolic, and al lauful spiritual regiment proceeding from
the same.

And therefore the Libeller guilfullie i^ respect of the simple, but fondly and
falsely in our eyes, disproueth our lauful refusal to obey men before God, and
our resistance in matter of conscience by the example of Chores conspiracy;
which touches al their rebellions from the sea Apostolic and Catholic
Church; and confirms al our endeavors for maintenance of the same against
what adversaries so ever.

And their rebellion is the more plain, The new clergy.
and persecution more hateful and intolerable; for that they have not only
unnaturally done this violence to their own spiritual rulers, but thereupon
also have chosen at their pleasures and intruded into their places a sort of
greedy wolves; unordered Apostats; amarous and godless companions; the very
filth and chanel of the Realm; who for hatred of the Catholic faith from
which they are Renegates, and through a kind of competencie or emulatio^ of the
true Bishops, (whose rooms by secular force they unjustly have invaded and do
deteine) bear such vnquenshable malice to the true anointed clergy and to
their obedient folowers, that they cease not to i^cite the powers of the Realm
against us; and exercise them selves under the pretensed title of their usurped
dignities and other temporal commissions, the greatest tirannie and cruelty in
the world; standing in fear of their state so long as they see any true
Bishop or Catholic man alive. Whose actions are the rather intolerable; for
that they know, and has been proved in open court, that they not only
usurp those places against Gods and the Churches laws; but that they were not
made and invested according to the new laws of the Realm, specially made for
creation of them.

So as our true pastors being vexed, spoiled, tormented and slain against
law, nature, and al reason by temporal men, having no authority in causes
ecclesiastical; and by a new forged clergy that exercises no Jurisdiction,
but by evident usurpation, against both the Canons of the Church, and the laws
of our country: who is of so dull a wit as not to see the difference of the
discipline of the Church and Realm done toward offenders in Catholic times
and states by lauful authority both spiritual and temporal; and the iniust
persecution of the Church and her children now, proceeding of nether lauful
authority temporal nor spiritual.

What clemency was used to them of the old Clergy at the beginning.
Therefore let not the Libeller here so much extol the equity and mercy used in
her Majesty's regiment to certain of the old principal clergy, because they
put the^ not to death as they have done others sithe^ce. Cicero will not stick
to tell them what a benefit is done to an honest man, when his purse is taken
from him, and yet his life saved; and what thanks ar to be rendered in that
case to the benefactor. What courtesy so ever was showed at that time more
then afterward to such as followed (which i^ good sooth was no other, then in
stead of a present quick dispatch on Gibet, to allow them a long and miserable
life or rather a lingering and languishing death, in durance, desolation and
disgrace; a far worse kind of persecution as S. Hilarie notes against
Constance the Arrian Emperor, then any other). But whatsoever it was that
moved them not to put such to present death as they have done some of the
younger sort afterward; no difference of cause there was; the later sort being
indeed no more traitorous or disloyal then the former.

This may perhaps be the chief cause; that persecutors lightly at the
beginning use of purpose and policy, Why they used Catholics better at the
beginning the now.
gentle allurements, hoping that way to gain the grace of al sorts: which is
the reason that Julian the Emperor in the beginning was much noted of
clemency; but in fin when he saw he could not extinguish the Christian faith
by art, his former hypocritical lenity was at length turned into extreme fury.

In our country at the first entrance of Heresy they had all the principal
Clergy, and diverse chief Catholics in prisons or places at commaundme^t,
where they could not exercise their functions; and being ancient men most of
them, they knew they could not live long: whereof diverse having been in high
offices hard before, had showed pleasures to some protestants that should have
else suffered for their Heresies or treasons in Q. Mary's days; who now by
saving some of the said Bishops lives, thought to requit their courtesies in
part. They little thought that these old holy Co^fessors, being worn out by
years and imprisonment, a new generation would rise to defend their old Bishops
and Fathers faith.

Wherein perceauing now after twenty five years struggling against Gods Church,
al their humane counsels to be frustrat; and that they can have no rest in
their Heresy, nor security of their state, depending (as they think)
thereupon: they are now in greater fury and rage toward us, making challenge for
our ancestors faith, then they were with the said holy Bishops; though to say
truth, in respect of the others high calling and unction to degrade only and
imprison one of them, was greater punishment the^ twenty deaths to us, being
to them but punies and their pupiles and most obedient children of their
pastoral dignity.

But where the Libeller pretends us to be guilty of other treasons and
trespasses then they were, and therefore punished by death rather then they; as
also pressed by these new questions of the Bull and other capital matters, as
they never were; we avouch both assertions to be untrue: nether our treasons
being other then matter of our conscience and religion more then theirs were;
nor yet they (being in deed so quiet and obedient subjects as you confess them
to have been) were always free from such or other bloody and quareling
demands, as now are put to us, for entangling of our blood: Whereof as well the
honorable Confessor and Bishop of London may be an example, before any
excommunication of the Q. was heard of; as other Prelates and prisoners of that
time and rank conuented afterward, about nine years ago; and had
interrogatories concerning the Bull of the very same sense and peril as these
that quiet Catholic men ar now tempted even to death with-al.

As for the high praises and special testimony of wisdom, Praises geeuen to
the old Clergy by the Libeller.
learning, and loialtie that it liked the maker of the Libel to give in
particular and in very nice fashion and miniard terms, to certain of the
chief Clergy; though it be but the sweet Salve of Ioab to Amasa, kissing and
killing both at once, (for within six lines he cries shame and reproach to them
al): yet it is a condemnation to him and his fellows that presumed to
dispossess so noble, wise, and learned Prelates; and to prefer the judgment
and verdict of men ignorant and profane before such men's sentence even in
matter of Religion: and much more to put into their places a number of
incircuncised Philistines, taken of the raskalitie of the whole Realm; and of
such only as could and would fill my Lords of the Courts hands with the
benediction given to Esau: in respect of whom, or of any or all the route that
suffered for Heresy in Q. Mary's days, the poorest and worst that be in
trouble for religion at home, or in banishment for the same abrod, (of whom
this Libeller upon either his malicious heretical humor or artificial policy,
to diminish their credit with the people, or their grace with the Princes and
Prelates abroad, under whose protection they live, speaks so contemptiblie,
and in part so reprochfullie and slaunderouslie) may be in all life and
behavior accounted Saints.

It is a shame to follow the Libellers folly in the pursuit of such childish
things; The comparison of those that suffer now, with the^ that suffered in Q.
Mary's time.
but he compels us, and therefore we be forced to compare our cases and
persons to theirs that were burned in our country for Heresy and Apostacy
not long before.

The Libel therefore makes a glorious muster of Archbishops, (so he speaks by
Enalage numeri); for indeed there was but one, and he a notorious perjured and
often relapsed Apostata; recanting, swearing, and forswearing at every turn;
Cra^mer.
and at the very day and hour of his death, sacrilegiouslie joined in
pretended marriage to a woman, notwithstanding his vow and order (the very
first and principal cause of of The English calamity.) Other Bishops or clergy
men were there none of all the pack that was burned; (though two or three of
them had iniustly usurped some Prelates rooms) but were of the basest (for
most part) worst, and contemptiblest of both sexes. In so much that the very
saint-woman, Foxes Saint-vvoman.
whose child (as he says upon lying Foxes credit) burst out of her belly into
the fire, was naught of her body; and therefore to cover her incontinencie
would not utter to the Officer her case, nor claim (after the custom of our
country) the benefit of her belly; but for the honor of her holy Martirdom
(forsooth) went to the fire with the child i^ her womb, her self only
knowing thereof: where almighty God discovered her filthe and shame, where she
looked for the glory of a Saint and of a virgin Martyr; of which sort there is
none in all Foxes Martirologe, nor commonly amongst protestants saints.

Now for these we yield unto the Libeller; The number and quality of
Catholics that have suffered.
first fourtene noble and most worthy Bishops at one time, such as him self
upon evil intent commended even now so highelie (and indeed they were inferior
in virtue and learning to none in Europe) who al were deprived of their honors
and high callinges, and most of the^ imprisoned and spitefully used in all
respects; besides the famous co^fessor Archbisshop of Armachane Primate of
Ireland, and a number of Bisshops of that country. Next we yield you in
banishment two worthy English Prelates of the same dignity the one dead
the other yet alive in Rome; three elected Bishops al now departed this life; we
name the honorable Abbat of Westminster; four Priors or superiors of religious
Couents; with three whole Couentes put out of their possessions either into
prison or out of the Realm.

In the same case were a doosen of famous learned Deanes, which next to the
Bishops do hold the cheef dignities in the English Cathedral churches:
fourtene Archdeacons; above threscore Canons of Cathedral churches; not so few
as an hundredth Priests of good preferment in Q. Mary's time; besides many one
made in our banishment and since martired; fiftene heads or Rectors of
colleges in Oxford and Cambridge, men of great importance in those universities
and in the common wealth; and with them and the rather by their good example
and provocation, not many years after, many of the chief professors of al
sciences; and above twenty Doctors of diverse faculties for conscience sake
fled the Realm, or were in the Realm imprisoned. And both at the first and in
diverse years sithence has many of the very flower of the universities come
over both into the Society, Seminaries, and other places, famous for learni^g.
Where through Gods goodness and the great benignity of Prelates, Princes, and
Catholic people, they have passed their long banishement in honest poverty;
and some in worshipful calling and rooms in Universities, with as much grace
and favor as to forreiners could be yielded: in no place (thanks be to our
Lord God) impeached of crimes or disorder; whereof we can show the honorable
testimony of the best where we have lived in all nations.

And for our Christian comporteme^t both at home in affliction, Our behavior
in our time of persecution.
and abroad in banishment (though we be subject to infirmities as other sinful
creatures be) we dare stand with all the protestants in the world: which we be
forced against this infamous Libeller to speak more liberally and confidentlie;
for that he so shamefullie and against his own knowledge writes; That very
fevv ar fled for Religion other then such as were not able to live at home but
in beggerie; or discontented for lack of preferment which they gaped for
vnvvorthelie in universities and other places; or banke-rupt marchantes etc.
Where the poorest wretches and worst amongst us that in this tedious time of
twenty five years absence from our country, will relent in religion and
return to them, may be most welcome, received with joy and triumph, and made
ieolie fellows in their new Synagoge. Ita nusqua^ facilius proficitur, quam in
castris rebellium; Tertulia^.
as one says. So earnestly they woo every poor Apostata, lewd scholar, and
lost companion; that for wearines of banishment, loose life, or impatience,
looks homeward toward heresy or carnal liberty and license again. By
which allurementes yet the world knows how exceeding few you gain or get from
us; whilst we in the mean space (through Gods great grace) receive hundrethes
of your Ministers, a number of your best wits, many delicate young gentlemen,
and diverse heirs of al ages, voluntarily fleeing from your damnable condition,
and seeking after God; and many of them also become Priests or religious, even
now when you hate, contemn, and punish Priests so deadly. This is the work
of God marvelous both in your eyes and ours; and cannot by humane force,
fear, or policy be dissolved.

Temporal men Catholics.
Count your cards therefore better, and look not only of so many famous
Clergy men and the daily increase of them against your violent laws (Sir
Libeller) but count if you dare for shame, among your beggars and bankeroutes
in Q. Mary's time (as you dishonestlie term us now) so many noble and valiant
Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquiers and gentlemen, that have either suffered prison,
or as their conscience led the^, stood in arms for defense of their Faith and
Christian knighthood; not against their Prince or country, but against such as
abused her weak sex and former years of her youth to th'establisshing of them
selves and their Heresy; or have forsaken their honorable callinges, offices,
and liuelihoods in their countries for defense of their Christian faith; of
which I could name you a noble number of al degrees able and ready to defend by
sword, (excepting the respect they have to their Prince and dear Country)
their Religion and honorable actions against all the heretics in the world
that defame them.

Whose most worthy order and knighthood the Libeller seeks to distaine, Earl
of westmerland.
by naming the noble Earl of Westmerland; whose peculier life and actions, or
any other particular person of what condition soever though we go not about
nor need to defend against malicious envy and detraction of heresy; yet
surely notwithstanding his youthful behavior whatsoever (which he learned
there amongst you, and is not so strange in Camp or Court, you wot well M.
Libeller) he is able to prove that you slander him extremely; and we ca^
witness that he lives in good health and honorable charge in the service of the
K. Catholic: as we also can tell you that the renouned County of
Northumberland died a Saint and holy Martyr. Earl of Northumberland.
For what former quarrel or cause of his death so-euer there was, yet was he a
true Martyr, in that he was offered ^is life, if he would alter his religion; as
diverse others ^ere of the same action in the North; and al other ^riestes
pretended to be condemned for other trea^^ns

Which life and living in as much as they refused ^^r Christ and his Faith when
it was offered; they be (...) the number of Saints and Confessors, no less
the^ (...) they had died only for the same.

And therefore when the adversary charge D. San^rs and D. Bristow with
treason for affirming such (...) be Martirs, in this sense; he shows him self
igno^^nt: as he is malicious in bidding us enroule Somer^^ld Somerfild.
in the number of our Martirs; as perhaps before ^od he is, if he were distract
of his wits, or furious as al men say, and the Libeller confesses) to whom
^an not be imputed what so ever he did in alienation ^f mind; and to his
enemies shall be imputed murder that so ever was done against him in that his
state: or ^peciallie, (which is the most common opinion proo^ed by many
probabilities) if the poor gentleman were dispatched of purpose and
appointment; (as the ^ryar that accused the duke of Lancaster was, and ma^ie
other; and as the Protestants said John Hun was in ^ollards tovver;) for
prevention of the discovery of cer^aine shameful practices about the
condemnation and making away of the worshipful, valiant, and innocent gentleman
M. Arden: whose case like to Naboths, and his words of wishing the Q. in
heaven, (as it is reported) were so partiallie or rigorously scanned by the
malice of his great and potent professed enemy that many years has sought
his ruin; together with his zealousnes in the Catholic faith, brought him to
his most pitiful end, to the great regret of the whole country. But the
importunity of the adversary has brought us somewhat out of our intended
course.

To return back therefore to our famous Prelates, deposed in this Queens days
the principal whereof was Archbishop of York, D. Heath Archbishop of York.
and high Chancelour of the realm (the Primate of Canterbury being deceased
before): which worthy man this Libeller hipocriticallie commends for his
loyalty, though in Religion differing from them; thereby to make the Q.
Majesty's mercy toward him a pattern (forsooth) of clemency not to be
matched, as he wisely writes in Q. MARY'S time; which Queen notwithstanding
pardoned a number of heretics and rank condemned traitors, both of life and
lands whom we could name, and all the world knows yet alive. And further he
adds (which is a notorious untruth) that the said Prelate voluntarily left
both his Chauncelorship and Archbishopricke: where al wise men will witness with
him and for him, that he was most unjustly with the rest of his Suffraganes
and brethren Bishops for refusing to take that absurd oath of the Q.
Supremacy, and to use the new Caluinistical service in his province, deposed
by violence from his spiritual function and dignity.

Whose courage and resistance for quarrel of Gods religion, (how loial and
obedient so ever the Libeller would make those men in comparison of us; thereby
to insinuate, that the more bloody rigor is used now toward us then in the
beginning toward them) was such in them and specially in the said Archbishop;
that he worthelie, and as became his Excellency, refused to anoint or crown
the Q. Majesty that now is, though it apperteined to his special office to do
the same, the Metropolitan being dead as has been said before: and so did all the rest of the Bishops refuse the same until with much a do they obtained the
Bishope of Carlisle, The Bishop of Carlisle.
(the i^ferior al most of all the rest) to do that function. Which is here
remembered, by me for that the Libeller of his good discretion records it for
special courtesy of that man toward his Princess. Which refusal of him,
(specially that by office should have done the same) might in reason have been
construed to as heinous and treasonable a purpose, as most things that
afterward have been done for the Catholic cause by any of the later years;
if the malice of that time had been as ripe then, as now it is against Gods
Church and Priests.

The cause why they durst not the^, nor could be adduced by any humane fear
or authority to inuest her, was; Why the Catholic Bishops refused to croune
this Q.
for that they had evident probabilities and arguments to doubt, that she meant
either not to take the oath or not to keep the same, which al Christian kings
(and specially ours in England) do make in their Coronation for maintenance
of holy Churches laws, honors, peace and privileges, and other duties due to
every state, as in the time and grant of K. Edward the Confessor.

They doubted also lest she would refuse in the very time of her sacre, the
solemn divine ceremony of unction (accustomed in the consecration of al
Christian princes) through the evil aduises of certain yo^g counselors, being
then in the heat prime and pride of their Heresy, whereby great scandal might
arise, and hurt to the Realm. Which they the rather doubted, because they saw
(not long before) her Highness at her first entrance to that high estate,
command a certain Bishop, even the same of Carlisle now named, standing
ready to say Mass before her (a strange case in a woman toward a Bishop)
not to eleuate the holy consecrated Host, but to omit that ceremony, because
she liked it not. Which the said Bishop to his great honor, constantly refused
to obey. A thing that in one of us poor men now, perchance would be accounted
high treason and disloialtie toward our Sovereign.

And of this his courage in Gods cause it never repented him; but for doing the
other office at the Coronation when he saw the issue of the matter; and both
him self and all the rest of his sacred order deprived; and the Churches Holy
laws and faith, against the conditions of her consecration and acceptance
into that royal room, violated: he sore repented him all the days of his life;
which were, for that special cause, both short and werisome afterward unto him.

Otherwise doubtless all the Bishops, and the rest of the principal of the
inferior Clergy did stoutly and worthelie as could be wished, and as was
possible in that sudden assault of Heresy; fearing at the same time their
personal peril so little, The intention of the Clergy to Excommunicate the Q.
that they were many of them of that mind that it should be good to use the
censure of Excommunication against her Highenes and some of her leaders into
that revolt so dangerous and shameful to the state, so lately reconciled to
the sea Apostolic, and by oath and promis of al estates confirmed.

But the wiser of the Bishops, or at least the mylder sort, persuaded the
contrary for many inconveniences that might ensue: and so they rather
resolved the matter to be remitted to the high Pastor of Christ's universal
Church, then to be executed by them that were her subjects, not without peril
perhaps of some further tumult sca^dal and trouble to the whole Clergy; whom
they would have interpreted to have done it of malicious and rebellions mind,
rather the^ of love and duty, of which al such censures indeed do proceed,
how so-euer the party affected and sick in soul (especially Princes except
they be very well trained in the fear of God) accept the same; well remembering
that many Kings had killed their Pastors in like cases.

All this we put down that no man be abused by the enemy to think that the
Reverend Prelates, at the first were less zealous, (which he calls more
loial) or more obedient to the Prince in lauful things, then we their scholars
and offspring be; or we less loial the^ they, and therefore more punishable
then they were: though in deed their perpetual imprisonment and pining away in
miserable desolation; their tossing and shifting from one superintendents house
to an other; from one keeper to an other; from one prison to an other; subject
to extreme wantes, and to a thousand daily vilanies besides; whereof some of
the^ now have tasted for twenty five years together, is worse then any death
in the world. This then is a true Persecution indeed, when such men for such
causes against al reason and laws be so vexed, by such as owe them al
reverence, duty, and obedience.

Such is also the miserable fortune of the Catholic Nobility and Gentry,
The persecution of Catholic Nobility and Ge^trie.
whom this Libeller says; They put not to death, nor loss of their
inheritance though they hold opinion for the Popes supremacy, and defend that
the Q. Majesty ought not to be the governor over al her subjects in her
Realm being persons Ecclesiastical; which opinions (says he) ar
nevertheless in some part by the laws of the Realm punishable in some
degrees: yet such is their misery (we say) that notwithstanding these fair and
false speeches of the enemy, they be far more iniuried then the Clergy; even
themselves more vexed, spoiled, dishonored with fines, mulctes, bonds,
penalties, imprisonmentes, arreignements amongst thieves, pretense of
premuniries, misprisions, discontentments, evil affections, and contrary
religion to the state; pursued by the vilest, and most abject men; by
Ministers, spies, and promotors; assailed and robbed in their own howses; and
chased from the same into woods, yea sometimes into waters (we speak of
knowledge) and at length into banishment. Which who sees not how miserable a
thing it is, when their whole families must either perish of famine at home, or
beg in strange lands abroad; in which case both their goods are seized on
(as the world knows) and their possessio^^ fall to the Princes hands or into
the fiste of some lost companion, which shall upon favor obtain the gif^ to
make spoil of the same.

And yet this good writer, so nicelie, to color their cruelty toward
Catholic gentlemen, sets down the matter as though cases of Conscience,
Religion, or of the sea Apostolic were but in some degrees, in some little
part punished, and not with loss of lands, nor death at any time persecuted;
when he and all the world knows, that they may and do by those wicked laws of
theirs, disherite, put to perpetual prison, and to death diverse of the laytie.
We refer them to the worshipful M. Trugeons case, who lives in prison so many
years of alms after the spoil and rapine of so goodly possessions. We refer
them to the lay men put to death of late at Winchester and And over; to so
many fled for religion of the best Nobility and gentry wholly sacked and
spoiled of al they possessed; and so many hundreds more, vexed pilled and
spoiled at home, as they have not wherwithal to expel famine from them selves
and there families. And which is yet more; we tell you, that there can never a
Catholic noble man in the realm, if by any show of religion, or moderation
in life, he give th'enimie the least suspicion in the world of his good
affection that way, be sure of his life, lands and state one day. For by one
false pretense and calumniation or other, they will entrap him, emprison him;
and in sin, (except God marvelously protect him) they will overthrow him and
his whole family, and transfer al his honors sometimes to his cheifest
enemies. Yea all this often against the Princess will; being led against her
own natural inclination to such things, by the violent domination of certain
that ouerrule her and the whole Realm, so as no Catholic can be sure of his
lands or life, longer then th'aduersarie list.

God knows we do not amplify in the sight of strangers the calamities of
Catholics in our country; whose chains, dongeons, spoils, flightes,
disgraces, deaths, if all the world could see with their eyes, as we do feel;
all the Princes Christian would take compassion, and account our complaints
most just and necessary.

Wherein our miseries are multiplied, that such Libellers as these, The crafty
cozonage of this Libeller.
do by false reports and misconstruction of our sentence in religion,
guilefullie go about to diffame us with forrenners. As for example, when here
this fellow says that there be diverse gentlemen Catholics in England that
hold; The Q. ought not to be governor over any her subjects in her realm,
being persons Ecclesiastical, and yet are not persecuted to death for the same,
etc. For their prosecution and persecution I have made it plain before. But
for their holding of any such assertion, I must and do say that it is
slanderous, and most untrue. For there is a great difference to say she is not
to rule the Bishops in causes Ecclesiastical, or in matter of ministering the
Sacraments, preaching, and doctrine; and to say, she is not Q. or governor
over the Clergy, or that Priests or Ecclesiastical persons be not her
subjects. For they are also bound, yea eue^ monks and religious, as S.
Chrysostom says (which this Libeller in an other place alleges ignora^tly
to prove that in all matters, such ought to obey their temporal Princes) they
are bound (I say) to order and obedience of their kings; and to observe their
temporal and civil laws made for peace, tranquillity, and temporal government
of their people; and to do them al honor and service in that behalf; as the
Libeller right well knows that al Catholic Bishops and Prelates of the
Church, ever have done, and do at this day both in our Realm and in all other
Realms abroad to their lawful Kings, yea to heathen kings also; though in
matters of religion and of their spiritual charge, neither Heathen nor
Christian kings be their superiors, or ought to direct them, but rather to
take direction from them.

Thus then over and above al former recompted calamities, by opprobrious
tongues, lying lips and pens, we be persecuted for defense of our Fathers
faith and the Churches truth. The cause whereof puts the difference between
our Martyrdom, and the due and worthy punishment of Heretics; who shedding
their blood obstinately in testimony of falsehood, against the truth of Christ
and his holy spouse, and out of the unity of the same; are known
malefactors, and can be no Martyrs, but damnable Murderers of them selves.

One only thing belonging to this passage is yet behind, The protestant
Martyrs how they were traitors.
which we must answer to, breeflie. The adversary tells us that the Martyrs
of their sect in Q. Mary's time, denied not their lavvful Q. nor maintained her
enemies, as ours do. A strange boldness to avouch a lie without necessity
which all the world can disprove at the first sight. For how say you (Sir) was
not your Archbishop (named here for the principal of al your Martirs) co^uicted
and condemned ope^lie of high treason; Cranmer.
even for waging souldiars for Duke Dudley (a hateful name to England since
Henry the seue^thes time; ever aspiring, but still unfortunate to it self and
followers) against the Princess that was then, and her Highenes that is now?

Was not your next Martyr, Superinte^dent Ridley, Ridley.
an high traitor; publicly preaching and proclaming at Paul's Cross in
London, both Q. Marie and this Q. to be bastardes, and to have no right title
to the Croune? Sandz.
Did not your famous superinte^dent now of York, (yet no Martyr, how so ever
he has suffered of late some heavy Crosses for other causes of homely
quality) boldly publish the same in Ca^bridge; as also your confessor Jewel
of Salisburie had done the like in Oxford if he had not been in time prevented?
Were not all the pack of your Protestants, confederated or acquainted with
Wiates conspiracy and open rebellion against their Prince and Country; This
is proved by their own testimony herafter.
with other wicked attemptes against the state of that time, as they have been
sith, well near against all the states and Provinces Christened? But of this
you must needs hear more anon.

But it is a world to see the cunning winding of this Libeller; for being
ashamed as it seems, or else in doubt of that which he had boldly affirmed
before; now comes to foist in a word to salve al (as he thinks) and that is;
Anice shift.
That at their death they denied not their Q. etc. And in such deceipt-ful
cobling in of words, he passes no line lightly without fraud. But for
answer hereof, we say; that what they did at their death, or the day after, God
knows: but it is plain that in their life they were notorious Rebels, as
most of that sect be. And how many of our men (I pray you Sir) of whose lives
and deaths so great no^bers can bear witness; denied their obedience, or
meeklie prayed not for the Q. at the very place and time of their execution?
Every one of the^ as they lived exemplarlie for duty and loyal behavior to
al their superiors both temporal and spiritual; so yielded they their happy
life and blood in all Apostolical patience, peace, and meeknes; for the faith
wherein they, our country, and al converted nations in the world, were
baptized; and for the very same belief wherein the old glorious Martirs of
Gods Church gave up their lives.

This Faith, this Church, this Cause, seuereth our true Martyrs, from the
notorious malefactors of the contrary side. And so gives us just cause to
complain of persecution; and th'enimie no reason at al; of what number, name,
obstinacy, age, or quality so ever they be, that have suffered for their
Heresy.

THAT OUR PRIESTS AND CATHOLIQVE BRETHREN HAVE BEHAVED them selves discretlie,
and nothing seditiouslie i^ their answers to the questions of the Bull of Pius
Quintus; and that they can not laufullie be pressed nor put to death as
traitors by the true meaning of the old laws of the Realm for the same;
with examination of the six Articles proposed about the said Bull. CAP. IIII.
IN times of heretical regiment, where Politiques have all the government, though
Religion be sometimes pretended, as a thing whereof they make their advantage
for the affairs specially intended: yet indeed the first and principal care is
of their temporal state; and so consequently of the Princes and their own well
being in this life: the lote whereof, The different government of Politiques and
of true Christians.
they often prefer with Esau, before the weal of the world to come, the
blessing of Jacob, or the kingdom of Christ; which is his reign and regiment
spiritual in the Church, the house of his glory and our salvation in earth.

Contrariwise in Christian Catholic common wealths the chief respect is and
ever was (as it ought to be) of the honor of God, the good of holy Church, the
salvation of the souls of their people; and so to pass through these secular
things as eternal joys be not lost, and put in hasard.

In which difference of things you shall easily perceive, that in the days of
disorder and error the faults done against the Prince, or so said to be done,
are far more odious and punishable, then what so ever is directly done against
God; against the Common wealth, then against the Church; against the body,
then against the soul; more ado about Caesar's tribute then about Gods due. As
in the time and regiment of Hieroboam; when all the care was how to manage
matters so, The government of Jeroboam.
that the kingdom of Israel might be severed from Judah, and so established in
it self that no spiritual union by worship in Jerusalem, might reduce the
divided tribes to their former state again; and al things tendi^g to that
reunio^ were greuouslie punished, but matters of faith and religion wholly
contemned.

In our country when God and his kingdom had the first place, the terrene
state the second, (as in truth it ought to be; and where it is otherwise,
whatsoever is pretended, Christ has no place at al): then were the crimes
committed against God first and principally punished; as blasphemy, schism,
and such like: and secondly, treasons and trespasses done against the Prince
and country; whereof. Q. Mary's days and regiment may be an example, when
without the forgerie of new or false treasons, the lately named Archbishop and
other principal heretics, being convicted of co^spiracie and open traitorous
actions, might have justly suffered for the same; but yet were rather burned
for Heresy, as for their more heinous crime; and which a Christian Prince
ought to regard far more, then any thing committed against his Regalitie.

But now, and ever when the Superiority temporal has the preeminence, and the
spiritual is but accessorie, dependent, and wholly vpholden of the other; error
in Faith is little accounted of, what so ever their pulpit men (to make them
selves and their patrons sport) bral of such matters: and al our doings,
endeavors, and exercises of Religion are drawn to treasons and trespasses
against the Queen; them selves protesting, in all their doings that they meddle
not with us for our doctrine what-soeuer; thereby either insinuating that our
religion is true and in deed by the judgment of their own conscience not
punishable; or else that they care not for it, nor what we believe, no further
then touches their Prince and temporal weal; wherein yet they wipe so hard, as
they draw blood.

For; finding no errors, heresies, A new devise of our Persecutors.
or false opinions concerning God and his worship worthy to condemn us of;
and being ashamed of their statutes of new treasons (as it seems): they have
found out a new fault, and a term for the same, not usual either in writers of
our schools and divinity, or in their own laws; which they call traiterous
assertions, treasonable and malicious opinions against the Q. as in a former
like pamphlet, evil affection or evil disposition toward her Majesty; which
is now the only and proper point they pursue against us both in judgment and
writing. For which as of late they have put diverse to death: so by the same
they try (as they say) whither Papists be traitors or no, and accordingly to
use them. And for better trial thereof, they propose unto al men whom they list
make away or otherwise endanger, certain demandes which in effect are these
that ensue.

Pius Quintus against the Q. Majesty be a lauful sentence and ought to be
obeyed by the subjects of England? Demandes proposed to Catholics for their
intrapping.


Pius Quintus or any other Bull or sentence that the Pope has pronounced or
may pronounce against her Majesty?

invade her dominions; and whether such subjects so doing, do laufullie therein?



Pius Quintus) have therein taught, testified, or maintained a truth or a
falsehood?



Wherein if you say nothing, or refuse to answer somewhat in contempt or
derogation of the sea Apostolic; then are you judged no good subject, but a
traitor; whereby let al Princes and People Christian bear witness of our
miseries and iniust afflictions; who are enforced to suffer death, for our
only cogitations and inward opinions, vnduelie sought out by force and fear,
and yet not condemned by any Christian school in the world, nor uttered by us
but upon forcing interrogatories; we having committed nothing by word or deed
against our Prince or laws; but doing al acts of honor and homage unto her,
and suffering meekelie what punishment so ever she would lay upon us for our
Religion; The behaueour of English Catholics since the Bull of Pius Quintus.
for so most part of al sorts of Catholics have done both in England and
Ireland for this twenty five years space; only a very few Nobles of both
countries taking once arms for their defense, in all this long time of
intolerable affliction: (the like patience you shall hardly find in
Protesta^tes, as their furious rebellions against their Sovereigns in France,
Flandres, and Scotland do testify:) our Nobles and gentlemen having borne al
those anguishes of body and mind, with loss of honors, country, lands and
liberty for so long time; have both at home and abrod obeyed her with such
loialtie, as subjects ought to do their Sovereign; never took arms in all
England upon the Bull of Pius Quintus, nor any time since the publication
thereof: (contrary to the deceiptful division of those times, things, and
actions set down by the Libeller; placing that after, which was done before
the Bull was published): but have showed them selves in all cases as serviceable
as before.

The Clergy men also, whether religious, Priests, The proceeding of
Cleargiemen concerning the Bull.
or students of the two colleges in Rome and Rhemes; whether they were in the
service of their country at home, or in the schools absent; did al in manner
(notwithstanding the said Ce^sure of his Holiness) use al due reverence and
respect; vtteri^g in no preachi^g speech, or book, no nor at the hour of
their death and Martyrdom, nor ever before in any their confessions to the
Magistrate, any disloyal word against her Majesty. No (which we further
avouch) not any one Priest of the Society or Seminaries can be proved by the
adversary to have absolved in secret Confession any one man living from his
allegiance; or to have ever either in public or private, dissuaded any one
person in the Realm from his obedience in Civil causes to the Q.

Furthermore it is certain that never Priest had any such Commission given
hitherto by either the Popes Holiness, Priests Commissions.
or such other superiors in Religion or college, to deal in any such matters
touching the Q. nether is there any such thing employed in either the authority
or act of reconcilement; how so ever the ielous enemy has found knots in those
rushes that of the^ selves are smooth. As the contrary is doubtless most true;
the Governors of the students always of purpose prohibiting, and as much as
in such numbers of al sorts (not al ever having discretion to season their
zeal) could be, providing that in the course of our school questions and
controversies concerning the Popes preeminence, no matter of depriving or
excommunicating Princes should be disputed; no, not so much as in generalities,
and much less, the particularizing of any point in our Q. case. Which matter
notwithstanding it be determinable by Divinity, and do come in course to be
handled in schools as other questions do: yet because it is incident to
matter of state, (as now our country most unfortunately stands) and
consequently might be interpreted by the suspicious to be meant of her, whose
case men liked lest to deal in; it was thought best to pass over al with
silence.

The particular doings of D. Sanders and of D. Bristoe.
Which moderation was kept in all places and persons of our Nation; (two only
learned men of great zeal and excellency indeed, D. Saunders and D. Bristowe
excepted) who had their special reas^ns to do as they did which we will neither
defend nor reprove: but many Catholics were sorry therefore, and wished the
matter so offensive had never been touched, but committed only to higher
powers, and especially to Gods judgment; that he might, either in this world
or the next, (where both Popes and Princes must come to their accomptes)
discern of the controversy betwixt our two superiors: the one being our
spiritual Head and Sovereign, who is the higher and in matter of Religion
rather to be obyed: the other our temporal Prince, to whom likewise in such sort
and matter as the Holy Scriptures appoint us, we owe al duty and obeisance.

Whereupon afterward not only D. Bristow omitted in his second edition or
abridgement of his book that odious point, not fit at that time to be handled:
but D. Saunders also, (though his former treatise was not of any stranger
Catholic and learned, in any nation misliked; being more free therein,
because they be not entangled by authority and sway of laws as we are) yet
called he in and suppressed to his lives end, a very learned book made in
defense of Pius Quintus his sentence, and printed above fortene years since; no
copy thereof that is known, being now extant. Which course of moderation al
Catholics of al sorts both spiritual and temporal have followed ever since,
restraining (as much as in them lay) the rigor of that sentence.

And the blessed Martyr F. Campian him self as is recited in the story of his
arraigneme^t, The speech of Father Campia^ at Rome.
falling in talk with a certain principal Cardinal in Rome at his first
arriual there, (a dozen years sithence, and not many after the Bull was
published); he being asked of English affairs, and how the Catholics so much
distressed held yet out, and what effect th'excommunication had: answered,
that the Bull was troblesome to them, and cause of the Q. more heavy hand upon
them: insinuating that it were good it were mitigated, so that it should not
bind the subjects, but that they might obey her, as their lauful Princess,
notwithstanding any contrary sentence of the sea Apostolic before given.
Which good office of speech and meaning, the adversaries were not ashamed to
charge him withal in his judgment.

As their folly and partiality are also so great herein, that in this Libel
they specially put down, Touching the petition of F. Persons and F. Campia^
for moderation of the Bull and Censure.
to prove both the said good Father, and his Superior the Reverend F. Robert
Persons, guilty of treason; for that they made special suit unto his Holiness
that now is, to qualefie the Censure of his predecessor; at least so far, that
it might not bind, or make culpable any her Catholic subjects in
conscience, for obeying and serving her as their Sovereign; how so ever it
stood against the Protestants, who neither looked nor cared to be discharged of
it; as the Catholics, for conscience sake, most desired to be free. They knew
his Holiness would not wholly alter that ce^sure; the case standing with the
principal party as it did before his predecessors sentence. They knew the Q.
and protestants them selves made no account thereof nor desired to be loosse.
They knew it singularly perteined to the safety of her person and the quiet
of the state, that the Catholics were persuaded, they might laufullie obey her
as their Q. and Gouernesse, notwithstanding the said sentence. They knew the
subjects would gladly do that with safety of conscience, as a way far more
secure for both them selves and the Q. which they did before only for fear.
They knew they could not profitablie proceed in their spiritual work of
confessing, converting and reconciling the subjects to the Holy Church, except
they might by Apostolic warrant resolve them for their lauful obedience to
the Q. They thought good where neither the Pope could be induced, without the
repentance of the party, to call in the censure, nor the Q. to yield to any
condition that way; rather thus to seek for mitigation, then to leave it in
full force still: and finally, rather thus by moderation and sweetness to
temporize betwixt both their Superiors; to see whether God might not move the
heart of her Majesty, wholly lying in his hand, to enter into some good
conditions, for her reuniting to the communion of the Christian world; th'onlie
way of saui^g her Realm in this world, and her soul in the next.

Alas; what evil office have these good Fathers done herein? What treason is
committed more now, then if they had desired his Holiness to have discharged the
Q. and Protestants also of al bond of that Bull? How could either they or the
rest of the Priests do more dutifullie and discreetlie in this case, then to
provide that al such with whom they only had to deal, might stand free and
warranted in their obedience, and commit the rest that cared not for
Excommunication to the judgment of God?

By all which we may see the notable discret and sincere dealing of Catholics
all this while about fiftene years that this sentence has been extant and
published; and their manifold endeavors to mitigate and ease the burden
thereof, in all such as might therbie have remorse to obey and acknowledge the Q.
Regalitie. Never writing of the matter, nor dealing in it, but to the end of
pacification, public rest, and security of the state; brought into brandle
and doubt, by this unhappy alteration in Religion. And so they might have had
all the learned of our nation either silent in the question of
th'excommunication, or mitigators of it still; had not the unwise and very
impolitique importunity of certain in government (seeking by all direct or
i^direct driftes the blood of poor Catholics) forced men to their needful
defense and interpretation of their meaning herein: Unwise and very
impolitique proceeding,
yea verelie to seek with diligence the truth of the matter, which of purpose
they did let pass before, as a thing impertinent to their edification or
salvation.

Which they did the rather; for that Pius Quintus the author thereof being
departed, his successor Gregory the thirtenth that now happily sits in the
Apostolic throne, never revived the same (that we know of) but by conniuence
and expectation of our Q. and Countries return to holy Churches peace and to
the society of other Christian kings, suffered the sentence after a sort to
die, specially so far as it concerned the Catholics (as is said): even as the
like Censure of excommunication and deprivation published by Paulus Tertius
against K. Henry the eighth did pass over in peace to his dying day, The
excommunication of K. Hen. 8. by Pope Paulus tertius.
by the patience of other Popes following; and the many hopes and profers
which the said king made, of his return to the Churches obedience again,
though prevented by death it pleased not God to make him worthy of the same.

And this was the Catholics honest desire and behavior touching
th'excommunication ever since the publishing thereof: The desire of Catholics
to avoid matter of state.
until now of late, when by their interrogatories and new order of most
bloody, unlawful, and vnwife search of men's consciences; not deeds words or
writings, but very inward opinions, thoughts and cogitations of heart, are
wrong out of men by the questions before rehearsed. Whereby not only diverse
holy Priests that have suffered, but also some other being strangely and
conninglie brought into this odious and dangerous matter of state, and pressed
against their wills to say their cogitatio^s; they did notwithstanding as much
as was possible, avoid any ways so to determine or answer, as might be
prejudicial to their allegiance: which they observed, not only whilst they
had hope of life, but eue^ after their condemnation also, and at the very last
hour of death.

The diverse answers of sondrie to the for named interrogatories.
Some meeklie and discreetlie declined from the question one way, some an other:
but alwith great show of honesty, fidelity, and innocence. One (as Father
Campian) answered; they were controversies and questions not determinable i^
that court, but in school.

An other; that he thought the Pope, that gave the sentence, might err in some
cases: that is, though not in doctrine, yet i^ fact; for want of informatio^s,
proves, and other circumstances needfullie in such cases to be observed: but
whether he did err or no, and abuse his authority in this Ce^sure; that he
referred to God, him self not being sufficient to judge of his Superiors
doings.

Some said; they never saw the Bull in their life, and therefore could not
answer of the sense or force thereof, nor be guilty of any crime toward her
Majesty, contained in the same; no nor should ever have much thought or heard
of it, had not the other now revived the matter.

One or two answered; that they were not so learned as to discuss ex tempore
al those matters contained in their demaundes: but that they esteemed of al in
general, as the holy Catholic Church teaches, which is (said they) the
Roman Church.

Some said; there were or might be causes, as if a Prince should fall to
Apostasy, Arrianisme, or such like, that deserved excommunication and
deprivation: in which case the Pope might discharge the subjects from their
obedience; but of the Q. particular case they would not talk at al.

To be short; some being demanded what they would do, or advise others to
do, if the matter should come to batail for Religion, as it fell out in
Ireland, answered: they would do when that happened (which they trusted would
not so chance) as good priests ought to do; that is, pray for peace; and that
truth and justice in war might prevail.

In all which you see; on the one side, how carefully al men eschewed to utter
their opinions in any other words but such as could, in truth, no way give
offense to the Q. or state: on the other, into what marvelous perplexity the
ministers and mainteiners of heresy ar brought, that cannot but by such
violent means be secure in their sect; nor uphold their soul practizes
against God, the Church, and their own Country.

Let our Christian brethren of al nations judge of the causes, means, and
measure of our calamities. We never procured our Q. excommunication; we have
sought the mitigation thereof; we have done our allegiance not withstanding; we
have answered, when we were forced unto it, with such humility and respect to
her Majesty and Counsel, as you see; no man can charge us of any attempt
against the Realm, or the Princes person: The unreasonable dealing of our
persecutors.
Yet not content with this they will know what we will do hereafter, if such or
such a thing should chance; they will sound all the Catholics hearts in the
Realm; and (which is more then Antichristian violence) they will punish them as
traitors by death most cruel, for their only thoughts: Yea, (which God him
self does not) for future faults never committed, nor perhaps ever like to
come to pass.

Which search of men's future factes or intentions, whereof them selves have
neither knowledge nor rule before hand; is unnatural, intolerable, and to
common wealths most pernicious: and were able to make all the Catholics of
the Realm to be wholly desperate; not finding their loyal behavior (showed in all kind of office and service to their Prince) sufficient to save their lives:
but may be examined of these captious and deadly chapters; of their inward
opinions and purposes to come; when the Magistrate, or any man's one powrable
enemy, list require it. Especially now when their vulgar ministers give it
out generally, that al those whom they call Papists be in their hearts
traitors; and this Libeller says, those foresaid questions are most proper to
try them.

Into such thraldom of body and soul has that barbarous heresy brought us,
and them also into those hazardes of their state; which they pretend to be the
causes of these their so extraordinary proceedinges, as may be thought were
never before used, nor lauful by nature or custom of any Civil country in
earth.

Some such demaundes the Scribes and Pharesies and other of the Jews
sectaries, The proceeding of the Jews with Christ.
proposed in times past to our Savior, to entrap him i^ speech, and to drive
hi^ to utter some treasonable words or co^ceipt against the Emperors
regalitie over the people of God; which they presumed to be evil thought of of
diverse, and specially of the better and more exact zelators of the law,
notwithstanding that either for fear or other causes every one seemed in all
exterior offices to obey. Of which tempting questions, though Christ by his
divine wisdom easily discharged him self; nevertheless they ceased not still
to exclame; Hunc inuenimus prohibentem tributa dare Caesari; as others did
afterward the like of S. Stephen and S. Paul: and even so now our English
Saduces are not satisfied but by blood, never resting til they have pressed or
sucked out something, at least for men's intentions or other casual euentes to
come, that may sound against their duties to the Q.: Such is our present menage
of state in England, and into such terms are we brought of extremity.

When al other pretenses, practizes, forged crimes, and false witnesses against
Priests or Catholics do fail; then are these made just quarrels of their
death, and the highest treasons in the world: viz to affirm upon their
unreasonable and importune demaundes, that if (which God forbid) the Q. by
supposal, should fall to Arrianisme, Apostacy or Atheism (whereunto man's
frailty is subject) she might be deprived and her subjects discharged of
obedience to her: this is the only treason which they have tried out of
Catholics. Which for all that in truth cannot be treason, how plainly or
voluntarily so ever it were spoken; much less being wrested out by
commandment and subtle drift of interrogatories.

The Libeller says nothing is punished in us for question of Conscience or
Religion: The question of the Popes Supremacy a matter of Divinity and not of
State.
but yet this is such in the sight of al reasonable men in the world. For it is
a mere matter of Divinity, if not defined for us, yet at least disputable in
school as them selves will confess. It concerns the Popes supremacy and
power Apostolical; for which this Libeller affirms and repeateth often that
none be endangered of life or limme in England. This proposition (I say) or
any other equivalent to it, viz. That the Pope has power to excommunicate or
deprive a Prince in case of Heresy or Apostacy; and consequently, to absolve
his subjects from their oath and obedience to him; or to stand in defense of
them selves and the Catholic faith against him; cannot be proved treason by
the statute of Edward the third, upon which only he says we be condemned
for traitors. Who so ever should avouch the same, in any Christian country
in the world; or in our own country, in the time of the said K. Edward had
held the same opinion; should not, nor could not have been convicted of
treason, treasonable assertion, or evil affection to the Prince or country;
because it stands with the honor and safety of the whole common wealth, and
the rulers thereof, so far to be subject and obedient to Christ and his Church,
that they count them selves no longer to stand or reign rightfullie, then they
stand and reign for the advancement of Gods truth and kingdom in earth,
which is his Church.

What treason had it been to Q. Marie (whose regiment for an example of their
grief and our co^tentme^t, this Libeller so often alleges) if in scoole,
book or pulpit, it had been affirmed, that for Heresy or Atheism, a Prince,
or her self might be deposed?

If in the famous university of Paris, or honorable college of Sorbon, What
foreign Princes account of such propositions.
that conclusion of divinity were defended, that the Pope in case of Heresy,
might censure their king; would that trouble his most Christian Majesty, who
desires no longer to reign, then he does advance the glory of Christ? The
like might be said of the other great Monarch of Spain; who would not have his
own issue (which God almighty bless) succeed him, if it were not Catholic.
No more would The Emperors sacred Majesty; no nor the Popes Holiness (in
spiritual affairs and regiment of our souls, superior to all the rest) count
any of his own subjects traitors; for houlding, that in case of Heresy or
Apostacy, he might be deposed or loose the right of his place and dignity.

We ask here the Libeller; by what law or custom, Canon, Civil or National of
our country or other, is this made treason? Or why it should be more treason
in England then in any other place? seeing no law hitherto has passed by
authority against the same; nor any opinion, to be compted prejudicial to
any Prince or state; no assertion treasonable that is true in divinity: for
that no truth agreeable to Gods law and man's, can be contrary to the lauful
sovereignty of any power or potentate in earth.

But you will say (and that is al you can say) that though the general
proposition, An objection with the answer.
that Princes for Heresy may be deposed, were true; yet th'application thereof
to her Majesty in particular, may be treason; for that it is made high treason
by act of Parliament in the thirtenth year of the Q. reign for any to call
her an Heretic or a Shismatique under pain of death.

To which we answer; first, that our affirming that she may be deposed for
Heresy, does not at al avouch her to be one; no more then the like assertion
of the K. of Spain would implie him to be such an one, or us to think him
such an one: and therefore if your own conscience accuse your selves, or give
you suspicion that what soever is said touches you; it is you that apply the
general speech to your own particular and not we. Secondly we say, that your
said law may bind us that be subjects not to speak so irreverently of her, to
whom God has given power over us in this life, as to call her Heretic,
Infidel, or Schismatique (for those be the terms of your statute) though we
should know her damnably to err in Religion: but the Pope is not subject to
that law, but he may according to the authority given unto him, determine by
the laws of God and holy Church, who is an Heretic; and so will the learned
of foreign schools whether you will or no, apply the definition of Heresy or
of an Heretic, to what person they please.

As for us and our brethren executed, you know none ever called the Q.
Heretic voluntarily, contemptuously, or malitiouslie, as your statute
runs; but when they were driven by you of set purpose to offend the law, so
to have some quarrel to make them away.

The malice of our persecutours in driving and enforcing men to offend their
laws.
For example of your charitable and no less politic dealing in such matters,
we will set down the holy Martyr John Nelsons case. This man being brought
before the Magistrate, was demanded what Religion he was of? to which when he
boldly answered that he was a Catholic; they further asked what he thought
of that Religion and service which was used in England: and to that when he
answered that he took it to be heretical and schismatical; then (quoth they)
what is Schism? A volu^tarie revolt (said he) from the Roman and Catholic
Church. Well then said the Magistrate; go toe; what think thou of the Q. is
she a Schismatique or no? (for of any thing said before they had no just
pretense of law to condemn him of treason): the man of God answered, that he
never so called her for reverence of her high dignity; nor could tell (for
that he knew not her Majesty's meaning) whether this Religion were established
by her special commandment and authority or no; and therefore humbly prayed
them, not to urge him wittinglie to commit any crime, wherein hitherto he had
never offended. But they would not so cease; but said they could well resolve
him in that, that in deed this English religion was established by her, and by
her maintained: the Confessor refused still to answer; saying that he knew not
so much, for all that, of her mind and conscience, but it might proceed rather
of some of her ministers more then of her self: in which sort (as S. Augustine
notes) a man may be deceived by heretics but yet properly no heretic;
Haereticis credens, and non proprie Haereticus. A difference between an
Heretic and one that believes Heretics.
But because they would needs have the poor man's death, they left him not so;
but what (say they) if she were the author of this religion, then whether were
she a Schismatique, or Heretic, or no? The Confessor being loath to exasperate
the Prince on the one side, and more loath to offend God or give scandal on
the other; after he had paused a while, and asked strength from above, finally
he said; if she be the setter forth and defender of this Religion, then she is
a Schismatique and Heretic in deed. And so they got the holy person into the
compass of their law, for which afterward he was Martired.

Now we do appeal to the equity of al Christian people how loath our brethren
be to offend by word or deed the honor of the Q.; The offense of Catholics
coacted.
and after what a shameful captious sort, they be forced to do or say that,
which the enemy charge them withal, even to death. Alas; it is not
Catholics that apply those universal truths of schools, to the particular
case of our state: but it is their own uneven driftes, questions, fears, and
suspicions, that make them imagine and convert al to them selves. As also it is
their error in regiment (well near as may be doubted incorrigible) that has
brought them selves to these perplexities, and us to these coacted miseries and
complaints.

Lastly we say; that how soever any one Catholic or other has been driven
or shall be forced hereafter to offend against the said Statute of Supremacy or
Heresy, or against any new law made in that behalf; yet in equity they can not
be pursued to death for that cause; seeing our adversary protests here
publicly in his Libel, that no other trespasses shall be objected to us as
matter capital, saui^g treaso^s so made by the old laws of the Realm. As we
for our parts eftsons do protest and auowe before God (seeing we are now
enforced to treat of these affairs) that whatsoever we have said or shall say
in this our defense or remonstrance touching the former articles and demandes
about the Bull; A protestation before the entrance to the treaty of the former
demandes about the Bull.
nether has been nor shall be by us any wise spoken, me^t or applied, against
our natural Princess or country; how soever any suspicious, malicious, or
guilty mind shall peradventure conster or apply the same. Nether shall the
matter be otherwise treated of by me in this place, but in such general terms
as the schools use; without touching any particular person now living:
referring the application of al to Gods Church and to the chief Pastors
thereof; and to the conscience of every good Christian reader to whose hands
this book may chance to come. As on the other side, we will not busy our selves
to defend every private man's writing or actio^ concerning the matter of
th'Ecommunication, but will without partiality and personal quarrel, for a
common Apology of us al, ^eclare and prove these assertio^s of the Popes power
and superiority over kings in cases of Heresy, Apo^tacie, and other like; to
be agreeable to Gods word, and not treasonable nor undutiful to any Prince or
State in the world; but beneficial to al and every common wealth under Heaven,
whose government is contained within the prescript of Jesus Christ our Redeemers
law.

But first before we come to the declaration of Catholic doctrine concerning
Churches authority in censuring and deposing Princes for matter of Religion,
The Protestants opinion and practice for depositio^ of Princes in case of
false Religion.
it shall not be amiss perhaps to set down the judgment and practice of
Protestants in the same case: which though it weigh little or nothing with us as
being altogether both done and spoken of seditious and partial affection to
their Heresy, and against the lauful Magistrate of God: yet th'aduersarie
seeing his own Masters against him, shall well perceive that the resisting of
Princes and Magistrates in cause of Religion, as also the subjects taking arms
for their defense in such a case, is no way to be accounted treason; but most
lauful, according to their new Ghospel.

And first their grand-maister, Io. Calvin puts down his oracle, In Dan.
cap. 6. Ver. 22.25.
as a conclusion approved of their whole sect and confraternitie in these
words. Abdicant se potestate, terreni Principes, dum insurgunt co^tra Deum:
i^mo indigni sunt qui censeantur in hominum numero. Potius ergo conspuere
oportet in illo rum capita, The doctrine of Father Calvin.
quam illis parere, vbi sic proteruiunt vt velint spoliare Deum suo iure, etc.
Which in English is thus. Earthly Princes do bereave them selves of al
authority when they do erect them selves against God, yea they are unworthy
to be accounted in the number of men: and therefore we must rather spit upon
their heads, the^ obey them; when they become so proud, or perverse, that
they will spoil God of his right; and to the same place I further refer the
reader for his instruction.

For declaration of which text, and for cutting of al cauillation about
th'interpretatio^ of his words, their brother Beza; shall speak next who
allows and highly commends in writing, The doctrine of brother Beza.
the fighting in France for religion, against the laws and lawful K. of that
Country; saying in his epistle dedicatorie of his new testament to the Q. of
England her self; In editione. An. 1564.
That the Nobility of France (under the noble Prince of Condey) laid the first
foundation of restoring true Christian religion in France, by consecrating most
happily their blood to God in the batail of Druze. Whereof also the Ministers
of the reformed French Churches (as their phrase is) do give their common
verdict, The opinion of the Congregation. Art. 39.
in the confession of their faith, thus. We affirm that subjects must obey the
laws, pay tribute, bear al burdens imposed, and sustain the yoke even of
infidel Magistrates, so for all that, that the supreme dominion and due of God
be not violated.

Zvvinglius likewise a cater-cosen to the Caluinistes in religion, The sentence
of Zuinglius. lib. 4. Epist. Zvvinglii and Oecol. fol. 186.
writes thus. If the Empire of Rome, or what other Sovereign so ever, should
oppress the sincere religion, and we necligentlie suffer the same; we shall be
charged with contempt, no less then the oppressors thereof the^ selves: whereof
we have an example in the fiftenth of Jeremy, where the destruction of the
people is prophesied; 4. Reg. 21
for that they suffered their K. Manasses, being impious and ungodly, to be
unpunished.

And more plain in an other place. When kings (says he) rule vnfaithfullie;
and otherwise then the rule of the Gospel prescribes, Art. 42. explanat. Fol.
84.
they may, with God, be deposed: as, when they punish not wicked persons, but
specially when they advance the ungodly, as idle Priests, etc. such may be
deprived of their dignity, as Saul was.

And what our English Protestants writ or think of this matter, you shall well
perceive, by their opinion and high approbation of Wiats rebellion in Q. Mary's
days: whereof one of their chief Ministers called Goodman thus speaks in his
Treatise entitled; Goodmans opinion. Cap. 14. a page 204. ad pa. 212
How superior magistrates ought to be obeyed. Wyatt did but his duty, and it
was the duty of al others that profess the Gospel, to have risen with him,
for maintenance of the same. His cause was just, and they al were traitors
that took not part with him. O Noble Wyatt thou art now with God, and those
vvorthie men that died for that happy enterprise etc.

What the Scottish Ministry defines in this question, is plain, The
judgment of the Scottishe Ministry. Io. Knokes. Ibidem. page 77.
by the verdict of John Knokes their mightiest Prophet; the argument of a
treatise of this matter being set down by him self, thus: If the people have
either rashelie promoted any manifest wicked person, or else ignorantly
chosen such an one, as after declares him self unworthy of regiment above
the people of God (and such be al Idolators and cruel persecutors) most justly
may the same men depose and punish him.

So Luther also the Protestants Elias being asked his opinion of the Almans
co^federacie, The opinion and definition of Luther. Sled. Hist. lib. 8.
made at Smalcalde against Charles the fifth their lauful and noble Emperor;
answered: That in deed he was in doubt for a time, whether they might take
arms against their Supreme Magistrate, or no; but afterward seeing the
extremity of things, and that Religion could not otherwise be defended, nor
them selves; he made no conscience of the matter, but either Caesar, or any,
vvaging vvarres in his name, might be resisted.

Sledan also records that the Duke of Saxony and the Lantzgrane, gave this
reason, Lib. 21.
of their taking arms against their supreme Magistrate: For as much (say they)
as Caesar intends to destroy the true religion and our ancient liberty; he
gives us cause enough, why we may with good conscience resist him, as both by
profane and sacred histories may be proved.

Lib. 22.
The same writer reports the like of the Ministers of Magdeburge; declaring
how the inferior may defend him self against the superior, compelling him to
do against the truth and rule of Christ's laws.

By all which you see; that to resist the Magistrate, defend them selves in cases
of conscience, and to fight against the superior for religion, is a clear and
ruled case; and no treasonable opinion at al against the Prince, if we will be
judged by Protestants: wherein their known facts be far more notorious, then
their writings. The examples of the Protestants taking arms for their
Religion.
For that Beza and other the chief ministers of the French Caluinical
Congregations, were them selves in feeld, against two or three of their natural
liege lords and kings.

Zwinglius also the unfortunate Father of our English faith, was killed in the
battle as all the world knows; and thereby it is evident, that the instance of
D. Saunders who followed of zeal the late commotion in Ireland, can not be so
much objected to the Catholics reproach as th'aduersarie would have it seem;
whose report notwithstanding of the manner of his death, is also a very
slanderous untruth.

The Protestants of Flanders held it for a most certain truth (by the
approbation also and solicitation of England) that they might rebel against
their supreme Magistrate, for Religion; when by force of arms they altered al,
and deposed their Sovereign. Which ought the more to weigh with The English
Caluinistes, for that (as I have signified) their pudding lay also in that
fire. As likewise it is well known that them selves have been the cheifest
procurers and doers in the depriving of the lauful and anointed Q. of
Scotland; and for her further affliction, have kept her also in captivity,
these fourtene years together.

And here in these cases of their own, The variable and mutable dealing of
Protestants.
no treasonable propositions; no resisting of Gods anointed; no disobeying the
king, as being the most precellent; no ouerruling the person that
acknowledges no superior in earth, but holds only of God; (for all these
terms the Libeller seems to make great advantage of, against the resisters
of our Q. and deposing of her Majesty by the sea Apostolic) can have place
or bear sway. But when it comes to a point of their own fresh and
flourishing religion; then neither unction, nor lauful succession, nor any
other princely prerogative can serve lauful Magistrates, or save them from
their subjects fury: The English brethren ever specially assisting the
rebellion; as well by their divinity, as otherwise by force of arms to their
power.

The question therefore is not (nether is it material to the purpose which the
Libeller so much florisheth very idly) of the Princes lauful creation or
consecration: The true state of the question about resisting of Princes.
but whether a Prince laufullie invested and anointed, may be for any cause,
namely for matter of Religion, resisted by his subjects? We say that the
Protestants of al sects do both hold and practice it, England it self
specially allowing of the same. And therefore there is no treason in this case,
if we follow the present divinity of England: nor new example, if we respect
the furious attempts and rebellions of Scotland, Flaunders, France, and
Germany, against their superiors, for maintenance of their heresies; and al
well allowed by the ministry of every Province. And upon these examples you
should look (my Masters of England) when you make so much ado for one poor
commotion, made in defense of the Catholics, in twenty six years space of
the greatest persecution and tribulation that ever was since the Goths and
Vandals times. Where if the Q. had holden her Ancestors faith, and had ruled
over so many protestants but a quarter of the time, afflicting them, as she
has done Catholics (though perhaps not her self so much as her unmerciful
Ministers) her Majesty should have seen other manner of attemptes against her
state and quietness, then have fallen by Catholics either in England or Ireland
in this her reign. Which her long prosperity in government, proceeds
specially of the said Catholics timorous conscience, quietness of nature,
love of order and obedience, and great detestatio^ of garboiles, sturres and
troubles.

Which the very Heretics them selves have often reprochfullie and
scornefullie imputed unto them openly; The scorneful speeches of Heretics to
Catholics.
saying to some of great account, whom they had afflicted extremely. What will
you or what dare you do? Your hearts we know, and your wishes; but you are
very cowardes and beasts that be Papists. We stand in no fear of your
forces or what soever you can do against us. Yea the very ministers will out
of pulpits protest, that the Papists shall never have the world for them, come
what change of Prince or laws so ever, for they will fight for it to death.

Which challenge and vaunt they make on every hand so boldly, (and yet very
vndiscreetlie) because they see the Catholics, more sad, grave, honest, and
quiet natured men, The different natures of Catholics and of Protestants.
consisting of devout and aged persons and of godly weemen: where as the
Protestants, now in possession of state, goods and government, ar risen (most
of the principal) by alteration; spoil and faction; their chief folowers
youthful persons, venterous, and desperate; and the rest both of laity, and
specially clergy, entangled by the present commodities and pleasures (which
this new Religion yields, in all fleshly lusts and turpitude) are impatient,
vindicatiue, restles, and furious: and in a very few (in comparison of
Catholics and quiet men) make a great show and a terrible muster, in the
sight of quiet honest and peaceable persons.

Now these violent and factious men when the Prince and laws go for them, they
make their advantage thereof: but if they be against the^, they break al
bo^des of obedience, despise dominatio^, make spoil and havoc of al things,
and run headlong into al most detestable disorders.

If you mark the^ you shall perceive, they make their market most in the
minority of Princes or of their infirmity; as i^ England, in K. Edwards time;
The seditious and crafty practice of Protestants.
In France under the deceased two young brethren of his Majesty that now is; In
our country again, by the infirmity of the Princess sex that now reigns
(otherwise truly of most excellent gifts) but always a woman, easily
seduced, and not hardly led and drawn by those, whom she either trusts or
fears: i^ which case commonly, the more gentle or innocent the Sovereign
is; the more violent is the government, through the abuse of their simplicity,
by the tyranny of such as occupy under them principal authority.

How this sort of men abused the years sex and benignity also of the noble
lady now Q. of Scotland, The traitors of Scotland.
whose fortune therbie has been so hard as the world now sees; and withal bow
they have abused her most high and excellent Sons minority, to
th'aduauncement of their sect and selves; no man can be ignorant. And now when
that rare Prince is come to years of knowledge, and thereby like to epsy and
punish the wicked treachery and treasons of those that have so abominably
abused his infancy and Mothers sex; they barbarously, by the counsel of
wicked Ministers (the raskalitie of the Realm) ceazed upon his royal person:
and sithence being delivered by God from his enemies hands, they stick not to
tell him to his face, that he was erected by them to defend this new and
barbarous Gospel of theirs: and only upon fear of his further years they
seek to put his noble person in daily danger.

This lo is the devotion of Protestants toward their Princes, agreeable to
their former opinions recited before. But of their divinity we make no further
account, then is requisite for this dispute now in hand with their fellow
Protestants, and with those specially of England, who are the principal
protectors of al these practizes colored by religion; whereof yet they have no
further care, the^ concerns only their own interest. But it is sufficient
for us, that with these men (if we may believe either their words or deeds) it is
no treason to resist the Sovereign, for defense of Religion; nor no
treasonable assertion to hold that a lauful Prince may be deposed in case of
revolt from God. And so say also on the other side al Catholic men and
schools in the Christian world concerning this point. The different manner of
proceeding of Catholics and Protestants in ce^suring their Princes for
Religion.
But yet here is the difference between Catholic Christians, and rebellious
Heretics; that these good-fellowes, following their own deceiptful wills, and
uncertain opinions, without rule or reason, do adiudge by their private
folly and fantasy, that thing to be error or idolatry, which indeed is
true Religion; and do condemn for Gods enemies such their lauful Souerains,
as holy Church (which herein must be our chief informer and judge) does allow
for most just, godly, sacred, and Catholic Princes.

The Catholics contrariwise, as men of order and obedience, not trusting
their own particular imaginations or partial affections, which might lead
opiniatiue and restless brains to raise rebellion at their pleasure under
pretense of religion (whereof the Protestants have given us pitiful examples
these years past, when soever the wicked desired change of governors and
estate) do commit the direction of matters so important, to the Church and to
the chief governors of their souls: who can judge, by the Scriptures, Canons
and Councels, what is Heresy; who is an Heretic; what Prince is worthy to
be excommunicated; who to be deprived; who is incorrigible; who may be expected
in hope of amendment; who not: in what season and sort, to the lest disturbance
and most benefit and safety of the kingdom or place annoyed by such
unworthy Princes, the thing must be executed.

The Church is not partial in these things, The Catholic Church the best
judge of Heresy.
as we that be subjects may be; it is not decent that inferiors should
determine at their pleasures of there superiors. What way therefore can we take
in Christian religion, more seemly and sure in conscience for these affairs
then to harken to the high priest of Gods Church; by whose direction our
consciences, in this case, cannot lightly err; or surely not so
perniciouslie, when we follow them to whom Christ has given the charge of our
souls; and must render account thereof to him, as to the supreme Bishop of al,
by whom and for whom only al kings do reign. Catholics therefore (as you
see) agree with the other in the point of deposing and resisting kings for
Religion; but yet do differ in the manner, as far as reason and conscience
differ from fury and frenzy.

About which matter I will now set down some Catholic writers, albeit but few
for brevity sake; The opinions of Catholic vvriters about depositio^ of
Princes for Apostasy and Heresy.
yet of such excellent credit, as shall be able to instruct and satisfy any
reasonable conscience in this case; as also to be our brethrens defense against
al those, that charge them so deadly with these treasonable propositions.

Thomas Aquin; that glorious Saint and clarke, whose only sentence weighs
more, then all the Protestants wits and words in the world, says thus: S.
Thomas.
Postquam Princeps est denunciatus Apostata, omnes inferiores and subditi
absoluuntur a praestito iuramento and obedientia illi debita; that is to say:
After a Prince is one denounced to be an Apostata, al his inferiors and
subjects, are assoyled of their oath made unto him, and of their obedience due
unto him. This case therefore is plainly resolved upon, Toledos opinion, of a
Prince exco^municat. in 2. 2.
by the greatest of all the school Doctors, and therefore can be no treasonable
assertion or opinion. Upon which words of S. Thomas, the famous professor of
our time Francis Toledo writes further thus: Nota (says he) quod eadem est
ratio de Excommunicato; quia cum primum quis est denuntiatus excommunicatus,
omnes subditi absoluuntur ab eius obedientia. Licet enim sit notorium crimen
Principis, non absoluuntur vasalli a iuramento, vt been dicit Caietanus, ante
denuntiationem ab Ecclesia; qua facta, non solum sunt absoluti ab obedientia,
sed tenentur non obedire; nisi forte propter periculum vitae, vel damnum
bonorum temporalium. Et sic de Henrico octauo in Anglia factum est: cui etsi
subditi postquam denuntiatus esset excommunicatus, tenebantu^ non obedire;
tamen quia is crudelis erat, and illos vel vita vel bonis priuasset, excusati
fuerunt subditi, illi adhuc obedie^do. Which is in English. Note (says he)
that albeit S. Thomas named only an Apostata, yet the reason is al one in the
Princes case that is excommunicated. For as soon as one is denounced or
declared an excommunicate, al his subjects be discharged of their obedience.
For though the crime of a Prince be notorious, yet before declaration thereof be
made by the Church, the vassals are not assoyled from obedience, as Caietanus
well holds: which declaration being made by the Church, they are not only
discharged of their loyalty, but are bound not to obey him any more; except
it be for fear of their lives, The case of K. Henry the eight.
or loss of their temporal goods. As it was in England in the time of Henry
the eighth: whom though the subjects were bound not to obey, after he was
denounced excommunicate; yet for that he was a cruel man, and would either have
killed or spoiled the^; they were excused in obeying him. Thus does this
notable schoolman write; nether do we know any Catholic divine of any age
to say the contrary. Cap. Aliu. cu^ sequen. xv. q. 5. Cap. fin. de Haeret.


We will not allege the Canon laws; which for that they be the decrees
specially of Popes, whom our adversaries account partial, shall weigh little
with them; though they be authentical in all the lauful tribunals of the
Christian world: and make al Heretics (not only after they be namely and
particularly denou^ced, but by the law it self, ipso facto, as soon as they
be Heretics or de iure excommunicated for the same) to be deprived of their
dominions, though the subjects until denuntiation, need not take knowledge
thereof.

Only it is not good to omit the definition and words of the famous general
Counsel of Laterane, The sentence and definition of the great learned ad
general Council of Laterane.
celebrated above 300. years since; wherein there were Patriarchs and
Archbishops 70. Bishops 412. and other Prelates 800. In all, of the most chosen
learned men of al nations, 1282; with th'Ambassadors of the Roman Emperor, of
the king of Jerusalem, of England, of France, of Spain, and of Cipres, as
also of other Christian states; then which, there can be no surer judgment upon
earth: which assembly representing the whole Christian world, would never
agree upon any assertion traitorous. Cap. 3. de Haeret.
These the^ are the words of their most renowned decree, put only in English
for breuities sake.

If any Lord temporal, required and admonished by the Church, neclect to purge
his state from Heretical filth; let him be excommunicated by the Metrapolitane
and conprouincial Bishops: but if he contemn to come to order within one years
space, let relation be made to the supreme Bishop: that from thenceforth he may
declare al his subjects to be discharged of their fealty toward him, and
give up his land to be possessed by Catholics; which Catholics without al
contradiction (when they have driven out the Heretics) shall have and hold
the same, and so preserve it in purity of faith: (the interest and right of
the cheef Lord, ever remaining safe and whole, so that him self give no
impediment to the execution of this decree). And the same law to take place in
such also as be sovereign Lords and have no superiors.

Thus both Schools and Laws speak and resolve for the matter in hand: both
Catholics and Protestants agreing, that Princes may for some causes, and
especially for their defection in Faith and Religion, be resisted and
forsaken: though in the manner of executing the sentence and other needful
circumstances, Protestants follow faction and populer mutiny; we reduce al, to
law, order, and judgment.

But for the further clearing of this cause, we mean now in the next chapter
(by the help of God) to declare and plainly deduce all that hitherto has been
said in the premises, from holy Scriptures and warrant of Antiquity; that al
indifferent men may see, how far we be from treason, or undutifulness to our
Princess in these our opinions, especially when by a certain violence we be
coacted to utter the same.

OF EXCOMMVNICATION AND DEPRIVATION OF PRINCES FOR heresy and falling from the
Faith: specially, of vvarres for Religion; and of the office and Zeal of
Priests of the old and new law in such cases. CAP. V.
PRinces being not subject to superiors temporal, The dangerous state of a
temporal Prince if he be not subject to spiritual counsel.
nor patient of correction or controlment by their inferiors, may easelie fall
to grievous disorders, which must tend to the danger and ruin of whole
countries.

In respect whereof; great spirit, power, courage, and freedom of speech have
been from the beginning granted by God, as well ordinary to Priests, as
extraordinary to some Prophets and religious persons, in all ages and times,
both of the new and old testament.

So by Gods great providence (who by his Prophet warned kings to take
discipline, Psalm. 2.
and to serve him in fear, lest in his ire he should suffer them fall to
iniquity) the first kings of his peculiar people, had lightly some Prophets
or Priests in manner as overseers, that might from time to time charge them
boldly, and as it were by office, with their enormities; and namely with
their fall from Faith and the God of their Fathers: to denounce his threatenings,
yea and execute the same upon them, at sometimes if need so required; which
ministers of their Lord God, al godly Princes did hear, honor, and obey: as
contrariwise the kings that were wicked and disloyal to God, have ever sought
cruelly their death and destruction, that so their wickedness might pass
without controlment.

Saul the first temporal king that ever the Jews (being then Gods peculiar)
had; 1. Reg. 10 15.16.
though chosen and inspired by God, was for all that led and directed by Samuel
so long as he was in order. Saul deposed for usurping spiritual function.
But afterward for aspiring to spiritual function, and other disobedience; was
by Gods appointment and sentence (pronounced by the said Samuel) deposed of his
kingdom, and an other named David anointed by him. Which Saul now after his
deprivation, or after, as it were, his excommunication by Samuel; was invaded
by an evil spirit, that provoked him to kill not only David, that was now made
the rightful owner of his crown; 1. Reg. 22
but also to seek for Samuels death: yea and to command all the holy Priests
of Nobe (fourscore and five in number, as holy Scripture recompteth) to be
slain and murdered in most pitiful wise, as traitors to him, and fouorers of
David the competitor of his kingdom. And so it was done at last; though at the
beginning his guard refused to execute so vile and horrible an act; and in this
sort he remained enemy many years, against God and Samuel, and kept the
kingdom by tirannical force notwithstanding his deposition.

David nevertheless, in whom was the right of the croune, was laufullie up in
Arms, with one of the principal Priests whose name was Abiathar, that escaped
the foresaid murder; not of such power as the pretensed king was: til at
length the usurper (whom as S. Augustine deduceth, August. co^tra Adamantium.
he might laufullie have killed but would not) being slain in batail, David
obtained his right; first, of a part of the kingdom; and afterward, of all the
rest; which Isboseth did for two years by the pretended right of Saul his
father usurp.

By which it is plain, that the Priests and Prophets of God, Priests most
subject to danger in time of usurpation.
being the executors of his sentences, and rule of the people in such doubtful
and partial times of variety for claim and competencie; are most subject to
the hatred of usurpers, as also to death and danger for the same.

You see in what sort also Hiereboam king of Israel, 3. Reg. 13 14. The example
of Ieroboa^ a wicked schismatic, denou^ced by a Priest.
had a special Prophet sent to him to denounce the intended judgments of God
against him and his posterity, for his schism and separation of his people,
from the old ancient true worship of God in Jerusalem; and for erecti^g of a
new Altar in Bethel (i^ which al schism and division from the Apostolic Sea
is properly prefigured) and for creating of a wicked clergy out of Aarons
order: I mean; new, hungry, base, and inordered Priests (the pattern of
heretical ministers) thrust up, out of the array and orderly succession and
creation of Apostolic Priesthood: a crime so highly afterward both in him and
his stock (according to Gods former denunciation) revenged, that none of his
house was left to piss against a wall. Yet he fondly sought to apprehend the
man of God, and to kill him, for bringing this news, which he accounted high
treason, against his regalitie. Ozias also, The example of proud Ozias that
would take unto him the authority of Priests.
or Vsia king of Judah puffed up with intolerable pride (as the Scripture
says) and not contended with his kingly sovereignty, but presuming to
execute spiritual and Priestlie function; was valiantly by Azarias and
fourscore Priests with him, assailed, and thrust out of the Temple by force.
At what time for that he threatened the Priests of God and resisted them with
violence; he was strooken with a filthy leprosy: and so not only thrust out
of the Temple, but by their authority, severed also from al company of men (a
special figure of the Priests power to excommunicate for Heresy, as well
Princes as others, in the new law): and finally the regiment of his kingdom
was committed to his son. A clear example that Priests may use arms, and
repress impiety by forceable ways, where it may serve to the preservation of
Religion and the honor of God.

But the office and zeal of good Priests is notably 4. Reg. 11
reco^mended unto us, The example of depositio^ and death of Queen Athalia by
Ioida the high Priest
in the deposition of the wicked Q. Athalia. She, to obtain the croune after
Ochasias, killed al his children: only one, which by a certain good woman's
piety was secretly withdrawn from the massacre, saved and brought up within
the Temple for seven years space; al which time the said Q. usurped the
kingdom: til at length Ioida the high Priest, by opportunity called to him
forces both of the Preistes and people; proclaimed the right heir that was in
his custody; anointed and crouned him king; and caused immediately the
prete^sed Q. (notwithstanding she cried Treason, Treason, as not only just
possessors but wicked usurpers use to do) to be slain with her fautors at her
own court gate. Thus do Priests deal and judge for the innocent and lauful
Princes (when time requires) much to their honor, and agreeable to their holy
calling.

No man can be ignorant how stoutly Elias (being sought to death by Achab and
his Q. Iesabel that overthrew holy Altars, 3. Reg. 18 19. The execution done
by Elias the Prophet upon many with deposition of Princes.
and murdered all the true religious that could be found in their land) told
them to their face; that not he or other men of God whom they persecuted, but
they and their house were the disturbers of Israel: And slew in his zeal all the said Iesabels false Prophets, fostered at her table, even four hundredth at
one time; and so set up holy Altars again: How he handled the Idololatrious
king Ochozias his Captains and messingers, 4. Reg. 1
wasting them and an hundredth of their train, by fire from heaven; til the
third Captain was forced, to humble him self upon his knees unto him.

3. Reg. 19. 4. Reg. 9
How he had commission to anoint Hazael, king of Siria; Eliseus, a Prophet for
him self; and Iehu, king of Israel, and so to put down the son and whole
house of Achab; which therbie lost all the title and right to the kingdom for
ever.

This Prophet and his successor Eliseus, were so famous in this service of God,
for the chastisement of irreligious Princes; that in holy writ it is thus said
of the former: He cast down kings, destroyed them, Eccle. 48.
and plucked the honorable from their seats. And of the second in the same
place: that he never feared Prince, nor could be overcome by any. And in an
other place; 3. Reg. 19
Who soever escapes the svvord of Iehu, the svvord of Eliseus shall slay him.

By which examples of holy Scriptures, we see; first, Illations and
consequents upon the former examples.
that anointed and laufullie created kings may be deposed: secondly, for
what causes they were deprived: thirdly, that as in the creation and
consecration of kings, so also in their deprivation, God used the ministry
of Priests and Prophets, as either ordinary or extraordinary Judges or
executors of his will toward them.

For though nether these Priests nor Prophets were superiors to their own
kings or sovereigns in their temporal states and regiments; nor Lords or
masters of their crounes and kingdoms: yet for that they held their dignities
and sovereign authorities of God, and were bound to occupy and use the same,
with what forces so ever they had, to th'aduauncement of his Religion, and to
the true worship and honor of their supreme Lord and Master; as also to the
benefit and preservation of his people in faith and fear of him: the Priests
and Prophets (that then had the principal and direct charge of men's souls and
religion; and were in spiritual matters superiors to their own Princes)
rightly opposed them selves in all such actions as tended to the dishonor of
God, destruction of religion, and to the notorious damage of the souls of them
over whom they did reign: and in the behalf of God, executed justice upon
such, as contrary to their obligation and first institution, abused their
sovereign power, to the destruction of true religion and aduauncemet of
Idolatry, Heresy, or such like abomination. In which cases, and al other
doubts and differences betwixt one man and an other, or betwixt Prince and
people; that Priests and namely the high Priest should be the Arbiter, and
Judge, and the interpreter of Gods will toward his people; is most consonant
both to nature, reason, the use of al nations, and to the express Scriptures.

Deuteronomy. 17.
For in Gods sacred law thus we read: Si difficile and ambiguum apud te iudicium
esse prospexeris inter sanguinem and sanguinem, The subjection of al men to the
judgment of Priests.
causam and causam, lepram and non lepram etc. If thou forsee the judgment to
be hard and ambiguous, betwixt blood and blood, cause and cause, leprosy or no
leprosy; and find variety of sentences among the judges at home: rise and
go up to the place, which the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shall come to
the Priests of Leuies stock, and to the judge that shall be for the time; thou
shall ask of them, and they will judge according to the truth of judgment: and
thou shall do what so ever they say that have the rule of the place which God
shall choose, and shall teach the according to his law: thou shall not decline
neither to the right hand nor left. And if any shall be so proud as not to obey
the commandment of the Priest that shall for that time minister unto the Lord
thy God, by the sentence of the judge let that man die; and so thou shall remove
evil from Israel: and all the people hearing shall fear and take heed, that
hereafter they wax not proud.

Thus far in the holy text, generally without al exception: subiecting in
cases of such doubts as are recited, al degrees of faithful men, no less
kings then others, to the Priests resolution. Yea immediately order is given
how their kings, (which yet were not when that was written, but afterward by
their motion to be created) should be elected: that none could be chosen to
rule over them being the people of God, that were not true believers and
worshippers of him, according to the ceremonies of their law and religion:
which laws they might not take, make, or moderate them selves, but receive of
the Priests of the Leuitical tribe; and therbie learn to fear God, and keep
his words and ceremonies: expressly also appointing and warning them, or as it
were couenanting with them and him whom they should create or have for their
king; that he should not against Gods express commandment, bring back at
any time his people into Egypt: that is to say; from the liberty of his faith
and true service, to the bondage of Idolatry and false Religion.

Which condition was afterward to be implied in the receuing of any king over
the people of God and true believers for ever: Videlicet; A condition implied
in the creation of al Princes.
that they should not reduce their people by force or otherwise from the Faith
of their forefathers, and the religion and holy ceremonies thereof, received at
the hands of Gods Priests and none other; Insinuating, that observing these
precepts and conditions, he and his son after him might long reign:
otherwise, as by the practice of their deposition in the books and time of the
kings it afterward appears (whereof we have set down some examples before)
the Prophets and Priests that anointed them, of no other condition but to
keep and maintain the honor of God and his true worship; deprived them
again, when they brake with their Lord, and fell to strange Gods, and forced
their people to do the like.

And this it was in the old law. The authority of Priesthood in the new
testament.
But now in the new testament and in the time of Christ's spiritual kingdom in
the Church, Priests have much more sovereign authority, and Princes far more
strict charge to obey, love, Esa. 49.52. Esa. 60.
and cherish the Church: of which Church it was said by prophecy; Kings
shall be thy Fosterfathers, and Queens thy Nurces: And again; Kings breasts
shall nourish the; and every kingdom that serves not the shall perish. In
which Church without fail is the supereminent power of Christ's Priesthood;
Psalm. 2.
who with his yro^ rod bruseth the pride of Princes, that rebel against his
Spouse and kingdom in earth, like a potters potsharde: Ierem. 1.
and has right in his Church over al kingdoms, to plant and pluck up, to
build and destroy; before whom al kings shall fall down, and al nations do him
service. Math. 16.


Now Christ's Priestlie prerogative, passing his own regal dignity (much more
excelling al other humane power of the world) in most ample and exact terms is
communicated to the chief Priest and pastor of our souls, Mat. 18.
and secondarilie to the rest of the governors of the Church; in other manner
of clauses the^ any earthly Princes can show for their pretenced spiritual
regiment. Fie on that secular pride and wilful blind heresy, so repugning
against Gods express ordinance; and yet is of wicked Sectmaisters and
flatterers vpholden to the eternal calamity of them selves, and of millions of
others.

Joan. 21.
Now al Christ's sheep, wthout exception, be they Princes, be they poor (if
they be Christian men) are put to Peter's feeding and government. Now the keys
of heaven be delivered to Christ's Vicar in earth; Mat. 16.
to let in, to lock out; to bind, to loose; to punish, to pardon. Heb. 13.
Now we be commanded every one, (be we kings, be we Caesar's) to obey our
Prelates and Pastors, and to be subject to them, as to those that must make
account to God for our souls; 1. Cor. 5. 2. Joan.
wherein what Christian Prince may except him self?

Now they have full authority to forbid us the company of Heretics, Ad Tit.
3.
Blasphemers, Idolaters, and such like; and not so much as to salute them, much
more not to obey them. And lest any man should think this power to be so
merely spiritual, that it might not in any wise be extended to temporal or
corporal damage or chastisement of the faithful in their goods, lives,
possessions, or bodies, being mere secular things, and therefore not subject to
their Pastors spiritual or Priestlie function: it is to be marked in the holy
Apostles first execution of their commissions and authority, Spiritual Pastors
have power to punish corporally.
that though their spiritual power immediately and directly concerns not our
temporal affairs; yet indirectlie (and as by accident) it does not only
concern our souls but our bodies and goods, so far as is requisite to our
souls health, and expedient for the good regiment thereof, and the Churches
utility, being subject to their spiritual governors.

Therefore S Peter, Act. 5.
being but a mere spiritual officer and Pastor of men's souls; yet for
sacrilege and simulation, stroke dead both man and wife. Act. 13.
S. Paul stroke blind, Elymas the Magician. 1. Cor. 4
So did he threaten to come to his contemners, in rod of discipline. So did
he excommunicate a principal person in Corinth, 1. Cor. 5
for incest: not only by spiritual punishment, but also by bodily vexation,
giving him up to Satan's chastisement. As he corporally also corrected and
molested with an evil spirit Himineus and Alexander for blasphemy and heresy.
Finally he boldly avouches, 1. Timo. 1 2. Cor. 10
that his power in God is to revenge al disobedience, and to bring under al
lofty hearts to the loialtie of Christ, and of the Apostles and Saints in this
life. 1. Cor. 6.
Nescitis (quoth he) quoniam Angelos iudicabimus, quanto magis secularia? Know
you not that we shall judge Angels, how much more secular matters?

In all which there is no difference betwixt Kings that be faithful, and other
Christian men: who al in that they have submitted them selves and their
scepters to the sweet yoke of Christ, are subject to discipline and to their
Pastors authority no less the^ other sheep of his fould.

And although the state, regiment, policy and power temporal, The Civil
governor subject to the spiritual amongst Christians.
be in it self always of distinct nature, quality, and condition from the
government Ecclesiastical, and spiritual common weath called the Church or
body mystical of Christ; and the Magistrate spiritual and civil diverse and
distinct; and sometime so far that the one has no dependence of the other, nor
subalternation to the other in respect of them selves; (as it is in the Churches
of God residing in heathen kingdoms, and was in The Apostles times under the
Pagane Emperors): yet now where the laws of Christ are received, and the
bodies politic and mistical, the Church and Civil state, the Magistrate
Ecclesiastical and temporal, co^curre in their kinds together; (though ever of
distinct regiments, natures, and ends) there is such a concurrence and
subalternation betwixt both, that th'inferior of the two (which is the Civil
state) must needs (in matters perteining any way either directly or
indirectlie to the honor of God and benefit of the soul) be subject to the
spiritual, and take direction from the same.

The condition of these two powers (as S. Gregory Nazianzen most excellently
resembles it) is like unto the distinct state of the same spirit and body, In
Orati. ad popul. trepida^tem. and Impera. commotum.
or flesh in a man: where either of them having their proper and peculiar
operations, ends, and objects, which in other natures may be severed: (as in
Brutes, where flesh is and not spirit: Nazians similitude to express the
subordinatio^ of Civil and of Spiritual government.
in Angels, where spirit is but not flesh): are yet in man conioined in person;
and nevertheless so distinct in faculties and operations; that the flesh has
her actions peculiar, and the soul hers; but not without al subalternation or
dependence. Where we see evidently, that in case the operations of the body
be contrary to the end, weal, and just desires of the soul; the spirit may
and must command, ouerrule, and chastise the body: and as superior appoints
fasting and other afflictions, though with some detriment to the flesh:
commanding the eyes not to see; the tongue not to speak; and so forth. So
likewise; the power Political, has her Princes, Laws, Tribunals; and the
Spiritual her Prelates, Canons, Counsels, Judgments, (and these, when the
Princes are Pagans) wholly separate: but in Christian Commonwealths joined,
though not confounded; nor yet the Spiritual turned into the Temporal, or
subject by perverse order (as it is now in England) to the same; but the Civil
(which in deed is the inferior) subordinate, and in some cases subject to the
Ecclesiastical: though so long as the temporal State is no hinderance to
eternal felicity, and the glory of Christ's kingdom, the other intermedleth not
with her actions; but allows, defends, honoreth, and in particular
Commonwealths obeys the same.

Yet where it is otherwise, When the Spiritual government is to correct the
Temporal.
and the temporal power resists God, or hinders the proceeding of the people
to salvation; there the Spiritual has right to correct the Temporal, and to
procure by all means possible, that the terrene kingdom, give no annoyance to
the State of the Church: which now adorned in the new Testament, with the power
of Christ's Priesthood, and with several and distinct officers, appointed by the
Holie-ghost; must needs so far excel the terrene state and dominatio^, as the
Son passes the Moon, the soul the body, and heaven the earth. By reason
of which excellency and preeminence above al states and men, without exception
of Prince or other, our Lord proclameth in his Gospel; Math. 18
that who soever obeys not or hears not the Church, must be taken and used
no otherwise, then as a Heathen.

This being so plain, and in truth so beneficial to the very Kings and
Commo^-welthes them selves, that the preservation of both, specially stands
upon this concurrence with the Church and Priesthood, and with the due
subalternation of the temporal to the spiritual regiment: and which al Kings
(that be not for punishment of their own and their peoples sins obdurate,
and prepared by Gods judgment to be an example of his power and justice) most
gladly acknowledge: yet their be so many either flatterers of Princes that so
say; Deceatful persuasions of Politikes unto Princes for their ruin.
or Heretics that so think; that the Ministers of Christ's most dear Spouse,
of his very body mystical, his kingdom and house in earth (whom at his
departure hence, he did endowe with most ample Commission, and sent forth with
that authority, that his Father before gave unto him) have no power over
Princes, to denounce or declare them to be violators of Gods and the Churches
laws; nor to punish them either spirituallie or temporallie; not to
excommunicate them; nor to discharge the people of their oath and obedience
toward such, as neither by Gods law nor man's, a true Christian may obey.

Wherein it may please the gentle readers to inform their consciences partly
by that is said before, and specially by that which follows. Where they shall
find that straight upon the first conversion of Kings to the faith, The
examples of disobedient Princes to the Church and of their punishment or
confusion.
as the good and godly have ever obeyed the Church, and submitted them selves
to Ecclesiastical censures and discipline: so the evil and obstinate could
never orderly discharge them selves from the same, without evident note of
injustice, tirannie, and irreligiositie; and were either in fin brought to
order and penance, or else to confusion both temporal and eternal.

Chrisost. in vita Baby.
About xiij. hundredth years ago Babylas Bishop of Antioche excommunicated the
only Christian king or Emperor that then was (as some count Numerius, The
example of Bishop Babylas.
as others, Philip) for executing a Prince, that was put to him, for an
hostage. Whereupon, as evil kings sometimes do, he martired his Bishop; whom
S. Chrysostom and others reckon for the most famous Martyr of that time:
because he gave both by his constancy and courage in God, a notable example to
al Bishops of their behavior toward their Princes; and how they ought to use
th'Ecclesiastical rod of correction toward them, what soever befall to their
persons for the same.

After the said Prince had murdered his own Pastor; Nicep. li. 5. cap. 25.
then holy Pope Fabian for that he was the general shepard of Christendom (or
as some think Fabius the successor of Babylas) pursued the said Emperor by
like excommunication, and other means, til at length he brought him to order
and repentance.

Afterward S. Ambros Bishop of Millan excommunicated the elder Theodosius
The Emperor; Soz. lib. 7. Cap. 24. Theo. lib. 5. Cap. 17 Amb. li. 5 Epist. 28
Au. de ciuit. Dei. li. 5. Cap. 26
put him to public penance among the rest of the people; commanded him to
put of his kingly robes; to leave his Emperial throne in the Chauncel, and to
keep his place among the laytie: and prescribed him after eight months
penance, to make a temporal law for prouiso, against the occasions of such
crimes as the said Emperor had committed, and for which he was excommunicated.

This was an other world then we now are in; Our shameless age.
marvelous courage and zeal in Bishops for Gods cause; much humility and
obedience in Princes. Then was there no flatterer so shameful, nor heretic on
earth so impudent, as to make the temporal kings above al correction of Gods
Church and their own Pastors; nothing being more common in the histories of al
ages then that Princes have received discipline.

As when Anastasius The Emperor was excommunicated by Symmachus; Diverse Princes
excommunicated by their Pastors.
Lotharius and Michael Emperors, by Nicholas the first; and particular
Princes, by there prouincial Bishops: as we see in the records of al nations.
Therefore we will stand only upon more famous and ancient examples.

Innocentius the first, excommunicated Archadius The Emperor and his wife
Queen Eudoxia, for that they disobeyed and persecuted their Bishop S.
Chrysostom. Nicepho. li. 13. Cap. 34 Georg. Patriarcha. in vita Chris.
We will report the judicial sentence breeflie, because it is much to the
purpose and full of Majesty.

O Emperor (said Pope Innoce^tius well nere 1200. years ago) the blood of my
brother John Chrysostom cries to God against thee: The sentence of
excommunication given by Innocentius Bishop of Rome against the Emperor.
thou have cast out of his chair the great Doctor of the world; and in him,
by thy vviues (that delicate Dalila) her persuasion have persecuted Christ.
Therefore I (though a poor sinful soul) to vvho^ the throne of the great
Apostle S. Peter is committed, do excommunicate the and her, and do separate
you both from the holy Sacraments: commanding, that no Priest nor Bishop,
under pain of deprivation, after this my sentence come to their knowledge,
give or minister the said Sacraments unto you.

Thus did this blessed Father (whom S. Augustine exceedingly commended in his
time) deal with this Emperor and wicked Queen, the cause of her husbands
fall and offenses, and at length brought them to penance. But when in process
of time some Princes, When and upon what occasions spiritual Pastors began
to use the temporal svvord.
through Gods just judgment and the peoples sin, were fallen to such
contempt of religion (as it lightly happens by Heresy and Apostacy) that
excommunication, being only but a spiritual penalty, or other ordinary
Ecclesiastical discipline would not serve: then as well Bishops as other godly
persons, their own subjects, did crave aid and arms of other Princes, for
their chasticement: as most holy and ancient Popes (even in these old days
when the Protestants confess them to have been godly Bishops) did incite
Catholic kings to the same: that those whom the spiritual rod could not
fruitfullie chastise; they might by externe or temporal force, bring them to
order and repentance; or at lest defend their innocent Catholic subjects from
unjust vexation.

There is no war in the world so just or honorable be it civil or foreign, as
that which is waged for Religion; we say for the true, ancient, Catholic,
Roman religion; which by the laws of holy Church and al Christian nations,
War for the Catholic religion both lauful and honorable.
is adjudged to be th'onelie true worship of God; and unto the obedience of
which al Princes and people have yielded them selves, either by oath, vow, or
Sacraments, or every of these ways. For this, it is godly and honorable to
fight in such order and time, as we be warranted in conscience and law, by our
supreme Pastors and Priests; and not for wild condemned heresies, against most
lauful Christian Catholics, Kings and Priests; as the rebellious Protestants
and Caluinistes of this time do, without al order, law, or warrant of God or
man. As the arms taken for defense of Godly honor and inheritance in such
sort and difference from Heretical tumultes as is said, are so much more
commendable and glorious; for that no crime in the world deserves more sharp
and zealous pursuit of extreme revenge, (whether it be in superiors or
subjects) then reuolting from the Faith to strange religions.

Who-soeuer seeks not after the Lord God of Israel, 2. Paral. Cap. 15.
let him be slain (said king Asa admonished by Azaria the Prophet) from the
highest to the lowest without exception. And all the people and many that
followed him and fled to him out of Israel from the schism there, did swear and
vow them selves in the quarrel of the God of their forefathers. And they
prospered and deposed Q. Maacha mother to Asa for Apostacy, and for worshipping
the venereous God called Briapus.

For that case also in Deutrenomie express charge was given to slay al false
Prophets, Cap. 13
and who so ever should auert the people from the true worship of God, and
induce them to receive strange Gods, and new religions; and to destroy al their
folowers, were they never so near us by nature. And in the same place; that if
any city should reuoult from the received and prescribed worship of God, and
begin to admit new religions; it should be utterly wasted by fire and sword.
Nether pertains this to poor men only, but to the governors and leaders
of the people most of al; As we see in the book of Numbers, where Moses by the
commandment of God caused all the Princes of the people to be hanged upon
gibets against the son, Cap. 25.
Execution done upon Princes.
for communication in sacrifice with the Moabites; and the rest of the people
every one by the hand of his neighbor to be put to the sword for the same
fault; wherein Phinees the Priest of God by sleaing a chief captain with his
own hands deserved eternal praise, and the perpetuity of his Priesthood. By
Moses also his appointment, the faithful Levites slew 33000. of there
neighbors, brethren and friends, for committing Idolatry and forsaking the
true God. Marry in all this (as you see by th'exa^ples alleged) the Prophet
and Priests must direct them for the cause and action, that they err not of
fantasy, partiality, pride, and pretense of religion, as Heretics and
Rebels do: but the quarrel must be for the old faith, service and Priesthood,
against innovation; and directed and allowed by those which by order and
function have charge of our souls.

Cap. 27 The punishment of Princes for schism and revolt.
As we read also in the book of Numbers that the Captain and all the people,
were commanded to go in and out: that is; to proceed in wars according to
the order of Eleazarus the Priest. Such were the wars of Abia and other
kings of Judah, 2. Paral. Cap. 13.
that fought most justly and prosperously against the schismatical
Israelites, and justly possessed the cities which they conquered in those
wars. 1. Paral. Cap. 21. 4. Reg. Cap. 8.
As also Edom and Lobua revolted from king Ioram for religion; even because he
forsook the God of their forefathers, and could never be recovered to the same
again. Wherein also the example and zeal of the children of Israel was very
notable; that they would have denounced war against the tribe of Ruben and
Gad, only for erecting (as they topke it) a schismatical Altar, out of the
only place where our Lord appointed that sacrifice should be done unto his
honor.

So; much more since Christ's law and religion was established, diverse great
and honorable fightes have been made for the Faith, against Princes and
provinces that unjustly withstood and annoyed the same.

So in old times of the Primative Church the Christian Armenians laufullie
defended them selves by arms against their Emperor Maximinus. Eusebius. li. 9
Cap. 6.
And the Catholic people of diverse provinces have often by force defended and
kept their Bishops in their seats against the Infidels; VVarres made for
Religion.
but specially against the commandment of heretical Emperors: yea and
resisted them in defense of their Churches, and the sacred goods of the same.
As the citizens of Antioche defended their Church, against the Emperor
Galerius his officers. S. Basile and S. Ambrose people, Nazia^. de laud. Basi.
Amb. li. 5. Epist.
defended them against the invasions of Heretics. And not the people only
which may do things of headines, without counsel or consultation; (of whom S.
Ambros says, being willed to assuage their fury; that it lay in him not to
incite them him self, but had no means often times to repress them): but the
Bishops of countries so persecuted by heretical Princes, have justly required
help of other Christian kings and nations.

Theo. li. 2 Cap. 5. 13 The example of Athanasius. Socra. li. 1 Cap. 13. Soz.
lib. 4 Cap. 7. Damas in Pontif.
For so holy Athanasius (who knew his duty to his sovereign well enough and in
what case he might resist him) asked aid against Constantius the Arrian and
first heretical Emperor (whom Pope Felix declared to be an Heretic) of his
own brother Constance Catholic Emperor of the west. For fear of whose arms
the said Arrian restored Athanasius and other Catholic Bishops to their
churches and honors again: though after this Catholic Emperors death, the
other more furiously persecuted Athanasius then before.

Likewise against Valens the Arrian Emperor; Petrus, Socr. lib. 4 Cap. 17. 30.
Sozo. li. 6 Cap. 19. Socr. lib. 2 Cap. 18 Nicepho. lib. 14. Cap. 21.
successor to Athanasius and brother to S. Basil, did seek to the Pope of Rome
for succor, as al other afflicted Bishops and catholics ever did. So did
Atticus Bishop of Constantinople crave aid of Theodosius the younger against
the King of the Persians that persecuted his Catholic subjects, and was
therbie forceblie deprived, and his innocent subjects delivered.

The example of Pope Leo the first.
So did holy Pope Leo the first, persuade the Emperor, called Leo also to take
arms against the Tirant of Alexandria for the delivery of the oppressed
Catholics from him and the heretics Eutichians; who then threw down
churches and monasteries and did other great sacrileges. Whose words for
examples sake I will set down. Leo. Epi. 75. Euag. lib. 2. Cap. 8
O Emperor (says S. Leo) if it be laudable for the to invade the heathens,
how much more glorious shall it be to deliver the Church of Alexandria from the
heavy yoke of outrageous Heretics; by the calamity of which Church all the
Christians in the world are iniuried.

Lib. 1. ep. 71.
In brief; so did S. Gregory the great move Gennadius the Exarch, to make
wars specially against heretics as a very glorious thing. And so ever
have holy Bishops most intermedled, in cases of heresy and injuries done unto
Gods Church (as a thing properly subject to their correction) by
excommunication, or what other way so ever God has given them commodity of;
which al is to be used and executed according to the differences of times and
persons.

The holy Bishops might most laufullie (and so sometimes they did)
excommunicate the Arrian Emperors, What Princes may be excommunicated and
when.
and have warra^ted their Catholic subjects to defend them selves by arms
against them: but they always did not so; because they had no means by reason
of the greater forces of the persecutors. As there is no question but the
Emperors, Constantius, Valens, Julian and others might have been by the
Bishops excommunicated and deposed, and al their people released from their
obedience; if the Church or Catholics had had competent forces to have
resisted.

Yea the quarrel of Religion and defense of innocence is so just, that heathen
Princes, See S. Thomas. 2.2. quaest. 10. Art. 10.
not at al subject to the Churches laws and discipline, may in that case by
the Christians arms be resisted, and might laufullie have been repressed in
times of the Pagans and first great persecutions, when they vexed and oppressed
the faithful; but not otherwise (as most men think) if they would not annoy
the Christians, nor violently hinder or seek to extirpate the true faith and
course of the Gospel. Though S. Thomas seems also to say, that any heathen
king may be laufullie deprived of his superiority over Christians.

How so ever that be; plain it is that Kings that have professed the faith of
Christ and the defense of his Church and Gospel, may be and have been justly
both excommunicated and deposed, for injuries done to Gods Church, and reuoult
from the same; as sometimes also for other great crimes tending to the
pernicion of the whole people subject unto them.

But to speak specially of matter of Religion, and the crimes thereunto
belonging. Princes excommunicated and deprived for defects in Religion.
Leo the third was excommunicated and deprived of al his temporalities, in
Italy by Gregory the second. For defect also in Religion and of the Churches
defense, were the Greek Emperors discharged, and the Empire translated to the
Germans by Pope Leo the third. As afterward diverse German Emperors for notable
injuries done to Gods Church, for sacrilege, and for heresy; by godly
discipline of the Church, and by the diligence of sondrie Popes, have been
brought to order, or in fin deposed; or else where they would not obey Christ's
Vicar, either in them selves, or in their posterity have been notoriously by
God confounded. As Frederick the first, Frederick the second, Otho the fifth,
Jews the third, Jews the fourth, and whom we name last (because we must say
some what more of him) Henry the third (or as some call him) the fourth, by
Gregory the seventh; which example the Libeller and other Heretics most
mention; for that the said Henry so obstinatlie resisted (though otherwise by
the invincible courage and constancy of the Pope often brought to penance and
extremity) that in fin by arms he drove the said Pope out of his sea; and
placed an Antipape; An Antipape.
that is to say, one so opposite to Christ's vicar, as Antichrist shall be against
Christ: which by arms and patronage of this wicked Emperor, usurped and
occupied the Apostolical throne against the true Pope Gregory the seventh,
whom the Libeller (after the vulgar vain of Rebellious Heretics) voutsafeth
not the name of Gregory the seventh, but calls him commonly Hildebrand: as
the Heretics when they were in arms in Germany against their Emperor,
Heretical malice.
would not name him Charles the fifte, nor Emperor, but Charles of Gaunt.

And now because this good and notable Pope, The co^tentio^ between Pope
Gregory the seventh and Henry the third Emperor.
was ^ot able in fin to resist the emperors forces (the which Emperor, as all the histories of that time record was a most wicked, sacrilegious, simoniacal
and heretical person) th'aduersaries of Gods Church do triumph (as the
Libeller here does) over the blessed man; as Herod might have done over John
Baptist, whose admonition was taken in so evil gre, that it cost him his life:
as also th'executing of the Churches sentence, which is Gods, has done to
many a Prophet and Bishop in the world.

By which event of things who so ever measures the right of causes; will make
a good religion and a good defense of the execution of justice. For so most
Tirants might be justified for a time, against all the Saints of God. This
Gregory say they was in sin banished by the Emperor: and so was S. Chrisostom
by Archadius and Eudoxia, and dyed in banishment, as Gregory the seventh did:
yet they were but homely Christians that would justify the Emperors and
condemn S. Chrysostom.

And indeed this Pope, whom they specially hate because (as it may be thought)
he was the first man that authenticallie condemned the Berengarians heresy,
and in open disputation refuted it: though certain of the said Emperors
flatterers, and enemies of the sea Apostolic (as the fashion of our
Heretics is at this day) wrote slanderous Libels against him: Pope
Hildebrand a good man.
yet was he a very notable good man and learned, and did suffer, what so ever
he did suffer, for mere justice; in that he did godly, honorably, and by the
duty of his Pastorship, what so ever he did against the said Emperor: whereof
we could allege all the best writers of those days, or near that time, but
that we should be tedious. Of whom yet this one grave testimony of Baptista
Fulgosius a noble and learned man that was Duke of Genua above an hundred years
past, we shall not let to set down as we find it in latin. Constantissimus
habitus est Gregorius septimus Pontifex, Lib. 3 Cap. vlt. factoru^ memorabilium.
qui quod Henricum tertium Imperatorem propter aperta nimis Symoniae crimina,
pro pastorali officio reprehendebat, grauibus ab eo iniurijs affectus est:
itaque iniuriarum magnitudine compulsus, Henricum Gregorius vt haereticum
Imperij honor priuauit. Cum autem Henricus solui ecclesiastica censura non
emendatione vitae, sed armis quaereret; alium creare Pontificem enixus, capta
Vrbe obsidere Gregorium coepit. Quae mala cum Gregorius pateretur, nunquam
tamen a iusto proposito dimoueri potuit. That is; Gregory the seventh was
notable for his constancy; who for that according to his pastoral charge, he
had admonished Henry the third, The testimony of the Duke of Genua for Pope
Hildebrand.
Emperor, to leave his known impiety of Simonie: was by manifold
intolerable injuries vexed by the said Emperor; and by the greatness of his
wickedness, was compelled to deprive him as an heretic, of his Imperial
dignity. But Henry seeking not by amendment of his life, but by arms to be
absolved from the censure; he went about to set up a new Pope, and beseiged the
city of Rome, and brought the Pope into great distres. In all which miseries
Gregory could never be removed from his just purpose. So he writes of the
parties both. See Vspergen. lib. 5. Annal.
And of the horrible crimes for which the Emperor was most justly i^ the
sight of al good me^ deposed. Thus Trithemius reports i^ breef of the
wickedness of this Emperor. Episcopacus, Co^sta^tiensem etc. He sold the
Bishoprikes of Constance, Bamburgh, Mentz, and diverse other for money: those of
Ausbourg, and Straisburgh for a sword: that of Munster for Sodomie: and the
abbacie of Fulde for aduoultrie: Trithem. in Chron.
heaven and earth witness and cry out of these; and for the same abominations
he stands excommunicated and deprived, and therefore has no power nor just
title to reign over us Catholics.

But to go forward; this same Gregory the seventh did the like commendable
justice upon the king of Pole Bolislaus the second; Chrom. lib. hist. Polo^.
li. 4.
as well excommunicating as depriving him for murdering of his Bishop S.
Stanislay at the very Altar. Against which sentence though he stood by force
and contempt for a time, Kings of later times excommunicated.
yet at length he was forsaken and resisted wholly by his subjects; fled, and
in fin slew him self.

For Heresy also was George K. of Boemland excommunicated, and thereupon by the
forces of the king of Hungary at length actuallie deprived: As also John
Albert had half his kingdom of Navarre taken from him by Ferdinandus surnamed
Catholicus of Aragon; for that he gave aid to Jews the twelueth, being
excommunicated by Julius the second. For great injuries also done to holy
Church, and for persecution of Bishops and religious, was John one of our
kings of England Kings of England.
with his whole land interdicted, and brought (after long struggling against God
and the Sea Apostolic) to yield his Croune to the courtesy of the Popes
Legate, and to make both his Realms of England and Ireland, tributaries. Lib.
1. de Repub. Cap. 9.
The authentical instrument whereof John Bodin says he has seen.

For like causes, and namely for that he was veheme^tlie suspected of the
murder of the blessed Bishop S. Thomas of Canterbury, was Henry the second
driven by Alexander the third to order and penance. A number of the like
examples more we might recite, of our country and of the christian world;
whereby not only the practice of the Church in all ages may be seen; but also
Catholic men warranted that they be no traitors, nor hold assertions
treasonable, false, or undutiful; in answering or believing, that for Heresy
or such like notorious wickedness, a Prince (otherwise lauful and anointed) may
be excommunicated, deposed, forsaken or resisted by the warrant of holy
Churches judgment and Censure.

Whereunto we will add only the sentence of Gregory the great and first of
that name, whom the adversaries confess to have been both learned and holy:
who being as they know many hundredth years before Gregory the seventh, and
our special Apostle; pratised the point we now stand on, and therefore likely to
be believed of al reasonable men. He therefore in the form of his privilege
granted to S. Medards Monastery thus decrees. An excommunication of S.
Gregory upon Kings and Princes. In fine libri 12. Epist.
Si quis (inquit) Regum, Antistitum, Iudicum, vel quarumcunque personarum
saecularium huius Apostolicae authoritatis and nostrae praeceptionis decreta
violauerit, cuiuscunque dignitatis vel sublimitatis sit, honor suo priuetur.
If any king, Prelate, Judge, or what other secular person so ever shall
transgress this decree of our authority and commandment, of what preeminence
or height so ever he be, let him be deprived of his dignity.

This was the right and power of S. Gregory; and this has been the faith of
Christian men ever since our country was converted; and never subject called in
question much less accused of treason for it, til this miserable time; and
lest of al, made or found treason by the old laws in K. Edward the thirdes
reign, as is pretended; how so ever by their new laws they may and do make
what they list a crime Capital.

And ever since the said S. Gregory's time, or there about, al kings in
Christendom, specially those of Spain, France, Pole, and England, take an
oath upon the holy Evangelists at there coronation, The oath of the Kings of
England at their Coronation.
to keep and defend the Catholic faith; and ours of England expreslie, to
manteine also the privileges and liberties of the Church and Clergy, given by
K. Edward the Confessor and other faithful kings their ancestors.

Whereof S. Thomas of Canterbury puts his sovereign Henry the second in
memory, both often in speech, and expreslie in an epistle written to him in
these words: In vita S. Thomae.
Memores sitis confessionis quam fecistis and posuistis super Altar apud
VVestmonasterium, de seruanda Ecclesiae liberate, quando consecrati fuistis
and vncti in Regem a praedecessore nostro Theobaldo. Keep in memory the
Confession which you made and laid upon the Altar at Westminster, touching the
keepi^g of holy Churches liberties, when you were consecrated and anointed
king by my predecessor Theobald.

And the Patriarchs of Constantinople, took an instrument of such as were to
be crouned Emperors (specially in the times of Heresy) wherein they made the
like promis and profession, to keep and defend the Faith and decrees of holy
Councels. So did the Patriarche Euphemius, in the Coronation of Anastasius;
Nicephorus, in the inuesting of Michael; and others in the creation of other
Emperors of the East. And Zonoras writes that the Patriarche of
Constantinople plainly told Isaac Commenus The Emperor, that as by his hands
he received The Empire: Zonor. tomo. 3. and Cuspinianus in Anastasio, and in
zimiste.
so if he governed not well, by him it should be taken from him again.

Likewise when kings, that before were infidels, do enter by Baptism into
the Church, they submit their scepters to Christ, In what cases subjects may
break with their Princes.
and conseque^tlie make them selves subject and punishable if they reuoult from
their Faith and promis.

Upon these conditions therefore, and no other, Kings be received of the Bishop
that in Gods behalf annointeth them: which oath and promis being not observed,
they break with God and their people; and their people may, and by order of
Christ's Supreme minister their chief Pastor in earth, must needs break with
them: Heresy and Infidelity in the Prince tending directly to the perdition
of the Common wealth and the souls of their subjects, and notoriousli^ to the
annoiance of the Church and true Religion, for the defense of which, Kings by
God are given.

By the fall of the King from the faith, the danger i^ so evident and
inevitable, that God had not sufficiently provided for our salvation and the
preservation of his Church and holy laws, if there were no way to deprive or
restrain Apostata Princes.

We see how the whole world did run from Christ after Julian, The example of
a Prince most dangerous.
to plain paganism: after Valens, to Arrianisme: after Edward the sixte with
us, into Zwinglianisme: and would do into Turcisme, if any powerable Prince
will lead his subjects that way.

If our faith or perdition should on this sort pass by the pleasure of every
secular Prince, and no remedy for it in the state of the new Testament, but
men must hold and obey him to what infidelity so ever he fall; then we were in
worse case then heathe^s, and al other humane common wealths; which both
before Christ and after, have had means to deliver them selves from such
Tyrants as were intolerable, and evidently pernicious to humane society and
the good of the people; for whose peace and preservation, they were created by
man, or ordained by God.

The bond and obligation we have entered into for the service of Christ and the
Church, Our bond to Christ more then to our Prince.
far excedeth al other duty, which we owe to any humane creature; and
therefore where the obedience to th'inferior hinders the service of the other
which is superior, we must by law and order discharge our selves of
th'inferior.

The wife if she cannot live with her own hushand (being an infidel or an
heretic) without injury and dishonor to God; How man and wife may depart
for Christ.
she may depart from him, or contrariwise he from her, for the like cause:
nether owes the innocent party nor the other can laufullie claim, ^nie
coniugal duty or debt in this case.

The very bondslaue, which is in an other kind no ^esse bound to his Lord and
master, Theodos. l. Manachaeos. C. de haereticis.
then the subject ^o his Sovereign: may also by the ancient imperial ^awes
depart and refuse to obey or serve him, if he become an Heretic, yea ipso
facto he is made free.

Finally the Parents that become Heretics lose the superiority and dominion
they have by law or nature over their own children. Cap. fin. Extra de
Haereticis.


Therefore let no man marvel that in case of Heresy the Sovereign loses his
superiority and right over his people and kingdom: In case of Heresy the
Sovereign loses his authority.
which can not be a lauful Christian state or commonwealth without due
obedience to Christ and to the Churches laws; but may well consist and not
perish at al by change of their Prince or king: No any one person being
simply necessary for the preservation of the same; as some one (being an
Heretic and enemy to Religion) may, and lightly is (if he be suffered) the
destruction thereof.

And thus much may (as we trust) suffice with all reasonable indifferent
persons, for defense of our brethrens answers touching the question of
excommunication or deposition of Princes by the Pope: whereof by occasion more
shall be said in the next chapter and others following. The Libellers importunate
insolency enforcing us thereunto; like as the Civil Magistrates most captious and
bloody conceits constrained some of our blessed brethern before their
martirdomes to speak more thereof then otherwise they desired; though nothing
so much as by warrant of Gods word and holy writ they might have done.

THAT IT IS MVCH TO THE BENEFIT AND STABILITIE OF COMMON wealths, and
specially of Kings scepters, that the difference betwixt them and their
people, for Religion or any other cause for which they may seem to deserve
deprivation, may rather be decided by the supreme Pastor of the Church, as
Catholics would have it; then by popular mutiny and fantasy of private
men, as Heretics desire, and practice. CAP. VI.
THE Libeller once or twice in his discourse seditiouslie calls upon the
Monarchs and Princes of the world, warning the^ of the doubtful and servile
state they be in, whiles the Popes may be suffered to make and unmake kings and
Princes at their pleasure, The seditious sleight of the Libeller.
and to license their subjects to resist them.

And the man perchance might have his tale heard, if he spoke to the simple
sort, or to such Kings as feared nether God nor man; nor sought otherwise not
any longer to vphould their estates, but by desperate force and practice, and
for their own time without regard of their posterity. But speaking to them
whose wisdoms sustain the world; whose Crounes are worn, and Swords are borne
for Christ and his spouse; whose glorious Ancestors partly first rose, and
partly were established, and themselves yet safely stand and happily
flourish (which our Lord God long continue) by the benediction of the Sea
Apostolic and good intelligence and correspondece with the high Bishops of
the same; good audience hardly can they look for. The Example of some other
Princes Protestants about them, forsaking the fellowship of the Catholic and
Apostolic sea, and specially of king He^rie the eighth ^^rst; and his son
and daughter after him, in England; (...) man, a child, and a woman, not only
seuering them ^elues from the same; but annexing to their regalitie, ^y strange
laws, al Apostolical and Papal power spi^itual, with infinite emolumentes made
by confiscatio^ of al religious men's lands and goods in the whole Realm
(which was the beginning of that new Ecclesiastical regiment): these things
(being of greater ^emptation then the Libellers bare words) could ^et never
move The Emperor, nor either of the great Monarchs, nor any other king of
wise counsel in the world, to break with Gods Church and the chief Pastors
thereof. Knowing by the records of al ages si^hence Christ, that what Princes
or Pote^tates soever have formallie opposed the^ selves to Christ's Vicar; and
refused to communicate with him, in the faith and fellowship of the Catholic
Church; were ever in them selves or their posterity confounded, and their
kingdoms overthrown or brought to miserable servitude of Turk or other
heathen Tirant.

It is not the good fortune of a few years felicity, that moves the grave
and sage governors of the world (though the Libeller, to make fools feign,
The wise considerations of Catholic Princes.
urges their good luck in England much, since their breach with Gods Church):
but they will look farther about them, and see the events of these strange
attempts in us, and the judgments of God for the same: not only til the end
of K. Henry the eighth his race (who was Radix peccati) but afterward, if our
Lord defer his sentence so long, to some new generations to come. Over which,
as upon the Prince and state present of our Country, we humbly on our knees
with continual tears, desire God to have mercy; and to auert his indignation
from them and us: that the Princes and people of the world, may rather be
edified by the example of our conversion and return to Gods Church; then be
instructed by the sight of our punishment and confusion.

But now for the co^ceipt that this good man would drive into men's heads, that
no state should be in safety, if the Pope might deprive the Prince at his
pleasure; it is a bugge fit only to fear babes. Al wise men in the world
that either see the present times, The Popes authority touching Princes
regalities.
or look back into the ages past, know; that the Pope neither chalengeth nor
usurps nor uses any such authority at his pleasure, to depose or exalt
whom he list. And al learned deuines confess that he has not any direct or
immediate jurisdiction or superiority over the temporalities, Civil states, or
regalities of secular Princes or Magistrates: and therefore can not dispose of
their kingdoms nor actions, alter nor abrogate their laws; as he daily does
and may do at his good pleasure, of Prelates, Bishops, and Priests affairs,
upon whom he has direct power and jurisdiction: but that he may only
intermedle indirectlie with temporal Princes, as he is the Chief officer under
Christ and has charge of their souls, and therbie has to look whether their
regimentes tend any way to the injury of the Church and true Religion, or to
their own and their subjects damnation; as in case of Schism, Heresy,
Apostasy, Idolatry, Sacrilege, and other intolerable defectes in
government: for which, he being their Bishop is bound to admonish them sondrie
times with all lenity; if that serve not, to excommunicate them; and if they
contemn that, and the Churches discipline and authority; then be they
esteemed as heathens, and unworthy of superiority over Gods people.

This is not to depose Kings at his pleasure; nor is cause sufficient why any
just and Christian Prince should stand in doubt of the Popes censures: only
such as be Heretics, or intend to shake of the yoke of Christ and their faith
in him, What Princes only fear the Pope.
have cause in their conscience to doubt both the Churches discipline, and the
plagues of God: which will not fail them, how so ever by humane force and
violence they protect them selves for a time, from his Ministers sentence and
sweet corrections.

Al just and Catholic Kings are so far from doubting or misliking Gods
ordinance and the practice of the sea Apostolic herein; that they perceive it
most necessary for the stabilitie of their kingdoms, and the continuance of
their posterity in the glory thereof, that for their regiment in faith and
life they stand in some reverend awe of their chief Pastors; which is a
necessary and honorable bridle of Princes in their youth, and all the days of
their life, to stay them from dangerous disorders, and so to temper them in
there government, that they may reign long and happily over their people: where
otherwise they might fall into infinite calamities; and be either forsaken,
deposed, or shamefullie destroyed by their own subjects; whether they be
deprived by holy Churches censure, or no.

Nether does any godly Christian Prince at this day (as we think) wish
their Empire, either in them selves, their children, or posterity to dure any
longer; then they continue in the Catholic faith, and the communion of the
Sea and Church Apostolic: nor would suffer any of their name or blood to
reign after them, that were like to be Heretics; but rather would
disinherite or execute them with their own hands, then fear or expect their
deposition by the Pope.

Therefore though with such as feel their own fault it sounds evil to hear
of the Authority and usage of Gods Church in censuring kings: yet it
troubles not any just and lauful Prince: especially when by their wisdom
and experience they may perceive, that Princes, above al other, both good and
evil, be subject to humane casualties; and may fall, and loose their kingdoms
by an hundredth accidents of mutinies and rebellions of their subjects, or by
external or domestical wars of Competitours or enimyes: to al which, The
great commodities which grow to al kingdoms by the Popes high authority.
the Popes high authority and interest gives great stay and moderation, in
deciding the controversies of titles, and causes of civil or foreign wars;
and by his manifould endeavors of Pacification and composition, whereof all the
kings and states Christian, have at sondrie times of their distresses,
received singular profit; as appears in the histories of the wars, betwixt
our nation, France, and Scotland; and in our own Civil tumultes, which have
been often appeased by the mediation of the Pope: both parties deferring to him
as to the high Priest and general Arbiter of Christian Princes and people
(being to al indifferent without al partiality) the decision of those things
which otherwise could not by laws nor by arms without-lamentable destruction
and much blood be determined. Wherebie Princes of less power, iniuried by the
greater and mightier, have ever found succor and redress: and just kings
distressed by their rebellious subjects, have had singular assistance.

As we may see in the stories both of our own Country, where the Popes have
sent diverse Legates to the Barons, being up against their lauful Sovereigns,
to admonish them to lay down their arms; and when they would not,
excommunicated them; by which means many a king with us has kept his Croune,
which otherwise had been deprived, by tumultuous and popular sedition: and no
less in the examples of other nations, and that in our own memories; having
experience of diverse blessed Popes diligence, in aiding the two great
Monarchs, as well by the powers temporal which God has given them, as by
ecclesiastical Censures against their rebels; and large spiritual graces and
benedictions bestowed upon all that would faithfully adioine to the repression
of the seditious subjects, and the preservation of the Sovereign.

The Apostolic Bishop is not an enemy to superiority and domination, The
Bishoplike authority no enemy to Princes.
which he knows best to be of God, as his own high estate is: but a
spiritual and most loving Parent and common Father of al Christians, and
specially of Princes. He seeks not their depositions, nor mainteineth
reuoultes from them; no not the^, when to his infinite grief he is forced
sometimes (though marvelous seldom) to give sentence for the people and
subjects against the Prince: but uses needful discipline toward them for
their salvation.

Let the grave and wise men of al nations consider with us, whether Princes be
in more danger of their state by the lauful Pastors of their souls that judge
by Gods spirit, by counsel, deliberation, order and authority; without malice,
hatred, or partiality: or by Heretics, seditious and rebellious persons;
that deal by erroneous conscience, fantasy and fury.

The Protestants plainly hold in all their writings and schools, and so
practice in the sight of all the world; that Princes may for tirannie or
Religion be resisted and deprived. We and al Catholics likewise affirm that
for Heresy and some other great enormities, they may be excommunicated and
further censured. But the Protestants would have them selves and the subjects
to rebel and throw down their superiors, on their own head and wilfulnes;
and them selves to be judges of their Sovereigns deserts and Religion. Now we
demand of the Libeller, that gives Princes so friendly warning of their
dangerous estates; A reasonable demand to the Libeller.
if Popes may use such authority over Princes, whether the Kings of
Christendom (whom their own sect-maisters confess may be deposed) stand not
in far greater hazard of their dominions and persons by the brutish and
seditious people, armed always with fury, and often also (as at this present)
with Heresy, then they are of Popes?

It was not the Pope that gave license or encouragement to the subjects of
Scotland to take arms against their natural liege and Q.; to emprison her; and
to cause her by fear of death to resign her Croune. It is not the Pope that
embouldened them barbarously, to restrain their noble young King, and so often
to rebel against him: though nether they for his Religion have any reason to
deprive him; nor the Popes Holiness (otherwise then for the justice of his
quarrel against his rebels) any cause to defend him. It was not the Pope that
licensed the subjects of the king Catholic, to fight so long and obstinatlie
against their Lord and master: nor that encouraged them to deprive him of his
sovereignty and ancient inheritance. It was not the Pope that has hazarded
three mighty Kings, his most Christian Majesty that now is, and his two
crouned brethren before him, of their States; and bereaved them of many great
parts and cities of their kingdom: or that went about to deprive them, even
in the time of their innocence and young years. Popes use to defend innocents,
not to destroy them in their nonage; or to abuse their minority. And such is
otherwise the manifould hazard of kings by rebellions, that in our own
Country, The danger of Princes by rebellion.
the Child has deposed his Father; the Uncle his Nephew; the Wife her own
Husband: and most commonly the worse and more wicked, the more godly and
innocent. And we marvel much, this Libeller that would seem to be such a
Statesman and a Counselor to foreign kings, could find no danger to them and
their countries, saving of the Popes power over them: which in very truth by
Christ's special providence, is the greatest protection, guarde, and stay, that
innocent Princes and their people can have: the awe and reverend respect of his
holy authority keeping thousands from rebellion and intrusion; and a number
of just Princes in their empires, which else had been in diverse countries
overthrown.

The Protestants cannot prove by example of al nations and times since Christ,
that any one has been deposed, that was not proved to be a notorious
Heretic or evil man. On the other side, Rebels, and namely Heretics, by
unlawful means, The practice of Heretics.
deprive commonly none but innocent, just, and holy Princes. Unto whose
barbarous cruelty this Libeller would have their sacred Majesty's rather thral
and obnoxious, then to submit the^ selves to the sweet yoke of Christ's kingdom
and Priesthood; or to concur in happy unity with such as Christ and the
Holie-ghost have placed over the Church for the guiding of her people to
salvation, and that also in worldly peace and tranquillity as much as in them
lies: which is their chief honor and greatest guarde that may be both to
Prince and people: as the contrary motion of wicked men to sow debate between
Princes and Pastors is surely more unnatural, the^ to put discord betwixt the
body and the soul i^ the regiment of a ma^s person: A fit similitude.
wheri^ as the whole frame is best governed and preserved, when the flesh can
be contented to be ruled by the spirit; so no doubt the temporal power
consists most safely and endures longest, when it has good correspondence
and subordination to the spiritual; which seeks ever al advancement and
safety to the secular Powers appointed by God, for the worldly weal of their
subjects. Which terrene felicity (necessary for the clergy also in this
life no less then for others) is always by the state Ecclesiastical, most
zealouslie maintained against the disturbers of peace, concord, and due
obedience to superiors.

And therefore as the Church of God, and namely the Sea Apostolic, has
received (in respect of the honor due to Christ and his principal Apostle S.
Peter) infinite exaltation, by the Christian kings of al nations: so on
the other side, the Popes of al ages, have sought by all means possible, to
advance to honor, glory, and increase, Christian kings and states not only
spirituallie (which is their first and chief care) but also temporallie;
whereof every nation Christianed has had sufficient proof.

But to say nothing of Catholic Kings or Countries which gladly acknowledge
the benefit; and will avouch the right and just title of any their dominions,
Dominions holden by the Popes means.
received of the sea Apostolic, or adjudged theirs by the same: (for though
the Libeller would make them ween it were a base and perilous matter to stand
at the Popes courtesy in such things; yet he can persuade none of them that
they hold any piece of their states by evil conscience which is fallen unto
them that way, by the Popes warrant; nor is he so eloquent as to make them
yield up the same to their old owners again:) the states and Princes
Protestants must either acknowledge the benefit and just possession of diverse
high dignities, titles, and crounes received by the said sea of S. Peter, or
else they be neither kind nor wise.

Is not the Emperial dignity the highest humane preeminence that can be in
this world? And can the German protestants deny but that they hold or had
that of the Pope? The Empire from the Pope.
For where some wrangle that it came by election of the people of Rome; that is
most false, and contrary to al histories and reason. Dare they deny the Pope
to have had lauful power to translate the empire out of Greece? or will they say
their Emperor that now is, and al other his predecessors since Charles the
great, were usurpers; as they should be, if the order or disposition of the
holy Sea, were not lauful? No protestant nor other man in his wit will so say;
and specially no Alman, to the glory of whose nation, this thing so much
pertains. This nation therefore has no cause to complain of the high
spiritual authority, by which it self has been an hundredth times more
advanced, then hindered or diminished.

As Likewise the order of the Election, and (which al men esteem for a title of
most high dignity) the Electorship it self was given to certain Princes of
Germany by Gregory the fifth: who as the Magdeburge historians them selves
speak, being a German and desirous to adorn his native Country with some
excellent honor; Cent. 10. Cap. 10.
devised that the election of the king (which after his coronation by the Pope,
should also be called Imperator and Augustus) should only pertain to the
Germans.

Now let the Heretics speak and yield there reason (who took the matter so
much in douge^ these last years past, that the Pope should intermedle with the
displacing of the Elector of Colen. The fond reasoning of Heretics about the
Popes deposing of the late Bishop of Colen.
What? A Pope to depose an Elector, said they? As though a Pope might not
deprive an unworthy Apostata Bishop of his Sea and Electorship; who first
created and gave unto that nation and to that Sea, both Elector and Electoral
dignity it self? Let them tell us why his authority is not as great in
depriving for just cause, as his power was sufficient to establish that honor
in Germany?

And Let the Libeller that accompteth it so unworthy a thing, that some Popes
have given censure upon the Princes of the holy Empire, be demanded, who
established that high state in that country? and whether he that had power to
do that, can want any warrant to deprive an evil or wicked person of the
Empire? And in brief; let him be asked whether that noble nation have not
received more dignity and profit temporal then hurt and hinderance by that
Papal power over kingdoms, which this man in his seditious pride so much
abhors?

But to come to that which we and the Libeller best of al do know and
touches us English more near at home, and may be an instruction and proof of
the cause in hand to other strangers abroad. Surely, if the people of our
Country knew there own good, and were grateful as they were wont to be (for now
this brutish Heresy has made them without affection, as S. Paul speaks of
such unnatural Sectaries) they would acknowledge, that as to the Sea
Apostolic England greatly indebted to the sea Apostolic.
they owe their first faith and Christianity (not only for converting the
Britons, who were the ancient inhabitants of the Island, but also the English
them selves afterward, and that in very memorable sort: reconciling them
eftsons again to holy Church after their relapse; and endowing their Princes
and Prelates with such singular prerogatives, as no particular Church or Common
wealth i^ the world, with the good grace of al other Christian states be it
spoken, had greater or more honorable): so would they i^ like manner, besides
these spiritual favors, confess them selves indebted for the temporal
advancement of our Princes, received from the same Sea Apostolic; seeing the
regiment and Lordship of Ireland was by the Popes only gift bestowed upon our
Souerains in the time of Pope Adrian the fourth and K. Henry the second 400.
years agone; Irland the Popes gift unto England.
they having no other title thereunto in the world but by this grant of the Sea
Apostolic. Which title notwithstanding, we doubt not, but that our English
Protestants will account sufficient even unto this day: and K. Henry the eighth,
being fallen from the Church, and making him self of a member the Head thereof
in his Realm; went forward upon this title, and of his own new Papal
authority from the Lord of Ireland, made and called him self the King thereof.
Which style was afterward (as we take it) by due authority of the Pope
confirmed to Q. Marie. So desirous has been always the holy Sea of Rome, to
increase our Princes with all due honor, and to enlarge their dominions. None of
which titles, prerogatives, authorities or dignities (though received only or
principally by the Popes favor or gift) any one of our kings of what
Religion so ever, was yet so wilful to reject or let go, or yet so nise in
Faith as to make scruple of conscience to receive or retain as laufullie
possessed, what so ever they have obtained that way; though vngratful persons
acknowledge no benefit therein.

And not only large kingdoms so obtained, Al Princes contented to receive
hold and use titles of honor and dignity from the Pope.
Princes are contented to keep without scruple; but hold also al other titles
of honor annexed by his Holiness to their Regal dignities upon what cause
soever: as is to be seen in sundry great and mighty Monarchs of Christendom,
upon whom diverse high titles have been bestowed by the sea Apostolic for
their most Christian and Heroical endeavors for the Church, and their zeal
against Heretics and Infidels: as Catholic in Spain; most Christian in
France; and such like else where: and in our Country a style no less honorable
the^ the former; that is, Defendour of the Faith; The style of Defendour of the
faith.
which style and title all the Protestants in the world do know, that it was
given by Pope Leo the tenth to K. Henry the eighth, for his defense of the
Catholic Roman faith by writing, yet exstant under his own hand against
Martin Luther. And albeit the cause for which it was given, be now quite
altered and the Popes authority from which it was received extremely impugned:
yet the right thereof coming only from that authority now accounted so
unlawful, none of our kings will leave, or will renounce the same, as indeed we
wish they should not; for that it notably puts them in mind, what Church
and Faith it is, that they are bound to defend; and against what kind of men
they bear the sword which God has put into their hand.

The particular benefits received from this Pope.
We might add to this, the singular and incomparable favors and daily benefits
done by his Holiness that now is, to our nation, above al his predecessors
assuredly, excepting S. Gregory the great our first Apostle. Whose divine grace
and example of Charity he so zealouslie does imitate toward us, not only
for the salvation of the whole deceived Country, but for the particular
relief of many hundrethes of al sorts, ages, and sexes, that are driven by
violence of cruel persecution into diverse Catholic Provinces, and are forced
to leave their Country and what so ever is dear unto them, to learn that
Faith in which al their forefathers so honorably lived and died. By which his
rare benefits, his happy name (as Gregory's the first) must needs be in
English memories immortal: maugre this ingratful Heresy, to which (we hope) he
shall once be the bane. The Charity of Gregory the first toward


Of the said Gregory the great his more then common love of our souls, we
have (besides other Apostolical charity) this grateful example: that his
Holiness receiving great sommes of money in those days out of France, and
having intelligence that there were dispersed through that province numbers of
English children, bought as bo^dslaues for doing of al drudgerie for their
masters profit (as the state of servitude required); and that they lived there
in thraldom both of body and soul, unbaptized: the Blessed Father taking
deep compassion of their miserable case, specially because they were of that
Nation which was then nuelie gained by his travail unto Christ: he wrote
letters to his receiuour in those parts that he should not make the french
money (which was there to be received) over to Rome by exchange; but employ it
in France where it was current upon Charitable uses: specially therewith to
deliver English Children from servitude, and to bring them into Italy by
troops, having good grave Priests to ouersee and instruct them in the Faith;
and if any dangerous sickness should fall to any of them in the way, to baptize
them. So as he did not only procure our peoples salvation at home by sending
in diverse learned men to preach and teach the Gospel, under the conduction of
holy S. Augustine our Apostle: but also by education abrod of great numbers of
our Nation, to his great charges temporal. So did this renouned Pope and Doctor
for our Country, to bring it from Paganism to Christ, and through God
prevailed; and deserves for the same, immortal glory both in heaven and
earth. And no less truly does Gregory the thirtenth for reconciling our
country from Heresy, deserve: both bringing up abroad great numbers of the
Nation at his own charges in Godly discipline, and the same Faith that the
foresaid S. Gregory his Patron and predecessor first caused to be taught to
our forefathers; and also disposes of many fit persons endued with zeal and
spiritual power, to return in peaceable, humble, and Apostolic manner to
their Country, there to teach the dec ued, and to reconcile the^ by spiritual
power and Preistlie function, to the unity of Gods Church again, out of which
they are most sure to perish; and not by raising rebellion or tumultes, as this
Libeller most falselie pretends.

Which holy function for that they have done (by Gods great grace and goodness)
with far more fruit and increase of the Catholic religion, and notorious
damage of Heresy, The fruit of Priests labors in England.
then Protestants feared at the beginning: therefore have they subtellie and
falselie turned al these heroical endeavors of his Holiness, and good offices of
Gods Priests, into matters of State and Treason; and would make al Princes and
people abroad believe (that are not acquainted as necessity has driven us to
be with the practice of the first Apostles and Fathers of the primitive Church;
atchiuing the conversion of many cities and countries in no other sort then
our brethren most godlilie and dutifullie do attempt in our nation) that al
our preaching, persuading, praying, offering sacrifice, hearing confessions,
absoluing, reconciling; having of beads, crosses, images, and the like; were
seditious, rebellious, traitorous, and plain conspiracy against the Q.
Majesty and the Realm. The great malice and ingratitude of England toward
this Pope.
Yea they would so far (if they could) abuse the patience and simplicity of
Christian people both of their own Country and others; that they would have
them think, our holy and high Pastor to have erected the two Seminaries and
other commodities of learning and godly education for our countrie-men, upon
no other occasion, but to move sedition and rebellion: and therefore are so
far from giving him humble thanks, as they ought to do (and as our Nation
will once do, if ever it come to it self again) that they hate his person and
office for this cause most deadle; and do publish by this Libel and otherwise,
that it is a work of high hostility against her Majesty. But alas for pity;
and woe be to our sins, that the state of our Commonwealth is now so neerlie
joined unto Heresy; that nether Christ's Vicar by charity and discipline, nor
Gods Priests by any office of there life and death, can seek to remedy the
one, but they shall be accounted enemies and traitors to the other. Which fond
malice yet (through our infelicitie) is more apparent in England, then in any
other people of the world besides; though in error and out of Gods Church, as
ours. The godly and Zealous doings of this Pope for religion.
It is the peculiar glory of Gregory the thirtenth above al his predecessors
and other Prelates of al ages, that in so sweet and Apostolic sort he
provides for the instruction of innumerable youths, for their own salvation,
and for the reduction of their native countries, and interteining the
Catholic faith in most provinces of the world. Many are the people in the
world abrod, especially in the East, South, and North parts thereof; which are
in Schism, Heresy, or Error no less the^ the English: and the incomparable
care of this general Pastor, provides for every one in the best manner that is
possible, as well by corporal as spiritual relief. He has at this day some of
the fathers of the Society of Jesus in Constantinople, The Society of Jesus in
Constantinople.
Alexandria, and else wher-soeuer is any opportunity to gain souls: in the
dominions of the Turk; in Muscouia likewise, and other Provinces addicted to
the errors of the Grecians. He has instituted Seminaries for the Greeks,
Armenians, and Sclauonians: he has placed colleges of the Society and
Seminaries, in Suetia, Liuonia, Polonia, Boemia, Transiluania; for Scotland
also, and specially for the noble Province of Germany. Yea his pastoral
solicitude reaches even to the East Indies: where in Iapon he has founded this
last year past, and mainteineth a goodly college, not without his great
expenses.

Thus he does in the cause of Christ, from one end of the world to an other;
whilst his, and holy Churches miserable adversaries, waste their time in
wrangling and wrestling against the truth. And there is none of al these Nations
of what sect or sort so ever, that can be so suspicious or malicious as to
interpret his Holiness meaning, as The English do: or that conceive any fear
of treasons, confederacies, invasions, or destructions of their countries, as
our men dream of.

Other nations in Scisme not so ingrat as England.
The Germans, though al be not Catholics, but many much altered, by their
unadvised following of Martin and other as mad sectaries: yet they al count it
a singular honor and profit to their nation, that they have so famous a college
in Rome it self; as our Nation did of old, when it had there a great school,
about a thousand years ago, builded by king Offa, and afterward an hospital.
Where now we of England be come, by this wicked Heresy, to be so careless of our
public profit and honor: that we contemn and maliciously condemn, a gift
far more excellent the^ ever was bestowed upon our Country before in
foreign places; and most deuillishlie do hate the giver.

Wherein the Heretics in this Libel and otherwise show such ignorant and
barbarous mockery, touching the term of Seminaries: (as though they were
estranged from al actions of the Christian world, through out al which, that
term and calling is so common; namely since the godly decree of the holy
Council of Trent, The name of Seminaries.
giving order for the erection of such nurceries for the clergy;) as it is
tooto ridiculous in our English Heretics to make them selves sport at it: as
they wisely do in this Libel also at the name of the Popes Bulls, The name of
Bulls.
by pretty allusion as they think (but in deed with small grace) resembling
them to the bubles of water; with such scorneful companions the Church of God
has now to deal. But, for defense of the Society, Seminaries, and the
sending of Priests into England; the men of those orders and quality, have age
and ability to answer for them selves: and it is done to our hands
plentifully in their Apology, The English Apology.
which the adversaries shall never answer with reason and credit. And therefore
of that matter enough.

OF THE LATE WARS IN IRELAND FOR RELIGION: HOW THE POPE may use the svvord;
and that the differences betwixt temporal Princes and him, or their resisting
him in some cases of their worldly interest, can be no vvarrant to the
Protestants to contemn his censures or authority in matter of Faith and
Religion. CAP. VII.
How the Pope may use the svvord.
BUT the adversary obiecteth that whatsoever the Pope does or may do, by his
Bulls, excommunications, institution of Seminaries or other such like spiritual
endeavors, may either be contemned or neglected, by the example of her Majesty;
who regarded not his doings against her, so long as he satt still in his Chair:
but when he rose up in anger, and left Verbum, the word; and took Ferrum, the
sword; (against S. Bernardes direct advice to Eugenius, says this Libeller):
yea and when contrary to the Scriptures he drew forth the sword, which Christ
commanded Peter to put up into the scabard, and invaded by his forces her
Majesty's kingdom of Ireland: then (says this good man) she could do no
less but use such resistance by arms and otherwise, as was requisite for her
own defense.

Whereat we marvel less indeed; for that before, she had contemned the Popes
spiritual rod of excommunication, and al Ecclesiastical admonition and
censure, Lib. 1. co^t. Faustum. cap. 17.
which is the high Priests and Churches most proper weapon; and is more to be
feared of al faithful persons (as holy S. Augustine says) Then to be hevved
in pieces with the svvord, burned with the fire, or torn in sonder of vvilde
beasts; and is a punishment so dreadful, that even then when it is known to
be executed without just cause by some error or wrong information, it may not
be contemned. Therefore where that was not regarded, we know there could be no
scruple to withstand any other Martial attempt, against Pope or whomsoever;
nether could it seem strange.

But at this, all the world may wounder, and it is marvelous in our eyes; why
the Popes hostility in Ireland, The Popes doings no cause to martyr Priests.
should condemn so many innocent Priests and Catholics that never were in
Ireland, nor ever were acquainted with the action of that Country or any
other rebellion against the Queen in either of her kingdoms. Put down to the
world (if you can) any one word, writing, or approved witness, that any
Jesuit, Priest, or Seminary man of al those whom you have executed these late
years, were either authors, persuaders, or dealers therein; and then you may
have some shadow of defense for your justice. Prove only that his Holiness ever
communicated his doings or intentions (whatsoever they were that way) to any
one of them al, and we will confess that you have reason in the rest. If Pius
quintus addressed Doctor Nicholas Morton D. Morto^
sixtene years since, about the matter of the excommunication, into England:
shall al Priests and Iesuistes be deemed traitors therefore? If Doctor Saunders
D. Sa^ders.
either upon his own zeal and opinion of the iustnes of the quarrel; or at the
Popes appointment, were in the wars of Ireland employed for defense of the
Catholic Religion, against the Protestants; may you by your laws, or any
other divine or humane ordinance, condemn therefore to death, a number that
never knew either the man or the matter? Some pretense you may have to be
offended with the Pope, and perhaps lack no laws to punish the said two
Doctors, that never were either of the Society or Seminaries: but to make all the Priests and Catholics at home or in banishment traitors therbie, it is
to unreasonable; and to murder so cruelly one man for an others fault, is
tooto foul and intolerable iniquity.

And as for his Holiness action in Ireland; The vvarres of Irland.
we that are neither so wise, as to be worthy; nor so mallepert, as to
challenge to know his intentions council and disposition of those matters: can
nor will nether defend nor condemn it. Only this is evident, that those small
succors which were given by him to the Irish, or rather suffered at their own
adventure to go into those wars: came upon the importunate suit of the sore
afflicted Catholics, and some of the cheifest nobility of that country. Of
whose continual complaints, known calamities, and intolerable distresses of
conscience and otherwise, it may be he was moved with compassion; and did that
in cause of Religion; (against one whom he took in his own judgment rightly
by his predecessors sentence to be deposed; and in a quarrel in his sight most
just and godly) which, both her Majesty and other temporal Princes stick not
to do very often toward their neighbors (with whom otherwise they pretend
good amity and no breach of their league at al) in cases which either they
esteem lauful, or at lest behoofful for their own estate and affairs.

And it is a strange case that these men should with such full mouth cry out
against the high Priest and Pastor of Gods Church, for using the sword, or
geui^g his consent thereunto, against a Prince not any way his superior if no
way his subject; whereas the Ministers and masters of their sects both in
Flanders, Scoteland, and other places do not only council and persuade
subjects to take arms against their own lauful Princes and sacred Kings,
but also do practice and in person oppose them selves against them; yea in
Scoteland against a Prince of their own Religion.

For tell me (Sir Libeller if you please) were not the Ministers of Scoteland
the principal fannes and firebrandes of the last Conspiracy and open rebellion
against his Majesty's person and the state of that Country? Were not they in
person at Starling and else where both in feeld and council with the Earls of
Anguish, Mar, and other rebels against his Roial person? Were not al their
pernicious machinations of betraing their country and their Princes blood,
detected by the Earl of Gory, before his late behedding for that Conspiracy?
Are not Patrike Galovvay, minister of S. Ihonson; Andrew Pollard, subdeane of
Glasco: James Carmihel, minister of Haddingto^; Andrew Hay, person of Ranfroe;
Andrew Meluin, professor of divinity in S. Andrews; and diverse other chief
ministers of that country fled into England for this traitorous fact, and there
received, cherished, and protected?

And since that time; whereas in a Parliament houlden in Edinburgh by his
Majesty and all the three states of Scoteland, begone the 19. of May last past,
certain laws were amongst others enacted for the restraint of these Ministers
tumultuous authority, and to bring them under their own Bishops jurisdiction
(a thing so reasonable and consonant to Gods word as nothing can be more; and
practiced not only in England among their fellow-sectaries, but also
thorough-out al Christendom, disorderly and seditious Geneua only excepted):
and when these laws that were made by authority of the three Estates and
published not only in the Councel-house called Toulbooth, but also at the
Cross of Ede^burgh by Heraldes at arms for the state; did not Robert Pont and
Walter Baquanquel (two most impudent and rebellious Ministers of that town,
by the consent and provocation of James Lauson chief preacher there (as
afterward appeared) oppose them selves in public against the Kings authority
(thereby to raise up some commotion) by their open protestation made by
instrument in the hands of George VVakeson public Notary and toune-Clarke of
that City: and did not al these three named Ministers by night fly presently
into England after their insufferable insolency; and are there received,
harbored, and maintained?

Again; in the last Parliament before this, being about two years agone, did
not these Ministers (intending thereby some dangerous reuoult and seditious
defection) demand of their king in most impudent wise to be admitted into the
Parliament, as equal, or above their Bishops; whom they deny by Gods word to
have any supereminent authority? Is not this one of their articles for which
their archbishop of S. Andrews does withstand them; and has been of late in
England to co^ferre with the Protestants of that Country about the same? Is it
not an other of their articles, that it is an Heresy for any Prince to call him
self Head of the Church within his own Realm? and that he may be
excommunicated and deposed by the Ministers? Have not they excommunicated and
held out by violence these two years and more, their archbishop of Glasco
elected by the King, named M. Robert Montgu^mery; until now, that this last
Parliament of May has absolved and restored him unto his archebishoprike
again?

You exclame against the Pope being the first and cheef prelate of al
Christendom (eue^ by your own confession) for giving his consent that any
thing be done or attempted by arms and violence against any lauful or
anointed Prince whatsoever; be it for Religion or any other never so rightful
or just cause in his conceit: but what would these good-fellowes of your
Ghospel do if they had his authority, his power, and his pretense against
foraine Princes of a contrary Religion; seeing in quarrel of faction and favor
of rank traitors they deal thus against their own Leege, and against their
own anointed sworn King; of their own country, blood, educatio^ and
Religion: who as he never justly offended them in any sort; so has he by
infinite favors and graces bound them unto him in all most dutiful allegiance.

Again; as in the rebellions of Scotland, so likewise in Flaunders, and
France, England gives aid also to other Princes subjects.
has England these late years yielded no aid to the subjects, against their
lauful Princes? Have not their ba^ners been openly displayed upon their ancient
fre^des and confederates walls? Have they not houlden their tounes from them by
maine force? Have they not many ways stirred and succored, with men, money,
and munition, the rebellious subjects of al countries nere about them? Yea;
have they not in diverse Parliame^ts, See the Acts of subsedies. A0. 5. Reg.
Eliz. cap. 29. and 30. and A0. 13. cap. 23.
and namely in the Parliament houlden in the fifth year of her Majesty's reign
1563. as also in an other Parliament in the 13. year of her reign 1571.
published in print that the cheef consideratio^s (moving the whole assembly of
Caluinistes both of the Clergy and Temporalty gathered in those Parliaments to
grant those two great Subsidies) were in respect of the Inestimable charges
(for such is their own phrase) sustained by the Queen in maintenance of (the
rebellious Heretics) their dear brethren, against their leege Lords and
Souerains of France, Scoteland, and other places? Is it not now a special rule
in government amongst the worldly Machiuelians, to maintain their own repose
by their neighbors trouble? If this be usual in all other cases, and of many
not much reprehended, for the advantage of the temporal state of any Prince:
is it only so great a marvel that the Pope should do that for zeal of true
Religion, which other Kings do, for matters of far less importance? And if
our conjecture may serve any thing in this matter; perhaps he was the rather
ready to do this for Ireland, for that the Sea Apostolic has an old claim
unto the soueraintie of that Country; and that before the couenantes passed
between King John and the same sea. Which chalenges, Princes commonly yield
not up, by what ground so ever they come. Though for this Pope present (whom
God long preserve) we may be bold to say, that he had rather have the two
Islands Catholic, then the real possession of all the world: for the salvation
of the people whereof, no doubt he would spend in Apostolic wise his own
blood; so great an enemy he is to our nation.

The issue joined upon S. Bernardes opinion, whether the Pope may use the
svvord.
But the Libeller says, he should use the Word and not the Svvord; according
to S. Bernardes admonition. Well; let us then stand to that holy Fathers
judgment herein, and the matter will be more easily tried; as also the fraud
of this faitheles Libeller, by our faithful repeating the whole sentence,
shall be discovered; and withal the Scriptures (alleged for the same purpose)
expounded. Li. 4. Cap. 3. ad Eugenium.
Propter hoc (says he) magis aggredere eos, sed verbo non ferro. Quid tu
denuo vsurpare gladium tents, quem iussus es ponere in vaginam? quem tamen qui
tuu^ negat, non satis mihi videtur attendere verbum Domini dicentis sic;
Convert gladium tuum in vaginam. Tuus ergo and ipse, tuo forsitan nutu, etsi
non tua manu euaginandus: alioquin si nullo modo ad te pertineret, and is,
dicentibus Apostolis, Ecce duo gladij hic: non respondisset Dominus, satis est;
sed nimis est. Vterque ergo Ecclesiae, and spiritualis scilicet gladius and
materialis; sed is quidem pro Ecclesia, ille vero ab Ecclesia exercendus est;
ille Sacerdotis, is militis manu; sed sane ad nutum Sacerdotis and iussum
Imperatoris. That is in our tongue. For that cause thou should the rather
set upon them; marry with the word, not with the sword. Why seek thou again
to usurp the sword which thou wast commanded to put up into the scabard?
Which sword for all that, who soever denies to apperteine to the; seems to me
not to mark the word of our Lord, thus speaking: Return thy svvord into his
scabard. Therefore even the sword is thine, at thy beck perhaps to be drawn,
though not by thine own hand; How both svvords belong unto holy Church.
for otherwise, if it should no way belong unto the, when the Apostles said to
Christ, Lo; two swords here: he would not have answered them, that it was
enough, but that it had been to much. Therefore, both the swords belong to the
Church; the spiritual, and material. But the material is to be used for the
Church, the other by the Church. The spiritual by the hand of the Priest, the
other by the hand of the soldier and commandment of the Emperor, but at the
Priests Nutu.
appointment. So far this holy Father in the very place alleged by the
adversary.

Whereby we see; that though it be not always comely nor commendable for
Priests, which should be the authors and persuaders of peace to al Princes and
people, to be given to blood, wars and destruction (especially by their own
hands); or without great cause to use external force and violence against
offenders: yet the sword may be drawn for their defense, and is to be drawn
according to their council and direction.

Whereunto we add further that though the Apostles were taught and counceled
Eua^gelical meeknes by that metaphore of putting up the swords; Al temporal
and corporal punishment not forbidden to the Apostles and their successors.
and had prescribed to the^ a sweeter form of governing their flock, then the
heathen, or other temporal powers use toward their subjects: yet al temporal
or corporal punishment was not therbie prohibited to the rulers of the Church.
As we see by the example of S. Peter him self; who after the said prohibition,
did not only feed with the word; but stroke also corporally even to death,
Ananias and Saphira. Which as he might do laufullie by miracle: so his
successors now may do the like by ordinary justice. Which example we use the
rather, Bern. ep. 238.
for that the said S. Bernard uses it for proof of the very same matter, when
he says. Qui locum Petri tenet, potest vno ictu extinguere Ananiam; vno,
Simonem Magum. He that occupies S. Peter's room, may with a word destroy
Ananias; and at one word, extinguish Simon Magus.

And the next epistle before that, speaking also to Eugenius the Pope, he says
thus: Ad hoc enim constitutus es super gentes and regna, vt euellas and
destruas; vt aedifices and plants: for that end art thou constituted over
nations and kingdoms; that thou may pluck up and build and plant etc.
Wherein, as in other execution of justice, though the Pope as a mortal man may
sometimes do things out of season, and without good succes; even the^, when
the cause he would advance is most godly and lauful (as we read in the first
of the Machabies of the Priests unfortunate fight against the heathen): yet to
make this a general rule (as this Libeller does) that the Pope may no ways use
the sword for defense of justice or religion, is most false and absurd.

The true way which the Libeller should have used, for improuing the Popes
actions in Ireland.
The true way of defense for English protestants in this case touching the
wars of Ireland; and for impugnation of the Pope concerning his allowing or
assisting the same; should be (in mine opinion) not to affirm absolutely (as
our fond and most ignorant Libeller does) that the Pope may no way fight or
take arms at al; (for that is against a known truth; and not only we, but al
Catholics in the world will therein stand against him): but rather for
condemnation of his Holiness actions, to prove that his cause was not just; her
Majesty not to stand rightly excommunicate; not any way to be an Heretic,
as Pius Quintus declared; and consequently her subjects in no case to remain
absolved from their oath and obedience: of which points we may not at al
dispute; seeing our defense is only general, that the Pope may in some cases
excommunicate; for some causes deprive; and in many respects fight, and wage
war for Religion.

And it may be thought that the Protestants would never deny this, but in
regard of their own particular interest in some private case only. For they
will not affirm, neither does it displease them (as we think) that Pius
Quintus the last Pope was an Author of the late league and wars against the
Turk; The Popes war against the Turk.
and had also his Captains and banners displayed, in that renouned battle
against him, by the same. Against whose arms, the Turk notwithstanding might
as well have alleged the Scriptures as now our Protestants do, to make him
put up his sword. For in truth if it be lauful for him to occupy his forces
which God has given him, against the heathen, that be no way under his
jurisdiction: much more may he employ them against these whom he accompteth as
Rebels to the Church, which be properly under his correction: first, in
respect of their souls; and then secondarilie, of their temporal goods; so
far as is requisite to their souls good.

Al which is most true, even in consideration of his Priestlie and Apostolical
function only; as is plane in Phinees, whose priesthood was established upon
his zealous pursuing the enemies of God to death with his own hand. But
further marking that the high Priests of Gods people have been lightly in all
ages temporal Princes also, and judges of the world, not only in spiritual but
in worldly affairs too: there can no doubt remain, but they may use their
forces temporal to the maintenance of justice.

Genesis 14. Hebr. 7.
Melchisedech the samplare of our new preisthood, was both a Priest and a King:
and always in the law of nature, the eldest of the principal stocks, were
both Kings and high Preistes; In quaest. Hebrai. Priests may make vvarres for
just occasions.
as S. Hierome witnesses. So is it plane that Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and
the like, had the rule spiritual and temporal over their families and people.
And so likewise in the law, Moses was both the high temporal officer, and
also a chief Priest. Hely judged not only in temporal, but spiritual causes
forty years together. Finally; the Machabees, Judas, Ionathas, Simeon, and
others, were both godly high Preistes, wise judges in politic, and valiant
captains in martial affairs. Even so; the chief Bishops of Christ's Church,
our supreme Bastors in earth, by Gods providence and by the grauntes of our
first most christian Emperors and kings, and by the humble and zealous
devotion of the faithful Princes and people afterward; have their temporal
states, dominions and patrimonies, whereby they most justly hold and possess
the same, and are thereby lauful Princes temporal, and may most rightfullie by
their soueraintie, make wars in their own or other men's just quarrel, as
occasion shall urge them thereunto.

The Popes temporal jurisdiction most lavvful and firm.
And whatsoever the enemies of Gods Church and Sea Apostolic do bark or
blaspheme against the Popes high preeminence in these things (as they do no
less in deed against al spiritual Soueraintie) their is no King nor man in
Christendom, that has better title to his state, or so many years of
prescription for rightful possession; or so long and sure protection from God,
in such infinite mutabilitie of states and kingdoms; or such great likelihood
of co^stancy and continuance, as has the temporal state of the Sea
Apostolic. For, as for the spiritual function and power thereof, it shall not
fail til the day of judgment: though (to use S. Augustines words) Heretics
never cease to bay and bark on every hand round about it. Li. de vtil.
credendi.


And as these humane succors of temporal things be often necessary for the
Churches peaceable regiment, and the dooble honor due to the chief Pastors of
our souls; so the free gift of such things by devout Princes and people, is
marvelously commended in the example of Barnabas and others: who of devotion
sold their lands and goods, and dedicated the price thereof to Gods Church by
the disposition of the Apostles, humbly laying the same down at their feet.
As on the other side, the profane persons that disdain such honors and
liuelihoodes of the Church, and seek to defraud her of the same, may be warned
by the terrible death of Ananias and Saphira, which they suffered by S. Peter's
word, for their like sacrilegious fact and conceit. For if these were thought
worthy to be thus excommunicated (seeing it was an excommunication according to
S. Augustines judgment) and withal were so extremlie punished corporally,
Lib. 3. ca. 1. cont. Parmeni.
for witholding (upon pretense perhaps of a little better consideration of their
necessity to come) a piece only of that which they promised to God before, in
the Churches behalf, and yet was not actuallie bestowed: How much more do they
deserve excommunication and death, or rather damnation perpetual, that endeavor
to spoil the Mother and Mistres of al Churches in the world of her prerogative
and patrimony: and sacrilegiouslie to rob her not of some part of their own
gifts; but of all that by the devotion of others, the first and most faithful
Princes, has been for the honor of Christ and his chief Apostle, with great
alacrity and good will bestowed that way? The which alms and patrimony
dispensed by the godly prudence and charity of the Apostolic Bishops
redoundeth more to the avail of Gods Church and the poor thereof; to Christ's
honor, and to the benefit of al Christianity; (be it spoken without
comparison and to the honor of God alone) the^ any temporal Princes patrimony
liui^g: though many of their worldly habilities be far greater, the^ any
Popes are or ever have been. Which every indifferent man, that behouldeth the
immortal works of Charity which this one blessed Pope has done in the days
of his high Priesthood, must of necessity confess.

Whereof we thought meet to make some mention in this place; The seditious
practice of this Libeller.
for that both other Protestants are not ashamed to accuse the Holy Sea of
Robbery and rapine in getting and houldi^g the temporal state which now it
has so many ages occupied to the great honor of God: as also, for that this
Libeller often glaunceth at some injuries, which he pretends to have been
done, by the Popes tira^nous and excessive power, as he terms it, to the
Princes of the world i^ this case: sometimes seditiously and subtellie
suggesting to the Emperor and other the greatest and best Kings of
Christendom, to abridge his power: sometimes craftelie commending them, upon
a deuilish and deceiptful fiction of his own, that they only tolerate his
title and jurisdiction for a time and of policy, so far as they see it is
not prejudicial to their own states; otherwise nether caring for his curses,
excommunications, canons, nor commandments, no more the^ the protestant
Princes do; who have withdrawn from him in their states, al, both temporal
emolumentes, and spiritual prerogatives.

Of which restraint, limitation, or plain contempt of the Popes power and
censures, the writer alleges certain examples of diverse Catholic Kings
and Countries; that the English may seem to have done no new thing, in this
their shameful reuoult from the Sea Apostolic, and contempt of the
Ecclesiastical curse and excommunication. Which this profane Atheist affirms
none but the simple people to fear or care for; wise men and Princes to have
no scruple or conscience at al in such matters, but to resist by arms al laws
and ordinances as they list.

For proof whereof he brings (to no purpose) how diverse kings of France
have by their laws pragmatiques restreined the Popes of diverse claims,
prerogatives, and profits: Touching Catholic Princes restraint of the Popes
jurisdiction.
How they in England in old time limited and abbridged his jurisdiction by the
law specially called Praemuniri: How the noble Emperor Charles the fifth,
feared not their curses, when by his Captains he beseiged, took, and sacked
Rome; imprisoned and ransomed the Pope him self: How his son the King
Catholic now reigning, nothing respected excommunication, when his army was
led before Rome walls, by the conduction of the Duke of Aluas How King Henry
the seventh resisted the Pope in a matter of Alume: and his niece Queen Marie
her self (as much as she was devoted to the Roman religion) withstood him in
the favor of her cousin Cardinal Poole, against doctor Peyto about a Cardinals
Hat; the bringer of which hat, and the Bulls for the said Peyto she did forbid
to enter the Realm, commanding the^ to be stayed at Calls: and finally, that
Cardinal Poole him self having the Queen for him in the cause, had no fear to
disobey the Popes commandments, and his threatened excommunications or
curses; but continued Legate, and made the other poor Peyto being an obseruant
friar, to go a begging still. Thus much in sense says the Libeller in defense
of their resistance of the Pope, and contempt of his Censures.

But look attentively into the particular reasons and examples of this his
discourse, The answer to the examples alleged.
and you shall find nothing but fraud and falsehood. First; it is a most impious
and godles conceit that the Emperor, and other great Kings and Potentates of
Christendom either of old or at this present, have suffered or do yet endure
the Pope to command or have jurisdiction in their countries, only for some
respects in policy, and so far as they list, rather then upon conscience
and for religion: when it is certain that his spiritual authority, and high
Prelacie over al faithful Princes and people (as instituted by Christ, clearlie
deduced out of the Scriptures, approved by decrees of ancient Councels,
testimonies of all the old Doctors, and by both imperial and national laws of
the Christian world) is acknowledged in conscience of al Catholic Kings that
have been, or yet be within the happy unity of holy Church. And it is a most
shameless slander of their sacred Majesty's, that this Atheist would make the
world believe; that pretending conscience, devotion, religion, and sincerity
in their obedience to the Sea Apostolic, they do al in deed of policy. As
well might this Machiuilian bear men in hand that the Christian religion is no
otherwise admitted in Commonweals, but so far forth, as it serves for
policy, and the advancement of the Prince or temporal state. And God grant
this be not the mark that our Protestants and Politiques shoot at: much it is
to be feared that it is our English elne and analogy of Faith for measure of
al actions. And certes to no other end they use their pretended Ministry, and
new clergy of their creation, occupying them to interteine and amase the
people With the word of the Lord; whilst they accomplish their worldly and
wicked intentions: as apparent it is that the good author of this Libel, would
not, if he were a Prince, (as such be to near Princes elbowes these days)
admit either Peter, Paul, or Christ him self, into any jurisdiction either
spiritual or temporal within his Realm; nor would be deprived or
excommunicated by any of the^, more then now by the Pope; nor further deal
with them, then his advantage and policy requires.

And indeed by the means of such Lycurgians as this, we have in England new
laws against al claim of jurisdiction spiritual or temporal, The Machiuilian
drift of this Libeller.
that can be made by any person whosoever, borne out of the Realm. Which (no
question) might exclude Christ and his Apostles no less then their
successors, being as well forreiners as they. Wherein it seems singularly to
be noted; that this crafty Politic puts no difference, betwixt spiritual
regiment and temporal; yea rather takes away al ecclesiastical jurisdiction:
calling, in this his pestiferous Libel (which you shall not as we think read in
any other of the Heretics writi^ges of these days) the Queens spiritual
power, which she chalengeth against the Popes supremacy, her REGALITIE: The Q.
REGALITIE.
seeking by all means possible, wholly to extinguish the Hierarchy and
Prelacie of Christ's Church; and concluding al in Kingly authority. Whereby,
as also by the Scriptures which they foolishlie in the sight of wise men, but
to the simple perswasiblie allege; That al men must obey the King as the
Chief or precellent: they exclude Peter from his high spiritual function,
which he had in the time of Nero; and give unto the said Nero as his regalitie,
no less the^ now they yield, both Papal and al other Bishoplie and
Ecclesiastical authority in England to the Queen, as a piece of her Regalitie.

As though there were no difference between a King and a Priest? The temporal
and spiritual authority confounded by the Libeller.
As though there were no distinction betwixt Christ's body mistical, and a body
politic or humane Commonwealth? As though Christ had given his said body,
spouse, and spiritual Commonwealth, to be governed, either unto Kings and
Empeperours (who were then and some hundredth years afterward, persecutours of
his Church and Faith and yet had as large, whole, and perfect Regalitie, as
any faithful Prince has): or unto Christian Kings afterward, who are (by
receiving Christ's sweet yoke and Faith) made children and members of the
Church, and not Heads thereof? As though our Savior had not in his time
appointed special officers for the regiment of his Church? or the holie-Ghost
afterward not placed Apostles, Prelates, Pastors, and Doctors, to govern the
same even to the end of the world?

This deuilish confusion of things, and attributing al spiritual Soueraintie
to the temporal Prince and power, The way to Antichrist.
which the Scripture calls for distinction sake; Humanam creaturam: or rather
this turning al Prelacie into Regalitie, 1. Pet. 2.
(if it be permitted) will take away the very life and essence of the Church of
God, and of al religion; and will plane the way to Antichrist; who shall by the
title of his only Regalitie, Antichrists Regalitie.
destroy (if it be possible) al power spiritual and temporal, and set him self
to be adored above what-soeuer is named in heaven or earth.

Woe be to our Nation and to the sins of our people; which God has suffered
to be the first example of this abominable converting of the spiritual power
and regiment of our souls, into our Kings Regalitie. And Fie on this godles
Libeller and his profane intention; that by the defense of this special
turpitude of our Kings and Country, so foulie slaundereth also other most
godly Princes, with his shameful surmise, How foully Catholic Princes are
slaundered by this Shameless Libeller.
that they do but permit in their dominions, the Popes authority of policy,
and no further then is for their advantage. Whose impudent calumniation may
easily be refuted, by their Majesty's zealous devotion, and most sincere
obedience to his Holiness in all matters of Faith and Religion (wherein his
Superiority specially and properly consists); by their daily Roial
offices done against Heretics for defense of the Roman Sea and Faith: and by
open profession of the same, both in their lives and deaths; by their
continual resistance of the enemies thereof, to their infinite charge; yea and
often to the hazard of their persons, crounes, and dominions: by the due
observation of the holy decrees of the Sea Apostolic, as far as the great
loosnes of this time, and the manifould importunity of Heretics and Atheists
will permit; by exact justice done in many of their kingdoms, upon the rebels
of the Church and holy Sea; and finally, by their continual intelligence with
his Holiness, in all their affairs of Conscience and Religion; and the use of al
his spiritual Graces, Indulgences, and Benedictions with as great humility, as
the poorest Catholic man in the world.

But the adversary tells us for all this, that diverse Princes and Countries
before named, Al examples are not to be stood upon.
have abbridged, limited, and resisted the Popes doings and authority. To
which we say; that in such cases we should not stand always upon examples, but
rather on reason and law. For a man might say, that Herod killed John
Baptist; Philip made away Babylas; Theodosius banished S. Chrysostom;
Constance persecuted Athanasius; king Henry of England caused to be murdered
his Primat and holy Metrapolitane Thomas of Canterbury; and many more have
resisted the Bishops and Pastors of their own souls: whereof diverse have been
sorry, and sore repented their iniquity afterward, as our said Henry the
second amongst other. Whose examples may not be made a rule how kings should
behave them selves toward their Prelates. God forbid! No more in this other
kind we now speak of, need we to allow all the Pragmatiques, Praemunires, or
other National decrees and provisions which every particular Prince has made,
or may make (though in conscience Catholic) by which the Popes jurisdiction
and preeminences in some sort and in some cases are abbridged and limited.

As on the other side again, we nether need nor will condemn the same; because
they be not of things mere spiritual, Al restraintes of the Popes jurisdiction
in Catholic countries nether wholy allowed nor wholy to be condemned.
but either plane temporal or mixed; such as had either by the Princes laws, or
custom of Contries, been granted of devotion to the Sea Apostolic before;
and afterward upon farther consideration, by the difference of times, or of
less devotion, revoked upon pretense of preservation of the temporal state,
and benefiting particular Provinces; unto which, the emolumentes and large
privileges yielded before to the chief Bishop and other of the clergy, might
seem some hindera^ce: Or else, were of that nature that the supreme Bishop
might indeed of reason challenge, as things incident to his high office, and
requisite for the better administration of the same: but yet not such for all
that, as were necessarily or by divine laws apperteining directly to his
spiritual regiment and jurisdiction; and therefore might by his wisdom either be
tolerated (as many things in this case be which he allows not) for
avoiding of scandales, or for other detriment of souls: or by composition (for
the better reteining Princes and provinces in ecclesiastical peace) be
condescended and agreed unto: the limitation or imminution of his accidental
rightes, honors, and preeminences, nothing esteemed so material unto him, as
the salvation and preservation of kingdoms and Contries, in the unity of
Christ's faith and Church.

The Pope may yield i^ his humane prerogatives, but not in his spiritual.
There is no humane prerogative be it houlden never so rightly, or given never
so justly for the honor of Christ and his high office, but he may either him
self for just causes yield it up; or by violence either of persecutours, or
carnal and wordlie persons be bereaved thereof. Only his preeminence and
Prelacie over our souls and over al Christian Countries and persons, be they
public or private; and whatsoever our Savior granted to the Prince of the
Apostles (upon whom he builded his whole Church and to whom and to his
successors he gave the keys of Heaven; with full commission to bind, loose,
punish, pardon, feed, confirm in faith, decide, and determine, etc.) this he
can not yield; this can no earthly power take from him; this does no
Catholic King or Country restreine him of; nether ever were there any laws
made in France, Spain, or in our own Country (so long as it was Catholic)
for abbridging his Apostolical and mere spiritual authority i^ the premises.

Though otherwise, as it falls out in a man's own person, wherein (as the
Apostle writes and as we al feel) the flesh resists the spirit, The
contention betvve^ the spirit and the flesh how far tolerable.
and contrariwise the spirit the flesh; each one of them seeking after a sort,
to enlarge his own limits and commodities, by some hinderance of the other;
(which combat and conflict notwithstanding, is either tolerable or not
damnable; so long as the inferior, which is the flesh, by over greedy
appetite of her own advancement, destroieth not the superior, which is the
soul): So doubtless in a Christian Commonwealth, the spiritual and temporal
state being joined together as it were in one body, must needs keep some
moderate strife and combat for maintenance of either of their limits in
external regiment; which may be borne withal of each side, so long as nether
part seeks over obstinately the destruction of the other, but do agree and
conioine in preservation of the principal.

But where the body politic (as it is now in our miserable Country) by
intolerable disorder does strive not so much, with the Sea Apostolic, The
intolerable proceeding of England.
and body mistical of Christ, for things either indifferent or not merlie
necessary to the spiritual regiment; but by evident rape and violence, against
the laws of God and man, bereaueth Christ's Vicar, of his whole soueraintie,
high Preisthood and Prelacie; and the Catholic Church of all the rightes and
douries, which our Master her spouse endowed her withal; and tira^nicallie
draws al to the Princes REGALITIE altering by the authority thereof, the
whole faith and true worship of God, into abominable Apostacy, Scisme, and
desolation: there the Libeller can find no example in any Christian Laws or
Countries through out the world in any age to prove his purpose; though vainlie
and impertinentlie he allege these Concordates of France, and other Nations;
as also the compositions of England with the Pope, or what orders and laws
soever besides, either lauful or unlawful concerning restraint of any Papal or
Ecclesiastical power: which serve nothing at al for defense of the late English
general and most impudent revolt from the unity of Gods Catholic and
Apostolic Church.

Many things might the wordlinges of our Country even in Catholic times
attempt for their own advantage, Some vnco^scionable laws might pass in a
Catholic time.
against the commodities of the Church. Our Kings and other, in times of
dissension with certain Popes of their days, might drive the weaker to
unequal conditions, and serve their own ambitious humors, to the Churches
disadvantage. Some laws might also pass by the powerablenes of Princes in
their own dominions, the Sea Apostolic utterly reclaiming against them;
which though they were not directly against any point of Faith or Religion,
yet might be very prejudicial to the state ecclesiastical and liberties of
holy Church: as the law of Premuniri was, which is mentioned by the
adversary. Against which, diverse Popes (specially Gregory the eleventh and
Martin the fifth) opposed them selves earnestly; The law of Premuniri.
and dealt with K. Edward the third and Henry the sixth for abrogating the
same: which they both promised to do, but never did; and co^seque^tly, it
remains still in his first vnco^cionable force (if the makers had any such
meaning as their folowers have found out): for that it may by calumnious
interpretation, be used at the only pleasure of the Prince, to the
confiscation of al Church-mens goods; imprisonment of their persons; and
destruction of the whole Clergy: whereof king Henry the eight, in the
beginning of his Scisme, gave an horrible example. Which iniquity, the
Libeller him self is not ashamed to commend, and to propound to other Princes
for imitation.

These iniustices and the like may be by some Kings committed; and are (as we
have said) for peace and Charities sake borne by the^; who are taught by their
Master and by the Apostolical Bishops of the primitive Church, to set more by
one soul, then by all the honors, goods and privileges in the world otherwise.
So that God be honored, whether causes at the first instance, or by appeal
only be differred to the Court of Rome, or no; whether the Pope, Prince,
Clergy, or people, appoint the Pastors, or no; (a thing diversely used in
diverse ages): the Church can bear al, and turn al to good; so long as the
true Faith and substance of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction be not destroyed.

Wherein yet this may be comfortable to al obedient children of the Church,
Ecclesiastical restraintes have not proved so profitable.
and worthy to be considered of discret persons: that in all, or surely in
most part of such limitations, restraintes, diminishinges, or alteration of the
Popes and Churches authority; things have afterward so fallen out, that
wise men heartily wish no change ever had been made. And for the evidence
thereof, we refere al men to the pondering of this one point specially amongst
many; concerning the nominations and elections of Bishopes, Abbots, and other
Prelates; whether the world went not as well when such things passed by
canonical election, or the Popes provision; as it has done since, or hereafter
ever is like to do. At the beginning of such alterations, men pretended
reasons, for the particular Churches commodities of sondrie Nations: which a
few years experience, and the event of things, have in most matters
controuled.

But were it well or evil; it can nether be example nor warrant, to our present
Contrie, to destroy Abbeis; kill the religious; murder Gods Priests; imprison
all the sacred persons of Bishops through out the Realm; to hate, blaspheme,
abolish al authority and jurisdiction Apostolical: yea and to make a solemn
public prayer in the litanie, That God would deliver our Country from the
Pope; in stead of that which the whole Christian world devoutly sings, and
says daily, Vt Dominum Apostolicum and omnes ecclesiasticos ordines in
sancta religione conseruare digneris. Barbarous malice of English Heretics
against the Sea Apostolic.
Would any man think that either they should fall to such barbarousnes, or to
such impudency, as to defend so gross impiety, by the examples of other
Catholic Kings, Contries and times, in the cases aforesaid?

Or can it be possible they could imagine the difference between K. Henry the
vij and the Pope that then was, The grosnes of the Libeller.
about a matter of Alume; should warrant her Majesty that now is, or her
Councillors, to stand against the high Priest of God, and to go to law with
him for his spiritual Prelacie? What a Grossehead is this Libeller; or rather
what a deceiptful person (for he can not be so rude as not to know the
difference of things so far distant) that alleges the wars sometimes
fallen out betwixt certain Popes and Princes about their temporal interests,
to prove that Catholic kings care not for the Pope? or that them selves may
resist him by arms, and contemn his authority in matters of Faith and
Religion?

Wherein his examples also are very evil chosen, when he goes about to make us
believe, that Charles the fifth cared not for the Popes Excommunication and
Curse; The sacking of Rome by the Duke of Burbon.
because his souldiars under the conduction of Burbon, committed horrible
violence and vilanie in the City of Rome, against his Holiness, the Cardinals,
and al other whom they found there as their pray. Where in deed the said noble
Emperor, though then very yo^g, yet was nether co^senting thereunto nor had
any knowledge of the disorder, til it was done, purging him self thereof
afterward to the Pope very humbly: and the said Burbon author of that wicked
enterprice, by Gods mighty hand and judgment, and for a sign how highly
that impious fact displeased his divine Majesty; was slain sodenlie, and as
it is thought, the first of al other upon the wall of the suburbs. Let al those
that take such examples, take heed of the like ends.

As for the loialtie of the most Catholic King, that now is of Spain, to the
Sea Apostolic; Touching the examples of K. Philip and the Duke of Alua.
notwith-standing what temporal differences soever have fallen, or may fall out
between them, it were to much idleness to stand upon, against this fond
wrangler. And the Duke of Alua his Majesty's general behaved him self even at
that time when he had his army before Rome, (as well of his own singular
devotion, as by his Kings commandment) most religiously and honorably;
without any violence in the world, or damage to the City, other the^ the
waste of a few places of pleasure, vines, and orchardes about the walls: for
which this good fellow with who^ we deal, makes much moan (as it seems);
where in deed he would rather have wished the whole City both sacked and
suncke for devotion.

But these Princes (says he) cared not for the Popes Curses, when they thus
pursued their claims both by arms and laws. The truth is, that the Pope
excommunicateth not every one, that either resists him in temporal quarrels,
or matter of emolumentes of their peculiar Churches, or Countries, whether it
be by laws or arms: and therefore there is no cause why in such cases, where no
censures are usually published, this Libeller should say; How the Pope and
temporal Princes may contend in arms.
They regard no curses, nor anathematizinges etc. Nether the^ also when the
injury done to holy Church or Apostolic sea, seems so evident to the
Pope, that there may appear some reasonable cause of excommunicating the
impugners; and the parties so censured in the contrary side, upon persuasion
of their right, do persist notwithstanding in the defense thereof; not then (I
say) do they contemn the censure (as is untruely conceived by the
adversary): but rather absteining from the holy Sacraments, and company of
such as to them by law are forbidden; do use humble means toward his
Holiness, for his better information in the cause; and do seek that the matter
may be ended by good order of composition, or arbitrament of other Princes and
godly persons. Or if (in such causes of strife for worldly commodities, where
the temporal Prince may sometimes either have the right on his side; or seem to
him self in conscience, or by the judgment of godly, learned, and indifferent
men to have it) we grant that he may without fear of Censures by arms or
otherwise pursue his just claim without impechement of his obedience in
spiritual affairs: may therefore sacrilegious persons; as Heretics,
Apostataes, and open obstinate offenders, contemn at their pleasures, and
violently resist the sentence of holy Church; No, there is no match in these
matters.

What if the late Q. Marie of England stayed the messinger of the Pope, The
example of Q. Marie ansvvered.
bringing a discharge of the late renouned Cardinal Poole, from his authority
Legantine; and a Cardinals hat for a person (though very godly) yet known to
be unfit; til his Holiness might be better informed of the man, and of the whole
matter; as immediately he was, with all diligence and humility, by the said
most devout Princess: should this be an example or encouragement to others, of
plain disobedience, and revolt? or wholly to abandone the Popes authority,
and to inuest a woman (which is against nature) in his Supremacy and spiritual
charge, over al her subjects souls? No surely; no more then of reason it
should have served her Majesty's Council (sitting once in consultation together
of the case) to deny entrance to the Nuncio Apostolico The Nuncio Apostolico
that came to summon to the General Counsel, denied to enter England.
sent by Pius quartus about the third year of her Highness reign; to require
and beseech her in God, to send some of her learned men to the general Council
of Trent then in hand, as most other great Potentates of Christiantie did;
bringing with him a Safe Conduct for their peaceable passage, audience, and
intertainment; notwithstanding their contrary religion and faction.

So did the English Counsel the^ make their advantage of that unlike fact of
the late noble Queen; at once both to maintain their unlike separation from
the Christian world and the fellowship of other Catholic kings; as also (and
that perhaps especially) to cover the ignorance, fear, and insufficiency of
their Superintendentes; The English Superinte^dentes afraid to go to the
Council of Trent.
who though her Majesty and others of the Nobility were well i^clined to send
some of them for the honor of the Realm: yet for fear of burning (as they
pretended) but indeed for fear of the Catholics learning, and their own
shame, the good-felowes made all the suit underhand they could, that none might
be enforced thither. And so at length it was agreed; and moreover, that his
Holiness Ambassador should not so much as be heard, or suffered to come within
the Realm; upon the warrant (I say) of the forsaid unlike example of the
former Queen Mary.

Which also serves them further ever since, not only to renounce all the old
authority, power, and interest of the Sea Apostolic over our Country; and
to make the chief Bishop thereof a mere stranger, as other worldly Princes of
the Provinces about us, that have nothing to do with our affairs; (whose
messingers yet and Ambassadors for needful entercours and mutual intelligence
by the law of nations they willingly admit, either in peace or wars, as
occasion serves): but also to make him a Devil, an Antichrist, and worse then
the Turk him self; whose messingers (as the world sees) may have audience with
them, and good correspondence; whereas the Pope can have none. Whereby is
discovered the misery of wicked Heresy, and the extreme hatred that
rebellious children do bear to their mother, whom they unhappily have
forsaken, and obstinately resist to their own perdition. And this shall be
sufficient to show how wrongfully and unreasonably this Libeller has sought to
defend their English general reuoult from the Church of Rome; and their
contempt of his Holiness Censures, by the examples of some Catholic Princes
differences, and wordlie debates with certain Popes and prelates of the same;
upon matter of far different nature and quality from Faith and Religion.

THAT THE SEPARATION OF THE PRINCE AND REALM FROM THE UNITY of the Church and
Sea Apostolic, and fall from Catholic religion, is the only cause of all the
present fears and dangers that the State seems to stand in. And that they
unjustly attribute the same to the Popes Holiness, or Catholics; and untruly
call them enemies of the Realm. CAP. VIII.
HIEROBOAM for the better establishing of his Soueraintie over the ten tribes,
The wicked policy of Ieroboa^.
thought it an high policy to divide the temporal lot and partage, which by
Gods appointeme^t was fallen unto him, from al communion and society with the
other remaining in Jury, and serving their Lord in the temple at Jerusalem.
And therefore instituted for him self and his people strange Gods, new ways of
worship, other unordered base Priests, and several places to serve in; and al
upon this humane imagination, that if his people at their sondrie appointed
times, should go up to the Temple to do their sacrifice and other rites
according to the law; as also converse with the Priests and people of the
other party, and be subject to them in matters of conscience and religion as
they were bound; that then they might easily be induced or much tempted, to
return to Salomons successors in Jerusalem again: and that his people being
subject to him only in temporal matters, and not in religion, he might seem
to be but half a king; yea, as at this day our Protesta^tes (for flatteri^g the
person whom herby they will ruin) use often to say of our ancient kings of
England and of other Catholic Countries abroad; that they were but half
Kings in their own Realms, if we compare their authorities with the ample
regalitie of her Majesty now reigning: whose jurisdiction extends above the
old wont, to al causes spiritual no less then temporal.

Well; so thought Hieroboam then, and so did he: and was (no doubt) most highly
commended for the devise by his Politiques that were about him. But yet this
thing which was esteemed so prudently done, for preservation of his state; was
after as well by the mouth of Gods Prophet, as by the miserable event of
things, proved within a very few years, to be the only destruction of his
whole house, and perpetual calamity of his people.

The secular prudence of the children of this world compared to the true
wisdom of the godly, and resisting any way the course of virtue and salvation,
The vvisdome of vvorldlinges in the end confounded.
is found in fin always deficient; and in truth, folly. But it never
appears so weak, deceitful and pernicious, as when it opposes it self to
the ordinance of God; to the force of his spirit and truth; and to the Spouse,
Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ. In which case the Giantes building of Babel
prevailed not: the proposition of Achitophel was dashed: the purpose of Herod
for murdering of Christ in his cradle, lest he should bereave him of his
croune; and of the Jews afterward in prosecuting his death to save their
state and Country from the Romans, was turned to their own destruction. Saul
found how hard it was to spurn against the spur. Iulianus cried out Vicisti
Galilee: that is; Thou have the victory of me, man of Galiley (so, that
Apostata of contempt called Christ): and finally; true it will ever prove, that
their is no counsel against God, nor no long peace to any that resist him.

And therefore those Princes and people only to be happy both in this world
and in the next, and their states alone lauful and durable, that have learned
faithfully to submit their Scepters, to Christ's sweet yoke; and to join
their terrene kingdoms, with the Priesthood and Spouse of him, by whom al
Kings do reign; The calamities which en sue to them that oppose them selves
against the Church.
of whose Church it is said long sithence by the Prophet, and proved by the
experience of al ages; that the Nation and People that serves her not shall
perish: who so ever hear and obey her not, must be accounted as Ethniques: who
so ever despice her and her governors, despice Christ him felf: who so ever
refuse her regiment and superiority, specially for matter of Faith and
Religion, and would rather have a King over them to lead both their body and
souls; do not so much refuse to be ruled by Gods Priests, as they reject
Christ him self, being not contented that he should reign over them. Finally;
who so ever do give to Caesar that which is due to God, preposterouslie
preferring the temporal prerogative of worldly Princes before the spiritual
power of the Priests of the new Testament; directly do repine against Gods
ordinance, and shall at length prove (with what humane prowes, power, or
prudence so ever they sustain their factions) that they have vneauenlie and
unadvisedly matched their combat.

The house they impugn is founded upon an impregnable rock: there is no
tempest of heathen, The invincible rock of the Roman Church.
heretical, or domestical persecution; nor no storms of wether or water that
can overthrow it: hell it self and the powers thereof can not prevail against
it. And to the end that the Nemroths and other new euangelical Giantes of our
Country mistake us not, nor beguil^ them selves in their desperate
contradiction against the City of God; S. Augustine tells them, it is the
Sea and succession of the Church of Rome, Psalm. Contra partem Donati.
which is so inuincibly guarded. These be his words. Count the Priests from the
very Sea of PETER, and in that order of Fathers who to whom has succeeded;
that same is the rock which the proud gates of Hell do not overcome.

The chosen corner stone of this building, is by the Prophets and by Christ's
own declaration such, as who so ever falls upon it shall be broken; and on
whom it falls, The ancient Popes prevailed against the ancient Emperors.
it shall crush him in pieces. Not only the Faith of Peter by our Lords promis
and protection, being infallible; but the Apostolic regiment, by the
assistance of the holie-Ghost, shall endure to the end of the world. Which has
already borne down by her patience and constancy, all the heathen Emperors;
against whom the high throne of Christ's Priesthood in earth, and tribunal of
Faith and religion, was placed and preserved by the mighty arm of God, in the
very chief City and seat of their Empire for diverse hundredth years together
after Christ's ascensio^; notwithstanding all the humane means of worldly
policy or tirannical cruelty, that could be devised or exercised against
them. Those great Monarchs, in that time more doubting and fearing the Popes in
their poverty, and persecution; and more loath to have them in their own City
of Rome so near them (if they could have chosen); then any other powerable
competitour or emulatour of their Empire: as S. Ciprian says of Decius the
Emperor in regard of Pope Cornelius, who was therefore afterward (as al other
his predecessors before him) martired.

By the same promis and like assistance of the Holie-Ghost the same Sea has
worn out all the old Heretics, The Sea of Rome has prevailed against al old
Heretics and their Persecutions.
of far greater power, pride, and learning, ^hen these Protesta^tes be;
sustained not only by some ^articular Princes of certain provinces, but by
di^ers most mighty Emperors, persecuting the Catholic Bishops, Priests and
other, through the whole Roman world, as heuilie, as now some smaller Princes
protestants do, within the bounds of their dominions only. The same Sea
has gone through al other distresses, foreign and domestical; stands and
florisheth now (notwithstanding all the threats, molition and machination of
her forsakers) in all virtue, strength, and glory. Never more loved, honored
and regarded of the Catholic Kings in the world. Never more reuere^ced and
obeyed of the Churches children; never more feared of her forsakers. As we may
see by the desperate and most obstinate course they take, in our poor afflicted
Country: not so much thinking to defend themselves, by the daily sheding of
most innocent men's blood; as baselie to wreake their inque^shable anger at the
Sea of Rome, The inque^shable rage of England against the Sea of Rome with
their fear of the same.
which they fear must be the instrument of Christ's rod of justice toward
them in time, for forsaking the felouship thereof, in Christian Faith and
Religion. Them selves doubting that the stroke of this Excommunication (so
often revived by them selves) will never in the end fall void (as other where we
see it has not) though by the flattery of a few years good fortune, our men
at home cry peace, sport, and security to the poor people; persuading them
that al is well and safe, by the killing of a few Priests: when there is no
other way of saving our beloved Country (assuredly) from perdition both
temporal and eternal, but by repentance and humble craving pardon of Gods
Church.

If they could kill all the Clergy and true believers in the world, and had the
Popes own person to do their pleasure with him; or could make away as many
Popes one after an other, as they have done Priests, and as the first
persecutours of our faith did martyr: yet could they not prevail nor escape
the hand of God revenging always at length these Contempts, Schisms, Heresies,
and Apostasies, with memorable punishment. In warning whereof he geeueth us a
good admonition by his own writ, when he says. Ne dixeris peccaui, et quid
mihi accidit triste? Altissimus enim est patiens redditor. Eccle. 5.
Do not say I have sinned, and no misfortune has fallen upon me for the same.
God paieth home at length.
For that God is a patie^t restorer or payer. So that God pays home at length
albeit with great patience; and then takes the saying of S. Austen place, that
he recompenseth his slownes with the greatness of his punishment.

Into what desolatio^ al Afrique was finally brought by the schism and sect of
the Donatists: how the Heresy of the Arrians, Plagues upon Heresy.
after the wearisome toil almost of the whole world for many years,
discharged it self at length into Machometisme: how the division of the
Oriental Church from the Sea of Peter, has been the loss of liberty, and the
eternal destruction of so many noble, most free, and flourishing Provinces of
that part; no man can be ignorant. As also not see into what hazard and extreme
perils, these deuilish doctrines of our days, and the seditious folowers of the
same, have brought the glorious kingdom of France, with the states of
Flaunders, The peril of diverse kingdoms by this new Heresy.
Germany, Poole, and most of the North parts of the world near unto us.
Which consideration draws us also into the doleful account, of our English
present fears and miseries; and much more, to the foresight of our calamities
to come: seeing clearlie by the records of our Country, that no Nation has
oftener sustained general alteration of the state and government then ours: nor
yet, ever any violent change or mutation, but for some notable contempt of the
house of God. As appears by the sondrie invasions and conquests made on us;
and by the notes which Gildas the wise, venerable Bede, and other men of
experience and foresight, have in their momuments set down; which were too
long and needles to rehearse.

Only this is ever to be borne in mind; that when our kings of England had
good intelligence with the Pope, and mutual offices of love and honor passed
betwixt them; and our body politic and Civil magistrate, had al godly and
charitable correspondence with the spiritual Commonwealth of Christ's Church,
and the prelates thereof: then had we a most happy and victorious Contrie,
blessed of God with all spiritual and temporal benediction. In such sort
surely, that to remember only what grace and glory our Realm has
received, by ioining and submitting it self to the laws and regiment of holy
Church, might make our hearts joyful; if the consideration of this our present
infelicitie, by seuering our selves from the same, did not eftsoons turn al to
inconsolable sorrow.

Truly what so ever is or has been singular to our Countries honor either in
Church, City, The benefits and honors of our Country by Catholic religion.
University, College, School, Monastery, Library, or any part of the
Commonwealth, not lest renouned in the world: al came of the Catholic
religion; and the greatest part of the famous Prelates of our Nation. As
likewise what piety, justice, fidelity, conscience, devotion, fear of God,
peace, order, obedience, truth and honesty was once in any state of men; it
can be referred to no other, but to the godly discipline, forcible doctrine,
and manifold graces of the Church and her holy Sacraments: as on the
contrary, the waste of al goodness is now by many years experience found, to
proceed of the Protestants, not only fruitles, but pernicious preachers and
doctrine. Who by inuading the old honorable rooms of most noble Prelates
(founded neither by them nor for them) have made pitiful spoil of the
goodliest ecclesiastical states and monumentes, Our miseries by Heresy.
almost in all Christendom. And by taking away the daily dreadful Sacrifice,
Confession, chastity, fidelity, obedience, humility, order, and al honesty
of life and manners, have given our people doleful experience, of the deadly
fruit of their schism and revolt from the Sea Apostolic, and Catholic
communion of the faithful world.

Which we are forced to treat of here more largely, through the importunate
and odious vaunting of this Libeller, concerning their felicity and unwonted
prosperity in England, since their breaking from the unity of the Church of
Rome: specially since the Queen (says he) was cursed and excommunicated by
the Pope, al matters have gone luckelie. Not talking at al of the Realm, or
peoples increase in religion, devotion, conscience, fidelity, honor, and
honesty; for therein the difference and decay from the old manners in all estates
is too notorious and lamentable to behold. Never so much injustice, never so
much extortion, never so much theft, never so much pride, ebrietie, glottonie,
riot, and al other sin and abomination. But only (as though he knew no
other world or heaven but this) he profanelie, and proudly in sondrie places
of his little book, makes repetition of their good luck in this life; of
their abondance in wealth; of their long peace; of the fruitfulnes of their
feeldes ever since the Popes Curses. Much like to the irreligious Tira^t that
never liked his luck better, then after he had committed sacrilege, and robbed
sacred things. So this triumphant Libeller braggeth; Profane bragges of the
Libeller.
That the Queen has reigned as long as three Popes; five times as long as
Queen Marie her sister; in such felicity, that any other Prince of
Christendom would be glad to have some piece of her good fortune.

Which tooto profane and proud cogitations and comparisons of this writer, we
will not attribute to her Majesty or to her prudent Councelours; who have yet
more feeling and sense in such things, then to make so much, of a few years
more or less reign, and other terrene felicity; that either her Majesty
should pronounce of her self (as surely she will not) the words of that
mistical woman of the Prophet Esaias; Cap. 47.
I sit a Queen and widow I am not, and mourning I shall never see. Or that
her wise Councillors should admire her happiness for this thing, and second her
with such applause as the people used to Herod, in the height of his
arrogancy and proud proposition: Voces Dei, Act. 12.
non hominis. They are al to wise (I say) and over well experienced to do or
say thus; for they know the judgments of God incontinently following. They
are not ignorant, that before ruin, the heart is exalted. Prou. 16.
They can not forget the variablenes and inconstancy of mortal things, The
vanity and danger of continual prosperity.
with the sudden fall of very fortunate persons. They have read of Policrates
king of Samos; whose prosperity being extraordinary, he was by his friends and
specially by the king of Aegipt advised, to procure to him self some grief
and alteration of fortune, lest some memorable calamity should in the end
ensue; as indeed there did. Which example S. Gregory Nazianzen thinks in this
case worthy to be remembered. They can not but esteem S. Austens judgment of
good credit in this matter; who thinks that nothing is more dangerous or
unlucky to a Christian, then to live long in continual prosperity.

Wherefore, all this vanity and triumphant flourish proceeds only from the
vain of our Libeller; The vanity of the Libeller.
who is one of that popular sta^pe which in the Psalm blessed the people that
had their barnes and butteries full; Psalm. 143.
their sheep pregnant, their cattle fair and fat, al void of ruin, care, and
clamor: where Christian men must measure their matters otherwise, and say with
the Prophet, Beatus populus cuius Dominus Deus eius; that people is happy whose
Lord and master is God: without whom, and out of whose house (which is the
Church) al humane felicity, is but matter of more damnation; and truly where
it is extraordinary, ever a very sore sign of everlasting perdition. Which we
do not say, for that we account not this terrene felicity a great benefit of
God often times, as well to private persons, as specially to Common wealths:
Worldly prosperity.
or that we reckon this few years prosperity of our Contrie any thing
comparable to the constant honor and felicity of our Forefathers days: but
for that it makes no certain, nor often no probable proof of Gods favor
toward them that enjoy the same, Luc 10.
being lightly common to good and evil; though of the two more ordinary to
the wicked and worser sort, then to the better; because Lazarus often receaueth
evil in his life, as the gredie glotton does the contrary. Yet our Libeller
thought it a good popular persuasion to the vulgar sort of men that have
fastened their eyes and hearts only on these present delites and commodities,
never thi^king on the life to come.

But now we must go further with this vaunter, and be bold to tell him, that
our Country is in no such blessed state, The ease is examined, whether
England be now in worldly prosperity or no.
as he would make the silier sort at home, or strangers abrod that feel not
our miseries, to believe. For though a few persons in respect of the rest (not
surely the third man in the Realm, having given them selves to follow the
present condition of things; and putting their conscience, reason, and
religion to silence, to be partakers of the pleasures and commodities, which
there the world yields by the spoil of infinite Catholics and honest
innocent men of al sorts) are advanced to riches and degree; and do reckon
their present state, a terrestrial Paradise, feeling their own wealth and not
regarding other men's woe: yet in deed knowing as we do, that the far greater
part of our Country of al degrees are brought to ruin, misery, or extreme
danger and desolation, as well them selves as their posterity, for the raising
of others unto this pleasure plenty and felicity which they have now for some
years enjoyed; we must needs confess and testify, that the body of the
Realm generally, was never in such extreme misery.

First and foremost for the Clergy; (which was, and is in truth where soever it
remain, The old Catholic Clergy.
and ought to be in all Christian commonwealths the first and principal order
of honor; and in ours, for number, learning, wisdom, and excellency of al
kinds, inferior to none in Europe) it is wholly destained and destroyed as
the world knows: the chief Prelates, Bishops and others, al spoiled of their
dignities and liuelihoodes, thrust into prisons, forced into banishment, til by
manifold and long miseries they be almost al wasted and worn away. These then
so many, so notable, and so worthy; for whom, both God, nature, and their
place of birth do challenge a part of this so much praised prosperity, feel
none of it: but for mere conscience and confession of that truth, which their
holy predecessors laid and left with them, In depositum; have lost their
terrene lot: and either are dead, or have passed so many years in misery, as
these other good fellows their intruders have lived in joy and felicity; who
in deed are Filij hominum, The new Clergy.
qui nubunt and nubuntur; that is, certain fleshly companions, unordered
Apostataes, and contemptible ministers; who entering into the right and rooms
of others, provided not for them, do think al fair wether in England; and
have good cause to like of the luck of these later years, which makes true
men mourn while such thieves be merry.

Secondelie; if we go from Spirituality to Temporaltie, and do make our
consideration of al orders and degrees of men and of the whole corpse and
communaltie of the land; we shall find by reason, experience, and substantial
conjecture, that the whole being divided into three parts, two of them are
inclined to Catholic religion in their hearts, and consequently are
disconte^ted with the present condition of things. Catholic Schismatiques and
their misery.
Of which Catholics, so many as follow the world, and dissemble their
religion for fear of laws; as they be (notwithstanding their dissimulation)
many ways known and discovered, mistrusted, doubted and hated of the
Protestants; and generally kept under, iniuried, disauthorised, and
watchfullie ouerlooked; and therbie in continual misery and coffeehouse: so
also in respect of their own consciences (being forced to swear to such
Articles of this new faith, and her Majesty's ecclesiastical Regalitie, as they
assuredly believe to be most wicked, untrue and impossible; as also to receive
such falsified Sacraments, as they in their hearts condemn to the pit of hell,
and know to be poison to their own souls, and to their friends who for
companies sake do receive with them; and finally being constreined to hear
and hire such ministers, as daily read, speak, and preach, nothing but
blasphemy against Christ's Vicar, A pitiful case.
Church, Sacraments, Saints and al Holies) they are enforced to live, and
(alas) often also to dye, in infinite distress of mind and torments of
Conscience, passing al other humane miseries. So as al these have little part of
this goodly joy, whereof this Libeller speaks; but do live in perpetual
anguish, wishing sometimes (which we have seen and heard) with many a sigh
and groan, that her Majesty would ^e content with half their goods, so that
she would grant them liberty but in secret sort, to have the use but of the
holy Sacraments; and sometimes lamenting their manifold infirmities, and
impedimentes of wife and children; for whose only needful relief, they continue
in that damnable state of Scisme.

Now for the other zealous and sincere Catholics, being marvelous many
throughout the whole Realm, The true and Zealous Catholics.
and the number by Gods goodness daily increasing (such we mean, as know it
is not enough to salvation to believe with heart; except, when occasion is
given, they confess with mouth; and that if they deny Christ before men, they
shall be refused of him before his Father): these being no small part of the land;
of the greatest calling, some; of honor, worship, wealth and substance, many;
the rest, of the honestest, orderliest, and best-beloued of the whole Country,
taste not of the pleasures of this Libellers paradise; but have passed these
years i^ greater greefes, fears and miseries, the^ any ma^s pen or tongue
ca^ express: not the tenth part of their calamities, discovered by any of our
brethrens books, epistles, pictures, or complaints.

If our fellows in the Catholic faith through Christendom could conceive
that in heart, The cruel and barbarous sufferinges of Catholics in England.
which these Confessors do in deed feel, and we often with our eyes behold:
they would with infinite tears bewail our case; and with daily devout
prayers, procure Gods mercy toward us, as we trust they do. If they might
see all the prisons, dongeons, fetters, stocks, rackes that are through the
Realm occupied and filled with Catholics: if they might behold the manner of
their arreignement even among the vilest sort of malefactors: How many have
been by famine, ordure, and pestiferous ayers, pined away: How many by most
cruel death openly dispatched: How many have suffered proscription and
condemnation to perpetual prison: how many have been spoiled, and otherwise
greeuouslie punished, by forfaiting to the Queen an Viz. in Crounes. 222. and
odd.
100. Marks for every time they hear Mass: How many gentlemen, and other
persons of wealth are wholly undone, by losing Viz. in Crounes. 866. and odd.
thirtene score pou^des by the year for not coming unto the heretical service:
How many have lost al their lands and goods during life for flying out of
the Country for their conscience sake: How many of the most substa^tial,
profitablest, and persons of greatest hospitality in diverse provinces, are
chased out of their own howses; by spials, promotours and catchpols: How many
wander in place where they are not known, driven into wooddes, yea surely into
John VVestby of Molbreck Esquier, was glad to stand for a whole vvinters day
almost, in a pit in water up to the ears: and often forced to duck under the
water, least he should be espied of the persecutors.
waters, to save them selves from the Heretics cruelty: How many godly and
honest married cooples most dear one to another, by the imprisonment,
banishment, flight of either party, are pitifully sondred: How many families
thereby dissolved; into what poverty, misery, and mishap their children are
driven: what number thereby run over sea into most desperate wars and
fortunes; or by better luck and fortune go to the seminaries or other
service, to pass their time during their Parents calamity. And for such as
be of the vulgar sort of honest hushandmen or artisans (of which condition
innumerable be Catholics i^ our Country) they being not able to pay that
impious Masse-Mulct, much less the forfaiture for not coming to the
Caluinistes preaches and service, are most cruelly and barbarously whipped in
the open market places; as both else where, and specially of late a blessed
number in the City of Winchester (most pitiful to behold) were so used.
Others have their ears cut of; others burnt through the ear; The misery of
the more part now in England.
and others otherwise, of both sexes, contumeliouslie and slauishlie abused.

These then and a thousand more which we need not to rehearse, being the miseries
of the better sort and bigger number of the Realm; and they falling upon them
for their fathers Faith, and no other crime in the world, committed either
against Prince or Country: (as the Libeller him self confesses for the
principal Clergy, and for many good subjects of the laity; who therefore,
he says, are not punished by any capital pain; as though the loss of
liberty, lands, dignities, grace and goods, were no punishment:) but these
calamities (we say) being common to our whole state of the Realm, and to the
greatest part of the rest; shall we say the state is blessed? this regiment
fortunate? al is peaceable and plentiful in England? Where indeed only a few
newly raised by other men's fall, are made happy by other men's infelicitie: and
where a very small number, in comparison, have divided the wealth, honors,
offices, and pleasures of the whole land among them selves: and do menage the
Country by their fauorits, to the coffeehouse, disgrace, and destruction of
the iustest gentlemen in the same.

Now this condition and present fortune of certain men, that have by her
Majesty's lenity, and by alteration of the Catholic religion into Heresy,
thus advanced their particular; is by these men, called the State: and their
abundance, peace, and prosperity; the happiness of the whole Realm. Where, the
happiness of a King The true happiness of a King.
and country is; the weal of the Subjects, no less then of the Sovereign:
and where wicked men (as Thieves, Murderers, Heretics, and others like) be in
misery and bear the pains of the laws; and not where Gods Priests, the
Churches children, and true Catholics (for whose defense and protection both
Kings and al just laws are made) be in continual troble and vexation. To
conclude then; the greatest and best part of our Country being in the
extremest worldly misery (besides the torments of conscience, which pass al
other pain) that ever me^ were in, since Christianity was founded; the
adversaries brag of the English felicity, is too vain, fond and frivolous.

But going further with this Politic, or Atheist (whether you will) that
measures al by worldly felicity; deeming the Popes Anathema or Curse to be
void toward us, or rather turned into blessing, by the good succes the
Protestants of our country have had in all their life and doings, since the
publishing of the same: we will set aside the misery of so great numbers of
particular men named before, and presume for the clearer proceeding in this
cause, that the present happiness of some protesta^tes, were the peace and
prosperity of the whole Realm and state: The universal infelicitie of the
English state by Heresy.
and that being admitted; yet we have to tell the man, and shall prove it now in
the sight of al indifferent people, that our Country and State is in the
greatest misery, most dangerous terms, that ever it was, since or before the
Conquest, and far in worse case then any Country of Christendom: which
notwithstanding (he says) would wish any piece of the English felicity.

It were a hard matter to persuade this to a thriftles yonker, a vulgar reader,
a common person, or such an one as brutishlie beholds and esteems the
present pleasures or profits that he enjoys with licentious liberty, above
all that may fall to him or his, be it wealth, be it woe, afterward for ever: but
to wise men, and specially to such as have charge of Commonweals, it is
nothing dificil; who if they know not of them selves (as lightly they do by
the law of Nature) precepts of policy, and holy Scriptures: yet they may
easily be induced to consider, that the present peace and pleasure of a common
body or state, or the calm of a few years (if it be either procured or
supported by iniust and dishonorable means, or be joined with evident perils,
present or to come) is indeed no true prosperity, nether in common, nor in
particular: but rather a prognostication of Gods great plagues to come, and of
the future miseries either to fall afterward, in our own days, or to our
posterity.

No weale-publique is happy without justice, honor, and security. If our
wealth be obtained by spoil or sacrilege, it is unjust. If our peace be
maintained by our neighbors wars, it is injurious and dishonorable. If no
respect be had for the continuance, security and stabilitie of this good
fortune we seem to be in, the^ either we or our posterity shall feel as much
woe, as we now do joy.

Of the revolt from the Sea Apostolic, alteration of religion, spoil of
Churches and Clergy (by which they made their entry into this new
blessedness) how just and lauful it was, we will not now stand upon: nor show
what ignominious practices and plaguey injustice they have used to sustain the
same, far differing from the old royal dealinges of our Kings and Country;
who either by lauful open wars, or honorable leagues and assured amity,
procured their rest and peace.

To make the subjects of Scotland, first; then of France; and last of al of
Flaunders, The dealinges of England with other Countries.
and diverse other states, to rebel against their lauful Princes: to imprison
some; to surprise the tounes of others; to seize upon the money of others; to
hazard the persons of others; to maintain horrible civil garboiles in all the
Countries near us, and against al their next neighbor Princes (with whom
otherwise they pretend good amity and intelligence): to be confederate with all
the infamous Heretics and Rebels of these days, yea surely with the Turk
him self: finally; by sondrie piracies, proditions, spieries and foul arts,
to afflict and coosen the world round about us; what conscience, honor, or
equity can be in this course? None at al surely. Nether can our peace and
prosperity, by such dishonorable and sinful means maintained, ever be secure
or durable; but always full of fear, danger and doubtfulnes, as well to the
authors of so foul and unwonted proceedinges, as to the people: though the
simplest of this latter sort auerted by the present peace and pleasure of a few
years, can not epsy their future misery so easily, as those which having
led both their Sovereign and her Subjects by strange paths into these
perplexities, are now them selves come, almost both to their wits and to
their worlds end; having nether God to stand for them, whom they have highly
offended by forsaking him and abolishing his holy service, honor and
Sacraments: nor any Prince or state sure unto them; every of which they have
so notoriously annoied in the times of their distresses, that they can look
for no office of true friendship at their hands.

In all which, God has so wonderfully ouerrought their humane counsels (that
seemed to such as had no deep insight in things present, Gods controleme^t of
English practizes.
nor much foresight or care of that was to come, to be full wise and far to
excel the compass of our old Fathers, or any forreiners at this day; and
therefore our Nation, by the passing prudence of certain Councillors, to stand
in peace and joy, when al their neigbours about us by their devises were in
misery): God him self (we say) has so controuled these wise follies, by the
contrary euentes of every of their sinful devises: that the world may see and
wonder at Gods ways, and how different they be from man's cogitatio^s, and how
far the sound Councels of such as be truly wise, differ from the present and
pregnant wits, or desperate adventures of such, as menage al matters, for their
own present and particular, without regard of the general end or their own
posterity.

See you not, how even God him self has defeated al their driftes in Scotland,
In Scotela^d
and brought the matter by marvelous means of his providence, to the just
contrary issue, of that which they shot at? Were not their endeavors eue^ so
crossed in France, In France.
in every of the three brethre^s kings days? Where they have been always
frustrate of their purposes, and lost both their unthankful labors, and their
money? To what end their intelligence with the rebellious states of Flaunders,
In Fla^ders.
or with the Apostata of Colen or other their correspondents will come: they
partly perceive, and may acknowledge theri^ (as al other wise me^ do) the
mighty, just, and provident hand of God. The secret misery of English
Protesta^tes.
When our Protestants consider of these things deeply, and attend the issue
of al their extraordinary proceedinges, and as men out of al aim now and
compass of their intended course, can go no farther, without desperate
overthrow and hazard of al; what misery they may be in, let wise men judge:
how so ever the^ selves cover their perplexed cogitations from the vulgar sort,
by telling them of fair wether, and of their plenty of corn and cattle, long
reign, and prosperity of her Majesty above al Popes and Princes of her days.
But the origin of all the former dishonorable and desperate plottes, and of the
extreme fears and miseries, The true origin of English miseries.
they many ways show them selves to be in (and indeed are, notwithstanding
the pretense of their prosperity): is, their first fall from the God of their
forefathers, and the alteration of Catholic religion into this Caluinisme, or
Atheism, by which our Realm has so long perished. Though this Libeller and
other English new writers (no wiser nor better then Children or Bears, that
are offended with the rods, stones, or staves, wherewith they be beaten,
nether looking a^ the cause nor chief author of their punishment) attribute
their trobles or apprehended fears to the excommunication, and to the godly
endeavors of Catholic Priests, instructing the people, peaceably to their
salvation.

And how much this forsaking of holy Church Faith and communion of al
Christian people displeased God; and how unwisely it was done in respect of
the temporal state, and safety of our Prince and Country; the same Lord God
has in their own days, that were the authors thereof, revealed: as otherwise
natural reason and experience (if they were never so void of conscience and
religion) might have foretold the^. But (alas) their own particular
advancement, and infinite ambition, (which they thought should not have so
free course, if the old state of religion had continued): either brought them
into error of judgment (as it commonly happeth); or else (which is no rare
case nether) made the^ against their own knowledge, follow that which was so
pernicious both temporallie and spirituallie.

For who could not see, though his judgment, reason, Al mutations dangerous
but especially of Religion.
or reading were never so small, that al great alteratio^s in Commonweals are
dangerous? Let but an attempt be made to change your temporal statutes, and
national laws into the civil laws: change but your customs that now you be
guided by, in many things: change your form of government, which is now a
Monarchy, into an other kind of regiment: what infinite broiles would it
bring? But there is no alteration so perilous, as of Religion; and of that
Religion which was planted by our first Apostles; received from the mother
Church of Christendom; confirmed by miracles; approved by all the laws,
councels, customs, and tribunals of the Church, for to be the only true
worship of God, and consonant to his sacred word and will. What counsel could
be more dangerous in the world then this? They could not but think that the
subjects of the Realm, so many of them being Catholic, so lately
reconciled to the Church, and by public Ambassie, oath and promis to his
Holiness, aduowed never to fall again into Schism, could not but be much
discontented. They could not but see what hart-sore it would be to al those,
that depended on the old honorable Clergy, to behold the deprivation and
imprisonment almost of the whole order; and an other fleshly company intruded
into their rooms, whom no man almost liked of, and since are more and more
taken and proved to be the filth of the land.

They were not ignorant that the Pope and Sea Apostolic (now the second time
so contemptuously forsaken) could either of conscience or duty to his flock,
or his own honor, The peril by excommunication.
not use one time or other the rod of the Churches discipline, which is,
Excommunication; against the offenders: which how so ever they thought by
error of Religion they might contemn, and by power withstand; yet they could
not be so far ouerseene, that such Censures (by which many a man's conscience
at home might be perced, and of which any foreign Prince abroad, as time and
advantage served him, would perhaps make his profit) might not seem to them
very like, to breed more trobles then were to be wished.

They looked not well about them, Consideratio^s against change of Religion in
England.
if they foresawe not that their defection from the Pope, who is most dearly
co^federated with all the Catholic and mighty Kings of Christendom, might
not breed a great alienation of their hearts from us, and an occasion of much
inconvenience and danger to our Country. Their wisdoms and experience of the
diverse bloody conflictes foughten in our Fathers days for religion in
Zwicherland, and in our Country in K. Henry the 8. and K. Edward the sixth
late days; and the doubtful event of such things might have forewarned them,
of the like that might fall, and sithence have fallen as well in England as
Ireland: where all the Country being in good will Catholic, they might easily
perceive with what a general torment of conscience, and danger of civil war,
the new Religion were to be enforced upon them.

Fear is never a sure nor long keeper of his master. And because no Prince
rules his subjects so securely by force and fear, as by love and liking; how
could they not conceive, that al Ireland and a great piece of England was ever
to be interteined in subjection, by power and plain awe, and nothing by love
and sweetness? And which is of more perilous sequel in this case, and ought
most of al to have been by them foreseen, is; that the diversity of religion,
joined with the censure and sentence of the Sea Apostolic, may make such
alteration in the opinions of many (otherwise most loial subjects) that
diverse may seem to obey only of fear and nothing of conscience. Which
conscience of the subjects (doubtless) is the only sure pillar of the
Souerains estate.

They should have foreseen how many persons of honor and quality for
freedom of conscience and other discontentme^t grounded on religion, were like
to fly into foreign parts: who might by zeal or misery be so irritated
against the causes of their banishment and occupiers of their liuelihoodes,
that their absence might prove dangerous to their enemies state. Whom they can
not repress by calling them Fugitives, or such like names of vulgar reproach:
for that terrefied not the noble Prince Henry the seventh, K. Henry the 7.
grandfather to the Queens Majesty for pursuing the cruel Tirant and usurper
Richard the third: whom he honorably (notwithstanding he was an anointed
king, and in possession of the Realm) deposed of the croune.

They should have made their account before alteration of religion, that there
would rise thereby, Dissentio^ in religion deadly.
implacable division among the subjects, and pernicious difference betwixt the
dearest friends and nearest kinsfolks: no dissension nor hatred being so
capital and deadly, as that which comes of contrariety in Faith and worship
of God. And the unity of Christ's Church being once broken, that the
Protestants them selves should be combred with infinity of sects and
opinions, pernicious to the state. Whereof no doubt they should have received
good proof and lamentable issue ere this, had not the heads as well of the
rulers, as of the Puritanes, Anabaptists, Brethren of love and other sects,
been so fully and fearfullie attent upon the Catholics and their endeavors.

But the adversary tells us that they have gone through al these perils, and
have had so many victories against what enemies soever, at home or abroad; and
that therefore al was wisely done and luckelie. To which we say, that if al
prove well in the end, it is better for them: and that it is not so properly
perteining to prudence, to escape dangers when they fall (which good luck, fond
men also sometimes have by fortune) as to prevent and provide, that no dangers
fall; and to fly from such things, whereof evident perils must needs ensue.

But in this matter of Religion, God him self also has checked their worldly
purposes and conceiptes marvelously. The Heretics expectation deceived about
extinctio^ of the Catholic religion.
For where they had thought by severity of such strange laws as were never
made in any common wealth heathen or Christian, by putting all the old Prelates
into prison, and wearing them away, by yielding al Churches, pulpites,
schools, offices, honors, and commodities, to men of their own sect and
creation; and by what other extremity, policy, or diligence so ever, to have
in a few years extinguished the name and memory of faith Catholic: they now
yearlie and daily find, the number, zeal, constancy, patience, and knowledge
of the children of the Catholic Roman Church, so to increase in all orders
sexes and degrees of men, that they may see and confess, that Digitus Dei est
hic; and that if they persist, Exo. 8.19. Mat. 27.64.
Nouissimus error ipsorum erit peior priori.

Once, they show them selves to be so terrified by God in the blood and death
of so many Martirs, which they in a kind of extreme desperate obstinacy, and
obduration do daily kill, and yet are so appalled by the truth and the common
sense of al men; that they dare not, or are ashamed to execute them for
religion: whereby even now in the vaunt of their wealth, peace and prosperity,
they show such extraordinary fears, as is wonder to behold.

Wherein their misery is so lamentable (as we conster it) the perplexity which
God has driven them unto, The extreme fears of English Protestants.
so terrible; that there is not a poor Priest can enter to say Mass, but they
imagine he brings their destruction. There can not a ship appear in any
coast, nor any Princes preparation for his own affairs, but it is for
invasion of the Realm. There can be no College founded to relieve men's
banishme^ts abroad, no intertainment given to any Catholic either in ca^pe or
court, The speech of the Jews. John. 11.
but al is against their state; every man crying out, Quod venient Romani, and
tollent locum and gentem nostram.

So long as our Realm was in the unity of the Catholic Church, and lived
either in just wars, or honorable peace with our neighbors; was there any
such extreme fears of present invasion? was there such mustering? such diligent
watch, and swearing against the Pope at every port? such examination of
passingers? such a do generally, and such mistrust of the subjects
fidelity? such jealousy over al men, as though the whole Realm were a Camp,
that feared and expected every hour, some secret Camisado? Is this the
felicity and security that the Libeller so much glories of, whereof he says
other countries wish some part? Surely, a moderate fortune with security, is
without comparison much better, then all the pleasures in the world, with
perplexity. And it seems by outward signs, that there is no Nation in Europe
which stands this day, in so doubtful terms, as ours does. Woe be to our
sins therefore.

Which we say not upon any likelihood of any such present dangers, as seem
there now so extremlie to be feared: or for that the Priests of God or other
Catholic men, can possibly be any cause thereof, which is indeed no more but
this; Psalm. 52.6.
Deum non inuocauerunt; illic trepidauerunt timore, vbi non erat timor. God
only has driven them unto it, to give them some sense of their misery, and
some remorse of their reuolte from him, and motion of repentance.

But our consideration is specially of the dreadful and most desperate case,
our whole Country, every order, and each particular man thereof, is in; The
danger of the Realm by uncertainty of the next inheritour.
by the uncertainty of the next heir to the Crown: yea by the certainty of
most bloody civil and foreign wars, among such a number of Competitours,
such diversity of religions, such ambitious spirits that alredie make their
packes and complots for the same: al our rest, peace, and felicity what so
ever depending upon a few uncertain days, of one sole persons life, well
grown in years, subject to casualties, and under the hand of the omnipotent
Lord, that takes away when he lists the spirits of Princes, and is terrible
upon the Kings of the earth. It were to miserable, for any noble or
gentleman, or other person either of possession, wealth, or issue, in the whole
land, not to know, or not to care, to whom his liuelihood should descend after
him; but to provide for his own time only, and to let them go by the ears
and skamble for it afterward. Far more miserable, unnatural, and lamentable
it is, to see such a noble whole Realm, and public state driven to these
straites and incomparable distresses, that almost it looks for no longer life
and being; and no person subject thereunto, for longer peace, wealth, and use of
their own goods, then her Majesty lives: that is to say; for ten, twenty,
more or less years, as it pleases God to allot her. Which thing being an
evident demonstration, and palpable proof of our greatest calamity; the
deceiptful adversaries shame not to turn the same not-withstanding to the high
commendation of their government; telling the people how happy they be by the
same, and how needfullie they have to pray and provide for the preservation of
her Majesty's person, by whose only life, they enjoy so great felicity;
afterward al to be in extremes.

Which the Counselours them selves stick not to confess, and publish: as you
may read in an oration, Sr. Christopher Hatto^s oration.
made by one of them upon the accident that fell by the rashness of a certain
serving man, discharging his piece at randone, and striking one of the
watermen in the Queens barge, nere her Highness person then present. In which
oration, he acknowlegeth, nothing to be looked for after her death, but
confusion, persecution, blood, vengeance, wars, spoil, rauishmentes, and al
other maledictions, that the world can yield: and ten thousand more, then (as
he says) can be by him foreseen. Not doubting to conclude, that, that day,
we shall be the most miserable men in the world: in the mean time, only
enjoying al felicities heavenly and worldly by her life.

Thus much has that honorable person of our general calamity. In the mean
time, The vain felicity of England set out by the Libeller.
the matters are so ruled, that we must account our selves happy, if our
common wealth stand during the life of her Majesty. This is (alas) the
felicity of our country, praised and admired by them, that esteem only the
present uncertain pleasure of a very few years, without regard of the
posterity: but of wise men deemed for the highest misery that can be; nothing
in a Common body being praisable, that is not joined with security and
durabilitie.

Wherein our distress is more markable, that it is not only not prevented in
so many years of Gods patience, and general foresight of the miseries, by the
grave Councillors and al other wise men: Evil provision for the succession.
but (which is more pitiful and unnatural) it is by special laws and capital
penalties provided to the contrary, that none may know or name the next
lauful heir and successor under pain of high treason; nor any make claim,
or challenge any future right therein, except her Highness natural issue. Whereby
under pretense of preserving their present state, they are contented to plonge
their whole posterity into eternal or very long miseries. Yea and (which
passes al dishonor to the Realm and to her Majesty's person) to insinuate,
that though the next in blood and lauful succession to her Highness, may not
challenge or be named: yet only her natural; may be advanced thereunto. Which
had been shameful enough, and to much injury to the next of lauful blood, if
it were granted to the issue of a King gotten out of lauful matrimony: but to
prefer the natural of a Queen, (in whose person, by reason of her sex,
fornication were fouler, and the fruit thereof nothing so capable) that passed
al shame and honor: procured (no doubt) or set down in statute, by some
wicked forgeries, of such as sought to dishonor her Majesty contrary to the
meaning of the whole Parliament, which (as we think) did never deliberate of
that special article, though it be extant in the printed and published copies
of the same.

How so ever it be; our misery herein is notorious and the old glory and
felicity of our Realm (the guides thereof, wittinglie and willingly beholding
it, and consenting thereunto) so fades and falls to nothing in all men's sight:
that we can not complain enough of our instant calamities, nor attribute them
to any other cause then to Gods judgments; whereby first (as the Italian
says) a man's brain, is taken away when God entendeth to punish him, lest he
should by providence auert the intended plague.

This our Countries scourge, proceeding wholly of our notorious forsaking the
Catholic Church and Sea Apostolic, began first in K. Henry the eight;
King Henry the eight the beginner of our Countries misery.
being Radix peccati of our days (as the scripture speaks of 1. Mal. 1.11.
Antiochus) upon that his most iniust title and challenge of the Headship and
supreme government of the Church, whence al these extremities are ensewed
sithence. Which king God plagued meruelouslie straight upon his revolt, both
spirituallie and temporallie. For within a very short space (by his
sufferance) he killed his own wife, mother to her Majesty that now is; whom he
loved so impotentlie a little before, that for her sake he both divorced him
self from his former wife (with whom he had lived so honorably twenty years
together) and from the unity of the Church (which he and his predecessors had
been in, nine hundredth years before); and shed the blood of the learnedest,
Fisher.
worthiest, and to him self the best beloved of al his Realm. More.


After that he married and remaried, killed and dismissed both wives and friends
as often, King Henry's great offenses.
and as many as he thought good; in such intemperate sort, as the like has
never been seen. He was in such torment of conscience, and such perplexity
for his revolt and other sacrileges: that sometimes he went about to join with
protestant Princes in religion; sometimes (thrice at least after his fall) to
reconcile him self to the Pope again; which thing our Lord, for his greater
punishment, suffered him not to bring to good effect; but to die in passing
anguishe of mind for the former offenses, and all the strange sacrileges
committed, by forcing into the world well near a hundredth thousand professed
persons: and by the destruction of ten thousand religious houses and Churches
in one year, as one testifies of him, in this Epigramme.

Millia dena vnus templorum sustulit annus.
Quam timeo in poenas vix satis vnus erit.
And he that without al fear of God brake so many thousand holy men's wills
and foundations; had his own testament broken, falsified, and forged, before
his bones were thorough cold: and that Roman religion, which he by force of
his own newly challenged supremacy, and by sharp laws and humane devises
and punishments maintained during his life, and was by him specially
recommended unto such as he gave the government and education of his son, was
immediately abolished and the whole Realm altered into Zwinglianisme, which of
al other sects he most abhorred.

And for his issue, leaving behind him three goodly and towardlie children:
first, King Henry's issue punished for his sins.
Edward of marvelous expectation; whom God took away in his young years,
even then when he was toward marriage: and after him his elder sister Marie;
who living long a virgin, married at length only for desire of issue, and for
the benefit of the Realm; which our Lord did not accomplish by her, but took
her away within few years: and lastly the Queens Majesty that now is; whom
for her youth and great likelihood that way, every man verelie looked straight
that she would have taken some noble Prince, either stranger or subject; having
profer of the best in Christendom, and her self not seldom making semblance
of good lyki^g that way, and of much love to many. Which yet the same Lord God,
for the due punishment of the said King her father, would not suffer: but by
little and little, causing the Realm to fall to this desolation, that now we see
it in; and the whole stock and issue of the said King, contrary to al hope
and expectation, to fail and be frustrate.

Wherein, it is but a small comfort and remedy for these our public distresses,
that the Libeller so often, The Libellers fond repetition of a maiden Queen.
by shameful flattery, and odious (we dare say) to the Q. Majesty her self,
tells us she is A MAIDEN QVEENE; seeing that with the Protestants it is no
great merit nor praise to be a virgin; who compare the state of married persons
in all points of dignity unto virginity, preferring it also in some. And with
us Catholics, in this case of the Realms extreme danger, even sacred and
professed virgins, have been justly taken out of their better life, and by
dispensation married. And would God in stead of her Majesty's virginity (so
that it had stood with Gods will and hers) we might rather have had for the
Realms safety, issue of her body i^ honorable wedlock. In which state there
is godly continency also, and perhaps (as things stand) as meritorious and
glorious to her self, as her virginity.

But al are signs of Gods ire toward our poor Country: the evil luck
whereof and of King Henry is so much more, that this noble line and issue now
failing, they will not suffer us to go to the next of the same royal blood
descending from the renouned Prince Henry the seventh, grandfather to her
Majesty (by whose victorious entry, happy marriage and issue, al diversity of
former claims of the Croune, and most cruel Civil wars were ended; and the
coniunctio^ of the two Royal houses of Lancastre and York, fortunately
atchiued:) but by most shameful packing of certain Puritanes and ambitious
persons with the emulous house, and contrary faction to the family of this
said noble Prince Henry the 7. would bring al to skambling; and as they hope,
gape after, and work for, to their own post. That so by Gods just judgments
our Country should at once, fall into two extreme miseries: both by forsaking
God and the Catholic religion on the one side; as also by refusing, and tooto
shamefullie abusing the only next, true and lauful heir; and consequently
the whole blood of king Henry the seventh, on the other side. Wherein our
fears might be the less if they would or could prevent the said mischeeues,
by declaring, at least now at length, the heir apparent. But herein also our
future calamities are showed to be inevitable, except God use mercy above
humane means. For the matter is so far past and ouerruled by certain, that
they can now skarce enter into any deliberation of the succession (as they
imagine) without extreme peril which they had rather put of, to the end of the
Queens life and their own, then have it to fall presently in their days. Our
Lord God turn al to the best, and to that end that most shall tend to his
glory, what deserved confusion so ever fall unto us.

This yet we can not but lament and marvel at in this cause; that the
conjunction and uniting the two noble Realms of England and Scotland into one
Monarchy, which we have sought for with so many cruel battles, and so much
blood of both Nations? being now offered by God and nature in the sweetest and
(doubtless) most indifferent sort that can be; The conjunction of the two
Realms into one Monarchy.
and in two persons, Mother and Son; the one for approved prudence, virtue,
patience, constancy, courage in adversity, and equal love of both the
Countries: the other for the rarest towardlines in all Princely parts, of any
of his age in all Christendom: both of our flesh and blood, and the nearest of
all the beloved race of Henry the 7. most proper for this purpose, and even (as
it were) provided by God him self; can not yet be accepted: but sought by
unjust laws, shameful practices, imprisonment of the one, raising rebellion
against the other, either utterly to be defeated, or made uncertain of their
certain right, and forbidden to challenge or utter the same: while others
intending usurpation, upon the next lauful successors uncertainty, make their
profit and pack, for atchiuing their ambitious purpose. Of whom, as well the
Queen as the whole State present stand in far more danger, then they could
ever do by the public acknowledging of the lauful heir: which yet is their
pretense, in concealing the same from the Realm.

Into these straites (lo) on every hand, is our poor Country brought by the
judgments of God; whilst our Libeller and other Protestants, tell the simple
people of their fair weather, and present abundaunce of al things, to auert
their minds from the foresaid endless miseries. Which for our forsaking the
faith of our Fathers, al wise men extremlie fear, and certainly expect, if we
return not to our Lord God, and unite our selves again to the Catholic and
Roman Church, which we have so unworthily left, and cruelly persecuted. Out
of whose company and obedience there is nether salvation in the next, nor any
true peace and security in this world: which both Christian charity and
natural love toward our dearest country, friends, flesh and blood, causes
us so often and earnestly to inculcate; Deuteronomy. 32.29.
Vt gens absque confilio sapiat, and nouissima prouideat.

Alas; it is nether Pope nor Priest (as the Libeller untruly affirms, Who
are indeed true enemies to her Majesty and our Country.
and many deceived men simply may suppose) that desires their destruction:
the one as a most loving Father and Pastor, with unspeakable pains,
solicitude, groans, tears and expenses; and the other by voluntary death, and
shedding of their own blood, seeking their brethrens salvation, and the
reconcileme^t of their Country to Christ and his Vicar. But they only are in
truth (and so will in the end prove) most capital enemies to our Queen and
Country, that first were authors to her Majesty to forsake the Church and Sea
Apostolic; and do still animate her and the Realm, after so many signs of
Gods wrath toward them, to contemn the authority and censures of the same;
and violently to resist by force of arms and bloody laws, the supreme
Pastor of Gods faithful people: as though he used the rod of correction
toward offenders upon malice, hatred, or partiality, and not of entire
affection, love, and charity.

Moses and Aaron resisted Chore and his confederates, and executed Gods
sentence upon them, and were not their enemies. Samuel denounced and executed
Gods sentence against Saul; Elias against Iesabel; and other Prophets and
Priests against other Kings without al malice and with much love. No otherwise
then Io. Roffensis, Sir Thomas Moore and others did; who resisted upon great
love and duty to their Sovereign, dissuading both his divorce from the Church
and from his wife. Which kind of men be nether traitors nor enemies to be
resisted by sword or laws: but they are only such adversaries as our Savior
comaundeth the faithful to agree withal in the way, for diverse dangers
following. Math. 5.
And those men in such a case are only wise and godly Councillors, her
Majesty's true subjects and worthy members of the Commonwealth, that humbly
exhort her Highness, not to be beguiled by her present fortune, or to think
obstinate and forcible resistance of the Pope or Churches sentence of
Excommunication, True and good council to her Majesty.
to be her most security: but to see what Theodosius the elder did when he was
excommunicated by S. Ambrose; to remember how Theodosius the yo^ger behaved him
self in the cause of S. Chrysostom, for whose unjust banishment the said
Emperors father and mother were excommunicated; Lib. 10. trip. hist. cap. 18.
and 26.
to consider well what the end of the controversy was betwixt King Henry the
second and the Pope and Bishop of Canturburie in his time; and afterward
between King John and the Sea of Rome and Clergy in those days? That al these
in fin (as mighty Princes as they were) yielded and reconciled them selves to
the Sea Apostolic. A thing that after a little heat or headines of young
Princes be past, was and ever shall be found in fin the only sure and
honorable way before God and the world, to keep them selves and their Realms
from perdition.

Which danger her Majesty's father (in whom this revolt of our days and
Country began) both before once or twice, The meaning of K. Henry 8. for
reconciling him self to the Sea of Rome.
and specially toward his death saw; and earnestly sought to auert from
his posterity, by the like reconciling him self to the Church. Which yet,
through Gods judgments, he had not time to accomplish in him self; but was
atchiued afterward most honorably in his eldest daughter, not only for
conscience sake otherwise: but especially for effectuating her said fathers
great desire therein, as some of her chief Councillors (to whom he had
communicated his mind in that matter) did publicly testify to the whole
Realm at Paul's Cross. Would God our sins and the Realms, could suffer her
Majesty's wise Councillors to consider of the case, with such sincerity as
were requisite for them selves and us al: who by their better or worse election
in this one matter, are like either to be long happy, or unhappy for ever.

We trust the intolerable flattery of this Libeller or other like (telling
her Majesty, How al temporal princes have superiors.
that she has no superior but God; none above her but the Almighty; none
that she need to fear or care for but him; and therefore that she has not to
regard any sentence of Pope or others) can much move any of their wisdoms:
this being a most shameful Heresy and untruth, that a King has no superior
in matters of his soul and conscience. When not only the general Pastor of
the whole Church is his superior, if he be one of Christ's flock or fould (all the sheep whereof without exception by our masters express sentence were
committed to Peter and his successors feeding and government): but also other
Prelates of his own kingdom that have charge of his soul; to whom likewise
he owes al Christian obedience, in spiritual affairs, no less then the
poorest man in the Realm. For kings were not excepted from. S. Paul's rule
and admonition given to all the faithful, in these words; Obedite praepositis
vestris and subiacete eis; Heb. 13.
Obey your Prelates and be subject unto them; whereof he yields immediately
the cause: For that they vvatch as being to render account of your souls.

If Princes then have souls, they must needs be under the account and charge
of Prelates; if they have Prelates, they must obey them and be subject unto
them; if they be bound to obey them, and be subject unto them, they must
acknowledge them for their superiors. How then say these wicked flatterers,
that Kings and Queens have no superiors; none to be subject unto, but God? That
they be the chief eue^ in causes ecclesiastical, and in matters of religion,
soul, and conscience, within their Realms? That neither Pope nor Prelate can
excommunicate them, or use other discipline for correction of them, when they
fall from their faith?

If Theodosius the Emperor had had such bolsterers of his pride about him, or
so little grace and wisdom as to have given ear to them: The example of
Theodosius.
he would little have esteemed S. Ambrose authority sentence and censure
against him. But he was more happy and Christian then to plead his
superiority in such matters above his Bishop; or to challenge exemption or
impunitie in this world for what so ever he did or believed, and only to be
reserved to God. And it is a singular note of irreligiositie in our days, that
these profane Heretics and godles persons do prefer humane things, before
divine; the regiment temporal, before spiritual; the body, before the soul;
earth, before heaven; Regalitie, before Priesthood; and this life, before the
next and al eternity. Which is an evident demonstration, that al tends in
this Heresy, to plain Paganism and Epicurisme: esteeming and admiring none,
but such as be in worldly height power and dignity, that can yield them these
transitory honors, pleasures and preferments.

The sayings and doings of ancient Fathers in this case.
But the truth of this matter may and ought to be learned, partly of the old,
glorious, and most excellent Doctors and Bishops of the primitive Church: and
partly by the behavior of the first great Emperors and Kings, that were
professors and defendours of the Catholic faith. What is more honorable
(says S. Ambrose) then that the Emperor be called a child of the Church;
Epist. 33.
for a good Emperor is within the Church, and not above the Church. And S.
Chrysostom admonishing Priests of their duty, in keeping from the holy
altar great offenders; expreslie warns them to use their authority therein,
even toward Kings, or what soever they be. Whether (says he) he be Duke,
Prefect, or crouned Prince, that would vnvvorthilie approach, Hom. 60. ad
Popul. and 83. in Math.
forbid him: thy authority and power is greater the^ his. So S. Gregory
Nazia^zene speaks to his own Emperor. The law of Christ has made you
subject to my power and to my tribunal, for we have our soueraintie, Orat. ad
Ciues Nazianz.
and that more excellent and perfect; unless the spirit should subdue it self
to the flesh, and heavenly things yield to the earthly. Which my liberty
of speech I fear not (O Emperor) but thou vvilt allow, seeing thou art an
holy sheep of my sacred fold, and a pupil of the great Pastor, and well
instructed by the holie-Ghost from thine infancy.

Also S. Athanasius plainly avouches and proves the Emperor Constantius the
Arrian, Epist. ad Solit. vit. degent.
to be the precursor of Antichrist, in that he made him self judge and
superior in causes ecclesiastical over Bishops; and that his arrogated
preeminence and exercise of jurisdiction in such matters (which our gentle
Libeller calls in our Queen, her Majesty's Regalitie) is, Abominatio
desolationis, fortold by Daniel. What would this holy Father have said, if he
had seen Cromwell Cromwell Vicar general.
made the Vicar general to K. Henry in Spiritualibus; and sit among and before
all the Bishops and Archbishops of the Realm, in their conuocations? If he had
heard tell of Sigillum Reginae ad causas ecclesiasticas; of her commissioners
and courts; of her deposing and creating Bishops, and determining of Religion
at her pleasure? Kings nether Catholics nether Heretics, ever went thus
far; being much more capable, then any woman can be. Of which sex S.
Chrysostom says thus. Lib. 2. de Sacerd.
When it comes to the government of the Church and charge of souls, al
vvomankind must needs wholy give place.

That not only Athanasius the great but the ancient Osius, Leontius, S.
Hilarie and other, did so sharply reprehend it in that heretical king
Constantius; might have forewarned our Country and her Majesty's Councillors,
to have taken heed, as well of the like absurdity, as of the suspicion of
Heresy that in men's heads might seem to be engendered therbie: seeing that
such as first attempted it, were notorious Arrians. But to give the same and
far more superiority to a woman (whereof, as you see by S. Chrysostom she
cannot possibly be capable) that passes all the barbarous flattery and folly
in the world; and makes our nation a very fable to al nations, and to the
posterity.

Which, in truth, is not to make her next to God in her Realm (as the Libeller
says) but to make her the God of her people. How near the Libeller does make
the Queen God.
From which cogitation, though of her self, having so many means to put her
in mind of her mortality, we doubt not but she is very far: yet truly
this abominable and blasphemous adulation of some about her Highness, may breed
great tentations. As we see in certain of the old heathen Emperors, who never
rested til they were adored with divine honor. The next step unto which is
(doubtless) to say and believe, that a temporal King is above the Priest in
causes ecclesiastical: or that in a Christian Commonweal, the next dignity
to Christ or God, is not the Priest but the Prince; and so arrogate the
regiment of the Church to a Queen, which S. Paul expreslie testifies to be
given to Bishops: Act. 20.
saying; Take heed to your selves and to the whole flock, vvherin the
Holie-Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of God, etc. Touching
which our English singular absurdity, it is the greatest pity in the world to
see them so many years, after so much holy blood protesting against that
iniquity, and so many learned men's admonitions, persist in the same: and to
allege still those scriptures so impertinentlie for the Princes usurped
spiritual soueraintie, by which Claudius or Nero (in whose days and of whom the
Apostle spoke specially) might as well challenge to be above S. Peter and Paul in
the government of the Church and in causes ecclesiastical, as any Christian
king that now lives. Mark this reason.
For when S. Peter admonished the Christians to whom he wrote, and al other in
them, To be subject to the king as excelling or preeminent (which place our
adversary so confidentlie alleges): 1. Pet. 2.13.
can any man be so dull or obstinatlie blind, The absurdities of Protestants in
founding the Q. spiritual Supremacy upon S. Peter's word.
as to think that he prescribes any other duty toward the king then was
common both to the Pagane Princes at that time persecuting the Church, and to
Christian kings afterward protecting the Church? S. Peter, Paul, or Christ him
self in the Church of God, or in ecclesiastical regiment? (for Christ behaved
him self to the Emperor in his days, as the Apostle here commands
Christians to do): and that the Apostolical preeminence, or our Saviors own
Preesthood among the faithful, should not be esteemed so high in truth and
before God, as the regalitie of Nero, or any other either faithful or heathen
temporal power?

S. Chrysostom writes) do owe obedience to lauful kings (whether they be
heathen or faithful) from those matters, wherein nether Pagane nor Christian
Prince may command the Priest nor people that is in religion and affairs of
the soul?

S. Peter next going before, that the occasion of his writing of this obedience
to Princes, was; to teach the faithful, how they should behave them selves in
company of the heathen without offense? Who among other things slaundered and
charged the Christians of treason, conspiracies and disobedience to their
Prince (even as our Protestants do Catholics) because they would not leave
their Christian faith and exercises at their commandment; nor obey them
before God and their holy Pastors, in matter of faith and conscience. For
stopping of al which false and slanderous tongues, S. Peter The true meaning
and cause of S. Peter's words.
required the^ to obey their Princes in all worldly, temporal and civil
matters; to pay their tribute, keep their civil laws, live peaceably and
lowly amongst them; yea and to pray for them, whether they tolerate the
Christian religion or persecute the same.

to obedience and due subjection, if either should rebel against the other?
Wherein because the spiritual power consists in things Quae sunt ad Deum; and
that concern our souls, and the conducting of them to life and peace
everlasting: and the temporal pertains principally to the good and
tra^quilitie of this tra^sitorie life; comparing the^ both together, it must
needs be confessed, that the spiritual is the higher nearer and liker to the
Soueraintie of God, over his reasonable creatures; the^ is the terrene power or
Humane creature, as the Apostle here terms the King and his preside^ts. 2.
Pet. 7.


So as every power both spiritual and temporal being of God (as S. Paul
teaches) and obedience and subjection due to both in their kind, though in
several subjects, causes and respects: yet is it most clear that of the two
the ecclesiastical power and regiment is more excellent. In respect whereof, S.
Ignatius The subordination of the two powers according to S. Ignatius.
gives this order in honoring and respecting our superiors: Honor God the
author and Lord of al, and the Bishop as the Prince of Priests, being the
Image of God and holding his Princedome of him, and his Priesthood of Christ.
Epist. ad Smirne^.
And after him you must honor also the King. For none is to be preferred before
God nor equal to him, nor more honorable in the Church then the Bishop,
exercising the Priesthood of God for the salvation of the world. Nether is
any equal to the King in the host or camp, procuring peace and benevolence
to the other Princes under him. For he that honoreth the Bishop shall be honored
of God; and he that dishonoreth him shall of God be dishonored. For if any man
rising against the king is vvorthie of damnation; how can he escape Gods
judgments, that attempteth any thing against or without the Bishop? For
Priesthood is the cheef and sum of al man's good: which who so ever
disgraceth, dishonoreth God, and our Lord JESUS CHRIST the chief Priest of God,
etc.

And if any man list farther to see what the old Christian Emperors thought
and acknowledged in this matter; The opinion and practice of old Christian
Emperors in this cause.
and how they behaved them selves toward Gods priests in all causes of
religion and spiritual affairs; and with what honor, privilege, and
prerogative they respected their persons, and holy calling even in temporal
causes: let him read Zozomenus how Constantine the great behaved him self
toward the Bishopes in the first Council of Nice: Li. 2. ca. 2. trip.
and S. Augustines 162. epistle of the same Emperors contentment, to ask
pardon of the Bishopes for taking upon him to deal in the Cause of Caecilian,
properly perteining to them: and S. Ambrose epistle 32. of Valentinian the
elders law, that in ecclesiastical causes none should iuditiallie deal, that
were not of the same order. The like he writes of the Emperor Gratians
behavior in the Council of Aquileia. And to be brief; let him read the
Emperor Iustinianus sixth constitution, where he both puts the true
difference betwixt the Priesthood and the Empire; and prefers that before
this, saying thus: The greatest gifts of God among men, Auth. Quomodo oport.
Episcop. etc. in. p.
is the Priestood and the Empire: of which two the former having the
administration of divine things, the other of humane, both proceeding of one
beginning, do adorn man's life etc.

And thus it is, even in those Countries where the Church and Civil state
concur in one common wealth; and where like as the Prelates be in some respect
and causes subject to the temporal Prince: so again the Prince and state
reciprocallie in spiritual matters, are obedient to the Church and Prelates:
either of them deferring due honor to the other; but the spiritual souerantie
ever preferred among the faithful; though for worldly power, force, and glory
(most necessary to keep the people in awe and order) kings do lightly
exceed the other. Which exterior show and splendor of Prince the Prelates of
their several dominions, do most humbly by all service and office manteine.

But now for the Pope (chief of al Bishopes and Christian people) being in
respect of his temporal state, subject to no Prince nor Potentat of the world;
and for his spiritual dignity and jurisdiction far passing all the Prelates
of particular Churches and provinces; his principality being in nether kind
subject or subalternate to any other: he must needs be greater and more
pearls without al exception and limitation. And though his state and
authority temporal, be not holden nor challenged by Gods express law
immediately of him, as the spiritual supremacy is, The providence of God for
the Popes temporal power.
which he has and holds immediately and directly of Christ: yet it is Gods
great providence that since the Emperors and Kings have been christened, and
submitted them selves to the obedience of Christ and his Church; that the
chief Bishop should for the honor of Christ and his high dignity, be made
free from al subjection, by the Princes and Emperors own grauntes; and be
possessed of the capital City of all the world. Which could never have been
brought to pass, nor so many worlds continued (in the reuolutions, changes
and ouerturninges of so many kingdoms states and great Monarchies round about
him): had it not been done by Gods special pleasure and ordinance; to the end
that being subject to none, he might with more liberty, less danger, and
greater indifferency, do justice to al; and use discipline without fear or
respect of persons, as well toward great as small. Which, if he were subject to
some secular Princes, as most other Bishopes are, could hardly be done.

In which case also some of our ignorant Heretics (as among other, this
Libeller) be so insensible, that they stick not to allege the saying of S.
Paul; Absurd allegatio^ of S. Paul by the Libeller. Romans 13.
That every soul must be subject to superior power; to prove therbie (as it
seems) that the Pope should be obedient to our Queen, or to some other
particular king. As though every person should be subject to every power, or
to any other then to him, that has superiority over him: or in any other
matters then wherein he has superiority and may command. Or as though God had
only ordained secular power, and commanded al obedience thereunto; and not
appointed spiritual power and prelacie, with charge of subjection unto the same
also. With such gross fellows the Church has to do, that nether have sense,
reason, nor religion: and which allege that, for obedience to earthly powers
only, which either in express words, or by necessary sequel, much more
commends subjection to spiritual powers.

As with like blindness, the man also alleges this our Saviors sentence: The
Kings of the Gentiles, have rule over them, Luc. 22.
but you not so; to prove that Popes should arrogate no temporal authority,
but feed only, as he says Peter did, and many of the next Popes after him.
Which he would never have cited if he had known that hereby only al
tirannical domination used among the heathen Princes is forbid to al Christian
magistrates both spiritual and temporal; and not any just rule, superiority
or regiment over others, to either kind. Or if he had considered, that feeding
contains not only preaching, but also al kind of just means and holy
endeavors, for the propagation of the Gospel, and men's salvation, according to
the difference of times, persons, and places; as excommunication and other
ecclesiastical censures and corrections: which things at least perteyning to
the spiritual powers directly, our adversaries should admit and humbly obey;
and if they so would do, they should never need to fear either the Popes, or
other men's swords whereof they make so much impertinent brable.

Marry they pretend some zeal in the matter; affirming that the Popes of Rome,
The Libellers Zeal for limitation of the Popes svvord and curse.
before they had these great temporal states, and followed Christ and the
Apostles in humility, dilated the limits of Christ's Church and the faith
more in one hundredth years, then the later Popes have done with their swords
and curses in five hundredth years. To which we say that they seem now not
only desirous to have his temporal power and sword taken from him (as they
pretended by their former speeches and allegatio^s): but also his spiritual
weapon and exercise of discipline toward offenders, called here by the
Libeller, his Curse. Which (no doubt) they used of old upon such as were
subject to the Church, and their regiment, no less then the Popes do now and
some what more: though they could not then (before Kings were converted to the
faith) use any discipline or authority over them, much less any humane
forces: for that they had not then such worldly preeminence, as was due to
their high calling in Christ, and as afterward God has endewed them withal;
but were for some hundredth years persecuted and put to death by the enemies of
Christ's faith and glory. In which state it seems the adversaries would have
them still, being misco^tent that they have either forces to fight against the
Turk, or to pursue Heretics that will not obey their spiritual sentence or
rod of Excommunication.

As for conversion of peoples or nations to the faith, How necessary temporal
habilities are to the Pope.
whether there were more brought to Christ i^ those days and in the poorer
worldly condition of Popes, then afterward in the days of their wealth, is
not to the purpose to dispute: but whether this state of things be more
agreeable to the time present, and for the conservation of Princes and people
alredie converted, or rather the first poor Apostolical condition, tha^ is to
be considered of wise men. Though the Libeller shall hardly prove that more
nations have been wholly converted in the time of the Popes poverty and
adversity, then afterward in their greatness.

This is sure; that our own English people, the most part of Germans,
Polackers, and other northern Countries, Conuersions wrought by later Popes.
besides the inhabitants of the East and west Indians and other extreme parts
of the world; have specially been either first converted, or recovered since by
the holy travails of these later Popes. And further we may be bold to say,
that the Pope only by the powers temporal and spiritual that God has given
him, does more at this day for conversion and gaining of Panimes, Turks,
Jews, Mores, Heretics, Schismatiques and other Infidels, then all the
Protestants put together in the world: besides other infinite immortal acts of
charity which he does in many parts of Christendom; which he could never
do, if he had not such temporal habilities, as thereunto and to the upholding
of his high and pearls dignity above al particular Prelates and Princes, were
requisite.

But of the prerogative of the spiritual power as well in this high Priest (who
is subject to none in earth) as in other Prelates of particular provinces (who
are often subject to other Princes) we have said enough to repress the
pernicious flattery of the Libeller, and the like; that would exempt every
secular person from al submission and obedience to their Pastors. Only
leaving to all the wise of our Country these few lines of S. Ambrose, A most
excellent determination of S. Ambrose about spiritual superiority. Epist. 33.
for a warning and a watchword in this cause, and for the end in manner of al
our dispute. Mandatur: (says he) Trade Basilicam. Respondeo. Nec mihi fas est
tradere; nec tibi accipere (Imperator) expedit. Domum priuati, nullo potes iure
temerare; domum Dei existimas auferendam? Allegatur; Imperatori licere omnia,
ipsius esse vniuersa. Noli te grauare (Imperator) vt putes te in ea quae diuina
sunt, imperiale aliquod ius habere. Noli te extollere; sed si vis diutius
imperare, esto Deo subditus: scriptum est, Quae Dei Deo, quae Caesaris Caesari;
ad Imperatorem palatia pertinent, ad sacerdotem Ecclesiae: publicorum tibi
moeniorum ius commissum est, non sacrorum. In English. The commandment was
this; Give up the Church: I answer, that it is nether lauful for me to deliver
it, nor expedient for the (O Emperor) to receive it. Thou can by no right
violate any private man's house; and think thou the house of God may be
taken away? But they say; the Emperor may do what he list, and that al are
his. I answer. O Emperor be not so much abused, as to think that thou have
any Emperial right in divine matters. Extol not thy self, but if thou list
hold thine empire long, be subject to God: for it is written, Marc. 17. Luc. 25.
The things that are Gods, to God; and that are Cesars, to Caesar. The palaces
perteine to the Emperor, the Churches to the Priest. The charge of the common
walls of the City are committed to thee, and not the charge of sacred things.

So he spoke to Valentinian the Emperor. And so we say to our Princess, and
to al such as have charge under her Highness of our Country; that this Libeller
and who else soever (by loathsome and base flattery extolling her Regalitie and
secular Soueraintie above Priesthood and the Apostolic authority; thereby
exempting her from al obedience and subjection to Christ's Church and to those
whom the holy Ghost has placed over the same Church in earth) do shamefullie
abuse them, to their and the Realms destruction, except God be merciful above
our merits.

We tell them plainly and sincerlie, with the said glorious Doctor and Saint,
and thereupon will pledge our lives in this world and our souls everlastingly,
(and that without detracting any obedience due to her temporal soueraintie in
spiritual matters) that her Majesty has no charge, authority, or power over
the Church or ecclesiastical affairs, no more then the poorest soul in her
Realm; nor so much nether, til she be a member and obedient child of the
Church and Sea Apostolic. With this only exception, that for the height of
her dignity and by her special oath and obligation, she is bound more to
defend and protect the Church then her subjects be.

And finally, upon all the proofs reasons and authorities that have gone
before, we avouch, that besides God almighty, every temporal Prince
Christened, has his pastor also, and specially the general governor of the
whole Church, for his superior in earth in all causes of soul and conscience;
to whose orders in matter of religion, he is bound to obey under pain of
damnation: and that Gods just judgments are nere the Princes and countries
what soever, that will not obey him; but violently resist his ordinance, and by
Antichristian pride, do challenge power not lauful to be yielded unto them.

THE CONCLUSION CONTAINING A CHARITABLE MOTION, AND A ioinder with the
Libeller touching some means of tolleration in Religion, and ceasing or
mitigating this cruel Persecution. CAP. IX.
AND now though in the deep conceauing of this our Countries incomparable
offense, our hearts be wholly oppressed with fear and heaviness: yet either the
force of our peculiar affection toward our flesh and blood, driving us to
hope for better then is deserved; or the largenes of Gods immesurable mercies,
yielding, contrary to man's demerits, pardon upon repentance; do cause us
oftentimes to expect grace and mercy, rather then extreme rigor and
judgment.

In which cogitatio^ it comes often to our minds, Causes of fears and hope
toward our Country.
that if any thing auert Gods ire from our Prince and Country, it is the
abundance of holy blood shed these late years, and ever since the first revolt.
Which though by justice, it might cry rather to God for vengeance (and so it
does in respect of the impenitent, and the clamor thereof shall never be void)
yet we trust it sueth for mercy, specially in respect of the infinite number
of al estates, that never consented to this iniquity. It is the heroical
endeavor of a great-manie zealous Priests and worthy gentlemen, that
continually offer not only their prayers, and other devout and religious
offices; but them selves in sacrifice, for the salvation of their best beloved
Country. It is the ardent and incessant care of his Holiness, seeking our
reconcilement with charity unspeakable. It is the general coniunctio^ of al
Christian minds in the whole world, toward our recovery. No Church, no
Company, Monastery or College of name in Christendom, that with earnest
devotion and public fastes and prayers, laboreth not to God for mercy
toward us. Finally; even those things and persons, that the adversaries
account to be the cause of al their troubles and fears, are indeed the only
hope of Gods mercy, their own pardon, and our Countries salvation.

In which case, to deal as freely for a farewell, and as charitablie with the
Libeller as he would seem to conclude with us: we wish no more for
performance of that he proposes and partly promises, The Libellers offer in
the end of his book Fol. 18.
but that he were assured of her Majesty's and the Councels mind therein: or
were of such credit with them, that he could bring that to good effect which i^
covert words he pretends, toward us: which is, that he doubts not but
her Majesty would shed no more the blood of her natural subjects, nor use any
more bodily punishments at al, if they would desist from their practices
abroad, from their writing of raili^g books, and from wandering in disguised
apparel within the Realm; and would employ their trauail in the works of
light and doctrine, according to the usage of their schools; and content them
selves with their profession and devotion. So the man speaks how soever he
means. But (Alas) if any mercy, just or tolerable treaty were meant, The
urgent distresses of English Catholics.
or ever had been offered to Catholics upon any reasonable conditions what so
ever; our adversaries had never needed to have fallen to such extreme
proceedinges with their own flesh and blood: nor ever had any such troubles,
fears, or dangers been thought upon, whereof now they have so deep
apprehension. If any pitiful ear had ever been given by the superiors to the
incessant groans, cries, tears, and supplications of their Catholic
subjects, desiring but relief of their infinitlie distressed consciences,
tormented by damnable oaths, articles, and exercises of Caluinisme, that were
forced upon them: if they might have had either by license or conniue^ce, in
never so few places of the Realm, never so secretly, never so inoffensiuelie,
the exercise of that faith and religion, which al their forefathers since our
Country was converted, lived and died in; and in which them selves were
baptized; and from which by no law of God nor man they can be compelled, to
any sect or rite of religion, which they nor their forefathers ever
voluntarily accepted or admitted: if of all the noble Churches, Colleges, and
other inestimable prouisio^s of the Realm, founded and made only by
Catholics and for Catholics, and for no protestants nor any their
sacrilegious ministeries at al, some few had been permitted to the true owners,
and to that true worship of God, for which they were instituted: if they might
have obtained any piece of that liberty, which Catholics enjoy in Germany,
Zuicherland, or other places among protestants; or half the freedom that the
Hugonots have in France and other countries: yea, or but so much courtesy as
the Christians find among the very Turks; or very Jews among Christians;
upon any reasonable or unreasonable tribute (which has been often in most
humble and lamentable sort offered and urged): or (to be short) if any
respect, care, or compassion in the world had been had, either of Catholic
men's souls, bodies, or goods; our adversaries should never have been troubled
nor put in jealousy of so many men's malcontentment at home, nor stand in doubt
of the departure and absence of so great a number of Nobility and principal
ge^tlemen abroad: they should never have had such Colleges and Seminaries in
other Princes dominions, erected and furnished with English youths, the issue
whereof is now, and perhaps will be hereafter more and more wonderful to the
world: they should not have been controlled in their Heresy so zealouslie and
effectually by the Priests created at home of old, or lately ordained and
sacred abroad: there should have been no cause of writing so many books for
defense of our innocence, and the Faith of our forefathers; and for our just
complaint to the Christian world, of the intolerable rigor or cruelty used
against us.

In all which books no protestant in England is able to reprove the writers of
any untruth or slander, railing, immodestie, or misbehauiour toward our
secular Princess or persecutours; what so ever the Libeller without proof
affirms here. Wherein I auow him to be so much destitute of truth, as he is
not able to allege one line, or sentence, or any one example out of our
writings to the contrary: as on the other side, nether he nor any else can
clear our adversaries the enemies of Gods Church, of any one point of fact,
or doctrine, wherewith they be by us charged.

Lastly; the said Priests which pass into England (of whose covert working,
disguising and close keeping they so much complain, as though that were enough
to prove them traitors) would have appeared openly in their own Priestlie
habit, Offer of open dealing with disputation if it may be received.
and have done their holy functions in the sight of al men, if in any sort
whatsoever they had been permitted. As also at this present, not only upon
her Majesty's grant and desire (insinuated here by the Libeller) for the^ to
use openly their devotion doctrine and profession according to the manner of
their schools: but upon any sufficient warrant of safety, they are further
also then that, most ready and willing to give an account of al their doctrine
publicly in the Universities of England, or before her Highness and Council
whersoeuer. A thing which by many books, petitions, and supplications, our
brethren have often humbly and instantly asked, and could never yet obtain.

The Libeller puts us in hope, that if the Priests and Seminary men would
deal openly, the persecution and blood should cease. And we assure him that
the persecution first ceasing and her Majesty's pleasure herin understood
(which is the natural order and not contrariwise) al Priests, religious, and
Catholics will appear, and present them selves; and will do al such Christian
exercises duties and functions, (as now by persecution they are forced to do
in secret) in the face of the whole Realm: no man, thanks be to God, being
ashamed of his order, faith, profession or Master: though every one be bound
otherwise by the law of our Religion, to save him self so long as it shall
please Christ, from the persecutor. And it is a great sign of our Priests and
Catholics innocence and of our adversaries ignorance and malice: that,
seeking to appeach a Christian man or Priest of treason; they have no more to
lay against him, then that he shows not him self openly, but deals
secretly; and wears an other habit the^ is belonging to his degree.

The holy King and Prophet David, in place of danger did not only otherwise
cover his person often and fled from his enemies: That men may fly and hide
them selves in persecution.
but feined him self a plain mad man before Achis king of Geth in all his
behavior, to escape peril. How often do we read in the Evangelists that our
Savior fled, that he did hide him self, that he walked not openly, 1. Reg 21
that he went up to Jerusalem on the feast day not openly, but in covert?
Ioh. 10.
Who can be ignorant that it was no offense for Nicodemus that he came to Jesus
in the night for fear of the Jews? Who knows not that the Apostles, as well
before as after the coming of the holie-Ghost, kept them selves often secret
in private parlers and chambers: as the first holy Bishopes of Rome (for fear
of their persecutors) kept their meetinges, mysteries and councels, in caves
and grots under the ground? How can they forget what holy Athanasius did in
the days of his persecution? Or not be mindful how holy Barlaam feined him
self in apparel and al other behavior a merchant, Apud S. Damasc.
to gain Prince Iosophat to the Christian faith? Or of the notable example of
the holy Martyr and Bishop Eusebius Samosatenus, The example of Eusebius.
Samosatenus most like to the practice of Priests in England.
who in the time of Constantius the Arrian Emperor seeing many Churches
occupied by the Heretics and void of true Pastors; went like a soldier
through Syria, Phenicia, and Palestine, making Priests and Deacons, and
ministering the Sacraments to the Catholic people, destitute of their holy
rightes, then by the Arrians, as they be now in England by Caluinistes?

The case is ruled in all divinity; that any religious, Priest, or Christian,
to avoid danger of his person, may in the places of Infidels leave the habit
of their profession or usage, Men may change habit.
and cover them selves from the enemy by any disguise. And if we knew not the
art and cunning of Heresy, we might wonder to see our protestants so
religious now, as to require of our Priests to go priestlike, with open and
present danger of their lives; when their own Clergy at home make scruple to
use distinct attire from the vulgar, and account it plain superstition to
wear any religious or clarkly apparel at al. But yet I must confess that
they have good reason to wish every one of our Priests would show him self
openly; for so they might soon make an end of al (as they think) and atteine
the victory that they desire. Math. 10. Luc. 10.
But our master admonishing his disciples that he would send the^ as sheep
amongst woolues; warns them, and us in them, that men should not only be
simple as the dove, but wise as the serpent: specially among woolues, that is,
Heretics; which are of al creatures most cruel and subtle.

But to return to our purpose and to the Libellers profer of mitigation or
ceasing this persecution, upon condition we would deal no more in secret, but
openly. We protest before God and al his Saints, that we will (upon any
reasonable security of our persons, liberty of conscience, permission to
exercise Christian Catholic offices, to the salvation of our own souls and
our brethren) do the same things publicly which we now do secretly, in all peaceable and priestlie sort as hitherto we have accustomed: and that so,
those things which now you suspect to be done against the state (for that they
be done i^ covert) may plainly appear unto you nothing else indeed, but mere
matter of conscience and religion; as in verity they are.

Therefore, if such as govern our state under her Majesty at this day, can not
be induced to revoke the^ selves and the whole Realm (which were absolutely
the best) to the former Catholic state and condition wherein their ancestors
left it, and them selves found it, in respect perhaps of some little cheke or
dishonor which they may conceive would ensue by acknowledging their former
error; (though in sincere truth it must needs prove finally more
dishonorable and dangerous to persevere): yet at the least, let their wisdoms
consider, that their principal worldly error was; that in the beginning, or
long since, they gave not liberty of conscience to Catholics (being far
the greater and more respective part of the Realm) as other of their religion
and profession have done, to their own great advantage, in Germany and other
Provinces adioining; which error (no doubt) might yet in great part or wholly
be redressed, if they would but now at length have some pity of their people:
the greater part whereof languisheth away in body and soul most lamentably,
only upon an obstinate punto and formalitie (as is thought) of some few
particular adversaries, who will not seem to yield in any one jot or
circumstance, though never so much commodity might ensue thereof.

Which matter of liberty of Conscience we move not percha^ce, for our own
benefit so much, as for our adversaries weal, and worldly security, whereof
they will seem to have both mistrust and solicitude. And perhaps the wisdom
of God will sound otherwise and say to us, Mat. 20.22.
Nescitis quid petatis: judging it to be far more to his honor and glory,
and the breefer way to salvation of our whole Nation, The way of persecution
more sure for us.
and of more souls in particular, that we should pass through this
persecution, and win our own and our brethrens salvation by our blood. And
indeed if the Germane Catholics had been so restreined, persecuted and put to
death, as the English have been these years; and had not gone by halfes with the
Protestants as in some places they have done: they had had perhaps far more
Catholics at this day, and them more zealous; and their whole nation
(perchance) reduced ere this: which now, for the protestants, stands not so
much on their religion or conscience in Heresy; as upon their mutual peace,
concord, and concurrence with Catholics.

Well; what were best for us in this case God only knows. To. 6.19.
Nos humanum dicimus propter infirmitatem nostram, as the Apostle speaks. But
sure we are, that the first best for our English nation, as well Prince as
people, were both in respect of God and the world; of them selves, and other
men; Two ways of composition very profitable to the realm.
to restore the state again to the obedience of Gods Church, and to the happy
fellowship of al their forefathers, and other faithful people and Princes now
living. The next best were in respect of their own security and perpetuity
(if the first may not take place) to desist from persecuting their Catholic
subjects and brethren, and to grant some liberty for exercise of their
consciences, divine offices and holy devotions; that so they may pray for her
Majesty and Counselors as their Patrones, whom now they pray for only as
their Persecutours.

If to none of these conditions they can be brought, but will have our bodies,
goods, life and souls: The Conclusion.
then let our Lord God the just Arbitrer of al things, and Judge of Princes as
well as poor men, and the only comforter of the afflicted, discern our
cause. In whose holy name, word and promis, we confidentlie tell them, and
humbly even in Christ's blood pray them, to consider of it; that by no humane
force or wisdom they shall ever extinguish the Catholic party, overcome the
holy Church, or prevail against God. There can no Herod kill Christ in his
cradle: Math. 3. Exodus 1. Hest. 7.
nor any Pharao droune our male sex and destroy Gods people: nor any Aman
extirpate the stock of Jacob. Let them seek with all desperation to diminish,
bridle, spoil, impouerish, disgrace and extinguish the whole generation of
Catholics at home and in banishment: let them by artificial Libels (as this
against which we have written) and otherwise by most impudent lies and fictions
slander us, charge us with treasons and other trespasses, Mentientes, propter
Christum: belying us for Christ's sake: let them confederate them selves against
us with all the Protestants, Turks, Sectaries, and Atheistes in the world: yet
the Catholics (that is, the seed of God) will increase in number, power, and
zeal: the Priests will not leave of to follow their dutiful trade, with more
spirit, diligence, devotion, patience, and constancy then ever before;
remembering the advertisement of their Master, Mat. 10.22.
that he shall be saved that perseuereth to the end; as also that worthy record
left in scripture of Esaias the great and faithful Prophet: qui spiritu magno
vidit vltima, Eccl. 48.
as the Holy Ghost says of him; for that his courage never failed him in Gods
service to the end. The persecutours be now no stronger then thy were of old.
The Church is no weaker then she had wont to be. Her assistant and defender is
as near her as ever he was. We are no better the^ our forefathers. We less
fear death, and less set by our lives, then ever before. Our countes are cast
and allowed: it is better to die in this Apostolical fight and co^bat, Quam
videre mala gentis nostrae and sanctorum: 1. Match. 3.59.
assuring our selves that to be undoubted which S. Leo writes; Nullo
crudelitatis genere destrui potest Sacramento Crucis fundata religio. Leo.
Non minuitur persecutionibus Ecclesia, sed augetur. That, the religion founded
in the sacrament of Christ's Cross, can be destroyed by no kind of cruelty.
The Church is not diminished by persecutions, but increased. And that S.
Augustine says; Nemo delet de Coelo constitutionem Dei: Nemo delet de terra
Ecclesiam Dei.

Laus Deo.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
THAT many Priests and other Catholics in England have been persecuted,
condemned, and executed, for mere matter of religion, and for transgression
only of new statutes which do make cases of Conscience to be treason;
without al pretense or surmise of any old treasons or statutes for the same.
Cap. 1. 1 That F. Campian and the rest of the Priests and Catholics endited,
condemned, and executed, upon pretense of treason, and upon statutes made of
old against treasons; were never yet guilty of any such crimes, but unjustly
made away. Cap. 2. 18 That we now have great cause to complain of iniust
persecution, intolerable severity and cruelty toward Catholics in
England: and their Protestants no reason to do the like for the Justice done
to them in Queen MARY'S and other Princes days, and the cause of the
difference. Cap. 3. 34 That our Priests and Catholic brethren have behaved
them selves discretlie, and nothing seditiouslie in their answers to the
questions of the Bull of Pius Quintus; and that they can not laufullie be
pressed nor put to death as traitors by the true meaning of the old laws of
the Realm for the same; with examination of the six Articles proposed about
the said Bull.. Cap. 4. 59 Of excommunication and deprivation of Princes for
Heresy and falling from the Faith: specially, of vvarres for Religion; and of
the office and Zeal of Priests of the old and new law in such cases. Cap. 5.
89 That it is much to the benefit and stability of Common-vvealthes, and
specially of Kings scepters, that the differences betwixt them and their
people, for Religion or any other cause for which they may seem to deserve
deprivation, may rather be decided by the supreme Pastor of the Church, as
Catholics would have it; then by popular mutiny and fantasy of private
men, as Heretics desire and practice. Cap. 6. 116 Of the late vvarres in
Ireland for religion: how the Pope may use the svvord; and that the
differences betwixt temporal Princes and him, or their resisting him in some
cases of their worldly interest, can be no vvarrant to the Protestants to
contemn his censures or authority in matter of Faith and Religion. Cap. 7.
134 That the separation of the Prince and Realm from the unity of the Church
and Sea Apostolic, and fall from Catholic religion, is the only cause of all the present fears and dangers that the State seems to stand in. And that
they unjustly attribute the same to the Popes Holiness, or Catholics; and
untruly call them enemies of the Realm. Cap. 8. 161 The conclusion containing a
charitable motion, and a ioinder with the Libeller touching some means of
tolleration in Religion, and ceasing or mitigating this cruel Persecution. Cap.
9. 209
The faults correct thus.
Page Lin. Read. 49. 33. faith, brought. faith, that they brought. 55. 20.
persecuted. prosecuted. 60. 17. as Blasphemy. as Heresy, Blasphemy. Ibid. 30.
spititual. spiritual. 64. 34. obyed. obeyed. 77. 1. Ecommunicatio^.
Excommunication. 90. 15. fouerers. favorers. 98. 7. Common weath. Common
wealth. 144. 15. Bastours. Pastors. 182. 28. causes. causers. 195. 13. can
much. can not much.


