THE WARNINGS OF GERMANY.

BY WONDERFVLL SIGNS, and strange Prodigies seen in diverse parts of that
Country of GERMANY, between the Year 1618 and 1638. Together with a brief
relation of the miserable Events which ensued.

LVKE 21. 25. etc. And there shallbe signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and
in the stars, and upon the Earth distress of Nations with perplexity. etc.

All faithfully collected out of credible High Dutch Chronicles, and other
Histories by L. Brinckmair Captain.

As also a learned and Godly Sermon preached before the Lords the States at
Norrimberg. Anno. 1638.

LONDON. Printed by JOHN NORTON, for JOHN ROTHVVELL, and are to be sold at the
Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF PRODIGIES, by way of Preface to the Treatise following.
Section 1.
MOst divine is that Axiom, God Beda inter axiom. Philos. ex Arist.
and nature do nothing in vain. Nature is that constant order of being and
working, which God has appointed for the creatures. Where there is order, and
that order constant, and both determined by an infinite wisdom, there must
necessarily be some good end propounded by the Ordainer, and all motions
effectual for accomplishment. Yet the course of Nature is subject to many
alterations, because there is a God above nature, who has set bounds for the
creatures, but none for him save the counsel of his will. Whatsoever the Lord
pleases, that does he in Heaven above, and in the Earth beneath. Psalm. 135* 6


2
Hereupon it follows, That even those things which come to pass according to
the course of nature, are very considerable: because they are ^ffected
according to Gods ordination. His invisible power and Godhead Romans 1. 20.
may be seen in them. Nothing is so small, but his providence extends to it.
Praes^ntemque refert quaelibet herba Deum.

In every tender grass
God may be seen as in a glass.
Divine praescience were far from being, as indeed V^t^^is est maxima,
pert^ag^^e quem (...).
it is, all Infinite, did it not extend it self to every accident. Nothing is
or moves, or suffers in any kind, but in subordination to Gods eternal
decrees, that his wise purpose may be effected. And what is it which we see or
hear of in any of the creatures, which affords not some moral and divine use?
The world is Gods great book in Folio. Every creature is a several page, in
which w^e may read some instruction to further us in heavenly wisdom. The
Occasional Meditations of such as are piously devoted, give us sensible
demonstration of this. Profane then, and irreligious are they that look on
the ordinary course of Gods providence, but never look up to God in holy
meditation. Whereas everything we see is like Jacobs Ladder. The foot of it
is in earth, but the top is in Heaven. We should therefore look beyond our
senses, and use them as a prospective glass, to see God through, that he may
be brought nigh our hearts, though we be far from his glorious presence.
That Philosopher seems to have had some secret inspiration from the almighty,
who being asked Apud (...) Arist. de an.
wherefore man was made, answered, coeli contemplandi gratia. For God indeed
made us to study himself, and mind things above. Why was Adam put in
Paradise? Only to till the garden without taking other care, or pleasure?
rather, that by employing himself about the creatures, he might more
distinctly meditate of every one to inflame his affections toward God. And what
is it which affords no instruction? Toades, and such like, seeing man fly from
them presently. A lively Emblem of lapsed mankind, which cannot endure Gods
presence, we being conscious to our selves that we are worthy of his hatred.
Seeing poor worms made by God in such a condition, that every foo^e may tread
on them, and them without means to revenge or resist that hurt, we should
hence learn humility, patience, and all subjection to the will of God. Every
Cock crowing is a lesson of Repentance. Every sound of a trumpet an Alarm to
the last Judgment. And every puff (...) Pind.
of breath a Memento mori. For what is our life? it is even a Vapor, appearing
for a little time, then vanishing. I am. 4. 14.

3
This supposed, it follows further. Those things which are more rare in the
course of nature, diverse, A min^^i ad mi^es.
contrary, or above, are more then ordinarily to be thought upon. For of every
such thing it may be said, Digitus Deiesthic, God has an immediate hand in
them, they are for special use. Having therefore in the Treatise following ^.
the wonderful things of God reflicted to us as in a glass, by an historical
gleaning together of some remarkable Prodigies which of late Years have
happened in Germany, with the Events which followed them, it will not be
superst^ous to take something along with us in reading them, touching the
nature, ends, and use which is to be made of such like, according to the
Scripture. The rather because they are in themselves like the writing on the
Wall in Beshazzars Palace, Dan 5. 8.
which Sooth-fayers, Astrologians, and Chald^^ns could neither understand nor
read. Who can read Gods riddle, but they who plough with his Heifer? None
know what use to make of his works, but they who meditate of them, according
to his word, with the help of his spirit. Hence it is though some are careful
in observing them, yet few have the happiness to profit by them. Most men
profanely disregard them, being of Gallio's temper, careless of such matters.
Some su^^itiously abuse them. Many only gaze, and wonder. Few know what they
mean, and therefore skip them over as unskilful readers use to do sentences
of Greek and Latin which they understand not. To remedy this in some part,
Here is my endeavor in hope of Gods blessing. The work of the Lord is great,
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein Psalm. 111. 2.

4.
If the question be what Prodigies are, the answer may be, Signs and wonders
wrought by God immediately, or by others at his appointment, to signify his
pleasure aforehand touching some special mercy or judgment ensuing.

The Treatise calls them Prodigies, that is praedictions or foremarnings. So
much the word implies a. In Scripture phrase they are called, (...) signs and
wonders, Joel (chap. 2. v. 38.) calls them wonders, St. Luke, chap. 21. 11)
calls them fearful sights, and great Prodigia, quod ^orro dicant, dest,
sut^rrap ^edicant. Au. d^ Civ. D^i. lib. 21 cap. 8 Omnia qu^^pe port^nta contra
nauram di^mu^ csse: S^dn^n sunt ^dem. c ^^nch de ep^^ih. Dei. lib 3. Cap 13.
signs. St. Peter terms them, wonders in Heaven, and signs in Earth. Acts.
2. 21. Of signs some are to represent, Some for commemoration, Some to assure,
Others to prognosticate, whereof some be ordinary, others extraordinary.
Prodigies be extraordinary prognosticating signs. They are also called
wonders, not because they are all miracles in propriety; but because they seem
to be, unto such as know not the causes and effects of them, and therefore
cause wondering. A miracle is that which happens besides the order of all
nature, particular, and general, For a stone to moove upward when it is
thrown, is contrary to the particular nature of a stone, yet no miracle,
because all things give way to violence. The hanging of Mahomets iron tomb in
the Air (if it be, as it is reported) is no miracle, because it may be drawn
up by virtue of some Loadstone above it. But every thing is a wonder, whose
cause we know not, or at least which wise men know not. Admiration always
rises out of (...) mir^^u^um and (...).
some degree of Ignorance. There is therefore a difference betwixt a miracle
and a marvel: d under the term of wonder; 3 Several things be comprehended.

1 Special rarities in the course of nature, and Quae sunt rara ^psa sunt mira
Augu.
in the actions and affairs of men e* Secondly, miracles properly so called.
Thirdly, whatsoever it is which makes the wiser or greater part of men to
admire, as well as fools, however it be called. Alwhich are here included under
the name of prodigies.

5
Having briefly notified the meaning both of the name and thing in hand, the
next thing most necessary Novis omnia plena virg.
is to consider of the author, who gives being to things prodigious, and
appoints their use. That must needs be God, who is the only Alpha and Omega;
The center from which all lines are drawn, and the circumference wherein they
are terminated. All predictions, whether they be natural or supernatural,
must needs originally issue from him, that decrees things from eternity, and
causes them to exist in time in all circumstances according to his appointment.
This has always been out of controversy, not only among Christians, but
also among the Philosophers, yea even amvng the very Vulgar heathen. But though
all have reference to God, yet not all alike. Some things he either does
immediately, or at least wise seems to do, for both God, and nature are often
clouded. Many things are effected by the Ministry of the Angels. Some proceed
from me, and the course of nature, yet not without God. Those things which are
most common in the course of nature, are to be counted Gods a Job. 38. 28. 29.
works, and therefore much more those which are strange. God puts these
Questions to Job. Has the rain a Father? or who has begotten the drops of
dew? Out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who has
gendred it? The answer to be made is this, God gives being to al these things
according to his pleasure, what then shall be thought of raining blood, Fire,
and such like? No otherwise then according to that, The Lord rained upon Sodom
and Gomorrah, fire and Brimstone from the Lord out of Heaven Genesis 19. 24.
. He threatens such aforehand, and he alone has power to effect them.
Therefore when we see or hear of any such thing, we can do no less then
acknowledge in the Psalmists words, This is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. Psalm. 118. 23.

6
But how is it that signs and wonders are said to be wrought by false
Prophets? for so Moses intimates Deuteronomy 13. 1.
And our Savior says expressly, There b Mat. 24. 24.
shall arise false Prophets, and false Christ's, and shall show great signs and
wonders And to like effect Paul speaks of Antichrist* 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. We read
also that many signs done before Pharaoh by Moses, were also done before him
by the Magitians of Egypt Exodus 7. 11.
.

No doubt but Satan and his Instruments are permitted to do great things for
the trial of Gods Church and children, but in all they do they are no more
but instruments. Therefore that Fire wherewith Jobs sheep and servants were
consumed, is fuly called the Fire of God, though the Prince d Job. 1. 16.
of the Air was in that the Incendiary and the bellows, and added oil to the
flame. But Gods wonders and Satan's differs very much* Oftentimes in the thing
it self. Mar^^nus Biermanus, de Magicis Actiombus
Satan seems to work miracles, but God works miracles indsed.

Satan also makes a show of doing many things which indeed he does not,
deluding the outward senses and the the Fantasy. He always lies against God
or nature. Therefore well says Moses, Who is like unto thee O Lord among the
Gods? who is like unto thee? glorious in holiness, fearful in praise, doing
wonders. Exodus 15. 11.
But in the ground and end there is always a vast and manifest difference
betwixt the one and the other. All that Satan does, is out of hatred, envy and
malice, to God and man. But all that God does is in mercyor Justice. The plot
which the Devil prosecutes in every particular, is to rob God of his glory, to
make his word of none effect, and to frustrate the salvation intended for the
Elect. Gods immutable purpose is to glorify himself, to fulfill his word in
all the promises and threatenings, and to save those whom he has chosen in
Christ. The one intends nothing but fraud and mischief, the other to approve
his goodness even to them that wilfully perish. Satan labors to bring men
into Heresy, superstition, and Idolatry, to blind their eyes, harden their
hearts, and wholly to corrupt them in all their ways. God would have all men
come to the knowledge of the truth that they might be saveda, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
if any desire to know how it may be known, which wonders be wrought by God
especially, and which by Satan, let them consider, This is needless for us
curiously to inquire after, and fruitless to be known. Our duty is to look
upon all good and evil as coming from God, as Job did, saying, The Lord, has
given, and the Lord has taken, etc. Shall we receive good from the hand of
the Lord, and not evil? And though some Prodigies be but rarities in nature,
yet are we to ascribe all to God, in as much as nature is his handmaid, and
even of natural things there is more to be made then a natural use.

7
As for the matter whereof Prodigies consist, that is worthy to be considered
of, but warily to be determined A confused Notion that some things are
prodigious, without knowledge of the particulars, and whether it be good or
evil that is portended, has bred and nourished much curiosity and
superstition, needless fears in some, fond hopes in others, there have
anciently been a sort of men who have made it their study and profession to
teach what is ominous, and of what: such were the Soothsayers, Astrologians,
Chaldeans, and the like. But the light of the Gospel has made all these see
ming stars to vanish. And yet still pride, curiosity, infidelity, like
bitter roots growing in the heart of mankind naturally, lead them much what
in the same way. Hence it is that almost every accident is by some counted a
sign of good or evil luck, according to our common phrase. To reckon up
particulars in this kind, would be both tedious and ridiculous.

But it must be granted that some things are Prodigious: true. And that some
things are so in reference to particular persons, and families. Some to
Countries, Nations, and whole States. This also cannot be denied, Whatis then
the rule to know them by? No vulgar conceit, no nor every pretended reason. Nor
yet all manner of experience, so far as we are to regard Prodigies. The
Scripture is a sufficient rule. Therein we have multitude and variety of
examples that teaches us to count of sin as a certain forerunner of divine
vengeance, unless repentance intercept. And to take Repentance, Faith,
Obedience, Piety, Justice, and Charity for assured pledge of Gods love and
purpose of blessedness in every kind. According unto these we are to regulate
our hopes and fears. Humility is a special token of honor ensuing, and pride
a forerunner of destruction. Pro.
He that goes on in an evil way shall not prosper at the last, though the Sun,
Moon b Genesis 27. 9.
and Stars should seem to fall down and worship him, as they did sometime
to Joseph. And he that fears God, and escheweth evil may be confident that
all shall work together for the best, though Hell were for the present let
loose upon him. Yea, though God himself should make a but of him to empty his
quiver in. Four hundred Prophets may say to Ahab, Go up to Ramoth Gilead and
prosper. Yet Ahab falls there, for he had sold himself to work wickedness.
Romes merchants will not believe her fall, but they shall certainly see and
lament it Romans 19.
Babylon says I am, and none else besides me. I shall not sit as a widow,
neither shall I know the loss of children. But these two things (says God)
shall come to thee in a moment Isa. 4^. 8. and 9.
in one day, the loss of children and widdowhood, they shall come upon thee in
their perfection, etc.

In sinning there be some circumstances which are more immediate harbingers of
judgment, and so likewise many particular sins. Backsliding, as in Solomon.
Presently hereupon God stirred him up adversaries. Raeshnesse in things which
require a weighty consultation, as in Rehoboam. Self-will, as in Josias.
Impudency, as in Absolon. But I had rather leave particulars to the studious
Readers observation.

So on the other side humility, wisdom, patience, importunity in prayer,
diligence in well doing do more especially demonstrate Gods purpose to
manifest his especial mercy. But those praedions which we have now especially
to consider, are of another sort.

8.
To speak more fully of the Matter of Prodigies, in general* I conceive it is
some special accident happening by the providence of God. The things about
which such accidents happen are diverse, and according to the difference
thereof we may count of 3. kinds of Prodigies, Natural, Moral and Divine,
(...).

Natural are those special accidents which fall out in the particular or
general course of nature. Of which some are Celestial, some Elem^ntarie.
Celestial I call those which happen about the heavenly bodies. As about the
Sun, Moon or other Stars. By Elementary I mean those which happen in the
Elements themselves, or those things which are compounded of them. Moral
Prodigies are those which consist in the affections, passions, words, or
actions of men. Divine I call those wherein ((...)) some divine * Qui
portentorum numerat multitudinem que historia gentium con^inentur. Aug.
impression is more conspicuous or necessarily to be acknowledged. For each of
these kinds there is mutiplicity of Instances to be had almost in all
Histories, but it shall suffice me to particularise in some few out of
Scripture.

That extraordinary Eclipse which happened at our Saviors passion Mat. 27. 45.
, at which the greatest Philosophers, that then were, much admired. The plague
of darkness in Egypt Exodus 10 21.
, and the apparition of Angels and heavenly visions, whereof we often read in
Scripture, were Prodigies Celestial. Of Elementary we have more variety of
examples, The Fire which consumed Nadab and Abi^^ Levit* 10. 2.
, Fitry Prodigies.
That which fell from heaven on the Captains and their companies, sent by
Ahaziah to Elijah, 2 Kings 1. 10.
The pillar of Fire which was for safe conduct to the Israelites in the night
time Exodus 13. 21. 22.
. The fire and vrimstone which fell on Sodom and Gomorrah. The Cherubims and
flaming Sword which God placed before paradise. Genesis 19. 24.
Genesis 3. 24.


Airy.
The cloudy pillar which was Isreal's guide by day. The Manna wherewith they
were fed in the wilderness. The plague of Hail in Egypt. That on the army of
the Five Canaanitish Kings in Josh. 101^
Joshua's time.

The dividing of the red Sea.
Watery.
And of Jordan.
Christ's walking on the water.
Water issuing out of the rock,
And out of the Jaw bone of an Ass.
Bitter Water becoming sweet by casting in Salt.
Earthy.
Earthquakes, Famine, Extraordinary fruitfullnesse, Excessive multitude of
Birds, as of Quails, among the Israelites, or of Flies, Beasts, or creeping
things, as among the Plagues of Egypt, The strange peregrination of Creatures,
from their wonted habitation, as the coming of the creatures into the Arc.

These and many such like particulars are counted Prodigies, and for
distinction sake natural, because some thing in it self natural, is the
subject of them.

As for moral Prodigies that which is passed in the former Section
shal^suffice, because it is but a schedule that I have to write, and not a
volume: for divine prodigies, so called in a more especial manner, these
following are most apparent.

Isa. 38. 8.
The Sun and Moon standing still as in Joshua's time. The shadows going back
10 degrees on Ahaz his Dial in Hezechiahs time. The new stars appearing at
our Saviors birth. The rending of the veil of the Temple, and the
resurrection of dead bodies, at the time of his crucifying. etc.

These are sufficient to show us what is to be counted prodigious, and what
not. For all particulars we have no instance. Things new and strange may daily
happen as God sees cause to conclude this part of the matter in hand, let this
note suffice. Whatsoever happens extraordinarily and rarely to us or to any of
the creatures, has more or less of the nature of a Prodigy in it. Such was
the strange fighting in the nombe of Rebekah, Nebuchadnezzars, Pharaohs, and
Pilates wives dreams. The carriage and speech of Baalams Ass. The falling off
of the Chariot Wheels of the Egyptians, as they drove in the red Sea. Dagons
prostrating before the Arc.

9
Sufficient being spoken of the Matter, the next thing necessary to be touched
is the form, to show what makes any special accident to be a Prodigy, that
is (as I conceive) the aptitude which such accidents have in themselves, or by
divine institution to portend the futurition or manifestation of something as
yet not existent, or not known. As for example, Blood happening
extraordinarily in rain, in sweat, or in the use of bread or otherwise, does
fitly betokenwarre, murder, execution of malefactors, or persecution. But how
comes the Rainebow to be a sign the world shall never be overflowne again by
an Universal Inundation, whereas naturally it signifies rain. This it could
not do if God had not appointed it for such an use. It may be demanded what I
think of experience. If it be found by observation from time to time that
after such an accident in one kind, such an event in another follows, may not
that accident thenceforth be taken for a certain sign of such an event to
ensue? I answer, God is unsearchable in his ways. No observation whatsoever
will enable us to trace him. As the way of a ship in the Sea, or a Bird in the
Air, so are Gods ways. Experience therefore is but an uncertain guide,
because the course of Gods providence is a perfect maze or Labyrinth. There is
indeed no variance nor shadow of turning betwixt his will at one time, and his
will at another. (I speak of his absolute will) Neither is there any
difference betwixt his will in decree, and his will in deed, and he often does
the same things over again, for kind. Yet there is so much variety for
circumstances, that its impossible by all observation to conclude for certain,
from that which does happen in one kind, to that which shallhappen in another.
This notwithstanding the argument from existence of the sign, to the
^utu^ition of the thing signified, concluding only probably and indefinitely,
cannot justly be gainesaid: for instance, Thus to reason is very useful.
After a Comet or blazing stars appearing and vanishing, some great personages
do commonly expire.

This experienc^ out of many Histories confirms, ^
Therefore such a (...) now appearing, its likely some of the Go^^ of the Earth
shall dye like men, and all of (...) just cause more then ordinaril^ ^^pr^pare
^or death, ^^^ecially such as Herod. Bat ^^her matter calls me to it.

10
(...) the ^^nall cause of prodigies, that is diverse in diverse re^e^c^s. The
common end is that Go^ may beglorified by us in beholding his works, and
spelling out of them his infinite wisdom, I psa nomint indict ^in^m rei.
Monster sane dicta pe^hi benta. monsirando. etc. Aug quo supra.
power, and goodness, whereunto prodigies conduce no little, because they
minister master for an invincible argument against an Atheist or Epicure; and
strongly prove both God and providence. The proper end of them is either near
or remote; That which they serve for more immediately is in general, to
intimate some change in the condition of them, to whom they have reference: But
sometimes they serve to bring to light that which was hid, or to make that
known which was secret; as when Satan appears for a time where some body lies
buried in secret, and then vanishes, or when extraordinary trouble of mind
falls on some, that thereby they may be brought to disclose some secret sin,
the revealing whereof may tend to Gods glory. Some of them do more especially
serve for comfort, some for terror. Cum Deus puuitur^^ est gen^ens vel orben^
prod (...) id (...) Herod.
Some serve to terrifye for a while, as the burning Bush, but leave comfort in
the issue, a^ that did. And the Angels wonderful behavior in the presence of
Sampsons parents: some serve to streng then the faith of G^d^ children in time
of great discouragement; orwhen the (...) to some special service: some serve
to invite and call all, of all sorts, to repentance and amendment of life.

Those which serve to this end are in a more peculiar manner The Prodigies, and
such are those which are instanced in, in the following History* Comfortable
ones may happen to the wicked, and terrible to the godly, to harden the one,
and humble the other. That the one may prepare for correction and profit by it,
the other in Gods just judgment perish everlastingly. If the Question be when
fearful Prodigies happen in a Country where there be two contrary sides of
different professions in religion, how it may be known whether of them they
concern. I answer, the only nec^ssary thing is, for each private person of
what sort soever, whose abode is in such place, to take it to himself, and to
examine his heart, ways, and spiritual estate, that he may reform himself
according to the word of God, lest he also perish. Many are too prone to cry
woe unto others, but at last are forced to say (with him mentioned by Josephus,
where be speaks of the lass destruction of Jerusalem.) woe unto me also. God
is not wont to send general judgments, till all flesh more or less have
corrupted their way: and therefore it behoues all of all sorts* howsoever
different in the profession of religion to humble themselves, and study
reformation really* not inpr^tence. ^^e (...) P^oba^^, (...) ^act. (...) 16.
If they of Germany do so, and then send out a dove from their Arc, she is
likely to return with an Olive branch in her mouth. In the mean while so long
as every one looking on his neighbor says, Truth is on my side, Thou art an
heretic, and therefore the destruction threatened is to thee, but I shall
escape: God that is no respecter of Persons finds just matter of offense in
both, and on which side peace and Victory will rest, as touching sense is yet
uncertain. But we know who they are that cry peace, peace, to themselves:
that for temporal things dream of a fifth Monarchy, and for Church affairs
would feign force all to do as they do, that is, to put their Noses under the
Popes girdle. And though here I digress a little, I hope it will be pardoned.

11
As for those particular Prodigies which the History at hand makes mention of*
the Reader may well admire at them, and happily revolve these questions in his
mind. Whether there were such things as are here related* Whether they are
truly Prodigious or no. Whether those Events here adopted to them were
portended. Whether the like things have not happened elseywhere without like
effects or consequences, with more of likenature, if he be either cautious,
or scrupulous, to alwhich I have only this to answer. If any credit may be
given to such Histories of Germane affairs, as commonly fall into the hands of
the learned, from Mercurius Gallo-Belgicus; it is certain that Africa was not
anciently more famous for Monsters then Germany has for many years been of
Prodigies. The particulars hereafter mentioned make not a fourth part of what
might be collected in like kind. And if Prodigies be taken in a large sense,
as they are here to be understood, the matter does well answer the title. But
this must needs be granted, this or that single prodigy may happen, and yet no
remarkable judgment follow. For God may shake his rod often, before he strike
once. And many times he threatens, but to try. But when Heaven and Earth, Sea,
and Land did all make one outery, and strike up an Alarm, no other could be
expected, but that God should march on apace in fury after. It is but a
gentrall intimation of this or that Judgment, that Prodigies do make
necessarily. But what else could be expected but shedding blood on earth, when
it rained blood from heaven. Battles in the Air were most lively pictures of
the same to be on earth. So that we may truly say, God wrote his mind in
most lively Characters, and has punctually fulfilled what he threatened. It
seems they were confident of longer peace, or else God needed not to have
read them so many Lectures of blood: what particular Judgments are signified
by particular Prodigies may well be guessed by the Prodigies themselves: for my
own part I believe, admire, and adore, and shall wonder at him that can do
less. I do every day expect the like and greater, because our Savior has so
largely prophesied in this kind in reference to ourtimes, which all the
Evangelists have recorded. The latter days shall be short beyond expectation,
and Christ come sooner then we are aware, and therefore the signs of his
coming must needs be expected, whereof strange Prodigies are one.

12
And now hopeing this may satisfy such as have anycandor; its high time to
draw the Arrow to the head, and hit the mark I shoot at, which is to point
out the Christian use which godly fear and reverence teaches us to make upon
the knowledge of these dreadful things. To which end there are some cautions
to be premised.

I Seeing God is the author of Prodigies, we must religiously observe them,
and by prayer seek from him instruction and grace, to fit us for a holy
improvement of them to his glory and our own benefit; Saying as Paul, when
Christ spoke to him in a vision out of Heaven, Lord what will thou Act. 9. 6.
have me to do? And with prayer we must join all diligence in studying of
his holy word, for thence it is that al necessary instruction is dertved. Be we
sure to make use of Prodigies according to this rule, and light will come out
of darkness, comfort out of fear.

Secondly we may not be too curious in searching after the particular evils
which Prodigies foreshew, much less to know their circumstances, when, where,
and how they shall happen. It is enough for us, and great mercy from God, that
we have, aforehand, so much as the noise of his coming to aflict. In the state
of Israel, God was wont to threaten in the Fathers days those Judgments which
he purposed to their posterity, and yet upon those threatenings, he expected
present repentance. And surely that Memento given by Christ unto the Angel of
Sardis, is necessary for every Church and state to apply uato themselves in
these days: Remember how thou have received, and heard, Rev. 3 3.
and hold fast and repent. If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on
thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

A third caveat is that, which God himself Ier. 10. 2.
gives by the Prophet Jeremy, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not
dismayed at the signs of heaven. For the heathen are dismayed at them. Where a
things are forbidden. The one is learning the heathens way, that is, to worship
the creatures themselves, or to use any part of their Idolatrous service: The
other is excessive fear upon the sight of all unpleasant aspects in the
heavenly bodies, without any true fear of God who causes them, and in whose
hand it is to hasten or prolong, increase or diminish, or totally remove all
threatened evils. The grosser sort of ancient Idolalaters Ezech. 8.
thought the Sun, Moon, and other stars to be Gods, and Eclipses and such
like to be signs of their anger, whereupon they feared exceedingly unto
astonishment, and addicted themselves by diverse rites and ceremonies to pacify
them. Many times the Israelites were much subject to like Idolatry, against
which God there instructs them. This place therefore does not condemn all fear
upon the sight of prodigies, as unlawful, but the abuse of fear, when it is
placed on the creature, not on God, and leads not to true piety, but to will
worship. Or when it so captivates, that we think it in vain to seek God by
repentance, and do hereupon despise him, and harden our hearts, and commit all
intquity with greediness. Of all things such a fear is most to be feared. As
for such whom a lively faith has incorporated into Christ, and a true fear of
God in his judgments, made penitent and obedient according to Gods word.
Prodigies should rather comfort them, then otherwise. Joel having said in one
verse, The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood,
before the great and terrible day of the Lord come, says immediately in the
uext verse, It shall come to pass that whosoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord shall be saved. For in Mount Sion and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance. Our Savior speaking in Luke. 21. 31.
like manner of the Prodigies which shall happen partly before the destruction
of Jerusalem, but especially before the end of the world, and of the fear
which shall be in many, said to his disciples, When these things begin to come
to pass, then look up and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws
nigh, Christ the accomplisher and finisher of it. Thus much for caution.

13
Now for the uses themselves, who will not hereby be assured of a general
judgment coming on apace, seeing these forerunners of it. I speak both of
the Prodigies, and of the things which follow and accompany. The order of the
signs of the latter day is this. First false Prophets. Many shall be deceived.
Iniquity shall abound. Secondly, persecution, and by means thereof Apostasy in
some, great misery to others. Then Wars, Famine, Pestilence. Prodigies,
interchangeably, till false Prophets, and al deceived by them be rootea out of
the earth. And as touching wars, judgment must begin at the house of God.
Therein false Prophets arise, as Acts. 20.
Paul says, from among your selves etc. Their rising is like the opening of
Pandoraes box, the original of alevil. And certainly the churches negligence in
not convincing them by doctrine, and suppressing them by discipline in the
particular Churches wherein they first appeared is the corner stone of all, and
therefore it is fit gods churches should be first in the course of Judgment,
who are first in the course of sinning. The third course of signs which are
now most conspicuous shall continue till the first error be discovered and
amended, and that evil which it has brought in be removed, I mean particular
Churches be rightly stated, and faithful in administration of all public
Ordinances, etc.

14
In the mean while* for a second use, let every one of us learn hence, To
search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord our God, lest our security
prove prodigious unto us. Be we more careful to know Gods will, and to
profess that we know, and live according to our profession; in one or other of
these specialties we all fail. Yea wherein is it that we fail not? see the
state of the seven Churches of Asia, as St. John describes it, and I fear
whatsoever is reproved in all them together* will be found among us, but little
of that which they are commended for. Were it not that God is jealous of his
own honor, and (in his own phrase) fears the wrath of the enemy, lest our
adversaries Deuteronomy. 32. 27.
should behave themselves strangely, and say, our hand is high, the Lord has
not done this, we also ere this time had felt the effect of many prodigies
which have been among our selves. But I hope God will shortly stir up some
in a more especial manner, to bring Gods wonders among us in remembrance. This
for the present may serve something to awaken us. And if we regard neither the
voice of God on earth, by his Ministers, nor the voice of God from heaven by
his wondrous works, though Noah, Job, and Daniel were among us, they shall
deliver but their own souls. God must deny himself, or we perish if we
continue impenitent, The name of reformation which we have in our mouths, will
no more help us then the Jews crying. The Temple of the Lord, We be Abraham's
children. In many abuses there is not so much as a color of reformation, as in
the matter of sacrilege for one. It was after Josiah had reformed many things,
that his heart was tender, and smote him upon hearing of the Law. Perceiving
thereby there were yet more abuses in the Land than he at first was ware of.
Antichrist had made all places like Augean stables. They do therefore surely
need a continual clensing. The God of all grace fill us according to our
measure with wisdom and zeal, that we may grow from beauty to beauty in his
eyes.

15.
And seeing God is so gracious, as by all means to manifest himself and his
intended judgments, he has not left himself without witness, but we are
altogether without excuse. Let him have the praise which is due unto his name,
who abounds toward us in all means of grace, whereby we might be made wise
unto salvation. Thy Word, O Lord, is sufficient of it self to warn all the
World. Thy Works are the utmost that we can ask or think: what shall we say
of thy wondrous Works from day to day! Oh thou holy one of Israel. All this
is that thou might be justified in thy sayings, Rom 3. 4.
and overcome when thou art judged. It will be thy glory that thou ast showed
us signs in Heaven above, and wonders in Earth beneath, But it will be our
misery if we regard them not, or if regarding we do not bless thee the
Almighty, or if blessing thee in words we repent not and amend. Of our selves
we are able to do none of all this. Let it not always be said of us as it was
sometime of thy Deuteronomy. 29. ^
people Israel, Yet the Lord has not given you a heart to perceive, and eyes
to see, and ears to hear unto this day. For thy Annoyiteds sake power upon us
thy spirit, give us hearts according to thine own heart, and cause us to walk
in thy ways. Truth Lord, thou may leave us to our selves, and let us perish:
if thy Grace were not free for thee, to besto^^r not, it were no grace. If thou
say, I have no pleasure in you, do to us as seems good in thy sight. Yet
be pleased to remember thy Covenant. And for his sake who has sealed it with
his blood pour out his spirit among us. Work knowledge in our minds,
submission in our wills. Yea sanctify us we beseech thee throughout. Oh love
us, and cause us to love thee, and then we know assuredly that all things
shall work together for the best, Amen.

If any thing offend thee Christian Reader in this Prologue, consider herein I
tread an unbeaten path, wherein it is easy to err. The way it self is rough,
my spare hours for such employment few. Importunity of others, and arguments
drawn from the public good, have stolen me from my self to do others
service in this business. If it seem strange I make so much a do to usher in
a small Pamphlet, consider not the book, but the subject. In Prodigies God
comes in, as riding on a Cherub, and flying on the wings of the wind. How then
can just exceptions be taken at one for coming before to cry Genesis 44. 43.
Bow the knee? my boldness pardoned I am content to bear all other blame.

In Magnis est volxisse Satis.
Errors in the Preface.
In the first Sect. r. Axiona^a. for him r. himself. In 2. Sect. them r. him
for fooler foo^e. 3. Sect. for suspitiously r. superstitiously, for paedicant r
p^rdica^^. 5. Sect. for No is in mar. 1. Iovis so, mer men* in 7 Sect. so
pledge ^ pledges in mat-tom r. revel. for prediens r. p^edict^ors in the (...)
Sent r. which ate adapted.





DREADFVLL, AND PRODIGIOVS ASPECTS WHICH have happened, and appeared in the
Air, Water, and on Earth, beyond the common course of nature, in diverse parts
of Germany, since the beginning of these late bloody b^oyles in that Country,
from the y^er^ of our Lord, 1618. to this present time; together with brief
observations of the issues, and Consequences ensuing after (...).
AMong the many troubles, and turmoyles (Courteous Reader) which have long time
roved, and raged not only in Bohemia, but also in diverse other places of
Germany, there appeared a terrible Comet with a The blazing Start
great blazing tail, which was as terrible as visible.

It appeared first, October, 26. 1618. in the sign of Scorpio, and the tail
thereof was extended betwixt the Spicavirginis, and Arcturus, toward Polus
Septentrionalis. Afterward it took its progress in Signo Librae, continuing
its course from the Ecliptica to Topico Cancri, from East to West, or
Northerly. It was to be seen, often in a clear Sky, in the East: In Bohemia
and Ausiria, it appeared, at first, with red; in other places with a Saturnish
pale-red color, for the space of 27. days, and in some places longer. This
fearful, and ominous Link or Torch the Omnipotent Jehovah had constituted,
and ordained in the Pulpit of the Heavens to be a Preacher of Repentance; that
sinful man might see, and discern, that for incorrigible sin he was
resolved to plague and punish them if they timely prevented not the threatened
danger, by seeking grace, and speedi'y fying from sin the sole cause thereof.
For in as much as the ^^cure, and bood-winckt-World had long despsed, and
neglected the gracious reclaming voyee of his sacred Word, in the public
preaching thereof by his vignant and diligent Ministers, and refused to hear
those charmers, charm ^ they never so wisely, running on in their accustomed
course of sin, and transgression, refusing to be reclamed, and living all
their days in sensual impenitence, as if God regarded not their doings, and
took no notice of their desperate rebellions; Therefore the Almighty Lord God,
as merciful, as just, sent forth these his prodigious signs, in the Sun,
Moon, and Stars of Heaven, as certain forerunners of his wrath, and of
imminent, and eminent Plagues and punishments on them, if not speedily
prevented, thus (if it were possible) to awaken men from they even dead sleep
of sin, to timely repentance, and true reformation of life; but otherwise to
show and assure them that he would come suddenly, and severely upon them, and
bring all those evils, and miseries on them, which those hideous, and ho^^ed
lignes did portend unto them. Of which his proceeding in former ages manifold
examples are extant, both in the sacred Scriptures, and in other various, and
volummous Histories, which, for brevities sake, I here of purpose pretermit.
This Comet herein mentioned has bin indeed a certain harbinger, and
forerunner of the Lords high indignation, and future punishments, wherewith
(since it appeared) the secure world has ^in soundly whipped, and severely
corrected* ^ea the great Miseries and Calamities, which poor dilacerated
Germany has, since its appearance, ^elt and found, are as unspeakable, as
deplorable, ^ardly to be lively delineated by man's tongue or pen. For that is
now completely (if not too fully) effected, which is spoken of in Comets, that
never did a Comet appear, which was not accompanied with much evil and
misery. And Claudianus the Poet writ thus of their operations.

-- Bellacanunt, ignes subitosque tumultus,
Et*elandestinis surgentia fraudibus arma,
Civiles etiam motus, cognataque bell^
Significant. -- Thus englished.
They show fierce wars, fire, sword and sudain broils, And by clandestine
craft, fast springing toils, Uncivill-civill jarres, and homebred flames They
signify, etc.

Pontanus also writes thus of them. Ventorum quoque certa dabune tibi signa
Cometae
-- Et^am belli motus, feraque arma minantur;


Magnorum and clades populorum, and funera Re^^^* Comets are certain signs of
future things (Kings Threatening fierce Wirres, much blood, and death of

Of the estate, and co^aitio of this our present Comet ancient Astrologians
have thus written. Verba docent, et signa monent, et poena probabit,
Nisubito in melius vitam convertimus, (...)
Words teach, signs preach, and punishments make That want of true repentance
proves our bane* (plain,

Which altogether the following years being fulfilled and verified, is notable
to all the Christian world to take warning by: and to declare the misery W^
(after this appearing blazing Comet) Germany felt, would require many volumes.
How many fruitful Countries, Dominions, and Territories are through these last
wars totally ruinated; the Cities, Towns, and Villages therein spoiled, and
made pillars of fire and smoke; the Churches lying desolate, the woods being
cut down, the earth untilled, and lying waste. The bloody and cruel dealing of
inhumane soldiers, especially of the Crabats, in many goodly* Towns and
Cities, is scarce credible, which furiously have plundered the places,
torturing the Inhabitants most barbarously; ravished women even to death;
powered dunghill-water and vinegar into the throats of men and women; tied
chains and cords about their heads, and have twisted them so hard, that they
have fallen down dead upon the ground; some are hanged up by the privy member^*
s^wed off the legs of some, rubbed off the flesh from the legs of others to the
very bones; tied the arms of others backwards, and so hanged them up by those
distorted parts; drew many through the streets of the Cities stark naked,
brake and wounded them with axes and hammers, and generally used them with such
barbarous cruelty, that many begged to be shot or slain instantly, rather than
to live, and be partakers of such misery. Some they have roasted alive, and
sacked the Cities miserably, that they spoiled what they could not carry away.
All the corn and provision of victuals, have they taken away with them, and
left the places so bare, that many of the best rank, for the space of 8. days
after, saw not one bit of bread, but were glad to feed upon roots and water:
sp^iled the Inhabitants of their garments, exposed them to that nakedness,
that neither man, woman, nor child have had clothes to put on. No man indeed
can be ignorant of the miserable condition of all Germany. No man can think of
it without a sorrowful heart: none that has not put on the Stoics stupidity,
can hear it without compassion. Such civil wars were never without strange
prodigies, and this as in the beginning it was threatened by this said Come^, so
in the continuance the uncouth condition thereof was still made apparent by
those strange things, which happened out of the common course of Nature, which
I shall endeavor to declare, as follows.

A^no 1619. in the month of December the water which does run through Sixto
a City in Hungaria (where in the year 1588. an exceeding great battle was
fought betwixt the Turks and Christians) Water and ice turned ^^bloud.
turned to blood, and the ice therein was likewise bloud-red, which at many
places was transported. This perhaps has been a forerunner of the bloody
encounters and skirmishes, which happened afterward 1621. in the same places
and thereabouts, betwixt the Imperiali^^s and Bethlem-Gabors Army where
Bethlem-Gabor fought a bloody battle against the Imperialists under General
Bucqnoy, and rowted their whole Army, and put to the sword above 2000. of them
upon the place. About Midsummer, Anno 1620. another hard conflict happened
near the City Sixto where Bethlem-Gabor lost 600. men: and on the Imperial
side some 400. amongst which was the Marquis Palav^^ino an Imperial Commander.

Seen at Groningen A great Blassing Star and 2 Armies onein the North
totherin the South and the Northern Army beaten 1619

At wien water turned into blood for 8day es and 3 *Suns and 3 Rainbowes in
the Sky 1619



Two Army* fighting in the heavens.
In the same month December, Anno 1619. at Groningen in the Dukedom of
Brunswick, appeared a great blazing Star, and two Armies, one in the East,
the other in the North, fighting against each other in the Heaven, so long till
the Army of the North was slain and defeated. This islued out, Anno 1626. the
25. of August, where few leagues from this place a fore battle was fought
betwixt the King of Denmark and the Imperial General Tilly* in which the King
lost the field, and 4000. of his Army were slain and taken prisoners; amongst
them were also slain 4. Danish Colonels, and a Landgrave of Hessen. Of the
Imperialists lost their lives some 3. or 400. upon the place. We will not speak
much of another conflict, which happened in the same Dukedom, when the
forementioned Star was seen* where 500 were slain upon the place near
Calinberg; nor of the bloody massacre, done by the Imperialists in the City of
Munden in the said Dukedom, where 2500. Citizens and Soldiers were put to the
sword most miserably by the Imperialists, the 27. of August, Anno. 626.

Three Rainbows and three Suns appearing in the heavens.
At Wien in Austria, the water in the Ditch was to be seen like blood for the
space of 8. days: likewise 3. Rainbowes appeared, and 3. Suns in the Heaven,
in the beginning of April. Anno. 1619. here in the same place, and City, and in
the same year, the 25. of October a great, and bloody fight was at the
Donaw-bridge in the same Town of Wien, betwixt the Bohemians, and General
Bucquey: in which encounter were slain on the Imperial side 4500. and of the
Bohemians some 1000. and a great many wounded, which were brought with Waines
into the Hospitals of Wien.

Anno 1620. about the months of April, some strange fignes, and prodigies of
future misety appeared in Polonia: where it rayned blood, in so much that the
drops of them fell abundantly down from the tops of the houses, whose
signification not long after was th^s: that the Tartarians with an Army of
40000. men invaded Polonia, with such cruelty* as is scarce credible, killing
in one place more then 3000. of the Polonians. Likewise in the same year the
grand Turk with 90000. men falling into Walstady had a bloody encounter with
12000* Polonians under the leading of the great Chancellor of their Kingdom,
who himself with the whole Polonians Army was slain, very few of them
escaping.

Anno. 1621. in the month of March happened a terrible prodigy in Austria,
where two Armies were to be seen in the Heaven by clear day light, fighting
Battles together with great ^dnance ^d Canons dis^arging n the ^eavens.
thundering of Ordnances, and Canons. In the same Country, Anno. 1623. in the
month of January at Lintz, just over the City two Swords standing against
another, and two strong Armies fighting a pitched Battle together, were seen,
and observed by the inhabitants, with great terror, ^ Sword^ ^tanding against
o* her seen ^y the in^abitants.
and heaviness. This City of Lintz in the year 1626, was besieged, and many
times assaulted by the Austrian Boores, but were beaten off with loss of 500.
men. These Boores many thousand strong falling upon some Imperial forces under
the conduct of Duke Adolff of Holstein, touted and defeated them utterly, the
rest being glad to run away. This was afterward revenged by Pappenheim, who
with an Army of 6000. Horse and Foot came against them, putting to the Sword
3000. of them upon the place, and took many prisoners, who afterward were
executed in the same City of Lintz.

At Prage and Heidelberg the 5. of Febuary, Anno 1622. were seen three Suns
and three Rainbowes, a sharp conflict happened before this City of Prage in
the beginning of January Anno 1632. betwixt the Imperialists and the Saxons,
under the Baron of Hofkirch, who defeated 900. Crabats, and took 11. Cornets
of them, 3. Ensigns, and almost every man of the Imperialists were cut in
pieces by the Saxons before the gates.

Concerning Heidelberg the seat and the chiefest City in the Palatinat, the
same Town was by the Imperialists for a long time besieged, assaulted, and at
the last taken by force, with great loss and slaughter of the inhabitants.
Neckergemund a lesser Town, 3. English miles from Heidelberg, was likewise the
same time, Anno 1622. surprised by the Imperialists by furious assault, wherein
the Garrison, doing some resistance against them, with the inhabitants, both
men, women and children, were put to the Sword.

Anno 1634. in July was also the City of Prage, by the Saxons, and Swedes,
besieged; which by the space of 3. days plied uoon the Town with Canons, and
were replied unto from thence in the like kind, with great loss (...) both
sides; 900. men of the Saxons, and Sw^d^, being slain: of the imperial
Carrison within, consisting of 1400. men, under the command o both the
Generals, Coloredo, and Don Balthazar, 600 lost their lives.

In the month of April, Anno 1622. in the Country of Darmstad were found Trees,
whose leaves dropped blood. This Country afterward in Leaves of Trees drop blood.
the same year was grievously invaded both by the Imperial, and Spanish Army,
as well of Count Mansfeld, as Duke Christian of Brunswick; many bloody
encounters and skirmishes happened betwixt them; and especially a sore Battle
was fought not far off between Duke Christian of Brunswick, and General
Tilly, whose Army consisting of ^2000. of Foot, and 140. Cornets of Horse,
continued a great fight for the space of 6. hours with Duke Christian at
Hochst. But the Imperialists more in number beat the others, and dispersed
them, which flying to the Bridge, so thronged, and wedged in one another, that
a great many were thrust into the River Ma^n, wherein as many were drowned, as
were killed in the Battle.

At Minefeld and Malants the Shikles were seen blodey K Men drew there hands
out bloodey when they Cut the Corn



Anno. 1623. about Midsommer many bloody signs and aspects appeared in diverse
Countries, and places. In Bohemia in the County of Podybrat a well for some
days was turned to blood. At A Well turned to blood.
Tursin a Town 3. or 4. leagues from Egra, in a Citizens house, the table, the
wall of the parler, and the chaires sweated blood, in so much The Parler walls
table, and chaires sweat blood.
that it began to run in the parler. What bloody encounters happened in the
next, and other years in those places, is too well known: where 4000. of the
Bohemiant under Count Mansfeld were slain: some 300. of the Imperialists not
long after lost their lives also by the Sword: 5. troops of the Elector of
Saxonies Horses, lying then at Rakonick in Bohemia, were at once knocked down
by the Imperialists; scarce 120. of them escaping with their lives. What if we
should remember the bloody tragedy acted by the Imperialists at Egra, where the
Imperial Generalissimo Duke of Fridland himself, with 4. others chief
Commanders, was murthred, and massacred the 25. of February, Anno. 1634.

In the Territories about the Rhine, and Hossen Darmstad in this 1623. year,
in diverse Towns, and Villages, were seen bloody signs and tokens, Bloody
signs seen on ho^s s, and walls.
on houses, stones and walls: how prodigious this has been at Mingelheim,
where 2000. of the Imperialists were put to the Sword by Count Mansfeld, the
ways side by the River Rhine toward Germersheim being strewed with their dead
bodies. Also next year following in a Battle at Wimpsen betwixt General
Tilly, and Marquis of Durl^ch, 5000. were flaine upon the place. In the month
of January, Anno 1632. the Swedish General Rhinegrave taking the Town of
Kinchberg by assault, put to the Sword 147. Imperialists, and Spaniards
therein. Not long after the Rhinegrave in another occasion lost 300. of his men
by the Spaniards Sword.

Sickles in the l^ield bloody.
About Meyenfild and Malantz, the Sickles, and the hands of the laborers in
the Meadows were seen bloody. What cruelty, and shedding of blood by the
invasion of the Spaniards in those places afterward has been, would require
a large relation; where the Inhabitants, without respect of Sex or condition,
have been miserably massacred. This is notable amongst other cruelties there
committed; The Spanish, and Imperial^ Army coming from the Rhine, passed by
Gall into those parts, Anno 1635. where the Catholics to secure themselves
from being made a prey unto them, marked their dwelling houses with the sign
of the Cross, then thinking themselves as secure from injury from that Army,
as Rahab was by hanging the scarlet thread at her window, from the victorious
Sons of Jacob at Jericho; or Israel by striking the blood of the pascall
Lamb upon their posts, and lintels, from the destroying Angel. But as the
grounds of their hopes were most different; So the issue was most unlike. These
were the first which felt the effects of their insolency, being pillaged, and
murdered without distinction of age, sex, calling, or place; men and women in
religious orders being forced in their Monasteries, and an Agent sent unto them
from the States of the Province, precipitated by them from an high Rock.

It rayned blood.
In the Dukedom of Wirtemberg at Herbrechtingen and Hermeringen, the 16. of
July, Anno 1622. it rayned so much blood, that it fell upon the hands, and
clothes of the laboring men, and was to be seen upon Trees, Stones, and other
places in the fields. How many thousands of the Inhabitants of that Dukedom in
those last wars, and especially after the Battle, and in the Battle of
Norlingen have lost their lives, is too well known to the Christian World: in
which bloody Battle how many thousands on both sides were slain, no man had
certainty of it. Amongst which were many brave Colonels, and chief Commanders,
as the Marquess of Auspach, 5. Colonels, diverse Captains, and Officers all
dead in the bed of honor. Anno 1634. the 24. of Aug.

The 26 of December, Anno 1624. for the space of 10. or 11. hours it was
observed in Fiery beams* coming forth of the Sunnc stand in opposition to it.
Bohemia, that the Sun was changed first in diverse colors; at the last fiery
beams came forth out of the Sun, which for a time held their opposition
against the Sun, then they went away, and vanished like a smoke in the Air,
and at last fell down with a noise like Rackets. Two days before, in Silesia
happened an horrible prodigy, as if two Armies in the air continued a great
fight and skirmish against one another. How many skirmishes and conflicts have
fallen out in these two Countries the years following, is needless to
remember: remarkable alone is the siege of the City of ranckford upon the
borders of Silesia, which the King of Sweden took in by assault, Anno 1631. to
the terror and slaughter of 2000. Imperialists, which were out in pieces upon
the place, besides those that were drowned, and others found dead in Cellars,
Chambers, and elsewhere, as many more perchance. 300. Swedes also there stain,
and 100. hurt. At Lansbergen in the front of Silesia, 300 Swedish soldiers,
over-confident of their valor, were put to the sword by the Crabats: which
Town the King the 15. of April took in by assault, with slaughter of 300.
Imperialists: but of his own men no less then 600. lost their lives. In this
time at Cressin in Silesia, 200. Imperialists attempting the recovery of the
same Town, were slain by the Swedes.

An Ancient in red habit seen in the air: also a chariot with 2. horses, an
infinite number of men.
A strange prodigy in the heaven happened at Gierslet in the Dukedom of
Anhalt the 12. of May, Anno 1624* which continued from 6* till 8. clock at
night, and was observed by the Inhabitants of the same Town in this manner.
First of all came forth out of the clouds an Ancient, with a red Hungarian
habit: after him followed some grave men clothed in the like habit. Thirdly,
came forth a Chariot with two horses of diverse sprinkled colors, and another
Chariot with four armed horses. Suddenly did break out of the clouds an
infinite number of people, like a swarm of Bees, with such aforesaid Hungarian
habit, and with Hungarian hats upon their heads with great Feathers. After them
follows a man sitting upon horseback, with a great long robe, putting the
people before him. After this did follow a Comet, iuxia aquilam with inclining
head. A quarter of an hour after came forth another Army, consisting of many
horses, and foot, and Chariots, having hoods of broad rands with Feathers. In
the midst of the Army appeared a man alone, drawing before him a long red
cross, before which he made some prayers with extended hands. These the
following Army presently rowted and defeated. All these Forces marching toward
the Towns of Aldershliben, Hirshliben, and turning at the last-towards
Sandersliben, with red clouds oppressed vanished away. The day before it rained
blood at Wemsham in Bohemia, and likewise two Armies appeared in the air
skirmishing together. This portentuous prodigy issued out perhaps in the
bloody battle which was fought at Dessaw^ bridge, in the same Dukedom of
Auhalt, the 25. of April, Anno 1626. where Count Manifield came with his Army
before the Imperial Sconce, against which he cast up 3. Batteries, from whence
he night and day thundered upon the Imperialists. But the Duke of Fridland
coming to succor the Imperialists, utterly defeated the Mansfieldish Forces,
whereof were slain 3000. upon the place: amongst them 3. Colonels, and other
Officers. Of the Imperialists 1000. also slain. The day before that the
prodigy happened at Giersleb* it rained blood about Fridberg in Silesia, and
two Armies also appeared in the heaven fighting for a long time together. Three
years after happened a bloody encounter about the same place, ^e^re the Town
of Fridberg. For the Duke of Fridland fo^ding Colonel Pechman with 7000*
Horsemen and Dragoners to pursue the Danish and Weinmarish troops, there began
a sore fight betwixt the^, where at the last all the Danish forces were
ruinated and killed, 10. Companies of them taken prisoners, the Imperial
Commander Pechman himself, with diverse other Officers slain.

A strange Tempest.
Anno. 1624. the 8. May, a strange Tempest happened at Ratisbon, full of
admiration. When there was a great calm with a little rain, two dark Clouds
met together, which suddenly belched out a wind intermingled with fire, and
raised such a Tempest, as has not bin known in the memory of man. It was
first perceived near the Wood before the City, where it tore up the Trees by
the roots, and, as in a moment, drove them to diverse places; and thence
extending it self to the City, overturned more then two hundred houses in the
Town and Suburbs, which had not a chimney left standing, nor a piece of the
roof to cover it; not sparing the Churches, the Church of Emerant besides the
shattered windows, having one of the Steeples laid fat to the ground, and the
other broke off in the middle: two of the chiefest Steeples being blown down,
with the destruction of a Cloister, which cannot be well repaired with many
thousand Florens. This was the progress, yet the end was more wonderful, both
in its time of duration and the bounds of the Tempest. It was then supposed to
be raised by some damned Sorcerers, who by the assistance of the Prince of the
Air had caused this outrage. The instrument of this desolation was limited
both to time, place, and persons; the time lasted not above a quarter of an
hour: the Hericano (so we may call it, though the true one was never seen in
Europe) did not dilate it self beyond the City, where it rent up some few
Trees, and killed four men. This City of Ratisbone was ten years after this
strange Tempest, Anno 1634. in the month of May, straightly besieged, and
assaulted, by the Imperial and Bavarian Army, consisting of 30000. Foot, and
15000 Horse, when they night and day battered it with an hundred pieces of
Ordnance, but were valiantly every Battle repulsed by the Swedish Garrison and
the Inhabitants, with the slaughter of 4000. Imperialists in the last assault.
Many brave Commanders, and Officers, lost their lives in this siege. The
Garrison and Citizens having for a long time behaved themselves stoutly in
defense of the City, even to the admiration of the Imperialists, who had lost
before it by their own relation 8000. men that were slain upon the place;
6000. others who had run away; made 15000. Canons shot upon the Town; cast
above 2000. Grenades into it, endured 465. sallyes from within the City, at
last they surrendered it to the Imperialists upon honorable Conditions. Strange
kind of Fruit.


In the year 1625. the 6. of March, at Mors a Village near to the City of
Frankendall, was found a strange kind of prodigious Fruit, on a pear Tree,
which was brought from a Country man to the Town Clark with great admiration
of the spectators. It was a branch not round, as a natural branch or sprig,
but broad of about an ell in length, and the delineation thereof was
transported to many places, and some the Goverrnour of the Town himself
afterward sent to the Spanish Infantin at Brussel. Whether this prodigy has
portended the miserable devastation and desolation of the whole Palatinat, is
needless to make mention thereof. It is too well known to the Christian
world, what and how much this Country the years following has suffered, and
long felt the misery of war, famine, and the plague; and does not only
continue to this present in the same condition, but the flame thereof has set
the neighbor Countries on fire, which are sensible of the like miseries.
Therefore great need of repentance have such who do enjoy the contrary, I
mean peace and tranquillity and are disburdened of those afflictions with
which other people are incombred: for.

Verba docent, et signa mouent, et poena probabit,
Ni subito in mclius vitam convertimus, actum est.
In this before mentioned Village Mors, wherein this prodigy of Fruit was
found, were 9. Troops of Spanish horses under Don Philip de Sylva, who was
then General of all the Spanish forces in the Palatinat, and in the
Bishoprics of Mentz and Triers, whoafter a long fight were utterly rowted and
defeated by the Swedish Commander the Rhinegrave, Ar, 1631. The Town of
Franckendall was repossessed by the King of Bohemia their natural Lord, Anno
1632. the Spaniards therein would never treato with the King of Sweden about
it, but with the Prince Palatines ministers, to whom they condescend to deliver
it, but: it is lately conquered again by the Imperial Army, with most
lamentable sufferings of the Inhabitants.

Multitudes of Croweskilling Each other they baskits of them were Carried into
the City in Selesia 1625*



Near Troppaw in Silesia, in the Month of February, Anno. 1625. a great
multitude of little Crows (Corniculae) appeared in the Air, which fought as
it were in a set Battle, and skirmished so eagerly, killing many amongst
themselves, that the Boores gathered some sacks full of them dead, and
transported them unto the City. The year after, Anno. 1626. fell out a hard
and sharp fight, betwixt the Imperialists, and the Weinmarish Forces in this
place. The Imperial Commanders Schaffgotch, Dona, Colorede, and Hexted, with
an Army of some 1000. men of Horse, and many Foot, attempting to assault the
Weinmarish troops in their Camp near Troppaw, were still repulsed; and in the
end 7. Companies of the Weinmarish ^allying out of the Camp, slew and rowted
the Imperialists, 4000. dead corpse being found of them upon the place, and
many Officers slain; and so the Weinmarish got an happy victory of their
enemy, although they were more in number. Another, but more bloody, conflict
fell out few Leagues from this place the 3. of May, Anno. 1634. where the
Saxonian Army, under the command offield-Marshall Arnheim obtained a memorable
Battle, and brave successful victory against the Imperialists: where the
onset, and first shocke of the Battle was hot and fiery, continuing with great
obstinacy, and bloody opposition, for the space of 6. hours: the Saxons Canons
being three times lost to the Imperialists* and three times with much slaughter
recovered again from them by the Saxons. The Curassiers, and Crabats did show
much valor and resolution for the most part of the Battle, till in the end
the victory inclined to the Saxon side. Of the Imperialists were slain upon
the place of Battle above 5000. amongst whom were two General Majors, 1.
Colonel, 1. Colonel Lieutenant, 4. other Officers of account: Coloredo the
General, Trost and Winse, both Colonels, were grievously wounded; and most of
the Captains of the Foot forces were slain. Of the Saxons party slain about
400. whereof ^. Ritmasters, 5. Cornets, and 4. Ancients, and 100. of them hurt:
36. Ensigns, 9. pieces of Ordnance, 27. Comets won* in the field.

In the end of February, Anno 1625. in diverse places of Silesia was as
exceeding great Tempest Thunder and lightning.
with thundering and lightning, as has been since the memory of any man. At
Breslaw the spires of the Elizabeth, and Mary Magdalene Churches, the
foundation of the State-house, and many fine dwelling places, were overturned
into the Town; great Trees, and a new strongly-builded Bridge before the
swinith port, were torn up by the roots, that the next day following nothing
of them were seen, but driven to diverse places: many fair houses were utterly
demolished by this strange Tempest. At Nissa a lesser City then Breslaw, the
chiefest. Church therein was struck with a terrible thunder, and the Tower was
thereby battered to the very ground work, and foundation, the 9. of September,
1627. At Breslaw, Anno 1628. a strange prodigy also was observed by the
Inhabitants of the same City, with great wonder and astonishment: The Moon
appearing much bigger then usually, and four great Ordnance or Canons were
first seen in the Air, with great terror; and afterward heard shot off with
uncessant thunders, and volleyes one against another. After that, before the
gates of this said City of Breslaw, some sharp conflicts fell out about the
26* of August, Anno 1632. betwixt the Imperialists and the Swedes: who pursued
the flying Imperialists unto Breslaw. After some encounters the Imperialists
called to the Citizens on the walls, to assist them, by shooting at the
Swedish, and Saxons, which they refused: some skirmish being made on both
sides, the whole Swedish and Saxonian Army appearing with their great
Artillery, and being come within half an hours march of the Imperial
leaguer, they ranged themselves into Battaglia, advancing with their Canon
playing before them, and beat the Imperialists over the River Oder, who set
fire upon their own quarters before the Town, and in haste retired themselves
with Baggage, and Ordnance over the Bridge; which in three places they put fire
unto. This had the Imperialists not done, they had been all undone. The Swedish
were at this day in hot skirmish with them: The next day, in the morning, they
began again the fight, continuing till 8. a Clock: at which time shooting was
given over on both sides. The Imperialists toward evening retire a little, and
send much of their best Baggage, with 4. great pieces of Ordnance (each drawn
by. 20. on 24. horses) to be taken into Breslaw, for fear least they in their
retreat should be forced to leave them to their enemies. The Gunnes were taken
in. The most part of the Imperial Army in the mean time forsook their own
leaguer, and retired into that suburb on the other side of Breslaw, the Swedish
continuing their assault, upon those left at the Oder: but at last the
Imperialists in great haste retired themselves from Breslaw, some North
eastward, to Namstaw; others North-west-ward-to Auris, whence was thought they
would have gone, out of the Country. News afterward was brought, that other
Swedish had slain 200. horsemen more at Olaw-Bridge. Whilst the Swede was
thus employed about Breslaw, the Saxons follow the Caesarians toward the pass
at. Olaw, where all day, and night, the Saxon Ordnance so thunderd into the
Wood, that so soon as ever the Saxons came over the Bridge, the Imperialists
took the rout at it, leaving 2. pieces of Ordnance behind them. There were
1200. Imperialists said to be slain. October the third did Breslaw accord
with the Swedish Commander Dubalt, yielding to maintain those 600, Foot, and
1000, horsemen, which he already had about the Cathedral Church, which is in
the Suburbs.

At Hamborow the 3. of May, 1627. a prodigy was seen in the Heaven not without
terror of the Citizens, and Inhabitants. It appeared first a circle, and
therein the accustomed face of the Sun, but in the edge of the circle five
other Sunns, round about the first appearing Sun, with an interposed Rainbow;
afterward two other Suns with another part of a Rainebow, one extending
toward the West, the other toward the South, were to be seen; at the last all
this vanished in a burning smoke. This City of Hamborow lies upon the front
of Holstein, wheresome leagues off, betwixt Bredenborg, and Itz^ho, in the same
year the Imperial Count of Slick fought a Battle against the Marquis of
Durlach, then Commander of the Danish Army, where the said Marquis lost the
field, his Army rowted, and a great many of them slain upon the place, 32.
pieces of Ordnance, and 42. Ensigns taken by the Imperialists whereupon they
suddenly surprised the Fort of Bredenborg, putting to the sword all that they
found in Arms. Not long after, this Count of Slick having notice that 24.
Danish Compaines, with 200 hors-men were enquartered about Froyborg some miles
distant from Hamborow, he with all his forces over*tooke them, cut in pieces
300. of them, 3000. of the Danish hors-men sticking in moorish places were all
taken prisoners. Betwixt Hamborow, and Stoad in the end of April, Anno 1632.
happened another conflict: General Pappenheim being come with an Army of
10000. horse and foot into Stoade, had the passage into Keydinger land open;
where was a Swedish Regiment of General Major Leslyes, and 4. Companies of
Colonel Monroes enquartered; upon these falls Pappenheim, cuts them off all,
takes 19. Colors, and some Captains and Officers prisoners.

At Sanderborn in Pomerland Appeared a great Army and the northern side
prevailed



This 1628. year was full of portentuous prodigies, which were seen in many
and diverse places. At Sunderbory in Pomerland, the Heaven being open, an Army
appeared coming from the Northern parts, the Avantguard thereof being Pioners
and Musketeers; hereupon did follow great pieces of Cannons and Ordnances: the
reere was concluded by Cavallery or horsemen. Another Army came forth on the
other side against the first, where began a fiery, and hot skirmish betwixt
them: but the victory inclined to the Northern Army. At last a right fiery
beam followed upon the Northren Conqueror, which beam put forth fiery rays
or beams, and continued thus prodigiously for the space of some hours. A
prediction of a great Astronomer of the English Nation, and his judgment upon
that great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, July, 18. Anno 1623. is this;
That the effect of that conjunction would be felt in the North, and North-East
parts of Europe in particular: and in general over all. That it would produce
Wars, Famines, Plagues, etc. Places subject to this he names, Italy, France,
Bohemia, Silesia, and Germany. Of Provinces he names Prusia, Brandenburg,
Stiria, Hassia, and Saxony: yea, he descends to Cities; naming Rome, Prague,
Magdenburg, Coblenz betwixt Mentz and Cullen, Vlin, Brunswick, Augsburg, etc.
He says it is likely to go hard with the Roman Empire, Clergy. Jesuits: he
speaks of a King of a true Religion that should do all this, and much
happiness that should succeed it. How this observation has even now been
verified, we need not feed the humor of the times: true it is, and cannot be
denied, that in the year 1630. following, Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden,
having conquered many Towns from the King of Poland, both in Prussia, and
Livonia, came with an Army of some 12000. men out of the Northern corner of the
world, and landed first in Pomerania, not very far from Sunderborg, where the
foresaid prodigy was seen: where he first beat out the whole Imperial Army,
nor ever returned he out of them, but with the Olive Branches, the emblemes of
Victory. But these Northern trophes upon his next neighbors, as they had much
of glory; so have they much of credit in them: but chronicle, and belief, must
strain hard to make his Germane conquest any thing probable with posterity:
and were they not written in the times of doing, and acknowledged by his enemy,
scarcely would the legend be more apocryphal. For what belief (not easily to
be abused) could persuade it self, that two third parts of Germany could (and
by him that entered with 12. or 11000. men) in two years, and 4. months space,
be wrested from so puissant an Emperor? A might Empire and a potent,
formidable for its greatness, confident upon the power of its colleagues, and
upholders: vast in extent, terrible for its arms and Captains, renowned for
its conquests, beyond expectation successful in all its enterprises, and that
knew no bounds but the alps, and the Ocean. And yet this Empire, with its
Armies or Garrisons, that did hold so many Princes at a bay, was it self
constrained to take the yoke, which Swedens Gantlet put upon it. In less then
2. years and a half this Northern Lion did all this: what might he more have
achieved, had he gone on another year, and two months, and filled up the
time of that malicious and false prediction, which the Jesuits, had cast abroad
of him? They comforted their creduious Novices with his being Antichrist; and
that he should reign 3. years and a half, and no longer.

At Bishein a Village near the City of Strasburg, 2 Femals joined together.
a poor woman brought forth a strange monster to the world the 11. of March,
Anno 1628. which was two femalls, whose bodies were joined together, the
externe members, as hands, feet, and heads, being perfect and whole, but only
seen in them one heart, and one lungs. This prodigy if it has fore-run the
many and fearful outrages committed in the wars near and about Strasburg
the years following; and those great damages, which usually accompany the
wars, and the unruly Soldiers, I know not. Certain it is that these
continued wars, these grievous Impositions, these violences, injuries and
rauages in those parts would scarcely be believed: and to pass by also the
great famine and plague, which for a long continuance have followed this
prodigy, no man can be ignorant, how the people and inhabitants of that Country
have been tortured for their money, had their cattle driven away, their houses
firedand and all comers driven out of the same Country. The Soldiers neither
observed martial discipline, nor moral honesty: neither keeping the Laws,
nor fearing God. Virgins, and women have been ravished upon the high altars.
And if the weekly contribution were not paid at the Soldiers pleasure, then
the inhabitants were presently spoiled or killed of them.

Thunderbolt did much hurt
Strange was that Thunderclap which fell at Brig in Silesia, wherein the
Immediate power of God appeared. A thunder Bolt about midday, May, the 29.
Anno 1628. fell upon one of the Churches of the same Town, broke down the
door, slew a poor woman in the porch as she was praying, wounded in its
course many poor women and children. After this the same thunderbolt, rowted
toward the Church in the Suburbs, struck the Minister as he was reading, doing
him no more harm but that it singed the hair of his head, nor the people
which fell down and prostrated themselves to the Earth at the instant. A
strange thunder fell upon the Church at Sagan, another Town in Silesia, the
13. October, in the same year, whence it burst forth by a window, attended
with such winds, rain, hail, storms, and tempests, that it tore up the Trees
by the very roots, blasted the Herbs, and Fruit Trees, and so harrowed the
Country for a league about, that the loss was esteemed of a great sum of
money: I can only say with the Prophet, it is the glorious God, which makes
the Thunder; mavelous are his works, and that my soul knows right well.
Besides this Thunder and tempest, afterward appeared just over the Church
fiery beams like a sword and a rod, the Bells in the steeple began to sound
and Sword, and a Rod appeared.
ring without help of man, and 3. miles of the heavens for the space of an
hour seemed open and fiery. Betwixt this Town Sagan, and Steinaw both
situated in Silesia, a hot skirmish happened the 17. of August, in the year
1632. following; where the S wedes and Saxons forces came before the Imperial
leaguer under Don Balthazar di Maradas consisting of 12000. men. The Swedes
cruelly with 20. pieces of Ordnance thundered both upon the Town Steinaw and
the Imperial leaguer. The Swedes, and Saxons Cavalery charged, and fell upon
their horse quarters; their horsemen after a charge or two, were defeated: some
4000. of their foot having thrust themselves into the Fort of the same Town. In
this fight were some 2000. Imperialists slain; the rest of the horsemen
running toward Sweinitz, and Breslaw. At Griffenbery another Town betwixt
Sagan, and Brig in Silesia, the Swedish General* Bannier was entered in a set
Battle with 15000. Imperialists under the conduct of their General Coloredo
the 29. of June, Anno 1634. and: got a noble victory; where the Imperialists
lost some 4000. men slain upon the place. Another Town in Silesia, by name
Olaw, felt the like misery of the bloody wars, with more grievous punishment.
After the Battle at Lignith the Saxon Army marched toward the same Town,
wherein the Imperial Governor being advertised of the Saxons coming, burnt
the whole Town to the ground, and betook himself into the Castle; from
thence the Saxons did go to Orls, a lesser Town then this in Silesia, wherein
the Imperial Governor Don John de Languiall yielded to the mercy of the
Saxon, and was taken prisoner, with his 300. Soldiers. S^llaw a City in
Silesia suffered also much calamity, and was plundered at the same time by the
Soldiers in their fury. For the Saxon Army, though not with strong opposition
took, the same City by assault; the issue on both sides was bloody.

A very miraculous thing happened in a Soldier at Geismar in Hassia, Anno
1630. Two Soldiers lying for a safeguard in the same Town, the one at night
makes his complaint to his fellow Soldier, who lay with him in one bed, for
taking much cold, to whom the other answered, that he did not believe it in
regard that his body was very hot, and wet, entreating him to touch, and feel
his side. Which when he had done, finding his hands exceeding wet, which were
as it were glued or congeled together, suspected some had event; First looks
upon his hands in the shadow of the Moon, and apprehends his hands to be
bloody: being hereat much terrified, called for a Candle; who find^ the
Soldier very weak, and his left side and the sheets of the bed to be bloody:
and whereas their endeavor was to wash off the blood of his side, presently
comes forth more, and more blood; at length after a space of an hour it
cease of it self. Three handfulls of blood, or thereabout was taken out of
the sheets: this, with the relation of other circumstances, they presented in
the morning to the Captain and Commander of those two Soldiers, who enquired
of him, how he had felt himself that night; the Soldier answered, that he had
been in great anguish of heart, and was afterward restored to his former
health. It cannot be concealed, how many and several Armies and Forces since
have invaded this goodly Country of Hassen, and especially about the time when
this prodigy happened on the Soldier. The 2. next years after, how
barbanously and inhumanely the Inhabitants thereof have been used by the
Imperall Army, and that against all reason, without any cause, and besides all
color of right and justice: they are yet still sensible of them; and which was
worse then all this, if the Prince with his poor subjects did at any time
complain or sue for justice or redress, they were but scorned and rejected
for their labors, contrary to all Laws and rights of nature; as also against
the peace of Religion and of policy, all Constitutions, and Articles of the
Roman Empire: yea, they have endured the most barbarous usage that might be,
in the said Country of Hassia; namely in quarterings, taxations, burnings,
robberies, sacking of their Towns, and Villages: yea, also, and of putting to
the sword innum^rable innocent Subjects of all sorts. During all which
proceedings of the enemy, and most lamentable sufferings of the Inhabitants,
the worst has been of all, that notwithstanding those infinite complaints,
prayers, cries, and lamentation, they were never able to obtain any pity of
their cause, or any Christian compassion toward them.

The Norinberg Carrier, with some company in his journey toward Hamborow
passing by the Town of Coburg at night in the month of May, Anno 1630.
observed with great admiration a prodigious fire going into the Town and out
of the Town, as if some discharging of great Orduance were heard, for certain
hours after this. Before the Town of Coburg General Wallenstein presenting
his Canons in the year, 16^2. following, the Town being there* upon entered,
the Dukes Palace within the Town fell also to the Soldiers ransacking with
the rich household stuff, and a great part of treasure. The Town being thus
mastered, the strong Castle standing upon a Rock without the Town, was next
summoned. The roise of the summons is answered by the thunder of the Canons:
which being louder then the sound of the Trumpet, would not let the offered
conditions to be hearkened unto. Wallensteins Ordnance therefore are sent to
reply upon Dubatals Canons, who had then the command of it. Wallenstein having
shot a breach in the lower parts of the Castle wall, he prepared all things to
give a general assault upon it. Five hundred Soldiers thereupon being
commanded into the dry Graft or Moate of the Castle; Other from the Town side
with continued Volleys of small, and great shot, entertained the besieged
Dubatel having with good diligence also brought down some new pieces of
Ordnance, he so seowers the Imperialists, that a many of the assaylants already
half way mounted, came fluttering down headlong into the Moate. Wallenstein
perceiving the Castle to be strong, high situated, well provided, and the
besieged resolved for defense; after that one repulse had been given him he
retreated, Anno 1634.

At Hall, in lower Saxony, in the beginning of May, Anno 1631. the Water was
turned to Water tur*ned to blood.
blood, which miracle was beheld with horror of many of the Inhabitants. Great
alteration about the middle of the said month of May, in the same year
followed in this City. First as it was taken by Tilly, so was it retaken by
their natural Lord the Administrator of Hall, and Magdenburg from Tilly. But
presently repossessed by Tillies Forces. Hither General Tilly, thus wounded in
the Battle of Leipsig, made shift to fly that night, and had his wounds
dressed by the Town-barber of Hall. This City of Hall is but 7. Dutch miles
distant from the place of Battle, wherein the Imperial Army was quite
defeated and beaten out of the Field, being miserably slain and trodden down
in the chase. And had the King of Sweden had but 3. hours more of daylight,
scarcely had, 1000. Enemies come off alive. One of the high- Dutch relations
does affirm, that there were, 15000. of the Imperialists slain upon the place
of Battle, or in the chase; the same night and the days following. Tillys
manly heart (it is said) could not refrain his tears, when he perceived his
brave old Soldiers, and Army, which was called invincible, consisting of
44000. brave men, thus going to wrack. The chase and slaughter being done,
which continued all the next day, the 10. of September, the King besieged Hall,
which the next day was yielded unto him. The Castle he took in September, 12.
where he took an Imperfall Sergeant Major, and a Captain prisoners, redeeming
a Colonel with some others that had been taken prisoners at Magdenburg; The
King sending for the Duke of Saxony, and other the great commanders of his
Army, to come to Hall, unto him. A council of war was there held, which way
to keep the enemy from gathering head again, and how to pursue the victory.
Anno 1632. Papp^nheim took in again this City of Hall, did not omit that
spoil, and barbarisine upon the City, as was reported. Part of the Bridge he
burned, and blew up some of the work es: Clapped a petard to the Castle gate, in
which then was a Swedish commander, with a garrison of 200. Soldiers. However
the leader of Pappenheins Salliers was there shot dead, and fell, his men
forced from the the Castle to retire, being after some skirmishing beaten into
the Town again. At which instant a messenger of Wallenstns overtooke him, to
return back with all his forces to wards Lutzen, in which bloody Battle he
was also stricken with a bullet of a ^^lconet.

At Madenburke a Captains wife dieing in Childbed desired to be ripte up she
had a Child as bige as a child of 3 years old on his hind a head peace and a
breast plate Great boots and a bag at his side

At Frawenstein ^6 miles from Dresden a woman hauemg^ bought bread and goeing
to cut it thereout I showed blood (...)



In the time of the siege of Magdeburg a City Captains wife dying in
childbed, desires to be ripped: the child was found, a boy almost as big A Child
taken out of the body of a woman as big almost as one of three years old.
as one of three years old. He had an headpeice and an iron breast plate upon
him; great boots of the french fashion: and a bag by his side, with two like
musket-bullets. This horrible prodigy has doubtless portended the deplorable
destruction, and dire abodement unto the same City; which fell out the 10. of
May, Anno 1631. when a general assault, by the Imperialists was made upon the
Town; the walls were in a trice mounted, the Town entered, and the Soldiers
fell to killing. Falckenberg the Swedish commander therein, after valiant
resistance was slain with a shot, the administrator hurt and taken. Whilst
all thus goes to wrack, a mighty fire breaks out (how none knows) it being a
great windy day, all was on the sudden become one great flame: the whole Town
was in twelve hours space, wholly turned to cinders, excepting few fisher
houses. Six goodly Churches are burnt: the Cathedral was by the Monks, and
Soldiers diligence preserved. Twenty thousand people at least were herein
killed, burned, and smothered: six thousand being observed to be drowned in the
River Elve. Tilly, Wallons, and Crabats never use to give quarter, or beg any:
So that all were killed. 2. days after Tilly came into the Town, and finding
some hundreds of women and children in the Church, he gives them their lives,
and some bread to maintain them. How inhumane a devastation of this so ancient
and goodly Hanse Town, the County of Tilly, and Pappenheim had then made, no
Pen can express it. The cruelty of which fury, no man can discover one half
to the world, that agoodly City should be reduced to such ruins: as if
Hannibal had done it, and not Tilly; Hannibal who had the art by fire and
vinegar, to moulder away, the Rocks and Mountains into crumbles; for the
forcing of his own passage.

The 18. and 19 of June, Anno 1631. at Asherleben in the lower Saxony, toward
evening a terrible prodigy was seen, and observed in the Heaven. Two strong
Armies met together, ^ Strang-Armies met in the Air, one out of the South, the
other out of the North.
and prepared themselves to a pitched Battle. One came forth out of the South,
and the other marching up out of the North. After a long fight the Northern
Army obtained the victory from the other. This Prodigy was seen the said two
days for the space of an hour in the clear heaven. After the Battle was
ended, a Man in a long coat appeared two several times, bearing a bow,
shooting and prostrating the leader or commander of the Southern Army. Betwixt
this Town Aschertlben, and Tangermund, in the month following, July the 8.
happened a sharp conflict betwixt the Swedes and Imperialists, Pappenheim then
Commander of 4. Regiments of Crabats, and others, and the expulsed Garrisons
thereabouts being sent by Tilly to hinder the King of Swedens proceedings in
those places. The Rhinegrave therefore with some Swedish Forces being there
abroad, Pappenheim falls upon on them; of whose approach the King having
intelligence with all the horse he could make, and some 2000. Musketeers came
time enough to make one in the Battle. Pappenheims Foot were almost all cut
off, most of the horse ran away. Himself escaped first into Asherleben* from
whence he hasted toward Magdenburg, there to expect his master the General
Tilly. It was said that some 20. Companies of the Imperialists were here
defeated, and some 14. Ensigns taken. Tilly being come back unto Wolmerstad,
few leagues from As^herleben, upon the 16. or 17. of July, he first of all
dispatches away 4. Regiments of Horse for his vant Curriers, to stay the King
whilst himself with his whole Army might come up to him and to tempt the King
to a pitched Battle in the Field. These gallant troops, most of them old
Soldiers, were Pappenheims men, and very forward therefore now to revenge
their follows, marching toward the Kings leaguer, and took up their quarters
about Tanger. The Swedish charging presently tumbles down a many of the
Imperial Curassiers; Colonel Bernstin, who was their leader, himself being
slain, thus were 1500. slain, all the 4. Regiments defeated. This defeat was
given, Tilly himself being in the sight of it. Tilly resolving now upon a
revenge, July, 21. forwards he sets toward the King brought some 26000. men
along with him, and all these full of anger, resolution and desire of revenge;
3. several times assaults the King in his trenches, but was beaten off, and
with such a tempest of shot, chaine-shot, murdering shot, and what ever was
cruellest to do execution, showred in amongst the Imperialists out of the
Kings camp, that there was made a miserable butchery. Tilly at length retired
from the King, leaving five hundred starved horses behind him. Some report him
to have lost 6000. or, 7000. men: perchance in all these 3. great defeates of
P^ppen^eims, Bernsteins and his own. Upon the fatal seventh of September,
this 1631. year in the bloody Battle of Leipsig, General Tilly himself was
twice or thrice wounded with Pistall-shot, and his whole Army slain, and
rowted, as is already mentioned. Upon the place of Battle which the enemy had
left for the King of Sweden, there sat a ^locke of Birds; which being sprung
by the Kings coming, took their fight directly over Tillies Army; and
fetching there a circle about (and that also the Romans would have accounted
an happy presage) they turned again toward the Kings Army: as who should say,
we went to fetch you victory. But the King had a better presage on his side
then a slight of Birds, God with us, which was the watchword; and that which
the Roman General sometimes preferred before the Birds: Romano milite dignus,
Ensis adest augur; his valor namely, and his sword. General Tilly, Anno 1632.
received also another, but more mortal shot of a Musket in the thigh, a little
above the knee, in the conflict at Lech betwixt him and the King, whereof he
afterward April, the 20. dyed within the Town of Ingolstad, after the taking
of 4. splinters out of his thigh*

Few years before the long, cruel and bloody Battle was fought at Lutzen,
the water in the Town ditch of Lutzen, was turned to blood, which prodigy was
fullfilled upon the 6. of November* Anno 1632. wherein the bloody encounter in
continual exercise lasted from 9. in the morning until night; in which the
Swedes did overthrow the whole Imperial Army with slaughter of 9000. men upon
the place: many a ^rave man dyed of the anguish of his wounds miserably; who
might otherwise have been cured. The King of Swedens Majesty himself, (as was
said) out of the greatness and heat^ of his courage, having made a charge upon
the Imper^all curassiers, was there over-laid with a number of men, and did
receive a shot in the left arm, which* he scarce feeling at first, would needs
have led on still. But perceiving by and by his royal blood to gush out
abundantly, in his retreat was shot through the body. Whose death indeed is
never enough to be lamented, and so this dying Conqueror did seal the
Religion, and liberty of the Germans Nations with his blood; and to whom the
more ingenuous Imperialists at Prague, were heard to give this honorable
Testimony, that he was the bravest enemy, and the best Captain, that ever was
in Christendom. And so the Swedes, and protestants Army found themselves to
have gotten ^ut a doleful and a woeful victory; losn^g that incomparable
Conqueror who was, alone, worth 2. Armies. But he is dead; and that as
heartily bemoaned of the Germans (to speak of him no more) as of his own
subjects, who yet profess their loss to be unspeakeable. And in both their
Chronicles shall his Sacred memory be made famous, and his Name shall live in
their mouths, and be honored. About the death of this glorious King of Sweden,
some singular, and miraculous Prodigies happening also, had affrighted the
people in Swedland: amongst others, in the self same hours and times, when
this Battle of Lutzen was fought appeared just over the Castle, and Royal
Seat of Stockholm A Virgin with a Candle, and Hand^ercher.
a Virgin or Damsel at night, holding in one hand a burning Candle, in the
other a white Handkercher, which she cast about. Besides it was noted and
observed, that all the doors in Castle, although they were shut and locked,
three several times did open themselves. A River not of small account in
Swedland, lost the same time his water, insomuch that all the day long a man
might go through with a dry foot. In Smaland a Province of that Kingdom, the
Bells without help of man began to sound, with great dishartning and terror of
the Inhabitants.

At Bushein a village betwixt the Towns of Frawenstein, and Fribery, in the
dominion of the Sheter of Saxony happened a strange Prodigic in the beginning
of April, Anno 1623. where first A double ^ai^e-bow, one white, the other black.
in the Ayrc was seen a sign of a twofold Rainbow, the one white as Snow,
the other exceeding black: besides this another sign appeared of a fiery
color. The next day from eleven till two of the clock in the afternoon,
another aspect of a high white color reappeared. Besides all this, at
Frawenstein a woman having bought some Loaves of Bread, and turning homewards
to her dwelling place, as she was dividing the Bread, blood came thereout.
Blood running out of a loaf of Bread.
This Frawenstein, being a pretty Town upon a Hill some 16. English miles to
the South of Dresden, was taken by the Imperialists by a bloody assault, the 3.
Of October following, in the same year 1632. For finding some opposition, the
Imperialists do carry the Town by Scaladoe, and put all both Soldiers and
Inhabitants most miserably to the Sword for it. October the 4. they assault
Friberg, a handsome Town upon the River Mulda, some 10. English miles to the
West of Frawenstein. The Town also was hard laid at by the Imperialists, being
no way able to hold out a general assault, which was the next day threatened
them, and a general destruction withal, if they yielded not; which the 5.
October was done. Near this Friberg, Holcks men, who was then chief Commander
of those Imperial Forces, taking, (I know not what) high displeasure at a
certain Minister of the Country (a man of rare learning) first of all hewed
him miserably in pieces with their swords, and then sung him to their Dogs to
be eaten. But the Dogs, as astonished at such savage cruelty (o stand, and
wonder) would not so much as touch, or lick a drop more of his blood.
VVhereupon his friends the next Homo (...) ^u^u^
day gathered up his pieces, and interred them. And lest this should seem
incredible, the Author of Le soldat Su^dois avowes, that the Crabats Men
metamorp osed into Vipers.
showed themselves ingenious to invent new torments for the poor Inhabitants:
and that it was frequent with them for want of Dogs-meate, to feed their
Curres with humane flesh. This if it may be true, though the Dogs were the
Man-eaters, yet the Crabats surely were the Cannibals.

At Kempten in Swabeland, a strange Prodigy, A strange Abortive
and abortive was borne of a Citizens wife in the month of August, Anno 1632.
his head was altogether fat, and without ears; the hands stretched out all
bloody twixt the flesh and skin, whose left hand held a rope, the belly thereof
having too pricked wounds, and the left knee twice broken, a cord being about
it.

This goodly Town was held by the Imperial Commander Bray, and being strongly
besieged, and many times furiously assaulted by the Swedes, at the end of six
days it was surrendered upon composition in the month of May, in the year
1633. The Commander went to Reitaw, where he was beheaded, because he so
slightly surrendered the said Town. The 18. of March, Anno 1634. was this Town
of Kempten the second time taken by Gustavus Horn by assault; and whereas the
Imperial Colonel with his Carrison had retired themselves into the Castle,
both place and men were enforced the next day to yield upon hard conditions.
Many bloody ^^^irmi^es are fallen out about this Town, where the Imperialists
were often times beaten to the very gates of Kempten. What misery the years
following this Town felt, and the Country thereabouts, when it was besieged
and taken by the Imperialists again, cannot well be expressed. It was brought
to such extremity of famine, not much inferior to that of Samaria, and
Jerusalem, recorded in holy Scripture, or Saguntus in Spain, and Perusium in
Hetruria, or Tuscany a Province in Italy, mentioned by profane Histories; many
brave Citizens out of, this and the neighbor Towns were compelled by
necessity to bear Arms, thereby to get their livelihood. Horseflesh was
sold for high prises, Dogs, Cats, and Vermin, were as good as Venison: all
commerce being cut off, Bread-Come was not only at an excessive rate, not to
be purchased with money: so that the spruce Citizens, which formerly held the
Country people as Boores and Clownes unfit for their society, might well
discern that their labors were not to be despised, their dead wares standing
in no parallel of Use with the Fruit of the Field, gotten by the industry of
the rough handed Plowman, and the blessing of God.

In the month of February. Anno 1633. at Dobenshutz, a Village in the
territory of Althenburg Blood springing out of a fish*pond.
in a fish pond sprang forth blood which caused an exceeding ill stink, so
that if passengers had touched it, they could not wash off the stink in 3.
days. This Country indeed has been this year and the others following
lamentably ruined and plunged: the Soldiers licentiousness, God punis^^^th
f^thy thy beastly ans with stenches, and ^^thy ^^vots.
exercising their wonted cruelty and beastly ravishing, has been unheard of.
Many fair Towns were forced, spoiled, and burnt to ashes for resisting, and
diverse of the Villages, as well as the foresaid Dobenschutz, put on fire, and
the Inhabitants thereof most miserably Friday and (...) ^^^cleann^sse.
slaughtered. Here were the women, yea, Ladies, Gentlewomen, and others like
beasts and dogs yoaked, and coupled together, to be sent into the Woods and
ravished: who for resisting had their clothes stripped off, their bodies whipped,
their ears cut off, and so sent home again. Hereabout gat the Soldiers and
Crabats together some thousands heads of Cattle, and Savage ^^^city.
what beast soever could not, or did not readily follow them, they either
houghed or killed; lest (as they said) it should serve some heretics. The rest
I omit, not so much for Frevities sake, as for horror: not listing to relate
the Barbarismes, and sheddings of blood committed by the Crabats as if they had
fallen in not to make wars, but desolations; or as if they had believed, that
a Country was never thoroughly conquered, till it were utterly by sword and fare
destroyed.

Gustavus Horn, Swedish field-Marshall, with the Rhinegrave, and a Landgrave of
Hessen, being come to Bibrach the 6. of March, Anno 1633. a portentuous
Prodigy appeared about 8. clock in the evening right over the Town; two long
Swords were seen in the Air, the one fiety, the other red as blood. Many hard
e^counters fell out about this time, and about this place, betwixt the Swedes
and Imperialists. Horns people were supposed to have killed 600. Crabats in a
few days, near and about this Town of Bibrach: and so many of Duke de Ferias
men, who had a new Army of Spanish and Italians brought to aid the
Imperialists, dyed by the way, by frost, sword and famine, that betwixt Vlm,
and Bibrach were found 1000. dead carcasses. And so the Catholic Generals
were then glad to make toward Bavaria, having scarce brought away the third
part of their Army; Spanish, Jtalians, Germans, and Burgundians. This Town of
Bibrach, not long after Gustavus Horns departing, was retaken by the
Imperialists by assault: the Garrison laying down both Arms and Ensigns, to
have their bare lives saved. Some months after four Regiments of the
Imperialists, betwixt this Town and Isne, were surprised and ruinated by the
Swedes, which invaded their quarters, took a Colonel with many Officers
prisoners, putting a great many to the sword: 600. other Imperialists having
been abroad, were also overtaken and killed the most of them.

In the month of March, Anno. 1634. Gustavus Horn besieged the City of Bibrach
again, in the which lay 1300. men, offering upon his first approaches a fair
agreement, which the Imperial Governor of the Town refused: then planting
his Ordnance, he battered the Town so long, till he won the enemies works,
and made a breach into the walls. Then the Governor sending a Trumpet out of
the Town, desired reasonable conditions; else that he would defend the Town
to the last man; And that first of all he would burn and blow up all the
Protestant Citizens, which he had already locked up into the Towne-house, and
into a cellar. This being refused, for that he had already denied first good
offers. After all this, when as all things were ready for the assault, and the
Swedish troops advanced toward the breach, the Evangelicall Ministers
together with diverse women came foort^ of the Town making a most pitiful cry
and entreaty to the Swedish General, signifying it would cost all their lives,
for that the Townhouse was already undermined, and the Mine filled with
powder, and that they certainly expected to be blown up immediately. Out of
commiseration therefore to those poor people was offered another agreement
unto the Governor, and granted them liberty to march out with their swords
only: which was accepted.

At Dresden June, the 23. Anno 1634. happened another Prodigy; where toward
evening at five of the clock, the Sun was first seen as white as Snow, and
then suddenly becoming dark, as if a mist went over it: It appeared first
in form of a Crown, and then like a Feather; red as blood, in which postures
when it had continued by the space of half an hour, it returned to his
orbicular shape, but retained the sanguine hew till it went down, and the Moon
at her rising, retained the same bloody aspect till she was not to be seen in
that Horison. I know not whatsoever the Physiologers babble of natural causes,
yet such alteration in the Heavenly and Ayry bodies is always prodigious.

Memorable was that observation of the ancient Astrologians to this purpose.
Speaking of the fearful blazing Star seen 1618. that it did presage -- 1.
Violenta et superba Consilia, dissidi^, proditiones et rebelliones.

2 Latrocinia, et subsessiones viarum, solicitudinem Auxietatemque Animorum.

3 Regum et Principum interitum, bella, pestem, et morbos varios.

4 Religionis legum, et institutorum mutationem, novarum rerum inexplebilem
cupiditatem.

I shall not dispute of the effects but expect them: a Luxuriant wit may
happily play on either side, and presage probably good or evil to either
party. I dare not meddle here; my wish is -- Deus omen in hosts Convertat --
and my prayer shall still be: Power out thine indignation, O Lord, upon the
Heathen, and thy wrath upon them which have not called upon thy name.

Blood and Brimstone from Heaven.
About the middle of June, Anno 1634. at Berlin in the marquisdom of Brandenburg
it rayned Blood, and Brimstone. The next year following in the month of
November, before the gate of Itzeho, a Town in Holstein it rayned thick blood;
whose drops instead of inck have represented right natural Blood in writing.
How many bloody conflicts and encounters the same year and the next following
happened betwixt these two Countries, no man can fully apprehend or believe,
unless such as have seen it with their eyes. And to avoid all other bloody
passages, whichhave raged most cruelly in those parts, yet still in remembrance
is the last bloody and sore Battle, which was fought in the month of October,
Anno 1636. at Witstock, in which were slain 7000. of common Soldiers upon the
place, on the Saxon and Imperial side, and many others more, which fell by the
sword of the Swedes in the prosecution. 6. whole Regiments being totally
ruinated, besides those great Commanders who lost their lives also, namely the
two General Majors, Wilsdorp, and Goliz, 5. Colonels, besides Rittmasters,
Captains, and diverse Officers both of Horse and Foot 1500. prisoners taken,
amongst which were 170. Officers, 143. Cornets and Ensigns, 14. pieces of
Ordnance, and 8000. Wagons were lest to the Swedish conquerours. Of the Swedes
were also slain upon the place of Battle 1000. and upwards; amongst which
there were of account two Colonels, 4. Lieutenant Colonels, and sundry
Ritmasters, Captains, and under officers.

At M^lnick where the Randevouz of the Saxon Army was, in time of prayer, July
the 24. Anno 1634. was a strange apparition in the Air, which is thus
delivered by Letters bearing date the same day -- That about evening, when our
Electors Chaplain was at prayers, there appeared a sign in the Sky, like a
fiery Beam: when he had finished his course, and the Lieutenant General
Arnheim his Chaplain Scepter seen red, and fiery.
did his Office, there appeared another in a form of a Scepter fiery-red, just
over the house where he made his sermon, as soon as prayers were done, and the
Chaplain had spoken Amen, the sign vanished: It was seen of many after this.
The Crabats, like Vermin in a Warren, worse then Bandetties, have ransacked,
plundered, and pillaged what places soever they came unto, in these Countries,
this year, and the other following: they spared neither Noblemens Houses,
Churches, nor Cloisters, but robbed, and dismembered the Country people,
ravished the women, defloured the maids, burnt the Villages, and Towns, and
did such mischievous insolences, as those Rhodopes, and Dolopes would have
started at.

Man and beast, and Fowls of the Air, all seemed now to be at an
irreconciliable difference, and Germany must be the stage whereupon they played
their prizes: at Hessen, in the month of March, Anno 1635. there met together
2 Armies of Birds fighting
two Armies of strange Birds, which fought, as it were, in a set Battle: and
near Straubinge, upon the Danubie multitudes of Dogs had their randevouze,
which fought so eagerly, that the whole vicinage was not only affrighted by
the Prodigy, but, as if they would not admit of any agreement, but such as
themselves liked of, when the Governor of Ratisbone had sent out against them
4. companies of his Garrison, with Muskets and other Military instruments to
assault and slaye them, they left their hostility, a strange Enemy coming upon
them, set upon the Soldiers, and in despite of their shot and weapons devoured
nine men.

Multitudes of Strange dogs fought so Eagerly and slew each other that the
Gouerner of Ratisbone sent 4 Companies of Muskets against them and 9. of the
men were slain by the dogs

The Conduit at Isenach rane blood for 2 hours together 1637



Strange Prodigies terrifying the hearts of the people, while the Princes and
peers were in their jollitie in the Diet at Ratisbone: Mars, and Saturn
reigned abroad, and war with his grim attendants, Famine, Pestilence, Fire,
and destruction also raging abroad in the Roman Empire. What might happen by
the fault of a careless or unskilful Mason, not well bedding or cementing the
stones, at the building of a new Steeple at Vienna, was by the construction of
the vulgar sort counted ominous. The spire of Shotten lately built fell down
suddenly the 19. of December, Anno 1636. about the time of the Coronation of
the new King of Romans at Ratisbone, and demolished the new builded Church:
and that was made portentous, the rather, being accompained with another of the
same time at Rome; where a great blazing Star, called by the Naturalists
Cometa Crinitus, appeared for a space, and then vanished away suddenly over S.
Paul's Church with a noise: and diverse Monuments, placed in the Church, fell
down, and were defaced utterly. Now it would relish of over much boldness to
peep into the Arc of the Divine Secrets, nor can we conclude any particular
consequences to have been portended by the accidentary fall of the aforesaid
new Steeple at Vienna; yet doubtless the comet, though caused by the meeting
of secundary and natural causes, was the significator of what ensued about
that time, and not long after. Within the space of a month the Emperor
Ferdinand the second, who had long been sickly at Ratisbone, and then removed
to Vienna, exhaled his last spirit, February the 5. Anno 1637. betwixt 8. and
9. of the clock in the morning, to the great grief of the Court and City,
which had prepared triumphs and tournaments, and in much braverie determined to
receive the new King of Romans: but by this occasion laid aside their
gallantrie, put on the face of sorrow, and by their dejected looks and
mourning apparel, showed their anxietic for his loss, who so long had steered
the ship of State to their content, and was then taken from them, when the
tottering Empire freshly assaulted and ransackt by strangers, required such a
Nestor, as by sage directions grounded upon mature deliberations might preserve
it from fear of utter ruin.

Some prodigies happening in sundry places of the Roman Empire before the
meeting of the Princes in the electorall diet at Ratisbone, did dis-hearten the
common people, and made them despair of any good issue by that treaty. One was
at Wels in Austria, the sudden uncovering of the Emperors house of pleasure,
where he was lodged, (by a violent tempest, and this was accompa^ned with two
others at Lintz, the first whereof, was the sudden fall of an Arch of the
Bridge made over the Danuby, which the Emporour had no sooner passed over, but
it tumbled into the River: the other this; Three carved Eagles, placed upon the
house of a Burgess of Lintz, being broken down, by the fury of the Tempest,
were mounted by the same violent blast into the Air, shattered there sundry
ways, and the one in the end fell upon the house appointed for the assembly of
the Province, the other upon the State-house, and the third upon a public
Aqueduct. Anno 1636. Distracted wits upon every light occasion, project
terrible things: These conceits were fond, and superstitious, not rational,
and sound. The harsh beginning of the Diet, and the first session was more to
be feared, as a fatal Prognosticke of no happy conclusion, then those
antecedent accidents.

A bloody time was in the Electorate of Saxony, and a general fear was
conceived by the adjoining Princes, that the fury of war would not be
confined there: the hearts of the people were terrified by a strange Prodigy,
which though it admits no particular interpretation, was as terrible as
portentous. A conduit running Blood
The conduit at Isenach Anno 1637. situated in the midst of the Marketsted,
suddenly instead of water poured out blood, and so continued for the space of
two hours, before it yielded again that Element, for which that aqueduct was
ordained. A bloody time ensued it betwixt the Imperial Generals and Banniers
^orces: where few days passed Without shedding of blood in those parts about
the same time. And the miserable condition of that Dukedom of Saxony, and the
detriments and most total ruin thereof, can not be delivered without an
accent of grief: which desolation was made, not only by the Swedes the
enemies, but also by the seeming friends the Caesarians, who spared not to
burn those places to the ground, where they find not as much provision, as
they demand for their Armies: and the several Conflicts betwixt the Swedish
and Saxonian Armies, were not without the effusion of much Christian blood, but
the blood so shed was not taken away by way of murder, (War justly grounded,
is continued lawfully; the Sword is often a just decider of controversies, and
though it be accounted one of the great Plagues sent by GOD, it is not
attended with any injustice in the execution) black murders and horrid
treasons hatched in darkness, what ever the pretense thereof may be, are not
only unexcusable, but detestable also to GOD, and man.

Peace, the benefits whereof have not for many late years been sensibly
discovered to the Germans, was now, and especially in this Country of Saxony,
the general desire of the people: the Boores, which lived by tillage, and
feeding of Cattle, hoped that these years the Swords would be turned into
Plow-shares, and the Pikes into shepherds Crooks; the Merchants, whose free
traffic was stops by these Military broils, began to feel poverty, coming
upon them, more then the armed men against their enemies, and longed for an
open trade, and several persons, according to our humane condition, qui facile
credsmus, quod volumus, upon each slight occasion, gave out, that a truce for
time of years, if not a certain and firm peace, would be concluded betwixt
the Crown of Sweden and its Allies, and the King of Hungary, and his
adherents. But the misery of that Country was not yet come to the height: the
Elector himself lost almost his whole Country: Moissen the chiefest City of
Mionia, Eulemberg, Grim, Borne, Debitz, Bitterfeld, Belgeren and Hall, yielding
instantly to the Swedish Conquerours; having no hope of relief by any
Confederate Army; only Dresden of all the umbilicall Cities of Saxony, did
hold still out, yet not without fear of being made the spoil of strangers,
the Imperial Armies being so far from their succors, that their march, and
places of reft, were unknowen to the Citizens.

The Swede was by this ^ucce^^e grown terrible to the Commons of the Empire*
some accounted him as an authorized executioner of divine justice, upon the
Saxon, whose juggling dealing had brought this misery and desolation upon his
Dukedom.

A woman at vienna appeared Crying Nothing but woe unto you woe unto you



A strange Worm in the shape of a man.
Anno 1637. the water at Weimar again turned to blood. A strange Worm in the
shape of a man, with perfect Lineaments, and a golden Crown upon his head, was
found in a sallad at an Herbwomans shop at Coblentz, and which (if not
prestigious) was most terrible, A woman appeared in a mourning habit, in
Stephens the Cathedral Churchyard at Vienna, June the 18. 1637. which, with
an accent of sorrow, from 11. to 12. at night yelled out woe unto you, woe unto
you; often repeating those words, and nothing else: the Bells without help of
man rung suddenly, to the great affrightment of the people, who descanted upon
the Omen, doubting such horrid consequences would ensue it, as presented
themselves to their sevetall fancies. A new time of trouble began then, fire
and sword raging in the most and best part of Germany, not only casually, but
by the arbitrament and will of such as used that devouring element, to the
damage of those with whom they were at enmity.

FINIS.

