A REVELATION OF THE APOCALYPSE, that is, THE APOCALYPSE OF S. JOHN illustrated
with an Analysis and Scolions: Where the sense is opened by the scripture, and
the events of things foretold, showed by Histories.

Hereunto is prefixed a general View: and at the end of the 17. Chapter, is
inserted a Refutation of R. Bellarmine touching Antichrist, in his 3. Book of
the B. of Rome.

BY THOMAS BRIGHTMAN.

Blessed he that does read, and blessed are those which do hear the words
of this Prophecy, and which keep the things that are written therein. Iren. 4.
Book chap. 43. All Prophecy before it have his efficacy, be reiddles and
ambiguitye unto men: But when the time is come, and that, that which is
prophesied is come to pass, then have the Prophecyes a clear and certain
exposition.

AMSTERDAM Printed by Iudocus Hondius and Hendrick Laurenss. Anno 1611.

To the holy reformed Churches of Britanny, Germany, and France, grace and
peace from God our father, and from Jesus Christ our Lord.
Think it not strange, o most holy spouse of Christ, that a new
interpretation of the Apocalypse is presented unto thee: considering that among
so many both of old and late writers, it is the judgment of all, that the
Revelation, needs still another Revelation: and that these words be
continually sounding in thine ears, The Lord has spoken, who shall not
prophecy? For the Lord has not only spoken of old by dreams and visions, but
also he speaks daily, so often as he vouchsafes to illuminate the minds of
his servaunts, for to manifest the hidden truth of his word, and to expose the
same openly. And with who^soever God does thus communicate, he thincketh that
necessity is laid upon him, for to manifest unto others, that which himself
has received. And in deed, should the candel be lightened for to be putt under
a bushel? should the common danger of all, be privily declared for the benefitt
of one only? Is it not rather for this, that being put in the watch tower, he
must give warning to the rest, for to avoid with all speed the present danger?
The Lepers knew this well, and they could say, that if they had kept the
joyful tidings until the day light, evel should have come upon them. But
what and if any should conceal the eminent danger, of what punishment should
he be guilty? Verily of so much the more greater as the difference is between
one altogether lost, and one that is deprived of joy but for a few hours. And
therefore having learned from this Apocalypse, that shortly a great tentation
shall invade all Christendom, in so much as the sword of the Lord shall be
made droncken in heaven, and all the host of them shall be overthrown, and
that you, the Christian Churches of Germany, France, and Britanny, are by name
favorably admonished of this tempest by written Epistles: I finding by the will
of God these Epistles which do show this thing, and understanding by the
inscriptions, to whom they were written, I durst not otherwise do, but to
render them, to whom they belong: least by the intercepting and keeping of them
secret by me, I should both betraye your welfare, and be condemned as guilty of
treason against God. There is no godly man but he sees, that the Divine
worship despised, the most holy word of God derided, the great securitye and
pride of the Pastors, and the altogether corrupt and dissolute manners of all,
of whas order and condition soever they be, do foretell of some horrible
calamitye shortly to come. Now these Epistles do not foretell the thing by
ambiguous co^jecture, but by most plain words do teach a goulf full of
miseries to be at hand and ready to invade us. Thou spouse, see, I pray thee,
the seal, know the hand, the words, the style of the writter,; thou know
well the voice of the Bridgroome: if the letters be sent unto thee by him, as
they do show, it is more then time to cast off those defylements, which thou
have drawn to thy self, by a to much and to long securitye, least otherwise if
thou continue to be negligent unto this thing, thou may at the last be
suddenly purged with great sorrow by the fire of the refyner. Notwithstanding
least thou should thinck that I bring only such great sorrow and morning,
behold also a great joye and a great triomphe. For after this tempest shall
presently follow joyful days, and greatly to be desired; for what can be
more pleasant unto the chaste spouse, driven out by the Romish whore (who
vauntes her self to be the true vvyffe) and by the same vexed so many aages by
all manner of contumelies and in juries, then to see finally that impudent
harlott, her nose slit, spoiled of her clothing and ornaments, defiled with
dung and adle eggs; and finally butnt and consumed by fire? Lift up thine
ears a little and receave of this Prophecy, not some obscure signs, but most
certain arguments of the Bridgroomes short coming to avenge thy grief, and
deliver into thine hands the whore, that thou may pour out upon her all
the heat of jelousie. And for the increase of thy joy, receave vvithall the
last destruction of the Turcks, soon follovving the destruction of Rome, for
this must first be abolished, the fevvell only and matter of the barbarous
tyranny of them, the sinevves of which shall altogether be disolved and cut
off, after that Christendom shall be purged by an exceeding great destruction
of her, of her heinous vvickednesses, as the Apocalypse plainly shows. And
that thy joy may be full, know also the uniting together of the Jews with
the Christian nations: and so unto the end a most happy tranquillity. Things
indeed very great, and greatly to be admyred, part vvherof has already bin
manifested in some sort to the Christian Church, in so much as was fitting
those times, yet far from the end of the Prophecy, unto which approaching, is
reserved a more full knowledge: the other part is so strange and so
unexpected, as I could not ever find in any, not so much as a probable
suspicio^ of it out of this Apocalypse. All which effects notvvithstanding,
will yeilde unto us this new centurie of times which now we enter into, as
our exposition, if I be not deceaved, does make plain. For now is begun the
last act of a most long and most dolfull Tragedy, which shall overflovv
with scourges, deaths, ruins: But this Scene being removed, shall come in the
place of it the pleasant prospect of a perpetual peace, accompanied with
abondance of all good things. Thus then thou have, most dear Spouse of Christ,
the residue of the course of thy vvarrfarre, stand now in the hatches, and
after long tossing, at lenght behold the Iand; hitherto the cloud seen a
far of has deceaved thee, but now behold the sea shore, and know the
mouth of the haven it self. Let thy eyes judge, whether I be vvorthie, to
vvho^ the revvard of good nevves be give^. For so far of is it, that I think
that we must stand to the judgment of Rome alone, as I hope I will convince
by necessary arguments, that she is altogether by Gods just judgment bereft
of her lights; vvherby at length she shall suddenly rush into eternal
destruction

Therefore let her mind and judge these things as she pleases, she shall
know shortly, what it is, by her enchantments, to deceave her self and
others. Thou in the mean while, o natural Spouse, be mindful of the tempest
at hand, and prepare thy self for it; hale in the shoot, be careful of the
helm, look to plie the pu^pe; least in the entrance of the haven, which God
forbid, thou make shipvvrake. And now see how very acceptable this
Revelation ought to be to thee, not only for the future events of very great
moment indeed, but also in regard of the memory past: to which if thou
shall turn thine eyes, thou shall see even from the Apostles times, that, that
continual path, in which thou have set thy foot steps, has been marked
out with so plain paternes, as thou need desire no plainer history; and also
thou shall enjoie a most pleasant remembrance of the dangers which thou have
fuffred, which yeilde unto thee so many arguments of the in co^prehe^sible
providence, wisdom, love, truth of God, keeping thee safe amidst great
distresses. Surely this addition with the rest of the Apostolical vvritings
adjoined to the old Testament, ministers Histories of the world it self from
the first beginning unto the latter end thereof: for which cause this
unestimable treasure ought to be to every one most dear. And these are the
causes concerning you, o Christian Churches, of my public vvriting: There are
also some causes that concern the Prelacie, namely, mercy and wrath: mercy
because I savv many ignorant rude and unskilful in the heavenly truth, as yet
to worship Antichrist as a God. Those were to be taken out of the javves of
hell, if so it should please God. For which thing I will go before to shine
unto them with so great plainenes of truth, that they shall necessarily see,
so that they will open their eyes, that, that Prelate of Rome is that man of
sin, to whom if they persevere to cleave, they cannot be saved. Truly my
indignation is kindled against the Jesuits: For when by hap I fell on
Ribera interpreting this same holy Revelation: Do, said I, the Papists again
take courage, that that book which of late they permitted scarce any man to
touch, they should now undertake the full handling thereof? Was it a vain
show at the sight whereof, yea in dim light, a fevv years ago they
trembled, that now they boldly endure to look in to the same glass, and
cry out that some other thing is shevved in it then their Pope? O we drovvsy
men and sluggards if we suffer it! Therefore I thought that their croaking is
in some sort to be restrained, esteeming that it would be worth the labor, to
show to the Jesuits, how wickedly they are mad, how foolishly they trifle,
how they understand none of these Mysteries, how it cannot be, that here they
should be any thing weise; that if they desire the truth, as they make a show,
at least weise they may have me a helper to search it out; or if otherweise
they do yet despise it being offered, an aprouver of their condemnation. But if
they will not be silent, for I know that for a short time they shall fill
heaven and earth with their noise; yet I hope to have given that force of
light, whereby they being hereafter bereft of all show of reasons, they shall
vomit forth no other thing, then their mere blasphemies against God and men.
Thou holy mother, by what kindness and clemency thou art toward thine, pardon,
I beseech thee my slendernes, where I shall have slipped; chiefly respect not,
nor regard the rudenes of my style; the scope of us both is the truth only;
let me stemmer unto thee, mother, after what manner soever; I bring unto thee
Mandrakes such as I could find; as for the curious, who do regard words
more then the truth, there are no herbs in our basket for them; unless this,
that if they be diseased with the drowsy sickness of too much elegancie, they
may fetch hence, if they please, (...), the perfume of bitume^ or earth pitch,
and the herb called Goats beard, Strab. book 16. whereby, as the Sabeans, they
may shake off their drousy disease, and awaken their dull senses.

I pray God, that you Christian Churches, by understanding may profit in
godliness, and by true and earnest repentance, may either quite remove away the
evil hanging over you, or be so armed with his might, that in all storms you
may stand invincible.

A Citizen and Nourrisson of yours most unworthy: THOMAS BRIGHTMAN.

A VIEW OF THE WHOLE APOCALYPSE.
The particular Prophesy
Chap. 1.1 THE Preface shows the argument of the book: 4. The Epistle sent in
common to the 7. Churches, after the inscription does tell who has give^ the
Prophecy, who has received it; the things heard; by which it confirms the
authority of it. Chap. 2. The Epistles ar give^ severally. The first
co^prehe^deth the languishing disease of the Ephesians: 8. The Smyrneans are
confirmed against the strength of the enemy: 12. They of Pergamus ar
reprehended for permitting Balaam and the Nicolaitans: 18. They of Thyatira ar
reprooved of sin for suffering Iezabell. Chap. 3. The Sardians ar charged of
hypocrisy: 7. The piety of Philadelphia is co^me^ded: 14. The lukewarmnes and
boasting of the Laodiceans is with weighty words reprehended. The common
Prophesy
Chap. 4. The common Prophecy propou^deth the general type of the holy Church,
notable for her center, God, ver. 2.3. for the co^passing about of the
faithful ver. 4. for Gods protection ver. 5. for gifts, doctrine, ordinances
ver. 5.6. ministers ver. 6.7.8. and finally for the whole public worship, ver.
9.10.11. Chap. 5. The first of the things which are spoken of in special, is the
dignity of the Prophecy, which is declared, first by the weakness of the
creature: 6. by the merit of the Lamb: 8. and the celebration of all. Chap.
6. The first special events ar the seals. 1. The first is opened and the
truth prevails under Trajan, Hadrian, and Antoninus Pius, at the voice of the
first living creature, of Quadratus, Aristides, and Justin Martyr: 3. at the
voice of the said Justin, Melito of Sardis, and Apollinaris, the second living
creature, the redd horse goes forth under Marcus Antoninus Verus, troubling
all with wars; 5. the third seal being opened, the third living creature
Tertullian cries out, under Severus the Emperor, when the black horse did
afflict the world with famine and scarcity. 7. The fourth seal is opened, and
the fourth living creature Cyprian speaks, Decius being then Emperor when
the pale horse wasted all with war, famine, pestilence, and wild beasts. 9.
The fifth seal is opened, and there is given some breathing from the public
persecution under Claudius Quintilius, The seals from John to Constantine.
Aurelianus and the rest, even to the 19. of Diocletian: 12. The sixth seal is
opened, and then rage Diocletian and Maximinian Hercule; who finally being
driven out of the Empire by the power of the Lamb, for fear of him the tyrants
fled and hid themselves. Chap. 7. The seventh seal first does yield a
general pattern of the whole following age: 1. There being contention, ambition,
heresy, they trouble all things with war: they are repressed by Constantine
the great, until he sealed up the elect, and provided for the faithful being
few and base, in that great calamity of the Church, which forthwith followed.
^. In which doleful time at length there should be more prosperity then in time
past, and a great felicity of the faithful. Chap. 8. Secondly, of the same
seventh seal there is silence in heaven, peace being obtained by Constantine:
2. the trumpets ar prepared, and constantine gathers the Nic. counsel to
cut off troubles, which thereby are mor increased: 6. The Angels blew, at whose
first blowing there arises the co^troversy of Consubstantiation: 8. At the
second, a burning mountain of ambition, is cast into the Sea, by the Decree
touching the Primacie and dignity of the Bishop: 10. At the third, a starr
falls from heaven; the Arrian heresy being defended by Constance and Valence:
12, At the fourth, the third part of the Sun is stricken, that is, the Church
of Afric by the Vandales. 13, The world is admonished of the near grievous
trumpets, following by Gregory the great.

Cap. 9 1 At the fifth blowing the bottomless pit is opened, and there come
forth swarms of locusts, of religious persons in the West, of Sarasens in the
East. 13. At the sixth, the Turks do invade the world punished for the Roman
Idolatry.

Chap. 10.1 At which time the Turks arise, the desire of the truth is kindled
in very many of the Vest; 9. By whose labor Prophecy is again restored to the
earth.

Chap. 11.1 Preaching being restored, thereis so^evvhat a more full knowledge
of the time past, namely, that the Church from the days of Constantine for a
thousand two hundred sixty years, was ^idden in the secret place of the
Temple, the Romans in the mean while boasting of the holy City and utmost
Court; 7. and in that in the end of those years the Roman Prelat would
prepare war against the Church, cut the throat of the Scriptures by h^s
Tridentine Counsel, and make the same mere carkases, and triumph over them
for the space of three years and an half, tred also under foot the Saints in
Germany by the power of Charles the fifth, which yet after three years and an
half revived by them of Magdeburg and Maurice, they stroke a very great fear
into the enemies, and they overthrew the third part of the Roman dominion: The
Trumpets from Constantine to the year 1558.
15 The seventh Angel blows, and about the year 1558, new kingdoms are
made for Christ, England, Ireland and Scotland, coming to the Gospel.

Chap. 12. The first part of the seventh Trumpet as yet brings a fuller
light of the time past, the Centuries of Magdeburg being raised up. The thing
is repeated and taught from the beginning, 1. That the first Church of the
Apostles, was most pure, but very much afflicted by the Dragon, the Roman
Heatnish Emperors, who endeavored with all their power least there should be
way opened to any Christian to the chief Empire. 5, That Constantine the
Great the manchilde of the Church at length was borne; at whose birth the
first purity flies into the Wilderness from the eyes of the world; that this
Constantine did cast the Dr^gon from Heaven, the Heathnish Emperors being
depulsed, least again they should once bear rule in the Church. 13. the
hostile power being taken away from the Dragon, he persecuted the Church
under Christ's name by Constance and Valence: 15. And endeavored to swalovv her
up flying away, by the overflovving of the Barbarians sent into the West. 17.
Which flood at length being dried up, raised up the war of the Saracens.

The first part of the seventh trumpet of things past.
Chapter 13.1 The Dragon being cast out of heaven by Constantine, establishes his
Vicar in the same place; which beast is the Romish Pope, such as he did rise
together with Constantine, made great by the Counsel of Nice: he vas vvounded
by the Goths possessing Italy: was cured by Justinian and Phocas, also
thereby made greater then ever before; 11. The second Beast is the same Roman
Pope, enlarged by Pipine and Charles the great, who gave to him as a new
birth, vvherby he became most wicked.

Chapter 14.1 For a thousand year from Constantine, the Church was together with
Christ hidden in most secret places, but she did nothing of great fame in the
world; 6. These thousand years being ended, Wickliff preached the Gospel to
the world: 8. John Husse and Hierome of Prage succeed, who threatened the
ruin of Rome: 9. After those follovveth Martin Luther, who very egerly
sets upon the Roman Prelate; 14. Afterward there is a harvest in Germany
by Frederike the Saxon, the other protestant Princes, and free Cities: 17. Also
a vintage in England by Thomas Cromwell and Th. Cra^mer.

The second part of the seventh trumpet concerning things to come.
Chap. 15. Hitherto of the first part of the seave^th trumpet of things past: 1
The preparation of things to come, is the seave^ Angels with their Viales; 2
The reformed Churches disagree between themselves, but all triumph for the
overthrow of the Pope of Rome: 5 The Temple is opened, and knowledge
increases, and the citizens of the Church are made ministers of the last
plagues, the end of which the new people of the Jews expects before they
come to the faith.

Chap. 16.1 The vials are povvred: the first by our most gracious Queen
Elizabeth and other Protestant Princes, vvherby the whole flock of Papists is
full of ulcero us e^vie. 3. The second viale by Martine Chemnin against the
Tridentine Council: vvherby the sea of the Popish Doctrine, by the Jesuits
the masters of the controversyes was made, as it were, the corrupt and filthy
blood of a wo^de. 4 The third by William Cecill against the Jesuits, which
are the welspringes of the popish doctrine; and so far are our times gone;
The rest of the viales are to come, but shortly to be povvred out: 8. The
fourth on the Sun, that is on the Scriptures, by whose light me^ shall be
tormented and shall boil in great anger and contentions; 10. The fifth on the
city of Rome, the throne of the Beast: 12. The sixth on Euphrates, vvherby a
way shall be prepared to the Eastern Jews, that after they shall have
embraced the faith of the Gospel, they may return into their own country:
when there shall be also a great preparation of war, both by the Turk
against these new Christians in the East, and also in the West by the Pope:
17. The seventh on the air, whereby the mystery shall be finished, the Turks
and the Popes names being rased out: and then also the Church shall be settled
in exceeding great felicity, as in the earth may be expected.

The viales from 1558, even to the end.
Chap. 17. The execution of the fifth viale on the throne of the beast, by which
it shall be manifested by some one of no great name, by most undeniable
arguments that Rome is the seat of Antichrist, and that she has bin made his
seat, from the time that the Heathenish Emperors were driven from thence.

Chap. 18. The second execution of the fifth viale is the last overthrow of the
city of Rome by three Angels; 1 descending from heaven, 4 the second exhorting
the Romans to flight, and describing both the mourning of the ungodly, and
also the joy of the godly, 21 The third confirming her eternal destruction by
casting a great millstone into the sea.

Chap. 19.1 There is d^scribed the joy of the saints for the perdition of Rome:
5 The sixth viale is opened, and the calling of the Jews is taught: 12 Likewise
a warlicke preparation, partly in respect of Christ the c^ptaine, and
soldiers, partly in respect of the enemies; 20 The seventh viale is declared
by the destruction of the false Prophet of the Roman Pope, of the Western
enemy and his ba^des.

Chap. 20.1 The whole history of the Dragon is repeated, as it was in the
Ge^tile Emperors before the imprisoneme^t: 2 How it was in prison, into which
he was cast by Constantine, and bound for a thousand years: An interpretation
of the three last viales.
in all which space the elect had a battle with the Romish Pope, which being
ended, there is made at last the first resurrection: many every where in the
west aspiring unto the more sincere truth: 7 Together with this resurrection
the Devil is loosed, and the^ arises the Turk with the Scithians, Gog with
Magog, which now destroying the greatest part of the earth, at length they
turn their weapons against the holy city, that is, the believing Jews, in
which warfare the name of the Turk shall utterly be abolished: 11 There is
made the second resurrection, by the second and full calling of the Jews.

Chap. 21.1 The last part of the seventh viale describes the felicity of the
Church, after the vanquishing of all enemies, by the new Jerusalem descending
from heaven, of a most glorious building.

Chap. 22.1 It is showed how this felicity both by meat and drink shall
redounde to others, and shall continue for ever: 6 The conclusion confirms
the whole Prophecy by many most strong arguments.

CHAP. 1. A REVELATION OF THE APOCALYPSE.
THE Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his
servants things which must shortly be done: which he sent, and showed by his
Angel unto his servant John.

2 Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and of all things that he saw.

3 Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein; for the time is at
hand.

4 John, to the seven Churches which are in Asia, Grace be with you, and peace
from him, which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven
Spirits, which are before his throne.

5 And from Jesus Christ, which is that faithful witness, and the first
begotten of the dead, and Prince of the Kings of the earth, unto him that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his blood.

6 And made us Kings and Priests unto God even his Father, to him be glory and
dominion for evermore, Amen.

7 Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him; yea, even they
which perced him through: and all kinreds of the earth shall wail before him,
even so, Amen.

8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which
is, and which was, and which is to come, even the Almighty.

9 I John, even your brother and companion in tribulation and in the Kingdom
and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the Isle called Patmos, for the word of
God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ.

10 And I was ravished in spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great
voice, as it had been of a trumpet.

11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and that which thou
see, write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches which are in Asia,
unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamus, and unto Thyatira, and unto
Sardi, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.

12 Then I turned back to see the voice that spoke with me, and when I was
turned, I saw seven golden Candlesticks.

13 And in the mids of the seven Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of man,
clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girded about the paps with a
golden girdle.

14 His head, and hairs were white as whitewooll, and as snow, and his eyes
were as a flame of fire.

15 And his feet like unto fine Brass, burning as in a furnace; and his voice
as the sound of many waters.

16 And he had in his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth went a
sharp two edged sword, and his face shone as the Sun shines in his strength.

17 And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead; then he laid his right
hand upon me, saying unto me, fear not; I am the first and the last;

18 And am alive, but I was dead: and behold I am alive for evermore, Ame^: and
I have the keys of hell and of death.

19 Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the
things which shall come hereafter.

20 The mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right hand, and
the seven golden candlesticks, is this, The seven stars, are the Angels of
the seven Churches: and the seven candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven
Churches.


The prayer.
I entering into a matter beyond the strength of man, pray thee, O Father of
lights together with thy Son the Chief Prophet, and the Holy Spirit, the
leader into truth, make plain to mortal men the way not as yet sufficiently
known. Our mind sees not, the things thar are before our feet: How little
or nothing perceives it high and hidden things? And how great danger is there
from hence, either of preasing rashly into thy secrets, or of passing by true
things, and faining things absurd and contrary? Nevertheless thou who have
made thy word a light to our feet: who call the most simple to the searching
out of thy hidden mysteries: and who do choose for the most part fisher men
before the wise of the world. Be thou, I say, present and help this my
slendernes: grant me a prosperous voyage between these dangerous Ylands: Cause
that I no where run upon the high rocks of pride, nor stick in the shalowe
of blind ignorance, but the next way by thy guidance arriving at the very
truth, I may holily and religiously reverence and maintain it being found out:
not conceal it through any shameful fearfulnes: corrupt it for any either
hatred or favor, but may bring it forth purely and syncerely into the view of
every man, to the glory of thy most great name, and consolation of thy Church
yet grievously mourning: grant this through our Lord Jesus Christ, Ame^

The Resolution.
THE Revelation after the Proheme is included whole in an Epistle. The Proheme
in the three first verses declares the Argument, Authors, both principal,
and also Ministers, and the Fruit. The Epistle is spent about an Inscription,
Prophetical narration, and conclusion. The Inscriptio^ is excellent for the
person of the wrighter, and of those to whom he writes, and of him especially
from whom salvation is wished, the eternal verity of which one God the Father,
the manifold grace of the Holy Spirit verse. 4. of the Son, as the triple
office verse. 5. so especially his very great benefit^ on the elect, both
present verse. 6. and to be expected in his glorious coming, is celebrated,
which the kinreds of the earth shall receive with wailing, and the saints in
the mean time desire most earnestly, as is expressed in those words, even so
Amen verse. 7. The Prophetical narration respects either the particular
Churches, or the whole: Them partly jointly in the rest of this chapter, partly
severally, in the two next. The things which are declared jointly, are to the
end, that the seven Churches may know, that John undertook not this wriring
at his own pleasure, but was called and commanded of God. Whereof the person
calling may cause a full persuasion, which cannot be of any other, but of God
himself, verse. 8. Likewise the person called, verse. 9.10. Lastly the manner of
calling him by hearing, verse. 11. the^ by vision; The type whereof is showed v.
12.13.14.15.16. and certain things following thereof are declared, on John's
part, a great fear and astonying, on Christ's part, a consolation ver. 17.18.
then a commanding to write ver. 19. and the interpretation of the vision ver.
20.

A short exposition.
ver. 1. Apocalypse. The Argument of the book, signifying a Revelation made of
God, the coverings being taken away, which before did hinder the eyes of
mortal men: Which sort of things were wont to be called in old time visions
and prophesyes, but in the writings of the Apostles, the word of Revelation is
more frequent: I will come, says Paul, to Visions and Revelations of the Lord,
2 Cor. 12.1. And again, that J should not be lifted up above measure, with
excellency of Revelations ver. 7. So whosoever of you has a song, has
doctrine, has a tongue, has a Revelation 1 Cor. 14.26. Furthermore, the
knowledge of the Gospel is attributed to Revelation: of seeing which, there is
no greater power, before it shall be revealed, then of understanding future
things: I give thee thanks, says Christ, O Father, because thou have hidden
these things from the wise, and revealed them to babes, Mat. 11.25. Whether is
then this not the sense of this word, that no new thing is published: but as
the Gospel is an open and reveal^d law, so the coverings being removed, that
only to be showed, which before lay hid under the old shadows? And so it
might paradventure be thought, unless this were also a word of the ol^e
testament: The saying of him, says Balaam, that hears the words of the
strong God. which sees the vision of the Almighty, falling down, but having
his eyes opened or revealed, Number. 24.4. So the man of God spoke unto Heli in
the name of the Lord: Did not I reveal my self playn^ly to the house of thy
father? 1 Samuel 2.27. Wherefore there is no argument from hence to this purpose.
This may be without doubt, that this kind of speaking, used as well here as
there, does show, that it neither was in the beginning, nor yet is proper to
the wit of mortal men to find out such mysteries by searching.
Nevertheless that now all things are easy to be passed through, by the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, so far as is behoveable for his Church. Do thou
therefore, most high Day Star open our eyes that we may behold thy wonderful
things.

Of Jesus Christ: Who is one of the chief authors of the Revelation, the
Mediator between God and men. All the old Prophecies flowed always from the
same Christ: but in these last days God has spoken unto us by his Son,
after a singular and special manner, Heb. 1.1. Whereupon there is a difference
between the ancient inscriptions of the the Prophecies, and of this: There,
the vision of Isaias, the vision of Obadias, the book of the vision of Nahum:
The Prophecy which Habbakuke saw: never before, the vision or Revelation of
Jesus Christ. This Prophecy must needs be most full of majesty, which is
notable before others for the title: neither is it to be doubted, but that
according to the proportion of the light of the Gospel, all things are
delivered here more distinctly and more clearly, then ever before.

Which God gave unto him; To wit, the Father, the author and fountain of all
things. And he gave these things to Jesus Christ, in as much as he is
Mediator, not as to his coessentiall Son. For these things do show rather
the order, in which God does give knowledge to his Church, then the original
of knowing in respect of his Son, as Th. Beza declares most learnedly. He is
the pipe, by whom is derived unto us men, from the unmeasurable depth of his
goodness, whatsoever may be profitable for us. Although the verb to give,
joined with the infinitive mode, signifies often to permit, as, thou will
not give thy holy one to see corruption; that is, thou will not suffer him to
see, Psalm. 16.10. And Edom r^fused to give to pass through, that is permit:
Number. 21.21. After which manner Demosthenes speaks, the word of permitting
being joined with it, Give and permit me to speak of these things unto you.
But it comes all to one, whether we make it the beginning of knowledge, or of
power, Therefore we must rest in the first answer.

That he might show to his servants: Therefore the understanding of those
things is peculiar to these. You profane be ye far, o be ye far from
hence. Why, o ye Jesuits do ye touch this book? These mysteries are shut
and sealed to you, whatsoever diligence in interpreting you may pretend: Here
is nothing for the sworn slaves of Antichrist. Leave off to trouble your
selves, and to deceave others. If ye desire indeed to understande these
things, renounce the Lord whom ye serve, to the end that he whose name ye
counterfaite, may impert these secrets to you, returning again into his family.

Which must shortly be done: An explication of the things whereof it is a
R^velation: not of those which were past a good while since, but which should
be done afterward and shortly: For he says, that the time is at hand, because
the things should be begun forthwith, and from that time should proceed in a
perpetual course without interruption: Although the last acomplishment should
be at length for many ages after

And he signified: That is, which also he signified, when he had sent by his
Angel to his servante John: Two isntrumental causes are rehearsed, the
Angel and John. Christ uses his ministry, not because he disdayneth himself
to speak to us (for he gives himself to be seen in his own person in this
very chapter:) but because both our weakness cannot endure the beholding of so
great majesty, as it appears by and by after in John, who fell down dead at
the sight of him, ver. 17. And also that he may show, that he does rule and
command to the Angels and all other things.

2 Who bare record:, As touching John, he describes plainly himself unto us,
showing that he is no other the^ the Apostle himself: of which two certain and
proper marks are rehearsed, one the testimony given to the word of God and to
Jesus Christ: The other, an eye belief of those things which he testified:
For Christ chose twelve out of all his Disciples, who should be with him
continually, and should be present at all his miracles and conferences, of
which they should be witnesses afterward even unto the furthest parts of the
earth, Act. 1.8. by which double mark Luke does note them out, writing thus,
Who from the beginning were beholders themselves and ministers of the word,
Chap. 1.2. By which arguments also John himself does maintain his authority
in an other place: That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life, 1
Ioh. 1.1. And the things seen which are here mentioned are not the visions of
this book which follow, but the acts and miracles of Christ, at which while
they were done, John was present. Otherwise how could those things have
procured authority to the writer (which thing only the mentioning of these
respects in this place) which were not yet made known to the Church?
Wherefore, that John, who wrote the Revelation, was the Apostle, unto whom those
marks do agree, by which the Apostles were known and famous in the Church
above others: neither is there any other John besides, to whom these same
things can agree. And indeed he has declared himself to be such, by very
good advise, when as it would be very much avaylable for the credit of the
Prophecy, that men should be persuaded of the authority of him that did write
it.

I mervayle therefore, that Dionysius of Alexandria regarded these things so
little, that he would dispute against them so egerly. But his foolish
conjectures have been confuted by others most leardnedly. He then being let
pass: from hence it may be understood, that those words, which Aretas
testifyeth to be added herein in some books, and we see to have been put in by
Plantine and Montanus out of the Compluten translation, And whatsoever he
heard, and whatsoever things are, and whatsoever must be done hereafter, that
these words, I say, have crept in wrongfully and into an unmeet place: for
things not known have no authority themselves, much less can they bring it
to an other.

3 Blessed is he that reads: Hitherto of the Authors: the Fruict of the
Prophecy is the happiness of them that read or shall give ear to others that
read to them, if truly they do observe the things that are written therein:
knowledge and works are to be joined together, in such order, that, that may go
before, so at lenght men come to that happiness. But no word unless that which
is inspired of God, can confer such fruict to men. But who are those blessed
ones that read? Are they those that shall be alive in that space of the last
three years wherein Antichrist shall exercise cruelty and tyranny, a little
before Christ shall come to judgment, as the Papists do imagine? In deed
Frauncis of Ribera the Jesuit does thrust together this whole Prophecy almost
into these narrow straites, prudently verily, as touching his Pope, but in
respect of the truth it self, very perversely. For were men utterly void of
this felicity, by the space of those whole thousand five hundred years which
are now past, since the Revelation was given? Or can any be happy either in
reading, or keeping those things which perteine no thing to him? If all these
things are to be thrust into this three years space, they shall in no wise be
blessed. But they have bin curious in vain who either hitherto have searched
out those things, or have used diligence in effecting them. Which same thing
must needs also come to pass in future times, we know not for the space of
how many ages. But the whole handling of the thing shall convince this
invention, either of very great fraud, or ignorance and unskilfulnes. Let us
know in the mean time that such a fruit is here praised, which is common to
all ages since this divine Revelation came forth to be seen of all me^: which
shows severally and one after an other the condition of every time, even unto
the last end, as shall be manifested with God his help, by this exposition of
ours.

For the time is at hand. Wherein these thinhs shall be put in execution. But
seeing the whole prophecy does denounce a battle, rather then put on a
crown, the reason seems to be fetched from the danger nigh at hand, as
though he should say, blessed are they that are fortified with some firm aid
against the evils ha^ging over their heads. But huge great evils stand at the
doors, of which this prophecy is full: therefore they are blessed that shall
take heed and keep faithfully the way of escaping them.

4 John to the seven Churches: Hitherto the Proheme: The Epistle follows,
the person of the wrighter of which, namely John, was known sufficiently by
the things before spoken. They to whom he writes, are the seven Churches in
Asia, that is, the universal Churches in every place, as Aretas and Beda do
well affirm, and all, as I think, Interpreters with one consent, do judge.
Neither can invery deed the things here rehearsed, bear to be restrained to
these seven Churches. We shall hear in the Epistles sent to every one, an
admonition, that all should hear what things were written to the Churches.
Secondly it belongs to these seven Churches to know as well of future
things as of present, the charge of both, namely of writing and sending, he
shows afterward to have bin committed to him. And the last conclusion of the
whole book, which wished the grace of Christ to them all, shows that this
whole Prophecy was sent to the seven Churches for an Epistle, chap. 22.21. But
wha^ had it availed these seven cities which were to remain but a little time,
to have understanding of such things that after many ages should be, which
nothing concerned the^? Hereunto is added that the number of seven is an
universal number, by whose revolution all times are made, all times being
winded upon this Pole, even as the whole heavenly frame is turned upon the
seven stars. Wherefore, as being full of mystery, it is used afterward the
whole book through in describing of all things. Yet all Churches are not so to
be considered, as if nothing indeed had been sent to them, which by name are
afterward noted, but together with the signification of the mystery, the truth
of the history is to be retained. Seeing therefore these seven Churches
stretch further than their names declare, whether in them the estate of all
times even to Christ's coming is to be considered? No verily, but only of
that time, wherein the Church shall be among the Gentiles. Which thing shall be
manifest by those things that follow, and also so plain a desciphering of the
Churches of Asia seems to grant, that the Synagogue of the Jews is not to be
mixed with them. Which thing has caused, that in the resolution, we have
distinguished the whole Prophetical narration, into that which is proper to
particular Churches, and into that which is common to all Churches.

Grace be to you and peace, from which is: He comes to the prayer, whereby the
third person of the Inscription is declared. And he sets down the fountain
of grace and peace to be one true God three in person: whose first person these
words declare. Arethas thinks, that these three times do specially bolong to
the three persons. Because the Father, says he, is otherwhere called which is,
Exodus 3.14.: the Son, which was, John 1.1. the Holy Ghost, which comes John
16.8.13. Act. 2. But the distinction so clear which forthwith follows,
gainsaies it, which challenges this description of that J will be Exodus 3.14.
common to the whole Deity, here to the alone person of the Father. Whereby also
we are given to understand that this threefolde difference of time belonges to
the unchangeable and steadfast truth of God concerning his promises. For there
is the same force of this circumlocution, as of that abreviation Exodus 3.4.
which we know was used, that he might teach Moses that the time was come, that
he would perform the promise once made to Abraham of delivering his seed out
of Egypt. From whence is also that name of Iehova, whereby God was not known to
the Fathers, Exodus 6.2. because they had not yet obtained that promise.
Certain mind that this is a name of being, no portion of which a created
spirit can understand, as if God should take to himself such names, only for
his own sake and not for ours. Wherefore these things are as if he should say,
From God the Father most true and constant in all his things: which presently
gives most plentiful experiments of his truth, by sending at length his Son
into the world, who in former times never failed in any one of those things
which he had promised, who lastly so has caused hope of things as yet to come,
that daily he endeavors the performance of them, and hasteneth the
acomplishment of his whole truth. For which comes has this force, as a
present future, that I may so say: For that which comes is not yet present,
nor yet altogether absent: Therefore it is much more significant, then if he
had said which will come, or which is about to come, as commonly it is turned:
For this, which comes, declares that he will no further defer his promises,
but that now forthwith he is employed in fulfilling of them: an excellent
confort for them, which through wearines of delay do fainte. But thou will
say, is truth attributed to the Father only? Verily it is common alike to all
of them, but seeing the parts of the Son and Spirit are chiefly employed in
executing the decrees, it is mentioned as proper to him alone, whom order of
doing makes to be the Author of promising, and the fountain of goodness.
Gentile impiety has imitated this division with their tripos which they
report that Apollo used for three commodities of things which he had very much
tried, (...), which saw things to come, to be, before they were, as in the
Scholiaste of Aristophanes on Plut.

And from the seven spirits: The second welspring of peace is the Holy Ghost,
most plentifully enriching and replenishing his Church with every kind of
gifts, for which cause such a circumlocution is used. For he which together
with the Father and the Son is the giver and causer of peace and grace cannot
be counted amongst the creatures. Of which matter see that most learned man
Francis Iunius. Neither proves it that this is a creature, as the Jesuit will
have it, because he is said to stand in the sight of the throne, after the
manner of those that rather serve God himself, than that he is God himself:
Whereas by this reason neither the Son should be God, which being a lamb came
and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat on the throne,
hereafter chap. 5.7. And more plainly in Daniell 7.13. and before him (that is
setting in his throne) they presented him, to wit, the Son of man. What then,
is the Son to be beteft of his Godhead? Wherefore we must know that the words
mentioned thorough this book, both here and else where, both universally of
God, as the chief and highest Governor, in which regard a throne is
attributed to him: and also of the Son and Holy Ghost as ministers. By whose
more near working all things are done. Wherefore they are said to stand as in a
readiness before the throne, and as it were expecting the commandment and
beck of the Chief Governor. So was the Revelation given to the Son, ver.
1. and therefore the Spirit seems in this place to be noted more by his
gifts, by which he works in his saints, then by his proper name. But the
things only of order are not to be drawn to destroy the natures.

5 And from Jesus Christ, which is that faithful witness, (...), and from Jesus
Christ that faithful witness, that is, (...), which is that faithful witness,
the want of the relative being supplied, very often used in this book after
the manner of the Hebrews. These things apperteine to the third fountain
Christ, which we call the third in regard of the place which here he
susteines, not in order of person. Hitherto has bin differred the describing
of him, because it was more at large to be insisted upon, and from him to be
derived the thankesgiving, by whose alone merit we are made partakers of all
good things. And first he mentions his Prophetical Office, calling him, the
faithful witness, that is, which has faithfully, truly, and fully taught the
whole will of God, as far as appetaines to man's salvation. For the whole
doctrine of the Gospel is wont to be called a testimony, as John 3.11. and
5.31.32. and 18.37. 1 Timothy 6.13. And can there be any vain thing in that which
comes from so faithful a witness? Or appertains it to his credit, to hide from
us any thing, which is no where else to be drawn forth, than out of the chest
of the breast of the Roman Prelate? especially when no where, or in one word,
has he allowed any such store house, whence we must fetch it? But these are
the dotages of witnesses (if possible it may be) so vain and unfaithful, as
this heavenly and most true witness is faithful.

That first begotten from the dead. These things concern his Priesthood,
whereby thorough death he has overcome death, and has made a full satisfaction
for our sins, for this is to be the first begotten from the dead, that he
first by conquering death arose again, whom death would nev^r have let go, if
it had but never so little power to have kept him with him. For which cause the
Apostle says, he is risen again for our justification, Romans 4 25. He seems
briefly and distributively to be called the first begotten from the dead, for
that which fully should be thus, the first begotten of them which arise again
from the dead: By which two things are signified, first, that he is the Prince
and head of them that arise again from the dead, as the Apostle declares to
the Coll. 1.18. And that he is also the beginning, and the first begotten from
the dead, that amongst all he may have the pre-eminence: therefore he is also
called, the first fruits of them which slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. Secondly, that at
last by his power he will also raise up others from their graves: Even as he
himself says, and I will raise him up in the last day, Ioh. 6.39.40. Which
two things apperteine only to the elect: For neither is he the head of the
wicked, neither will he at the last day raise them up in glory, to wit, as
the elect: but only by the force of that curse ( in what day thou shall eat
thereof, thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17.) will restore to them their bodies,
in which they shall endure everlasting torments. Whereby it comes to pass,
that this repairing, seeing that it is only unto death, scarsely in the
scriptures in ioyeth the name of the resurrection. And therefore the spirit
seems not to speak collectively, the first begotten of the dead, but
distributively the first begotten from the dead, that is, of those that arise
from the dead: as before has been spoken, there being a plain difference of
the elect dead and the reprobate.

And Prince of the Kings of the earth:: The Kingly office of Christ, to which
whatsoever is in heaven and earth is in subjection, according to that all power
in heaven and earth is given to me, Mat. 28.18. But it was sufficient in this
place, only to have mentioned his superiority over Kings, above all which
now by infinite degrees he is superior, who when he was in the earth, seemed
the basest of servants. Neither do these things appertain to his dignity
only, but also to his excellent power over all Kings, which by bridling he now
so restrains, that they can not move themselves, but as far as he please,
howsoever in former time he yielded himself to their lusts.

Which has loved us: So has been his office, the present benefit which the
saints enioie, is set forth with a thankesgiving: The want of the relative
makes the sentence harsh, which full should be thus, to him which has loved
us etc. which relative is expressed in the next verse, to him be glory and c
But seeing that in so long a circunstance of words, a repetition thereof should
be necessary in the end, he omitted it in the beginning, least twice he should
repeat the same, that which once only was to be spoken, he leaves often
unspoken. But Francis of Ribera exclaimes, that this place is corrupted, and
that the latin copies without all doubt which now are, are far better
corrected then the greek copies: But by the Jesuits leave, neither is the
place corrupted, and if it were granted, yet he should unwisely conclude this
excellency of latin copies. There is in this place a wonderful consent of all
greek copies: Aretas thus reads and expounds, and he saw how all did fitly
agree together: The order, says he, of this sentence after this manner returns
from the last to the first, To him be glory and power, which has loved us, and
w^shed us through his blood: But this is hard, says the Jesuit; Therefore
let John have no audience in his Athenian ears, as inco^grue, which has no
thing more common, than after the manner of his country, both to want, and to
abonde with relatives. In the 1. ver. he had, and he had signified, for which
also he had signified; In the 5. And from Jesus Christ that faithful witness,
for And from Jesus Christ, which is that faithful witness: in the next verse,
and has made us Kings, for, and which has made us Kings, and so afterward
very often. But be it that the place is corrupted, shall for one blemish the
price be taken away from a most beautiful maid, and be bestowed on another
whose body is wholly deformed? But, says he, our Jnterpretour, as always he
is wont, has followed true and corrected copies: also there, without doubt,
where he t^rneth, and he stood, for, and J stood, chap. 12.17. and no man
could say the song, for, and no man could learn the song: chap. 14.3. and the
King of ages, for, the King of saints: chap. 15.3. and in the same place,
clothed with a pure stone, for, with pure linen, ver. 6. which art, and which
was, holy, for, which art, and which was, and which will be, chap. 16.5. in the
same place, J heard another saying, for, I heard an other saying from the
altar, ver. 7. at one hour after the beast, for, at one hour with the beast,
chap. 17.12. vessels of precious stone, for, of precious wood, chap. 18.12.
Let these suffice for a taste of many other. Saw the Jesuit these things, and
was he not ashamed to confirm that the old Interpretour has always followed
corrected copies? But these are faults of the Printers. It may be some are.
But what have we to do with the Printers thereof, as though the strife were not
concerning the greek and latin copies which now are extant, but of the first
edition of the latin translation, which no where at this day is to be seen?
Next, these are faults both ancient and also now confirmed by the author^ty of
the Council of Trent; which has set down and decreed, that of many latin
editions, this old and common translation, which through so long experience of
ages has bin approved in the Church it self, be accounted authenticke, nor be
refused under any pretense whatsoever, it were an easy thing to shift of the
authority of the Counsel, if by putting over the fault to the Printers of the
books, it were lawful to depart from the common edition. Thou see then
that those faults must be made good by thee, and the fidelity of the old
Interpretour very ignorantly, I will not say impudently, boasted of, though in
deed so it was needful for thee, by reason of that dutifulnes whereby thou art
bound to Rome.

6 And has made; that is, and which has made, by a want of the relative, as
but now we have said. All those things tend hereunto, that they may teach that
Christ has not these good things for himself alone, wherewith we have heard by
the words last handled, he is endued, but does pour them on the elect, whereby
they may be blessed thorough the participation of them.

Kings and Priests to God: Some read, A Kingdom and Priests, as also the
common translation has. It makes not much for the meaning: yet it is more
likely that there is a conioining of persons between themselves, than of
things and persons. The elect are Kings by participating of Christ's Kingdom:
through which we have overcome the law, death, and sin, and do daiely
triumph over the world, treading under foot the same by faith, 1 Ioh. 5.4.5.
By him also we are Priests: who being dead in him, we have God merciful to us,
and a way opened to call boldly on him. But he adds wariely that we are made
Kings and Priests to God, that we may not think that this honor is given to
us, either to trouble civil matters or to confound Churches polity.

To him be glory: This is all that we can render for his exceeding benefits,
namely to wish that by his righteous praises he be celebrated amongst all men.
And this thankesgiving seems to be undertaken for Gods present gift thorough
the knowledge of Christ poured forth on the Gentiles.

Behold he comes with the clouds. A benefit to come to be expected at his
glorious coming. To come with the clouds, is to manifest himself with a
storm and tempest and wonderful terror of vehement and great lightening, to
be avenged on the wicked and to deliver his. After which manner Daniell also
speaks of his coming: J saw in the visions of the night, that behold one like
to the son of man came with the clouds of heaven, chap. 7.13. For so the
notable judgments of God, ar wont to be described, by which he pours forth
his fervent wrath on his enemies, that we may think that all creatures do
fight for God, also he will use the heaven and the earth to help his people:
and furthermore that the reprobate shall have no means to escape. After the
like manner the Psalmist being delivered out of the hands of his enemies,
praises God for his power showed from heaven in delivering of him Ps.
18.13.14.15. In Matthew it is said he will come on the clouds, chap. 24.30.
but it may be in the same sense, which is in Ps. 18.11. and he sat on the
Cherubins and did fly etc. But the Angels affirm, that he will come as they
had seen him going into heaven, Act. 1.11. And no fear was there: only the
cloud took him away out of their sight, but without any stricking of
terror. But the similitude seems to be referred to the truth of the humane
nature, in which he shall return to be seen of all men, after which sort he
went into heaven, not for the pomp and majesty of his coming: or the Angels
speak in regard of the Godly, to whom his coming shall be most joyful: for
which the reprobate shall in vain desire that the mountains should cover
them. All be it, it shall be manifest by those things that follow, that here
these words are not spoken of his last coming, but only allude unto it
because of the similitude.

And they shall wail over him: Here the wailing is of repentance, not of
desperation, as is plain out of Zachary, from whence these words are fetched,
and they shall look, says he, to him whom they have perc d, and they shall
lament over him, as a lamentation for their only begotten, chap. 12.10. But
seeing that when men shall stand before the throne of the universal judgment,
their repentance shall be to late: by no means these things seem that they
can be u^derstood of the last judgment: neither of that his coming with the
clouds, which but now he spoke of, but rather of that his excellent glory,
which shall be manifest in the world in the calling of the Jews. Those are
they which once perced him, but at length they shall behold him: and all the
Tribes of the earth, that is, the whole nation of the Jews, shall with
abounda^ce of tears bewail the wickedness of their ancestors for delivering
Christ to death. And in deed the Revelation stays her narration upon their
conversion, as hereafter God willing it shall be manifest. And because then the
glory of Christ shall be very great in the earth, a most lively pattern of
that, which shall shine in the last day, a preparation unto this is brought
for the beautifying of it: Neither alone in this place, but as it seems also
in many other.

All Tribes; These things are proper to the Jews, to whom once tribe by tribe
the promised land was divided. The thing could not in more exquisite words be
declared. Sometime the tribes are taken metaphorically, but in no wise here,
seeing that Zachary mentions by name the Jewish tribes; The land says he,
shall lament, every family apart: the family of the house of David ^part: the
family of the house of Levy apart; all the rest of the families, every family
apart: The lamenters here, are those, which were percers: and the tribes are of
those that lamented, and therefore of them which perced him, to wit, of the
Jews: to whom properly this sin belongs. Therefore these words of the
Apostle are thus, as if he should say, Behold he comes with the clouds, and
all men of all sorts shall see him, also those which perced him, to wit, the
Jews, whose predecessors crucified Christ, and perced his side with aspeare:
these being scatered every where thorough all nations, shall at length be
convert^d to the true faith, and for earnest grief shall morn: both for the
detestable iniquity of their forefathers, and also for their so long hardening,
yea Amen.

And so finally this is the sum of all, that the benefit of Christ partly
present is here celebrated in the calling of the Gentiles, (for that which he
before spoke of Kings and Priests, is referred to the seven Churches of Asia,
that is, to all the Gentiles embracing Christ at that present, for which cause
there is attributed to him the praise of glory and power,) partly to come in
the calling of the Jews, which we have declared to us both by their
repentance, and also by the desire and wish of all the Godly.

Yea Amen: The fervent desire of the Godly desiring this coming, is expressed
in greek and hebrew, for this shall be the wish of all nations. The first
particle is properly of one affirming, showing the certainty of a thing, in
which yet may be understoode the wishing verb, Let it be done, or some such
like word: For so it is in the end of the book, Yea come Lord Jesus, as if he
should say, I beseech thee come so as thou have promised, chap. 22.20. It is
like that both the particles are used in the same sense, otherwise the
diversity both of tongue and signification would not note out any conjunction
of all people, to which end this twofolde proper form of spech seems to be
used. Amen, not only apperteines to one assevering, but also supplicating, and
earnestly striving, that the thing may come to pass, as in Jeremy chap. 28.6.
Amen, so do it, the last expunding the former.

9 J am Alpha and Omega: Hitherto has been the Inscription of the Epistle, now
he enters into the narration it self: where first for the authority of the
writing undertaken, there is set down a threefold property of the person
calling, the excelling power of creating, truth in his promises, and exceeding
power of governing The power is first declared metaphorically, and afterward
in proper words. For the beginning and ending do expound what Alpha and
Omega mean, of which that is the first, and this the last letter of the Greek
Alphabet: by a metaphore they are applied to any beginning and ending
whatsoever. The words are plainly of a certain order and relation to the
creature: In which respect they can not properly note out eternity, which
thing is absolute, nor in any regard is to be measured according to the
creature: Therefore I am Alpha and Omega have this meaning, to wit, the maker
of all things, and again the end whereunto all things are to be referred, who
in the beginning have made all things, and that for my own glory. It is the
abridgement of that which the wise man says, the Lord has wrought all things
for himself: yea the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.4. The constant
verity of God in his promises is declared by a distribution of a threefolde
time, as we have showed out of ver. 4. His Allmightines in the end of the verse
seems to appertain to that excellent power of governing all things according
to his will: in which there shines no less his incomprehensible majesty, then
in the first creation of things. For this teaches that his strength was not
spent in his first work, but for ever is of force without any lessening: which
is not tired with any wearines, nether oppressed with the weight of business,
but remains infinitely beyond all power of any created spirit in doing all
things. Such a one is he from whom the commandment of writing proceeds, a
most mighty creator, a most faithful promiser, and the chief hovernour of
all things.

9 I John: The person also called has great weight for credit, I John an
Apostle, a brother and companion in affliction, banished into Patmos for the
word of God, ravished from heaven in the spirit on the Lords day; Why should
not this man speak most certain truth?

And the patience of Jesus Christ: The common translation has and the patience
in Christ Jesus: So also Montanus, the interpretour of Aretas, by Chr. Jesus:
Therehy the sense is nothing at all or but little changed, whether any read it
according to the construction, as Th. Beza, or as these with a preposition. All
tend hereunto, that the communion of the faithful, (be it either of
affliction or of a Kingdom) lean on Christ the alone head, as upon the
ground and foundation. We must take heed lest with the Jesuit we do
interpret in Christ Jesus for the end, for Christ Jesus: for so the communion
of the Kingdom amongst the faithful should be established without Christ: as
if all should not together grow up in him, but should as it were be joined
together between themselves into some outward thing a part from him.

Patmos, an Island of the sea Icarium, thirty miles in compass: at this day
it is called Palmosa, as the latter Geographers would have it: But in Strabo it
has nothing memorable except the name: He is wont to mention carefully even
the very woods of Palm trees, if there be any: much more would he have
mentioned so great plenty, whereby the Island should be worthy to be renowned:
whereupon this name may justly be suspected: unless perhaps the succeeding
age caused it to be more happy in fruitfulnes. Munster supposes that Patmos
is that Possidium of which Ptolemaeus speaks in his tables of Geography, book
5. chap. 2. but Possidium in the same place is a Promontorie of the Isle Chios,
not far of from the city Chios, from thence they sail about the Yland, and
leave it on the right hand, Str. book. 14. But Patmos lies together with
Corasius toward the west of Icaria, but this toward the west of Samos, Strab.
book 10. But thou must observe, that Ihon does not plainly mention his
banishement, but only that he was in the Isle, soberly bearing his misery, not
proudely augmenting it by vain boasting.

For the word of God:: That is, for having preached it, not for to preach it:
For John of his accord went not thither to preach, but because he had preached
at Ephesus and elsewhere in Asia, Domitian the tyrant, as Ireneus and others
record, banished him thither. The same Isle seems to have bin almost desolate
and void of inhabitants, considering especially that the neighbor Island
Icaria much more renowned, because of the scarcity of inhabitans, as Strabo
reports, did bestow the use and commodity of their pastures on the soraine
Samians.

10 And I was ravished in the Spirit: (...), I was in the Spirit: that is, I
began to be moved in the spirit for to see and understand those things, which
do far surpass man's capacity, as of old the ancient Prophets being led by
the same spirit, did pronunce of things to come, with no less certainty then
of things present or past. After the same manner Marck speaks of another kind
of spirit, And there was in their Synagogue a man with an unclean spirit,
chap. 1.23. And again, there met him a man out of the sepulchers in an
unclean spirit, chap. 5.2. but altogether contrary in the manner of operation,
not only in respect of holiness or unholines, but also of the sweet and quiet
motion, seeing that the agitations with which the most wicked spirits do
tormente men, are violent and fearful: whence the Possessed are most commonly
depryved either of all their senses, or at the least of some of them: but those
who are filled with the holy Ghost, they are more strenghtned in all the
faculties of the soul. Both have them obedient to the^ who^ they do possess,
but the one by gracious inclining, the other by cruel constraining, as the
exemples of the one and of the other do make it plain.

On a Lords day: see of this Th. Bezam: It is very like that there was not any
holy assembly in this day in the Jland, otherwise Ihon would not have walked
alone in the shore, and bin solely occupied in receaving the heave^ly visions,
after chap. 12.18. Neither is there any mention that these Prophecies were
received by distinct times, as it is wo^t in the other Prophets, whenever
there is occasion, but they seem to have bin given all in the same day, and so
to have flowed with a continual course, that there was no intermission after
that the faculty of seeing was once given. The commandment also of writing
unto the Churches seems to require the same. For if there had bin any space of
time between, he would have had written by parts and pieces to the Churches, not
waiting for the things that would follow, unless paradventure he should have
bin otherwise admonished, which we do not read in this Prophecy to have bin
done. But all these things are gathered in one Epistle and not divided in
diverse. But the solitarines of John was well recompensed, having for teacher
God him self, when it may be he had none whom he might teach. These things
being thus expounded, he goes on into that which concerns his calling, by
which it does appear that this charge was imposed upon him by God

And I heard behind me: This word behind me is wont to shadow out the free
mercy of God, which recalleth us being careless, not regarding, negligent,
nor thinking of any such thing, for to receave most worthy things. In Isaiah
amongst other instructions of the heavenly grace, there is made mention of
this as of a chief thing, and thy ears, says he, shall hear a word behind
thee, saying, this is that way, walk through it, when thou shall go to the
right hand, or to the left hand, chap. 30.21. Wherefore neither John altogether
in heavenly contemplations, preventeth the heavenly grace: but as it were one
of the common people, hears a voice behind him, warning of the common
unadvisednes of us all: For we are all unapte to comprehend heavenly things,
until unwares we be endued with the faculty of them: which none of our own
dignity does procure to us, but Gods mercy alone. And the voice was great, as
of a trumpet, least we should think that any thing being whispered somewhat
softly was paradventure hidden from John: Nothing here could be hidden or
passed by, when the ears rang with so loud and shrill a voice: it is a great
argument of the certainty of the things which are to be uttered.

11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega: These words were above, ver. 8. But there of
John describing the person, whose authority he followed in writing this
Prophecy: here these words are of Christ himself, uttering the same with his
own voice. Therefore John above using this form, drew it not forth out of the
shop of his own brain, but brought it from heaven, from whence there can
come nothing but most holy. Aretas, the common translation and the Complutensis
read not these words: but they seem to be rashly rased by some man, because
perhaps they were repeated having so few things interlaced. But there was to be
a dictinctio^ between John and Christ, neither are these things to be
accounted superfluous, which do teach by what author these words were first
used.

What thou see write in a book; that namely, which by and by thou shall see,
and likewise also hear. This express commandment of writing, also to whom
by name he should write, shows that this was not a voluntary message, but
commanded and appointed of God.

Which are in Asia, in Ephesus etc. Above in the fourth verse, only
universally it was said in Asia: but by naming of these cities, we understand
that the whole continent is not meant, which by this name is celebrated for the
third part of the world, but only certain little part thereof, which usually
is properly so called. Which lying in an Island to the Sea Euxinum Aegaeum and
Pamphileum, is bounded on the North with Bithynia: on the west with the sea
Hellespontus and Aegaeum: on the South with Licia: on the East partly with
Licia, partly with Pamphilia and Galatia. In this part of the world flourished
of old time these seven most famous cities, representing here the whole
Church amongst the Gentiles. As touching Ephesus, Ephesus.
it is a very noble city by the sea shore of Icarium, not far from the river
Caister, the head city of Ionia, the greatest mart of all Asia within Taurus,
famous because of the Temple of Diana: very well known to Christians for the
three year labor of Paul Act. 19.20. and 20.31, for an heavenly Epistle
written to this people, and for Timothy their Pastor bestowed on them, and
also afterward for many years most fruitful watering of John the Apostle.
Smyrna, Smyrna.
a city also of the sea coast of Ionia, on the North of Ephesus, being distant
from thence three hundred and twenty furlongs: a Colonie of the Ephesians,
with whom in former time they dwelt together: mighty in old time and having
jurisdiction over certain cities near adioining, as also Ephesus, in which
the meetings of the subject cities were, See pli. book 5. chap. 29. Pergamus
Pergamu^.
is a city of Aeolia toward the North of Smyrna, very glorious, and being
the chief amongst the middleland cities, once the seat of the Kings of
Attalia: which at length became the Romans, they being appointed the heirs by
the last Attalus, which brought the country into a Province, and called it
Asia by the name of the Continent, swallowing up by hope doubtless from this
small beginning, that whole part of the world: as though Attalus had not only
bequeathed to them Pergamum, but also all Asia by his testament, whence,
unless I be deceaved, was the first distinction of lesser Asia. Thyatira
Thyatira.
is the last city of the Mysians, a Colonie of the Macedonians, toward the
south of Pergamum, to whose jurisdiction it likewise apperteineth. In time past
it was called of Seleucus the son of Nicator Thugatheira, for the joyful
news of a daughter that was borne to him: hereof Lydia the purple seller was a
citizen, of whom there is mention made Act. 16.14. a stranger of Philippi, as
it seems. Sardis Sardis.
is from Pergamum toward the South about six hundred furlongs. Once the
chief city of the Lydians, happy by reason of the rich mountain Tmolus, and
Pactolus that yeeldes gold, which runs through her fields. She was also of
great dignity in the latter ages, having chief jurisdiction, taking from
thence the name of Sardinia, see Plin. book 5. 29. Philadelphia, Philadelp.
of which there is here mention made (for there are three of this name) is of
Lidia, or rather of Cecaumena, that is, of the burnt country in the very
borders of Lidia and Mysia. Of old a city not populous, even when it most of
all flourished, because of the dangerous dwelling by reason of often
earthquakes, the most part live in the country: but, says Strabo, we may
justly mervaile at these few, who for desire of the place, are careless of
danger, and heedelesse of s^ffetie: or rather what the builders of the city
minded. Laodicaea Laodicaea.
by the river Lycus, one of the greatest cities of Phrygia, which reaches to
Caria, near to Colossie, to whom Paul a prisoner at Rome wrote, commanding
that the Epistle should openly be read in the Church of Laodicaea: Whose
letters also he commands that the Colosians should read, Col. 4.16. A city
in time past of great wealth, partly thorough the liberality of the cityzens,
who by their Testaments gave to it great riches, partly by reason of selling of
excellent soft woole, and black as a raven, for which causes their neighbors
did much desire it. Such are the seven cities, to whom this Prophecy was by
name delivered, described as in a table. Some man perhapes may mervaile where
Rome then was, to whom in steed of all it might have bin written very
briefly, as to her who brag that she is the head of all. Verily Christ
forgate himself, who passed over his vicare, nor would not send him so much as
one letter, who only seemed to have bin spoken unto. But there is a ready
answer, why he wrote not to him, he knew that he could not err, nor had need
of an admonisher. Let therefore this omissio^ be one of the prerogatives of
Rome. 12. I turned me therefore that J might see: To see is taken sometimes by
synecdoche for to perceive, as Exo. 20.18. The whole people saw voices and
great lightenings, and the sound of a trumpet etc. that is, perceaved. But
here it remains in his proper signification, when he had sufficiently
perceaved by hearing, and he now turned himself that he might use the benefit
of the other se^ce. Therefore the other word is changed from his native
signification, noting by a voice the man whose voice he thought it was.

And being turned etc. So was the hearing: the things seen are partly things,
partly a person. The things are seven golden candlestickes: the
interpretation whereof we shall learn beneath at ver. 20. In the mean while
let us note that every godly endeavor received greater fruit the^ was looked
for. John does turn himself that he might see the man: behold moreover
seven candlestickes, of which he suspected nothing.

13. And in the mids etc. The person seen is Christ himself, as is
understoode out of ver. 17.18. like the son of man, because in a new shape
taken unto him, he caused himself to be seen, not in that native form which
he took of the Virgin, and in which full of glory he sitted at the right hand
of the father, which may be the reason why the articles are not prefixed, as in
other places, as Th. Beza has observed. This form is put on for the present
condition of the Church, and therefore an other is taken, where an other estate
of the bride is described, chapter 19.11, 12. etc. Eve^ as also it comes to pass
elsewhere in many places, for Christ always is one and unchangeable: neither
for his own sake does he so often change his form, to who^ no alteration
befalls, nor any shadow of turning: but when according to his diverse
administration he uses a diverse condition of the bride, whereby he may both
testify his conionctio^ with her, and also may show that he in those
alterations of times forgettes her not: he takes upon him form fit for the
things. He suffers when she suffers: he also triumphs together with
her: what mervaile is it then in so near a society, if he sustain also a
common shape? According to the same meaning Ireneus expounds this diverse
form, So, says he, the word of God always has as it were the proportion of
things to come, and showed forth to men as it were the form of his fathers
disposition, teaching us what are the things of God, book 4. chapter 37. Neither
is it without cause, that he is with this habit in the midst of the
ca^dlestickes, manifesting by the same that this adorning does not simply and
absolutely belong to him, but as far forth as he is co^versa^t with the
Church for special time. Wherefore in such visions, we must not so much seek
what a one Christ is in himself, as what his administration is, and what a one
the bride is thereby, which he sets forth to be viewed in himself as in a
glass. Therefore as touching the interpretation of the special things, the
long garment is the perfect imputed righteousness of CHRIST, wherewith the bride
is wholly covered from top to toe, so as no filthy nakedness appears. For this
garment is not necessary to Chr. but serves to cover the bride, which
notwithstanding Chr. wears on his body, declaring how comely for those times
in this regard she should be.

Neither less often than significantly, is the righteousness of faith set forth
by a garment. Blessed, says the Psalmist, is the man whose sin is covered,
Psalm. 32 1. And the guest wanting this garment, is cast into utter darkness,
Mat. 22.12. Afterward in this book, they are pronounced blessed which watch
and keep their garments, lest they walk naked, and their shame be seen chapter
16.15. and often times so in other places. And what does more fitly rese^ble
the righteousness of faith, which loatheth our inherent righteousness as a
menstruous clothe, neither can rest in any other thing, except in this one
garment of Christ's righteousness.

And girded about the pappes with a golden girdle: made of silken threeds
covered with gold. But was the girdle made of such threeds only? But the
Priests girdle was made of embroidered work, pictured with scarlet, purple,
violet and yellow flowers, Exodus 28.39. Whose stuff was only of silk, as
Iosephe of the Antiquities book. 3. chap. 8. And this girdle was common to all
the Priests: There was another appertaining to the high Priest, differing only
in this one thing, that it was wrought with gold, as Josephus there speaks.
This then is a golden girdle, not that it was wholly of gold, but because the
girdle of the High Priest was for this difference excellent. Neither is this
girdle proper to Christ, but to the Bride: for which cause this same is the
girdle of the Angels, beneath chap. 15.6. The which we do atteine by Christ
alone, which has not only made his elect, Priests, but also has brought
them to the honor of the chief Priest. Seeing therefore that this girdle is
ours, it signifies most precious faith in the heart. And it is of Gold
because, what is more Golden and precious than true faith? Yea whose trial is
much more precious than gold that perished, 1 Pet. 1.7. This girding is about
the pappes, because, except faith has her seat in the heart it is no faith.
And therefore the seven Angels are girded after this manner chap. 15.6. because
otherways it is wont to belong to the loins, especially under the law, when
faith was not plainly delivered, but lusts were restreyned by the instruction
of the ceremonies and rites. But now the bride having obtained more plentiful
grace, should remove the girdle from the loins to the pappes, straightly tying
and binding to her those garments by a true faith of the heart, lest being
loosed and ungirded they slide down and spread abroad.

14 And his head and hairs etc. The garment and girdle are common to all
memhers: in the head and the hairs there is a certain distribution, whereof
the former concerns those which rule in the Christian assemblies, and are to
them as heads: the hairs do signify the common Christian people, which
depends on the holy teachers, drawing nourishement and ornament from them,
and they bestowing again on them decking and defense. Both of them is white,
flourishing in the seven Churches, or rather in the first of the seven
Churches by a singular purity. For we shall see that this order of the members
has refere^ce after a sort to the order of the Churchches. Although those
things which are related here in the last place, in the Epistles are
attributed to the first: which reversing of order do teach that those
properties are in such sort agreeing to some, as that also according to the
occasion they are proper to others. But the whitenes is of woo^l and snow: of
the former, for the simplicity of manners, wherewith the saints are endued,
which every where are called sheep, and not without cause, seeing our head is a
lamb: of the latter, because this purity and whitnes is not natural, but
borrowed. For wool by nature is filthy in greasines, full of dust and many
other defylings, but being thoroughly washed in the most clear fountain of
Christ's righteousness, it exceeds snow it self, or whatsoever excels in
the glory of whitnes. So great a thing is it to seek righteousness not in our
selves but in another, that the Spirit contents not himself with one
similitude of the garment, but also adioineth the similitude of snow, and many
other reasons in other places, showing how greatly he would have us to mind
this doctrine, and that on every side it should sou^de in our ears.

And his eyes as a flame of fire: Overcoming darkness, from which eyes no
darkness takes away the sight. Which kind of eyes did especially shine in the
first of the seven Churches; in which we shall see that the truth shined so
clearly, that no craft of heretics could darken the same. All their vain
shows were consumed as stubble with these fiery eise, or as coverings of wax
they do melt forthwith, and do openly bewraie their hidden deceit.

15 And his feet were as fine shining Brass: Wherefore passes he so quickly
from the head and eyes to the feet? especially seeing there follow the voice,
hands, mouth and face. It is not rashly done, but in that order the members
are described, which does most fitly agree to the Churches. Now therefore he
teaches after that first, what is the estate of the next Churchches, where the
faithful are feet, and like to Brass of Lebanon: for they were the head,
hairs and eyes in an other respect and manner. One member could not declare the
whole estate of the Bride, for which cause there are more used, and so much the
more because he whom Ihon saw, was like to the son of man. As touching
Lebanons Brass, Th. Beza does well retain the greek word in his
translation. Copper is manifest to the Latins, neither do I believe that it
sufficiently expresses the singular elega^cy of this Brass dug out of
Lebanon. For Aretas yeildeth the same reason of this word. And we know that a
possession which engendered metalles befell to the tribe of Asher, who had his
seat at the foot of this mountain. For so Moses speaks, Iron and Brass
shall be thy shoe, speaking of that coast where this tribe was seated, Deuteronomy.
33.25. Some had rather that here it should have the signification of
Frankincense: the author also of which judgment is Aretas, as it were
doubtful between both: all be it he plainly relates not that this
signification is as it were, drawn from use, or taken out of any approved
author, but as though the composition of the word should signify some such
thing. But Anthoine Nebrissensis bringes somewhat of weight for this point,
writing (as it is recorded of Frauncis de Ribera) that this title is frequent
in Orpheus amongst his hymns, Chalcolibanus for Apollo, for Latona, and other
Gods; that is, as he interprets, the male Frankincense, or the sacrifice of
the male Frankincense: as in Virgile in his Bucolickes, and offer for sacrifice
the fate vervin and male Frankincense: But I think that the words which
follow contradict it, burning as in a furnace. Similitudes are wont to be
fetched from usual and accoustumed things: but we read no where of such a
prodigal wast of Frankincense, noe not when Alexander himself sacrificed,
that it should be burned in an oven or furnace, which only was to be burnt on
an altar: Therefore that first signification of metal seems to be better:
chiefly seeing the visio^s already before made are according to this manner
recorded. In Ezechiel, his feet are like to shining brass, chapter 1.17. of
shining brass in Dan. chapter 10.6. As touching Orpheus, let the learned consider
whether Chalcolibanus for Apollo, may not be an image of brass of Lebanons for
Apollo, as if he should say, that he by his verse, did as it were erect an
image of most precious brass for Apollo. They were wont in ancient time to
consecrate to their Gods other things besides fra^kincense: according to which
custom Synesius a Christian Poet names his Hymns crowns and garlandes; J
make for thee this garland from the holy meadows. Him. 3. Such a thing
therefore is this Lebanons brass, whose feet burning in a furnace being like,
show the afflicted spouse in the Churches of Smyrna and Pergamum: which yet
received no damage by affliction, but through the strength of brass should
continue invincible, and should shine much more clear than fire. The common
latin translation for Lebanons brass, reads copper. The Jesuit according
to his wont, that he might by some probable reason hide the error thinks
that the old Interpretour first translated it Lebanons brass, as it is in the
greek, and that afterward this word was corrupted by printers or unlearned.
But what needs this defense? Wherefore has not the translatour here as always
followed the best corrected copies: if the greek books are corrupted? It is
foolishnes to bring a thing to the rule which is righter tha^ the rule it
self? But the power of the truth carries the man that gainesaies it from his
judgment, and drives him into contrary opinions.

And his voice as the voice of many etc. This similitude is often, and for the
most part notes an huge tumult: in this book, as it seems, it is of a
large signification, declaring besides the greatness of the noise, a certain
unconceavable (as I may so say) notion of things; as is the disordered and
confused noise of waters: which storming with contrary waves, and rushing
against the shore rocks, yeilde a certain huge noise, yet no man distinctly
perceaveth, what all that noise means. Such should by Christ's administration
be the word of truth in the same Churches, in which the feet should be like to
burning lebanons brass. To the heathenish men that lived yea in most pure
Ephesus, the truth was a certain unsavory and untastable thing, neither
sounded it any other thing then barbarous and unpleasant. Cornelius Tacitus
calls the doctrine of the Gospel a certain deadly superstition, showing by
his wicked blasphemy not so much his own as the common hatred of all the
Gentiles, book 15. Suetonius recite that the Christians were afflicted by
torments, that they were a kind of men of strong and wicked superstition, in
N^ron chapter 16. Pline a very learned and wise man in a certain Epistle to
Traiane singes the same song, he writes, that when he had enquired of 2 mades,
which were said to be the servantes of certain Chrestians by torments, what
was the truth, he found no other thing than wicked and unreasonable
superstition, the infection whereof had not only run thorough the cities,
but also the villages and country etc. How does the sound of the truth to
such men seem a certain rude and vain beating of waves? Their ears were
filled with a sound, whereof they conceaved no sense. And we shall see in the
next chapter how these although Gentiles, perteined to Ephesus. But not alone
of this kind of men the wholesome truth was accounted barbarous, but also of
many of Christian profes^ion in the Church of Smyrna, Pergamus, and the
neighbor Churches. Errors and perverse opinions so possessed many, that they
were altogether deaf to wholesome doctrine, neither tasted any sweetenes of
it, as it will be more plain in the next chapter.

And he had in his right hand seven stars: He did so defend with his mighty
right hand the Teachers of the truth (for these are the stars, as beneath i^
taught verse. 20.) afflicted with many evils, that in all miseries they were
conquerours. Although this thing be common to all Churchches, yet in those it
is chiefly seen, Where the feet do burn in an oven, and the truth either
not heard, or not understood.

Even there we shall see many delivered to death, but for one many forthwith to
arise: neither only does the power of his defending right hand so manifest it
self, but also in repelling the conspiracies which the wicked do make to his
Ambassadors.

And out of his mouth a two edged sword: This sword is the most mighty word
of God, more percing than any two edged sword: It searches the reins, and
pronounced sentence against the wicked and unbeleevers: Neither does one jot,
or any note become void and of no effect. It wondeth and kills, bringing
upon the wicked those calamities which it threatens. Now it comes out of the
mouth, because in the Church of Pergamus Christ would approve his most holy
severity to the world in punishing sins, unless, says he, they repent, J
will fight against them with the sword of my mouth, chah. 2.16. as it shall
more fully be spoken of there.

And his face shines as the Sun in his strength: The face or counteance of
Christ, is his worship appointed from God, in which he is seen of his as
clearly as we do behold things before us: Whereto perteine those
exhortations, Seek ye my face, Psalm. 27.8.: Seek the Lord and his strength:
Seek his face always, Psalm. 150.4. Asthough he should say, trust always in the
Lord and apply your selves to the holy study of those things, with which he
has taugh that he himself is to be worshipped. As long as we bestow our
labor thus, we are conversant in the sight of the Lord, but as soon as the
fucalty to be at his public worship is taken away, we are banished from his
face: as Cain complains, being cast out of the Church for the murder of his
brother, that he was hidden from his face, Genesis 4.14. Therefore the whole
religion of Christ perteining either to doctrine or to prayers, sacraments and
discipline should shine most purely in these Churches. For the reason of order
requires, that in the last place the shining face should signify that the last
of the seven Churches should be famous by the clear vision of Christ. And
among these (as we shall see) Philadelphia obtains the chief praise: the
other so behold the open face of Christ, that they may rather perceive that
Christ is angry with them, then rejoice in any of his favorable beholding or
countenance. Therefore the whole type or figure has this sum: That the first
of the seven Churches is no table, by the righteousness of Christ, thorough the
faith and holiness of the people, and mervailous quicknes of understanding of
the teachers, by whose bright eyes the darkness of errors are driven far away:
that those Churches in the mids are on fire through great affliction, yet
that the truth was not altogether overwhelmed, but did make a loud noise as
the fall of the river Nilus although to very many, it was but as the unconstant
dashing of the waves: That the last Churches had their teachers whole and
sound, kept the truth mighty to subdue the enemies, and a great purity of the
whole religion. For now it shall be sufficient to distinguish them in to three
degrees for plainness sake: we will follow a more accurate distribution, when we
shall entreat of them severally.

17 I fell at his feet as dead. Thus was the type from the consequents. First,
the great fear of John offers it self, such as in the like matter has
befallen other holy men. So great is the infirmity of our nature, and
conscience of depravation, that it can in noe wise endure the least show of
Gods majesty, Dan. 8.9. etc. which is another argument for the credit of the
heavenly vision.

Fear not; A consolation very necessary, considering that Ihon had not bin
able to perceive the things either heard or seen, unless he had first bin
recreated and confirmed from his fear. And so it is wont to come to pass in
holy visions: the evil spirits contrariwise do increase fear, as much as they
can, desiring to overwhelme men with fear and desperation. The places of
consolation are from his universal power over all things created, in this
verse, and by name from his victory and power over death in the verse
following. Those words first and last have great power to confort: for why may
not John be of good courage, when he bids not to fear, who in the beginning
created all things, and is able to bring them to nothing again at his
pleasure: unless peradventure, the words first and last are to be referred to
glory and humility, then he is the first now among all things created, or
rather above all things in honor and majesty, who once being conversa^t on
earth did seem the basest among men: Asthough he should say, fear not at the
sight of my glory, which is augmented above that you ca^ think, yet not for
your destruction, but salvation. And as once ye have known me the most humble
of all men, so in this unmeasurable glory, I retain my former mind, and do
not despise or neglect you dust and earth. Words full of confort, but in this
sense they were to be changed, I am the last and first, because the humility
did go before glory, neither now should that be placed in the latter place
which hah bin swallowed up of the majesty, coming upon it: unless
peradve^ture they have this sense, I am now the first, who of late was the
last: or the order of the words being kept, I which was the first, in the
beginning being with God, equal to the father, at length taking upon me the
form of a servant, became in the account of the world the last. Both which
sentences make for the second interpretation, and make it more probable.

And who am alive: Specially he makes mention of his victory over death, that
he might erect his mind against the greatest fear in life. These things
confirmed that he was Christ that appeared to John. Never of any creature is
any thing uttered in the person of God, without all signification of ministry:
least peradve^ture men should think him to be God, and should give that to the
creature, which is proper to God.

Amen: This is most certain which I say, that I live for ever, for confirmation
whereof, take not only a naked affirmation, but also a solemn word of sealing
up, Amen; The common translation reads not Amen: which nevertheless is found
in all the Greek books, and is found beneath chap. 3.14. To which we must
hearken rather then the Tridentine fathers establishing only this edition
authentical and of authority.

And I have the keys of hell and of death: There is a transposition of the
words in Aretas, the Complutense and the vulgar: and I have the keys of death
and hell. And in the conioining of these words hell is wont to be put after
death, as death and hell did follow him chap. 6. ver. 8. so death and hell were
cast into the lake chap. 20.14. And so the order of things requires, seeing
that hell is the last stinge of death. But seeing those keys are as well to
open as to shut (for because he lives that was dead, he has power to make
others alive from the dead) here hell is not of the damned, which is wont never
to be opened, that any should be fetched from thence, as neither in chapter 20.13.
For how can the hell of the damned be cast into a lake of fire? Therefore these
two do seem thus to be distinguished, that death be the very separating and
sundring of the soul and body; Hell the state and condition in which the body
is after the sundring.

19 Write those things that thou have seen, and which are etc. The commandment
of writing is repeated, but explaned more at large. In the eleventh verse it
was commanded only, write that which thou see in a book: Now he teaches
whereto that perteined, which he saw: to wit, to things both present and to
come: For these both joined together do expound that what thou have seen. And
in every of the Epistles, unto which the parts of this vision are fitted
according to the diverse condition of every one, we shall find predictions of
future things, so as those words which thou have seen, can not be restrained to
things only present. Seeing therefore the seven Churchches contain as well
future things as things present, the whole Prophecy is not rightly distributed
into things present and future. For these two members come together, as after
we shall see, in the singular explication and unfolding of the things. Let us
hold therefore that which the words plainly teach, that this vision proper to
the seven Churches, is touching things both present and future. The
observation of which small thing has opened a way to me to understand (as I
think) the particular Epistles: which I will that the godly judge.

20 The Mystery of the seven stars: In the last place is the interpretation,
which only teaches of two things, of the stars and candlestickes. Why does
he give no exposition of other points? Because these few were enough to open
his counsel of the whole. For after the same manner the rest are to be applied
to the condition of the Church. And so will the Spirit help our weakness, that
he may leave some parts of diligence to us. Although the things that remain of
the vision shall easily be made manifest from the Epistles, which teach by the
condition of every one, wh^t meaning the rest have which now are kept in
silence, as shall be showed in their places. As touching the words, Mystery is
of the fourth case, following the verb Write, which is to be repeated, asthough
he should say, write the mystery of the seven stars; And likewise in the
member following, and write the mystery of the seven candlestickes: For he
interprets the stars to be the Angels: The seven stars (says he) are
the seven Angels of the Churches, that is, signify the seven Angels. Which
let them observe who hold fast, as it were with the teeth, the letter of the
word in other places. Neither are these Angels spiritual substances, but men
Pastors and Bishops, to who^ the scripture attribute this name: as, although
the Angel of the Lord had come up from Gilgal to Bochim. Judge. 2.1. So in the
Prophet Hagg. Then spoke Haggai the Lords messenger, chapter 1.13. And Malachy
speaking of the Priests, For he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts. chap. 2.7.
How great therefore is the dignity of true Pastors, who both are stars,
fixed in no other firmament then in the right hand of Christ, and also Angels.
What skilleth it though the wicked skoffe at them with reproachful names,
seeing they be in this reckoning and estimation with God?

And the seven candlestickes are seven Churches: Very well compared to a
candlestick, wherein the everlasting light of truth shines, kindled of Christ
the Priest morning and evening continually. This similitude is fetched from the
candlestick of the Tabernacle, which was made of pure gold, of work beaten
with hammar, of one shaft, and seven branches. The multitude of branches
signifies the multitude of particular Churches, as well of Jews, as of
Gentiles. The common original from one shaft, the most strait conjunction of
particular Churches: all which come forth from that one of the Jews, as from
the shaft. Which shaft was more adorned then the other branches, in one bolle,
knop, and flower: because, as it seems, the Jews Church at length shall
become more abundant in the gifts of the spirit, then this ours of the
Gentiles: Exodus 25.31. They are then the candlestickes of the Church: but which
by their most precious matter do note out only summarily the excellent
dignity of it: Christ himself, represented severally the beauty of every of
each one of the members, in that figure, wherein he was seen of John.

Chap. 2.
UNTO the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write, these things says he, that
holds those seven stars in his right hand, which walks in the mids of
the seven candlestickes;

2 I know thy works and thy lahour, and thy patience, and that thou can not
suffer the wicked: and have tried them, which say that they are Apostles and
are not, and have found them liars.

3 And thou wast burdened, and do endure, and for my name have labored and
wast not wearied.

4 But J have somewhat against thee, that thou have left thy first love.

5 Be mindful therefore from whence thou art fallen, and do the first works;
or else I will come against thee shortly, and remove thy candlestick out of his
place, unless thou do repent.

6 But this thou have, that thou hate the works of the Nicolaitanes, which J
also hate.

7 Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says to the Churches, to
him that overcomes J will give to eat of that tree of life, which is in the
mids of the Paradise of God.

8 To the Angel of the Church of Smyrna write, these things says he that is
the first and last, who was dead, and is alive.

9 J know thy works and thy affliction, and poverty (but thou art rich) and
the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews and are not, but the synagogue of
Satan.

10 Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer: Behold it shall come
to pass, that Satan shall cast some of you into pris^n, that you may be
tried; and ye shall have affliction ten days: Be faithful unto death, and I
will give thee the crown of life.

11 Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the Churches. He
that shall overcome, shall not be hurt of the second death.

12 And to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus write, these things says he,
that has that sharp two edgedsword.

13 I know thy works, and where thou dwell, to wit, where Satan's throne
is, and that thou keep my name, and have not denied my faith, yea even in
those days in which Antipas that my faithful martyr was slain among you,
where Satan dwells:

14 But I have a few things against thee, that thou have there those that
hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balack to lay a stumbling block
before the children of Jsrael, that they should eat of those things, which
were offered to Jdols, and that they should commit fornication,

15 So also have thou them, which hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes, which
I hate.

16 Repent: or else J will come against thee quickly and fight with them, with
that sword of my mouth.

17 Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the Churches: I
will give to him that overcomes, to eat of the hidden Manna, and J will give
him a white stone, and a new name written in the stone, which no man knows,
but he that receaveth it.

18 And to the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, write, these things says the
Son of God, which has eyes as a flame of fire, and whose feet are like fine
brass.

19 J know thy works, and love, and service, and faith, and patience, and thy
works, and thy last are more then the first.

20 But I have a few things against thee, that thou suffrest the woman
Iezabell, which says she is a Prophetisse, to teach and deceave my servants,
that they should commit fornication and eat of things which are offered to
Idols.

21 And I gave her time to repent of her fornication: but she bath not repented.

22 Behold I will cast her into a bead and them that commit adultery with her
into very great affliction, unless they repent of their works.

23 And I will kill her children with death, and all the Churches shall know
that I am the searcher of the reins and of hearts, and I will give to every
one of you according to your works.

24 And to you I say, and the rest of the Thyatirians, whosoever hold not this
doctrine and who have not known the deepnesses of Satan, as they say: I will
lay no other burden upon you;

25 Yet that which you have, keep till I shall come:

26 For if any shall overcome, and observe my works unto the end, I will give
him power over nations.

27 And he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and they shall be broken in
pieces as earthen vessels, as I also have received of my father.

28 And I will give him the morning star.

29 Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the Churches.


The Resolution.
HITHERTO in common that which pertains to all the seave^ Churchches: that
which is proper to every one follows, an Epistle being inscribed to every one
severally. In every one of which, there is an Inscriptio^, Narration, and
Conclusion. The three first, are of the Church falling into a worse estate, of
Ephesus, Smyrna, and Pergamum: The other four are of the same returning: and
so as the three next are opposed to the three first, and are answerable one to
the other: the Thyatiren, to the Ephesine: the Sardinen, to the Smyrnen: the
Philadelphen, to the Pergamen: Only Laodicaea has noe equal, whereto she may
be compared.

As touching the Ephesine, which holds the first place, the Inscription is by
name to the Angel, describing also him, that gave the Epistle: That he holds
the seven stars in his right hand, and walks amids the candlestickes, ver.
1. The Narration, partly respected praise, commending their labor, patience,
discipline, ver. 2. then their unwearied desire ver. 3. partly reprehensio^,
which shows their sin, their first love left, ver. 4. and the remedy,
which first he propounds, teaching in what thing it consists, in a care of
their first works, afterward he inciteth them to use it, partly by a
denuntiation of removing the candlestick, unless it be done in time, verse. 5.
partly by a rehearsal of the cause for which they had bin spared hitherto,
ver. 6. The conclusion is both epiphonematicall requiring attention: and also
remunerant: where the reward is the power to eat of the tree of life, ver. 7.
The other Analyzes shall follow every one in his place.

Scholions.
Languishing Ephesus.
TO the Angel: Every one of the Epistles are inscribed to the Pastors, not
that they shoul have them privately to themselves, but that they should
communicate them with the rest of the Church, as has bin said before chapter 1.11.
Send to the seven Churches which are in Asia, to Ephesus, Smyrna etc. and in
the end of every one, let him hear what the spirit says, not to the Angel
alone, but to the Churches. But they are sent to him by name, partly because he
is the dispensatour of doctrine, exhortation, reproof etc. even as the use of
the Church does require: partly because the safety of the whole congregation,
rests chiefly upon the integrity of the Pastors. Neither are they sent to
any one Angel, but to the whole, that I may so say, College of Pastors, who
all are comprehended in this common word. For there was not one Angel of
Ephesus, but many: neither any Prince among them, as is manifest from Paul, who
to Myletum sent for the Elders or Bishops of Ephesus, Act. 20.17.28. He would
have spared the multitude, if any one had bin over the rest in authority: or at
least wise among the rest of his admonitions, he would had spoken one word of
obedience to the chief Bishop. But this pre-eminence and principality, was
not yet bred: It began then first, after the Apostles were taken from humane
affairs, except that Diotrephes gave some show thereof.

Therefore under the name of one Angel, he writes to the whole order of
Pastors, for whose praise, or dispraise, the chief force of every Epistle is
intended. For such is, for the most part the condition of particular
congregations, as their faithfulness and diligence shall be. From whence it is,
that at the end the admonition is given to the whole congregation, fitted to
the administration of the teachers.

Neither is it to be thought, that these Epistles were sent severally, and
asunder one from an other, but that all were written together in a common
Epistle, such as we have said this whole Prophecy is, and that every Church
fetched from thence that which belongs to them severally. And these things
are common to all the seven Angels, to be applied to every one apart.

To the Church of Ephesus: Of the city Ephesus we have spoken briefly at the
eleventh verse of the first chapter: to which are to be added, the reason of
the order, the force of the name, and the Antitype of it, that the counsel of
the spirit may the better be understood. There may be a double reason of the
order: one that this city sette^h before our eyes most of all the Church of the
Gentiles like to the P^^^^gall s^ne, whoring and spe^ding his patrimony in a
far country, Luke 15.1^. and^ (...) home we know Christ to have set forth as
an image of the conve^^i^^ (...) ^alling of the Gentiles. For this city,
besides the horrible Idolatry whe^^^ she was a leader of other cities: it was
also given to most wr^tched riot, casting out of the city a certain man called
Hermodorus, not for a^y other crime, then that he was a thrifty man: this more
over being added, Let noe one of us excel, but if there be any such, let him
be in an other place, and among other men. Tusc. quest. book. 5. leaf 125. a
voice in deed of beasts, and, even ni the sentence of Ethnikes, worthy of a
halter. For thus says Strabo, All the Ephesians are to be punished by death.
Behold therefore that prodigal son, coming again to his father and running
to meet him, and falling on his neck and kissing him. How is the grace of God
to be praised, who has converted us Gentiles, being a gulf of wickedness, the
disposition of all which we see in this city, into a most glorious palace of
salvation. We were once the Princes of naughtines, now we are become the head
of holiness, as this among the seven Churches: noe less excelling in godliness;
then of late we did excel in all wickedness. For the Father has commanded the
best robe to be brought forth, and has killed the fatted calfe for our sakes.
An other reason of the order is, that this city was the foremost in embracing
the faith among all of that country, from whence it spread to the other
neighbor places. For Paul coming to Ephesus, daily disputed in the schole of
one Tyrannus, and that by the space of two years, so that all that dwelt in
Asia, as well Jews, as Gentiles, heard the word of the Lord Jesus, Act.
19.9.10. Werefore it is made worthily in the same place, the beginning of
Cities, from whence was the beginning of faith.

Now the force of the name is to be declared. For it shall be clear in every
one, that the Holy Ghost has chosen purposely those Churches, which even by
the very names, as it were by certain marks written on the forehead, should
manifest their whole condition. We let pass that Amazon, from whom they report
that it took the name, that which follows beneath ver. 4. that thou have
left thy first love, teaches sufficiently what the Spirit regarded in this
city: namely that Ephesus, was as it were omission: whereupon we call her
languishing, whose godliness waxes cold in such sort, as that at length it is
utterly extinguished. How is it to be feared that in this thing also it carries
a type of the Gentil^s!

As touching the Antitype, seeing these seven cities contain the universal
condition of the Churches of the Gentiles, as it is manifest enough from those
things which have bin said at the first chapter, in every of them not only
that one city is to be regarded, but also some fellow Church is to be joined
together with it, which may directly answer unto it. But of what sort shall
we say that these antitypes are. For were these seave^ Churchches mad patterns
of all Churches of that same time, or of a diverse time? If we shall say the
first, so as in all ages the Church spread through the whole world, did agree to
those seven, to wit, that one should be an Ephesine, one a Smyrnen, one a
Pergamen, and so of the rest, it should always be of one form, and such as it
was in the first times, so it shoul be at this day, against which the use of
all times teaches. Therefore it is needful, to make every one of them
severally types, and in that order, in which they are numbered: but the
antitypes are those Churches which being divided either by the distance of
times, or the space of places, do agree to every one in their order. The
convenience of the things will show sufficiently within what bounds they may
be concluded. According to this rule we do make the first Christian Church the
Antitype of the city of Ephesus: which fetching the original from the
preaching of the Apostles, continued even until Constantine the Great, as
those things shall make manifest, which shall be taught here after. This is
the chief of all the following Churchches, even as Ephesus is the first of the
seven cities.

These things says he that holds the seven stars: A description of him
that sent the Epistles, which is diverse in every one, yet fetched from the
former vision, diverse members of it being applied according to the diverse
condition of things. Which teaches abo^ndantly, both the whole former figure
to have shadowed out only the administration of things, and also to be proper
in a manner and peculiar to the seven Churches. The seven stars in his
right hand, declare that the power of Christ is notable in defe^ding the
Ministers of this Church. He is even as mighty a keeper and faithful
maintainer of all his faithful servants, in what place of the earth, or what
time soever they have bin or shall be; yet in some certain both places and times,
he manifests himself more clearly to the world an ave^ger, than every wherein
other, as appears both in this city and antitype. As touching the city, Paul,
who planted the faith there first, how many adversaries found he there? J will
abide, says he, at ^phesus till Pentecost, for a great door and effectual is
opened to me, and the adversaries many: 1 Cor. 16.9. Yet we read not that any
calamity came unto him. He was beaten elsewhere and stoned and left for dead:
but here Demetrius stirring up the workmen against him, he that holds the
stars in his right hand, not only kept Paul free from all evil, but also
Caius and Aristarchus and Alexander, pacifying the tumulte by the prudence of
the town clarke; Act. 19. The same hand shielded Tychichus and Timotheus, the
Angels afterward of the same Church: Ephesians. 6.21. 1 Timothy 1.3. And no less the
Elders, the ordinary Bishops of the Church, whom Paul called to Miletum to give
them his last farewell. At length John came to the same place, and there abode
many years, stablishing all the neighbor Churches. Neither did the rage of
the tyrant proceed to his death: but at length returning from banishement, he
dyed quietly in this city. The power of the mighty and star bearing hand
gave such safety to his servants. The like power also shined forth in
preserving the Pastors through the whole time of the first Church. An huge
number indeed of the faithful were slain daily, but this is mervailous, that
in the opinion of me^ it being necessary that the name of Christ should be
extinguished utterly, much more the Pastors, against whom the Tyrants raged
most of all, there was made daily so great increase, that it was spoken then
commonly and truly: That the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church.
But Christ walks among the candlestickes, as often as he gives a manifest
proof of himself being present and regarding diligently all things which
perteine to the salvation of the faithful. In what city gave he a show of more
plentiful grace and favor, than in Ephesus, whereto for teachers he gave Paul,
Apollos, Tychicus, Timotheus, John the Apostle, besides many other Apostolical
men? And where or when was Christ more manifestly conversant in the earth since
his ascension into Heaven, then in those first times, until about Constantine?
He did enrich so abou^dantly the Church with all gifts, he pricked foreward
their sluggishnes, corrected their negligence, rewarded their virtue, so as he
might seem by himself to compass every one, and view their labor with his
own eyes. In one and the same manner he is always among the ca^dlestickes,
neither does he sit idly, but walks about continually, and comes to visit
every thing, so that he has no need of a Vicar: yet because by outward
arguments, this is not oftentimes alike manifest to the world, therefore that
which is properly and singularly belonging as it were to one city and time, is
alleged.

J know thy works: A narration, and first of praise. And it is common to all
the Epistles, in the beginning of the narration, to profess that he knows
certainly and tries every Angels works. Therefore neither shall reward be
wanting at any time to virtue, nor just punishment to naughtines. And as even
now I have put in mind of a Vicar, how wickedly serviceable are they, who
arrogate to themselves, as an absolute lord, the power over their fellow
servants, seeing he thoroughly knows all things, and is not in vain
conversant among the candlestickes? The praise of the Ephesine Angel
respects either his office, in this verse, or his virtue against outward
evils, ver. 3. His office consists, either in administering the word and
those things which are wont to accompany it usually, the Sacraments and
prayers, or in exercising of discipline. As touching that he says, I know thy
labor and thy patience: For the pains which is bestowed in preaching the
word, because it is laborious, and full of troubles and griefs, is wont to be
called labor in the scriptures, as, we pray you brethren that ye as knowledge
them that labor among you; etc. 1 These. 5.12. And they are worthy of double
honor: especially they that l^bour in the word and doctrine: 1 Timothy 5.17. But
patience as a necessary companion must be adioined unto the labor of teaching:
which the Spirit shows, saying and thy patience. As also Paul, The servant of
God must not fight, but must be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering
the evil men: teaching them with meek^nes that are contrary minded: 2 Timothy
2.23.24. Therefore this Church was famous in the faithfulness and diligence of
teaching. Behold the example of Paul, who by the space of three years day
and night ceased not to admonish every one with tears: Act. 20.31. Do thou
also conjecture from those godly Bishops, who loved Paul so grealy, whom also
he again loved no less: Act. 20.37.38 Afterward mind John and the rest. But
a matter that is clear needs not many words.

As touching her Antitype, the matter is even as evident; they did never more
faithfully give themselves to teaching. That Monster was not yet borne, that
any should be Pastor, that does not feed at all: Or that one should sit in
the chair of the teacher, who as dumme should be sleepy, distracted with other
businesses. There was then no Bishop, who had the office of teaching, who
taught not most diligently. Even also at Rome, where it behoved that the
mystery of iniquity should spring up betimes, they ceased not as yet from this
office. The Pastor every Lords day at the least did plainly and clearlie
expound those things which were read out of the books of the Apostles and
Prophets: then also he did admonish and exhort, that they would follow those
things, which being holy and good, they had heard rehearsed: Justin. Apolog.
2. The same thing testify Clemens, Origenes, Tertullian, Cypriam: But the
matter is so clear and manifest, as the contrary thereto to be done at this day.

And that thou can not bear the wicked: Such was the care of teaching, the
manner of their Discipline was no less pure and sound: Which first is
universallie set down, of what sort it was toward all the wicked: afterward
specially, what it was toward the clergy, that I may so speak, in the next
words, and have tried them which say they are Apostles etc. The general
discipline did not tolerate men in any sort living wickedly, and with the
offense of others, but according to the manner of their fault, did rebuke
either privately, or before many, if private admonition profited nothing: then
also at last it did debar them from holy things, if they would not obey them
that counseled them well. And touching Ephesus it can not be uncerten, but
that this holy rule did hold there, seeing Paul taught their the space of
three years: who gave commandment to Timotheus touching this matter so
diligently and exactly. The observation thereof was famous in the primitive
Church, as even Pline testifyeth in an Epistle unto Traian: The Christians are
wont, says he, to rise betimes in the morning to praise Christ as God, for the
preserving of their religion, to prohibit murders, adulteries, avarice,
cousenage, and the like unto those: Eusebius. kook 3. chap. 33. of the Eccles.
Hist. from Tertullian. Out of all doubt they did not only prohibit in word by
teaching: but also did restrain them by holy discipline. And they did
determine rightly, that Religion could not be preserved otherwise, unless
vices be cut of by this spiritual sword. Justin testifyeth that no man was
admitted to the Sacrament of the supper, but he whose life should answer and
accord with his profession, Apol. 2. But more plainly Tertullian writing thus:
There are also exhortations, corrections and divine censure: for it is showed
with great gravitie, if any have offended, that he may be sent away from
communicating in prayer, both of the assembly and all holy so^iety: where all
most approved Elders have authority, having obtained that honor not by money,
but by good report: Apologet. chapter 39. Origenes in his 35. treatise on Mat. In
the Churches of Christ, says he, such a custom has held, that they which are
manifest in great sins, thereof convicted, should be cast out from common
prayer, least a little leaven of such as pray not from their heart, should
corrupt the whole sprinkling and consent of truth. So in Hom. 7. upon Joshua:
Him that the third time being admonished refuses to repent, he commands to
be cut of from the body of the Church by the rulers of the Church: where also
he shows, that the Priests sparing one, and neglecting their Priestlie
severitie, do work the ruin of the whole Church. The Epistles of Cyprian are
most clear witnesses, how holilie and regiously he kept it in his Church, yea
they do prove how purely the discipline abod hitherto at Rome, as is clear by
the Epistles of Cyprian to the clergy of Rome, and to Cornelius, and again of
them to Cyprian. It is therefore an excellent praise of that time, that
conioined together with the purity of doctrine, sanctity of manners, by most
wholesome discipline.

And have tried them which say thy are Apostles. The other part of discipline
is toward Ecclesiastical men, who were reproved not only for sin in life,
but also they did undergo punishments meet for their ungodlines, if they
brought any new thing and diverse from the truth, which after lawful
examination was found not to agree to the rule of the sanctuary. And great
was the courage of the Angel in this matter, who was not skared from his duty
by great names, but did bring them back to a wholly examining, who did vaunt
that they were Apostles. Of which sort that there were me^ at Ephesus it is
clear, from that instruction given unto Timotheus, That thou would abide at
Ephesus, says he, that thou may give warning to some, that they teach none
other doctrine, neither give ear to fables and genealogies being endless,
which do breed questions rather then godly edifying which is by faith, 1 Timothy
1.3. And the same Paul warns the Bishops of Ephesus, to take heed to
themselves and the whole flock: For I know this, that after my departure,
grievous wolves not sparing the flock will enter in among you, and of your
selves shall arise some, which shall speak perverse things, that they may
draw disciples after them: Act 20.29.30. But the diligence of the Pastors did
pluck the vizzards from the hypocrites and did not suffer their crafts to
spread to the destruction of the flock: so the Church continued uncorrupted,
even to the coming of John, who ruled the same many years: who at length for
a time being removed, it staked somewhat of that former care, as we shall show
by and by. Likewise in the f^rst church there was such a troop of heretics,
as scarce has bin in all other times. There arose Simonians, Menandrians,
Ebionites, Cerinthians, Pseudoapostolins, Gnostickes, Sabellians,
Samosatenians, Manichees etc. Some of which the Apostles themselves did perce
through with the dart of truth. Paul delivered Hymeneus and Alexander to
Satan: So Phygellus and Hermogenes, and as it seems Philetus. And he taught
Titus, that he should shun an heretical man after once or twice admonition:
Tit. 3.10. But after they were gone to Christ, many other excellent lights
rose up, which did dispell diligently all heretical darkness. Among which
Agrippa Castor, as Eusebius reports, Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Tertulianus,
Cyprianus etc. Who all fought egerly for the truth against cou^terfait
Apostles. Wherefore as both the city and that former age were perilous because
of the impudency of those, who with false titles made a show that they were
Apostles: so were they no less happy by the faithfulness and industry of such
defenders, who would not be deceaved with a vain show, but bringing the matter
to the touchstone manifested to the whole Church, that they were most fil^hy
fellows, who would be counted the principal masters.

And thou wast burdened: Hitherto his faithfulness in executing his office, now
he rehearses his virtue against externe evils: which were many and great, both
of that city and of all the Christian world. The battles of Paul against
beasts at Ephesus are famous: 1 Cor. 15.32. But what tranquillity could be to
the Angels following, who should have to do with grievous wolves not sparing
the flock: Act. 20.29.30. It was therefore the commendation of this Angel,
that he did sustain and endure calamity stoutly, which is declared in a triple
degree: that he bare the burden: that he labored under the burden, and yet was
not tired: as though he should say, a great weight in deed of trouble did ly
upon thee, under the burden whereof thou gronedst, yet thou wast not
discouraged that thou should pluck thy neck from the yoke, and betray the
truth. It is a manly fortitude to bear out manfully troubles and torment.
Many bear the yoke cheerfully as long as they feel but a little grief; But
to go on constantly among the stinges of grief and sorrow, is a point of great
courage, and of heavenly fortitude.

Such was this Angel, such also was the whole Primitive Church. Nero and
Domitian had greatly persecuted the Church, before John wrote these things.
And besides Nero and Domitian, it abode patiently under Traia^, Adrian,
Antonin, Severus, Diocletian. The times were never more miserable when the
EMPEROVRS did let their labor to hire to the Devil, for to shed the Christian
blood, which he does always thirst after. Yet the faithful revolted not but
continued co^sta^tly unto the end, becoming at length co^querers, setting up
the sign of victory against the Devil and al foes. For what other thing were
so many sk^rres and prints, with which many Bishos were marked, who after the
tempest of tyrannical persecution drive^ away, did meet in the Nicene
Counsel, then so many triumphant bows of the victory gotten against the
enemies? Paulus Neocesariensis was bereft of the use of both his hands, the
sinews being shrunk and cut by the persecutours with a whote iron. Others had
both their eyes put out. Others their right hands cut of by the elbowe, among
which was Paphnutius Aegyptius. In sum a man might have seen a company of
famous and picked Martyrs gathered together: Theod. book 1. chap. 7. He was an
Angel of an invicible courage, whom so many calamities could not break, yea
not bow never so little. Now therefore if we shall gather all these things into
one sum, we shall see a most beautiful image of any excellent Church. For
behold an Angel sparing noe trouble of his own in the labout of teaching,
administering the dis^ipline most religiously: suffering none that should
offend the Church with his naughtines: either keeping far away the leven of
heretics, or taking it away most carefully at the very first. And last of all
for all these things undergoing boldly whatsoever the wicked enemies were able
to inflict upon him. Does he in any thing need amending? In nothing in deed,
if only he had continued in his integrity: but godliness faints by little
and little unless it be kindled continually: and often times a certain naked
profession remains, where all his power is utterly dead and lies quenched:
as we shall see by and by to have happened here.

As touching the words, Montanus and the vulgar translation do distinguish
this verse otherwise, also they put out and change some words: And have borne
a burden and have patience for my name, and have not fainted: So Aretas, but
the first words set out of order: And have patience and have borne a burden.
But these readings want express signification, which our kookes have, which
conioine together burden, trouble, and perseverance. The sentence becomes much
more weak where this word trouble is taken away

4 But I have somewhat against thee Hitherto was the praise: The reprehensio^
is for the leaving of their first love: Of which even a light slaking had not
wanted great fault: But to put of the same wholly, how great wickedness: For so
the word thou have left, sounds: as if the Ephesine Angel were like to those
widows given to riot, which Paul says, are to be condemned, because they have
cast away their first faith, 1 Timothy 5.12. Although this loss of love, was
nothing to the heinous offense of the widows, For their Apostasy was manifest,
his only a faint, or rather no care, and a very great negligence of godly
duties, the profession of the truth being kept. But the Spirit speaks of
diverse times, as it appears from this that he says, that thou have left thy
first love, and in the verse following bids them to do the first works.
From which it is perceaved easily, of what sort was this coldness, to it that
the Angel who in the first times of the Gospel received, faithfully executed
the office of teaching, and observed diligently every ons manners, to which
forthwith he applied a remedy by ecclesiastical discipline: afterward in the
latter years did so languish, that he was negligently occupied in the first
labor, permitted some of his floke to perish through ignorance, some through
the infirmity of the flesh to be carried headlong into destruction, no lawful
curing undertaken. This is that love, which Christ takes grievously to be laid
aside so shamefully. For he shows that he is then truly loved, when his
sheep are fed faithfully and with a sincere mind. Whereto pertains that
thrice repeated commandment to Peter, If thou love me, feed my sheep, Ioh.
16.17. But in process of time in this Church this fervency waxed cold or
rather altogether vanished away, as is manifest by the reprehension. Such is
our infirmity rushing a pace no less to the loss and destruction of
spiritual life, then our bodies have continually to the graves. Wherefore then
is there too much cure of this, and none of that? The Ephesians retained an
outward profession, neither were any calamities able to take it from them, as
the former verse even now taught, yet in the mean time they decayed by little
and little, neglecting those things, without which true godliness cannot
consist. And this leaving of love seems to have come to pass then, when John
had bin sent away into Pathmos. Doubtless while he abode at Ephesus he
suffered not either doctrine or discipline to decay, but being at length bereft
of so vigilant a watchman, they fell into this detested drowsines. The Bishop
may be for an example, although not of that city, yet of a neighbor place, who
thorough the negligence of holy discipline suffered a certain young man delivered
to him of John to be kept, to become a thief and a robber. Wherefore John did
worthily hit and cast in his teeth his good keeping: Eusebius. Hist. book 3.23.
But howsoever the history be silent in this matter, it is certain that the
Ephesine Angels fell together into shameful negligence about these times. Of
which sort also we find the carelesnes of the Church growing in use by little
and little.

In the first times while it had the Apostles for presidents, and eye witnesses
of all things, the diligence of the Elders was fervent, who did both preach the
word of God faithfully, and also further the godliness of their flock carefully
by discipline, but at length after two hundred years from Christ's birth, they
suffered all things to wax worse and worse by a manifest declining. How began
the discipline to be loosed and corrupted, when the Martyrs and Confessors
gave rest to those that had fallen, not only without the Bishops counsel, but
also against their wills? How this outrageous disturbance of the heavenly rule
troubled Cyprian, we may see from his Epistles: from whence among other causes
of the incumbent persecution, many of which he rehearsed, at length he
descends to this, And what plagues, what stripes do we not deserve, when noe
not the Confessors, do keep discipline, who ought to have bin an exemple to
others to good manners: Epist. book 4. 4. And not many years after, Eusebius
relating the condition of the Church, in which it was a little before
Diocletian began his persecution: They, says he, which were thought to be our
Pastors, rejecting the bond of godliness were busily occupied in mutual
contentions among themselves: These things only increasing beiond measure,
contentions, and threatenings, and emulations, and mutual grudges, and hatred,
following with all their might pre-eminence and dominion, as it were kingdoms:
book 8. of Hist. chap. 1. It must needs be that the edge of holy discipline was
made blunt in wonderful manner, which was of no force to cut of such noxiour
herbs. But Ambrose, who rehearses that the divine rule was vanished quite
away before his times, speaking of the Elders, at length infers most
clearly, Whereupon, says he, both the Synagogue and also afterward the Church
had Elders, without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church: Which by
what negligence it is grown out of use I know not, unless peradventure by the
slouthfulnes or rather pride of the teachers, while they alone will be thought
to be somewhat: upon the 1. at Tim. chap. 5. He was not long after that time
which we call the Primitive Church. Yet he so speaks, as though some ages
before his time, this wholesome custom had bin abolished. Which things do
clearly show, how in the later times the first love waxed cold altogether, and
at length went to nothing.

5 Remember from whence thou art fallen; Such was their sin: the remedy
consists of three members, a just consideration of their fall, repentance,
and redressing of the discipline. Which all together are required unto
amendment and in the same order, in which they are rehearsed. Because we fall
by little and little, we perceave not almost into how deep a pit we are fallen:
but let us look back to the high top, from whence we are fallen, and we
shall mervayle at the low gulf in which we ly. Whereupon he warns, that he
mind from whence he was fallen. Neither is it enough to perceive that we are
fallen, but very quickly we must get out of the gulf by repentance. He
adioineth therefore, repent: But many do deceave themselves, and think that
they have repented well, when in very deed they have done nothing less:
Therefore last of all he requires, that the first works be done. For then
thou shall prove thy repentance just, if it shall bring forth true holiness of
works, and either shall return to the first love, if it were sincere, or shall
increase the same by adding a greater unto it. But why does he require
instantly the first works, especially in the Antitype, which contains the
space of about three hundred years? Would he that the Church that was spread
far abroad, and increased with an innumerable multitude of citizens, should
return again to their cradell? Or whether will he that there should be the
same reason and respect of the whole e^rth, which is of one city? Now also it
was nigh, when the Church should have a Christian Magistrate, Constantine being
about to come strait way to the Empire and government of the world: What need
should they then have, of that former ancient discipline? It was meet
peradventure that Christ had waited for a little time, and had not urged so
earnestly the first beginnings, of which there should be no use in shart time.
But these are the dreams of such as are sick of a fever. He that knows what
is most fit for his Spouse, requires earnestly the first works, after so many
years, and after the dispersing of his Church in so many places: he wills
that she labor again in the word, and that she punish wicked men with the
Ecclesiastical Discipline. He knew that the order appointed by him should fit
as well Provinces as Cities: neither should hinder any whit the civil
administration, but further and adorn the same above all. From hence then let
us learn, that, that first governeme^t is common to all times and places:
Neither to be permitted to men's pleasure, to follow the way that they will, but
that always in reforming the Church we must have recourse to the first
beginnings: unto which rule must be recalled, whatsoever erres from the right
way, and not to frame it according to the corruption of the following Churches.

Or else I will come against thee quickly: The threatening puts to spurs,
and stirs up the feeble strength of the remedy. Often times the fear of
peril, prevails more with men, then the hatred of wickedness. He threatens
that he will come quickly and remove the candlestick out of his place. But
what need is there that he should come, who walks in the mids of the
candlestickes? He dwells not among his as a revenger, but as a brother and
defender; from whence as often as he must take punishment, he puts on a new
person and form, in which he appeared not before: and is said to come from
another place, and to seem now another, from him whom before time they did
know. In the Greek it is, J will come to thee, for against thee. Now to remove
the candlestick out of his place, is to take away the truth and dignity of the
Church. Which though it be not noted expressly by the Historiographers, yet we
may not doubt, but that according to this co^minatio^, Ephesus lost a while
after the form and honor of a Church. I co^te^d not about the name of a
Church, which I know she have retained for many ages, but for the first
purity, by which alone God measures a holy Church, and not by colored and
naked names. Much less is the candlestick to be understood of the Episcopal
dignity, as the Jesuit would have it, which we read to have continued from
those times eight hundred years at least. Therefore this candlestick was not
quickly removed: Did the Angel peradventure repent? It is not likely, seeing in
the Antitype it is certain, that, that followed in a short time, which is
threatened here to come to pass. For the Angels proceeding in negligence, as we
have learned from those things which have bin before spoken, Christ took out
of men's sight the first golden candlestick, by taking away his most holy
ordinances, of which the world was most unworthy, on which the primitive Church
was founded by himself and by his Apostles. For there was a new face of things
when Constantine came: there remained yet the desire of preaching in the
Bishops: but the doctrine was fowlly contaminated in many points: Relics
began to be in reckoning, Temples to be adorned more magnificently, all kind
of superstition to increase, besides the pride of the teachers, as a little
before Ambrose have taught, spoiled the Church of a necessary help to rule
their ma^ners. In stead whereof Ecclesiastical dignities were increased, all
things being curiously sought out, more for pomp, then for truth. And while
men gave themselves to things of this nature, the golden Candlestick, which
among the candlesticks did obtain worthyly the chief praise, was removed out
of his place. This shall be more clear then the light at noone day in the rest
of the book. In the mean time let men see, how evil they provide for
themselves and the truth, which think every thing right, which they read to
have bin used in those times. Rather let them go to the entire age in which
the candlestick stood in his place: which after it was set in an other place,
the same was overwhelmed with darkness, neither could he give light to others.

6 But this thou have and c: This also avails to quicken their carefulnes:
they might have bin proud of their present happiness, as though their own
godliness had procured it to them: It is not so, says the Spirit: but in that
the punishment is yet witholden, it comes not of thy approved faithfulness and
diligence, but of the only mercy of God whereby he spares that little good,
which thou have yet left. For as he would not have destroyed Sodom, if ten
good men had bin found in it: so his wrath waxes not hot against his, as
long as any hope of good is remaining in them. It was but a small thing
therefore, that let, that he should not by and by translate the
candlestick, neither shoul suffer it to abide any longer among them. But what
was this small thing? To wit, that he hated the works of the Nicolaitanes,
that is, of them whose chief author was Nicolas of Antioche, once one of the
seven Deacons, Act. 6. Who taught that wiv s ought to be common, and that it
was an indifferent thing to commit adultery, as Ireneus, Theodoret and others
do declare. For as touching that Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. book 3. does
attribute this heresy rather to the wickedness of his folowers, who drew to this
foul licentiousnes, the fact and saying of Nicol^s, which had respect only to
the removing of jealousy, it seems scarce credible. For John would have
spared the cred^t of the man, and would have told the ringleader of so great
filthiness, neither would have suffered his name to have bin borne falsely of
wicked men. The Ephesine Angel therefore was pure from the contagion of this
sin. What were the Angels of the Primitive Church? They were no less free
from this blemish. This heresy was soon rejected, for his own foulenes. But
after we shall see, that the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes did extend not only
to the filthiness of the body, but also was transferred unto spiritual
fornication: ver. 15. Were they also without fault in this part? In the first
hundred years the Church remained a chaste virgin: in the next ages it began
to wax wanton, defyling somewhat the marriage bed, partly with unprofitable
opinions, partly with foolish ceremonies, but somewhat fearfully and privily at
the first: nothing according to that impudency which came together with
Constantine, and afterward. In this respect therefore, Christ suffered it a
long time, although he saw that their first love had waxed cold.

7 He that has an ear etc. An Epiphonematicall conclusion, common to all the
Epistles: Wherein he shows that all whatsoever thy be ought to hearken to
these admonitions of the Spirit. Properly in deed they belong to the Angels:
but it concerns us all greatly, of what sort their condition shall be. They
either offend or do their duty not for themselves alone, but their condition
is joined either with the great good or evil of the whole flock. But what do
these things so long ago past, pertain to us? There is the same disposition
of all Churches, and of every one severally: whereupon it is very profitable for
us, of what age soever, to beware by their eville. Although all will not obey
these admonitions, but they only, whose ears the Spirit opens. For they are
bidden to hear, that have ears. And therefore we ought not to mervayl, if we
shall see many to contemn securely these threatenings, and to think that these
praises and reprehensions belong not to them at all. But what is that, which
he wills to be heard? That which follows by and by, says the Jesuit, To
him that overcomes, J will give to eat etc. Forsooth the Spirit would have
the last clause to be heard of all Churches, and of all the members of any
Church, but all that which was before, the Bishop shall have privately for
himself: A witty indeed and trusty exposition. Are not the Epistles
pronounced universally and inscribed to the Churches, Chap. 1.11? Would it not
profit them very much to be instructed touching the state of their Angels, and
to understa^d what they might require of them by right? They are sent indeed
by name to the Angels, not that they should keep them close to themselves as
mysteryes, but that by their means, they might be communicated to the
Churches, whom the Lord uses as his Ambassadors, to speak to his spouse.
Which does yet more appear from those that follow. For it does not fit a Bishop
only which after is written to them of Smyrna, Behold it shall come to pass
that Satan shall cast some of you into prison etc. ver. 10. or that to them of
Thyatira, and to you, J say, and the rest of Thyatira, ver. 24. That I say
nothing, that in some of the Epistles, the exhortation to hear, shuts up
the whole matter, as to the Church at Thyatira ver. 29. To the Church at Sardi
chap. 3.6. at Philadelphia, ver. 13. at Laodicea ver. 22. Whereupon if the
Church be reserved to the Epiphonema, she ought to open and shut the ears all
at one time. For there follows nothing to be heard.

To him that overcomes, I will give to eat of the tree of life: The reward in
every one is fitted to the times: and is one and the same every where, Jesus
Christ alone. For what greater thing can he give to his elect? Or what thing
shall we need, if we do enjoy him? But according to the diverse condition of
times he is set before us in a diverse manner. In this Primitive Church he is
the tree of life in the mids of the Paradise of God. Why? Because the first
state of the Spouse, was wholly like to the first happiness of Adam in Paradise:
of which that was a certain visible image and figure, restored in the last times
on earth, after our so long banishment from thence. For there was a tree of
life in the mids of the garden like a shadow: here Jesus Christ borne of a
Virgin was conversant with us in the mids of mortal men: there all kind of
beautyfull plants, most profitable both for sight and for meat: here a
copious abondance of of all gifts, which belong either to salvation, or to
ornament: there one river, but dividing it self from the garden into four
heads: here one voice of verity among all the Apostles, but which beginning at
Jerusalem, was spread abroad into the four quarters of the world, watering all
lands whersoever it flows with peace and salvation. What pleasantnes was
wanting there, that the mind of man can think of? What is not here
sufficiently furnished by him at whose administration the Angels themselves are
amazed? To wit, that terrible Angel, with a shining sword keeping the way to
the tree of life; it is now removed out of his place, and an entrance again is
opened into the garden most full of true pleasure. Christ therefore promised
that they which shall keep themselves pure from the corruptions of these
times, neither shall forsake their first love, shall continue those true
citizens of this holy Church, and that they shall have free leave to eat of
Christ, that true tree of life in the mids of this new Eden. Many wicked men
and heretics at that time, were thrust headlong (as once Adam) out of the
Celestial garden, yet with unlike issue and condition. For Adam falling away
from the shadowlike Paradise, by faith in Christ he found an entrance into the
true, but these heretics being driven from the heavenly and true, what return
can ever be hoped for? Seeing therefore that this is the natural sense of the
words, how foully do they err, who do count the Primitive Church an infant,
rude and imperfect? and do attribute ripeness of age and perfection to the
latter corrupt times? For they do prefer Tophet before Paradise: neither do
mind that all pleasantnes did belong to the first beginning: but thorns and
thisles and all noisome herbs to the curse following. Far be it that we
should think the water flowing by durty channels, either purer or sweeter or
fitter for our use, the further it shall be distant from the fountain. Further
let the reprobate know that they do never eat of this tree. For there is the
same meat both for way and for country: There is only a difference of a more
full fruition, wherein we shall rejoice after the battle finished. Neither is
the reward of them that overcome given to the slougthfull cowards. The Angel
will keep them far from it with his glistering sword, that they may not
pluck any thing at any time from this tree.

The Analysis.
SO is the first Epistle: the second, is sent to the Church of Smyrna, but
inscribed according to the manner, to the Angel: afterward he describes him
that sends: That he is the first and last, then, that he was lately dead, but
now alive, ver. 8. The Narration partly commends for their suffering of
affliction, which the blasphemous Ieuwes brought upon them, ver. 9. partly
instructs against a new calamity, both showing the Author, kind, end,
continuance: and also promising a crown, ver. 10. The Conclusion has both the
wonted Epiphoneme, and also immunity from the second death verse eleventh.

Scholions.
Sweet smelling Smyrna.
AND to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna: Smyrna was a Colonie of the
Ephesians, as we have said: So also named of Smyrna the Amazone, but of which
the Spirit respects an other notation. For from whence it is a sweet
smelling Smyrna, that is Myrrh, far more pleasant then any spices, as is
evident from this, that he reproves no fault of this Church, but shows that
it is most dear to him, howsoever nothing was more conte^ned and despised of
the world. Neither must we think that it does hold the second place after
Ephesus: For the Spirit does not recite the cities by iumpes, next putting a
sunder either Sardis or Philadelphia, or any one of the rest, but in the right
order, in which they were situated. And first he goes forward to the North, in
which part about the three hundredth and twe^tieth furlongs Smyrna is placed on
the shore. From whence again he declineth to Pergamus further into the North;
From Pergamus the rest in their order do bend to the south. And without doubt
this order demo^strateth the like progress of the Church. In our part of the
world, the further we go to the North, so much the further we go from the
sun, the fountain of light. Therefore Smyrna after Ephesus, do teach that
after the first purity, the Church will proceed every day to greater darkness,
while at length it shall come to Pergamus, the last bound: from whence again
it shall go toward the South, every day to be more and more lightened with a
greater brightness. We shall see in the things following, that the event does
so agree, that no equal judge will condemn these things for vain
subtilityes, but rather with me will admire the greatness of the mystery. And
if we shall hold back our opinions, while the whole matter shall be thoroughly
perceived of us, we shall judge far more uprightly, which shall be best both
for our selves and for the truth: Which only I do respect (God is witness) and
not any desire of parts taking or of novelty. But thou will say, how is Smyrna
so delectable Myrrh to God, whose condition is worse then of Ephesus? In
outward show indeed it is more deformed, shining with no ornament of lawful
polity: in which respect the North corner does agree unto it: yet the fervent
desire of the godly, who did fight most valiantly for the truth in this
miserable deformity, did raise up to God a most sweet savor. Furthermore by
how much the greater tentation does lie upon them, by so much God is wont to
deal more favorably with his. He shows not then rigor in threatenings, but
conforteth as much as he can, that he may confirm the languishing, and not
add affliction to affliction. The Primitive Church suffered most grievous
calamities, but at the hands of Heathen men, which was some asswaging of their
sorrow. But Smyrna must suffer all extremityes at the hands of their own. In
which griefs that it should not faint or be overcome, he hears nothing but
that which may add courage. Hereupon reprehensions are passed over, although
it had more of the basest sort then the former, Ephesus. The Antitype is the
next Church after the first. His Colonie, as of Ephesus Smyrna: sometime also
inioying one common name, even as those two cities, by reason of their great
conjunction at the first, as Strabo shows. This Antitype takes his beginning
together with Constantine, until which time the Primitive Church, the Ephesine
Antitype continued, and proceeds even unto Gratian about the year of the
Lord three hundredth four score and second according to Eusebius.

These things says he that is the first and last: The description of the
sender of the Epistle, is fetched from ver. 17. of the former chapter. In which
words we have showed that Christ is praised as the maker and ruler of all
things: by whose authority and comma^deme^t alone all things are done, and
that to his glory: or rather that in this elogie is praised the mervaylous
ioining together as well of his great majesty as of his humility. Which
interpretation receaveth confirmation from hence, that the condition of the
Smyrneans was like; Thou art afflicted, says he, and poor, but in very deed
thou art rich. What other thing is this then, although with the world thou art
counted the last, thou art notwithstanding in truth the first. And together
also it shows that alteration, whereby the truth first flourished among the
Smyrneans in very great estimation, afterward despised and trampled under foot
of hypocrites: even as Christ in the beginning was in incomprehensible glory,
God with God, but in the last times, taking upon him the form of a servaunt,
made himself of no reputation, being made like unto men. He takes to him
self titles that may fit the present condition of things. Whereupon he
spreads a diverse beam of his glory in the several Epistles, according to
the diverse condition wherein the Churches are. Whereby he teaches that, that
of his infinite divine majesty is chiefly to be contemplated with the mind,
which may be most availeable for the present matter. But that they should not
think that they must always ly in this base estate, he adioineth another title:
Who was, says he, dead, but is alive; as though he should say; although I was
in the beginning the first, after the last, yet I abode not any long time in
this most base estate, but death being overcom within the space of three days,
I obtained my former dignity, in which I now live for ever. These things then
declare the notable change that came to pass at Smyrna, and no less in his
Antitype. Where the first truth, which by the space of three hundred years was
established by so much blood, be came at length to be hated of the Christians
themselves, and the last fortune stayed together with his professors: which
Christ, as he himself rose from the dead, should raise again from the dust,
and place it in the former degree of dignity. Why then should they be
discouraged, whom their Captain has gone before in the same steps? Or
wherefore should they fear afflictions, whose issue is so ioifull and
confortable?

9 J know thy works and affliction: The narration of the condition, which he
says, is known of him, as in the rest, least peradventure they should
suppose, that their miseries are not regarded of him, because of his so long
sufferrance. The state of this Church was afflicted, as at the present time in
this verse, so afterward to be expected, in the next: Whereto the Antitype
agrees altogether. For after the first age driven away, by and by a lamentable
strife arose, when Constantine succeeded. The persecutions of open enemies
ceased, but the strifes and contentions of the citizens forthwith waxed very
hot. And not only of the whole Church in general, but also of this city:
Theodosius Junior boiling with envy against one Cyrus, who^ he saw to be very
gracious with the people, sends to Smyrna under a color to make him Bishop
of this city, but with a determinate purpose that he should be killed; For the
Smyrneans had killed long a go 4 of their Bishops; which barbarous cruelty
shows how grievously this Angel was afflicted: Epitome chr. set out with
Eusebius. chr. by the famous Joseph Scaliger, page 293. But if we shall enlarge
this Smyrna a little unto those contentions of the citiezens, of which I spoke;
by and by came Arius, who kindled that fire, whereby all things as well divine
as humane, were enfla^med. The Bishops studied noe other thing, then that one
might spoil another of their seats and dignities. Eustatius Antiochus was
banished with a great company of Elders and Deacons: Athan. in his Epistle to
them that lead a solitary life. Athanasius him self the only defender almost
of the truth, was not only assailed, but also oppressed with all kind of
false accusations; neither did they cease from their wicked assalting him,
before that he was banished to Treveres in France. Those were sorrowful times,
when the Emperor in the mean time not minding sufficiently the drifts of the
Bishops, did not know the true original of those sturres.

And thy poverty: That is, houw thou art moked and contemned, as a beggar: but
be thou despised mor the^ any Jrus of those hypocrites, thou art rich in mine
account, that thou may regard the less the wicked scoffing of those men.
And that we may let pass the Smyrneans, the matter is clear in the Antitype.
How few were there of the Orthodoxe that durst profess the truth? How
superstitiously were those few suppressed of the enemies? Certainly the Saints
were constrained to run hither and thither, that they might crave aid
against the tyranny. They also being turned out of their goods, could not
maitaine their life but by the liberality of others. Athanasius alone may be in
stead of many exemples: from whose often perils, flight, hidden places, no hope
to escape, any may easily see, how the faithful could prevail nothing with
their riches to repel the injuries of their enemies. The Smyrnean Angel was
then poor in deed, if we measure riches by humane defense.

But thou art rich: Not naked and forsaken, as men think, but by me and in my
account abounding in all riches: Which things also are together for to show
what defense and estimation Christ could prepare for his even in spite of the
world. Authority did increase together with affliction, as we know it came to
pass concerning Athanasius, who being vexed with all manner of contumelies in
the East, was in the west in great estimation. Constantin the son, Constans
the brother, Julius Roman, The Bishop of Treveres, who gave him entertainment
most kindly and liberally the space of two years, did reverence him according
as he was wortthy. Moreover also Constantin the great himself having perceaved
the calumnies of his adversaries, did honor his innocence and virtue, and
determined to bring him again from banishement.

And the blasphemy of those etc. Hitherto the kind of the present calamity:
now he shows the authors, arrogating to themselves, that which in no wise was
fitting them. But is it blasphemy for a Jew, to profess him self to be a
Jew? A Jew is taken figuratively for one people of God, which alone among all
men, knew the right way of worshipping him; as though he should say: They that
boast that they worship God after the ancient rule of the law, in which manner
their ancestors once worshipped, and all men ought allwaies to worship. This
was blasphemy, the retaining of the worship abolished, and the thrusting upon
God the ancient ceremonies, by which the glory of his son sent at length into
the world, shoud be overwhelmed: For which cause, although they were Jews by
stock, they lied in affirming that they were Jews, being so far from that
holy people, that in very truth they made a Synagogue of Satan. And it is
known, with what bitter minds they persecuted Christians in all places, as we
see in Paul and Barnabas at Antioche, Pisidia, Jconium, Lystra, and in other
places, Act. 13.50. and 14.2.5.19. Which they did also at Smyrna about these
times, as we learn from this place. Under Constantin these Jews were Arian
Bishops, namely, Eusebius Nicodemiensis, Theognis of Chalcedon, Maris,
Patrophilus, Vrsatius, Valens, and the rest of this sort, men in deed not
Ethnikes, nor woly void of all knowledge of God, as neither were the Jews, but
bearing the name of Christians, and such as were standart bearers in this
war. Who notwithstanding did hold their errors with thooth and nail, no
less then that stubburne nation of the Jews, striving to establish their
Decrees only, to vex by all means such as were contrary minded, to boast
that they alone had the true faith, to condemn all the rest of ungodlines and
blasphemy. But whatsoever boastings that wicked company made, as though God
dwelt in their congregations only, they gathered Churches not to God, but to
the Devil, of whose Synagogue, they were the chief rulers.

Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer: Now he instructs them
against the future evils, which were apparent to be more grievous then those
that were past. Those things with which the Jews did trouble them at the
present, then also those false accusations of the Bishops, while Constantine
lived, were light skirmishes of a sharper battle following by and by after.
Therefore he describes diligently all the manner of this combat, who should
be the chief Captain of it, with what kind of cruelty he should rage, to
what end, and how long. The Prince is the Devil, whom after we shall learn
to denote the Heathen Emperors, open enemies of the truth, as chap. 12.9. This
does comprehend also the Heretics, Christians in name, but in very truth
wolves devouring the flock.

The kind of punishment is the prison, under which, as the history teaches
is comprehended proscriptions, confiscation of goods, banishment, slaughters,
fires, tortures. With all these things the Devil should greatly torment, to
draw men from the truth. But this persecution should endure for ten days
only. And a day in this book is taken for a year. The number also of ten
some time signifies properly, some time by Synecdoche notes out some uncerten
number: I think that both are here used, that certain number should be of the
Type, and uncerten of the Antitype. Therefore as touching Smyrna it self, this
persecution fell out in the times of TRAIAN, which Devil, a professed enemy of
the truth, did reign next after this writing, very fierce against Christians,
delivering men into prison and death, that he might make them to renounce the
profession of Christ.

Smyrna could not be free from the common calamity: especially when Bythynia
being nigh to it, did altogether abound with the murders of the Christians, as
the Epistle of Plinius Secundus to Traian does show. From whence also it may
be gathered after a sort, of what continuance the persecution was. For in the
fourteenth year of Traian, Pliny relating to him the multitude of those that
were slain, was an occasion of staying that rage, and of obtaining some
breathing. What year it began, it is not plainly set down by the
History-writers. Some suppose that it was at the very beginning of his reign:
but in the fourth year triumphing over the Daces and Scythians, he seems to
have had first his Kingdom hindered, so as he could not have leisure to afflict
the Christians. But it is certain that he exercised his cruelty ten years at
least. It is likely that the end of that war gave the beginning of tormenting
Christians. Neither is it needful that this affliction be referred to Smyrna
only: but that it was that general of which he makes mention in the Church
of Philadelphia, which should come upon the whole world, Chap. 3.10. As
touching the Antitype, Constance and Valence Emperors, in name Christians; in
deed noe less fierce against the orthodoxe and true godly people, then once
the Ethnike Devils were. In which account also are holden the inferior
ministers of that wickedness: of the people, Syrianus, a Captain, and
Sebastianus, Governor of the armies Manicheus; Of the Bishops Eusebius, once
of Nicomedia, then of Constantinople, Macedonius, Georgius Alexandrinus, and
others of that sort, not Bishops, but monsters: whose barbarous cruelty was
scarce matched by any Tyrant. Of old the matter was handled with brawles,
chidings, and calumnies of all sorts: But after the death of Constantine, the
Devil was to come forth on the stage, and what broiles were raised up? It was
a light thing to drive holy men into banishement, to cast very many into
prison, to kill almost an infinite number; They tyrannised with torments and
all manner of contumelious punishments. Some were beaten with stripes unto
death, some marked in the forehead with prints of hot iron, some tormented
with other tortures. Yea the breasts were cut of from holy women: Unto some
they were burnt of with a hot iron: to many with eggs roasted in the fire to
an exceeding great heat. Who would believe that any such thing could have bin
inferred upon Christians, from men of Christian profession? It cannot be showed
in few words, how full of calamity those times were, but see Socrat. book 2.
and 4. Theod. book 2. and 4. Sozom. book 3. 4. 6.

And although this tyranny did continue above fourteen years, yet
notwithstanding it does make those ten days of the same manner that we have
said.

Be faithful unto the death: He provoqueth unto fortitude, the reward being
propounded to be Eternal life. It is a profitable loss which is recompensed
with so great gain. What should nor the godly undergo most willingly, being
sure of such a reward? It is fitted to the times ministering comfort against the
loss of this present life.

To which purpose he spoke before, that he was alive which had bin dead, that
by his exemple they should learn not to fear death, which they should know to
be a mean between God and them of eternal happiness.

11 He that has an ear: The wonted conclusion, warning all men, to hearken
diligently to these instructions touching fortitude and courage of mind in
afflictions. We were instructed before against the sluggishnes which is inbread
in us: here we are armed against outward violence. The reward which is added to
the end, He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death, is common to
the whole Church. That which was before, belonged properly to the Angel, the
knowledge whereof notwithstanding was very necessary to the people, as has bin
said before. But seeing that this conflict was to be undergone as well of the
people as of the Pastors, confort also is given them by name, to the same
purpose that the former was, but in a diverse respect. For there are two things
which are wont to kindle the desire unto every excellent act, hope of reward
and contemning of the peril: that first was proposed to the Postours, whose
courage is wont to be more ready and valiant by looking into the reward. This
second to the People, whom the fear of danger chiefly withdraws from their
duty, and suffers them not to undertake any thing worthy commendation. He
teaches therefore that they must not fear to spend their life, if need be,
for the truth sake: for there shall be no fear of the second death, by which
the body and soul perish for ever: according to that of Christ: Fear not them
that kill the body, but cannot kill the soul: but fear him rather, who can
destroy both soul and body in hell fire, Mat. 10.28. This in hell fire, is
this same which he calls second death: By the which the whole man shall be no
less deprived of all solace in God, as the body is destitute of all help
being separated from the soul by the first death. This is that horrible death,
to be feared in deed, from which he that has overcome death, do deliver his:
from which he promised to free them that overcome: He does not promise to
deliver them from the first, being too light a thing, either to be given by
such a great price Rewarder, or to be expected by those that are his. And what
need is there to be defended from the first death, which the necessity of
nature will bring at length; but to prevent it for the truths sake procures a
far greater crown? He promises therefore that which is best, and does not
allure us with a vain show of some light thing.

Analysis.
SO is the Epistle to the Smyrneans: That to the Church of Pergamus is
inscribed likewise to the Angel: he that sends has a two edged sword. The
narration commends his constancy, illustrated by the throne of Satan, and
the common times, in which Antipas suffered ver. 13. then he reproves the
sin: which he shows both of what quality it is, consisting in suffering
Baalamites ver. 14. and Nicolaitans ver. 15. and also the remedy for it, namely
repentance, which he sets forth by the danger of refusing the same ver. 16.
Lastly he concludes with a solemn Epiphoneme, and proposes a reward, the
hidden Manna, the white stone, and an unknown name, written upon it, ver. 17.

Scholions.
12 And to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus; Towred Pergamus.
Pergamus so far as the Spirit seems to respect the notation thereof in
this place, is as it were (...), that is, (...) the tower of Troy, as
Hesychius expounds it: to with, a towred city, high and superbe, agreeable to
that which follows in the next verse, where the throne of Satan is. It is
distant from Smyrna Northward about five hundred and forty furlongs, with a
greater distance then Smyrna is from Ephesus, in the last border of the North
latitude as touching those seven cities. A great diminishing of light fell out
in the Smyrnean corner under Constantine, Constance and Valence even at the
first turning from Ephesus first purity: But now he goes from Smyrna to
Pergamus into the utmost darkness, the Church being about to suffer a greater
defect of light then ever before this time since Christ was borne. The Antitype
of this Church is of longer time then the former, as also the distance of place
is greater, containing a great part of the kingdom of darkness, from the three
hundred and four score year, to wit, from Gratian, where the former period
ceased, unto about the year one thousand three hundredth, as in the explication
we shall see.

These things says he which has etc. The furniture of him that enditeth the
Epistle, is taken out of chap. 1.16. Which now he takes before the other,
because he would show himself such in practice in this Church. For he would
punish the rebels, as he speaks after ver. 16. on whom no light punishment
should be laid by a two edged sword and that sharp: and the sword is the
word of God it self, whose force should now be manifested in the subduing of
the man of sin: Although this sword in this period is shaken rather then
inflicted. For he threatens a fight against those that repent not, ver. 16. he
comes not forthwith to handy strokes.

13 I know thy works: A narration of his more approved condition, which is set
forth two ways: that he neither denied the faith, allthough he dwelt in that
place where Satan's throne is: s^condly that neither in those days, wherein
Antipas was slain. It is not hard to know, why it is called the throne of
Satan. For the city where the Ethnike Emperors had their seat made war
professedly against the Lamb, is called the Throne of the Dragon, chap. 13.2.
So of the foster and inferior cities, which come nighest to the disposition of
this chief city, because they make a palace more garnished for the Devil,
they are noted with the same name.

Now was the mother city of the Roman Empire in Asia. For it is likely that
this region being brought into a Province, after that Atalus Philometor King of
Pergamus had named the people of Rome his heir, the Proconsull being sent to
govern the same, placed there the seat of his jurisdiction. Pliny in his 5
book of his natural History chap. 30. says that this City was by far the
most famous of Asia, which glory should less agree unto it, if the Proconsuls
had had their dwelling in any other place, seeing honor is wont either to come
to cities or to depart from them together with the chief rulers. Although
before it perteined to the Roman power, it was the head city of the Kingdom
of Asia. For so Livius speaks entreating of Scleuchus the son of Antiochus;
He leads, says he, to the assailing of Pergamum the head and tower of the
Kingdom, Decal. 4. book 7. It was therefore a great thing to profess Christ
in the hearing and sight of so mighty a city and spiteful against the truth.
There may not be prophesying in Bethel, for it is the sanctuary of the king and
the Kings house, Amos 7.13. Aretas reports of Antipas, that he gave testimony
to the truth at Pergamus, and that his martyrdom was kept even to his times:
But I find noe more in any author worthy credit. From this place it is evident
that he was a very famous Martyr, by whose sufferings was signified the rage of
a most grievous persecution. This is another praise that Pergamus had continued
constantly in the faith, when a fierce tempest raged very greatly.

It is an easy thing to profess Christ, when a man may do it either with
honor, or without danger: But to retain the profession of him without fear,
even with the danger of life, is an excellent commendation and a point of true
courage. We have said that the Antitype was the Church from the four hundredth
year, to the three hundredth above the thousandth; When after Constantius,
Iulianus and Valence, Smyrna being left it went further toward the North unto
Pergamus, that is, was hidden in thick darkness, being brought under the power
of that City, where The Throne of Satan is, namely ROME.

This is that Towred City, The Tower of Troy, whose Daughter she boasted her
self to be, once the Mother City almost of the whole world, the proud Lady
and Queen of the Nations noe less famous for the stately Temples, Theaters,
High Places, then for the ample and large dominion and Empire.

It is plainly called the Throne of Satan in the 13. chapter of this book,
both because it was once the Seat of the Ethnike Emperors, as at the place
we will show And also because they being taken away, it was made the Seat of
the Popes, who during this time have most plainly showed, that they reigned by
the help of the Devil and not of God. Four and twenty Popes were all given
to Divelish arts: some of which gave up themselves wholly to Satan by covenant
to obtain the Popedom. Yea by the space of whole four sco^e years from
Sylvester II. unto Gregory the seven, noe Pope reigned but grealy famous in
this impiety. Can any doubt where the Devil has his Throne placed, when he
shall see so many Necromancers clothed in purple sit at Rome? Rome therefore is
Pergamus, and not only the city of Rome, but the whole Roman dition, as far
as the Dominion of the Roman Bishop did extend. As long as this tyranny
flourished, in all those places subject unto it, there was the Seat of the
Pergamen Church. And they that keep the name of Christ, are the faithful
dispersed at that time in every place, who not discouraged with the Roman
tyranny, retained firmly in the mean time the found doctrine, of which sort
were many in the East, in Africa, in our Britanny, and in other places, yet
rather apparent or manifest man by man, then notable in any whole assemblyes.
For now was the time of the Church lying hid, as after shall be showed more
fully, chap. 7. and 11. and 12. Antipas was slain, when about the year eight
hundredth it began to be a matter worthy death, to resist the Roman Bishop. For
behold what a most fit name the Spirit gives to the Pergamen Martyr: He is
called Antipas not with a feigned, but true name; which yet by almost so many
letters and syllables, should declare that the Martyrs of this time should be
Antipapes: not that twoheaded or threeheaded Hydra, whose heads should contend
one with another for the Papacy, but who should oppose themselves against these
sacrilegious Popes, desyring that, that wicked power should be brought into
order. Of which sort were Leo Isaurus, killed after a sort by Gregory the 2.
when he was by him spoiled of the Empire of the East. Frederick Barbarossa was
vexed with all manner of injuries. The Bishop Florentine of less fame, was
condemned, for teaching that Antichrist was come. A certain man called
Arnulphus, or as others write Arnoldus, was hanged at Rome, because he had
spoken boldly against the Pope, Cardinals and Priests.

Gerardus and Dulcimus Navarenses, burnt alive with thirty others; because they
preached that the Pope was Antichrist: and many others, of which it were to
long to make a catalogue, neither is it my purpose. The godly reader may
conjecture from the Decrees, which are found in the Right of Bishops, how many
Antipes, or rather Antipopes, were killed in this Pergame^ state. The first of
which is, He that goes about to take away the privilege of the Church of Rome,
given of the very higest head of all Churches, he doubtless falls into
heresy, and is to be called an Heretic, Did. 22. All or the Patriarchs
again, Let him become Anathema with God, which violateth the censure of the
Roman Bishops, Cause. 25. q. 1. general decree. To which add, They are not
homicides, who through zeal of the mother Church are armed against
excommunicats, Cause. 23. q. 5. Of the killers of excommunicats. From which
consider with thy self, seeing the good will of the Roman whore has bin
always the same, even also before that these laws were made, how many Antipes
have bin killed of the same, after she had gotten some power. Yet many even in
those times kept the truth faithfully, so far as it was revealed unto them,
for which cause a more glorious crown is laid up for them.

14 But I have a few things against thee: The other part of the narration,
wherein the Angel is reproved for his too much gentleness toward the wicked.
From whence it came to pass that this Church was infected with the doctrine of
Balaam in this verse, and the Nicolaitanes, in the next. There was but one
plague of the Nicolaitanes in the Church o Ephesus, unto this is added also
Balaam. Whose fornication (which he taught) had not respect so much to the
defiling of the body, as to the violating of godliness by Idolatry. Which double
corruption is so distinguished, that the doctrine of Balaam is proper to the
Antitype, although it be rehearsed in the former place, the doctrine of the
Nicolaitanes to the type, to wit of the very city Pergamus. As towching that,
most fitly is the Pope of Rome in those first times compared to Balaam, a
secret hypocrite, of great authority with Kings, ready to any thing for lucre
sake, uttering some true oracles, but as a diviner and man of the Ethnike
superstition, persuading the worship of Images to Constantine and Jrene
Augustes, as it may be seen in the Synodicall Epistle sent unto them, as Balaam
to the King Balaac, that he would entise the Israelites, beautiful women being
^et before them, to offer sacrifices to Baal Pehor, Number. 31.16. Now therefore
we see, why Balaa^ was reserved to this place, to wit, that he might signify
his true afspring, the Pope of Rome, as like his father, as one egg an other.
He in these times which we have spoken of should tread the Church under feet.
But this was the sin of the Pergamen Angel, that he suffered too favorably
men to draw of the dregs of this false Prophet. It was his duty to have bin
instant in teaching, admonishing, reprooving, correcting, if peradventure the
contagio^ might had bin stayed, that it should not spread further abroad. Of
which when the godly were some thing to negligent, handling to ge^tly this man
of sin, and halting or somewhat failing, as comes to pass in a common
corruption, gave occasion to the overseer of Churches, both to contend with
them, and also at length to punish that estate. And who knows not, how
tenderly and mildly they which embraced the truth in those times, touched in
speaking or writing, the Roman Tyranny? They should had thundered against it
most vehemently, and spared noe sharpness of words, but we shall find that
the Angel in this point performed not his duty. But how then had he but a few
things against the Angel, seeing the whole state of the Church was so greatly
corrupt? Wonderful is the gentle entreating of our God. He requires but a few
things of the^, to whom he gives few. The greater their corruption was, so
much the less he exacteth. He requires not so great ability of him that
lives in darkness, as of them round about whom the clear light shines.

That they should eat of those things which were sacrificed to Idols; that
is, being present at the worship of Idols, should give honor to them.
Otherwise if any thing offerred to Jdols were sold in the shambels, and the
offense of some weak brother hindered not, any man might well eat of it, 1
Cor. 8. etc. But the Spirit seems with good advisement to have spoken rather
of eating that which is offered to Idols, then of worshipping the Idol, that
he might show the crafty and subtle way of this Balaam in provoking and
alluring men to Idolatry. It seems not so ungodly a thing to men to eat
flesh sacrificed to Idols, as to fall down at the feet and give adoration to
the Image. Therefore this Balaam would endeavor to win men to his purpose by
very small things and having a fair color. He would abhor Idols in words
as much as any other, and would cry out that the honor which he commands to
be given to Jmages, is far from this ungodlines, by such words deceaving the
unskilful, and bringing them into this offense, of which the Spirith speaks.

15 So thou have etc. The reddition of the similitude, whose proposition is not
spoken a word of. Thus it should be full. As once the Israelites had those that
held the doctrine of Balaam: so thou have them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitanes. In stead of the proposition he attributes the doctrine of Balaam
to the Pergamen Church, because it was proper to his Antitype: but from whence
may be gathered the first part of the similitude. But this poison of the
Nicolaitanes had infected doubtless Pergamus.

Which J hate: as before, the common translation is, repent likewise. And so he
begins the verse following in this sense, as I have warned the Ephesine
Church, so do I admonish thee. But this is weaker, then if he did command
simply, repent.

16 I will come against thee quickly, and fight against them; He threatens a
double punishment, one against the Church it self against which he says that
he w^ll come quickly: The other against the corrupters, against whom he says
he will fight with the sword of his mouth. For we may not think, that he
will come against the Church, only to take away those plagues and destructions
of men (for this could have no fear, but would be a thing to be chiefly
wished) but she also must suffer the punishment of her negligence, as they of
their wickedness. Therefore this violent breaking into the Church, was a certain
chastisement by war, or some such calamity, as is manifest in the Antitype:
whose times were very troublous, partly by the overflowing of the Northern
Barbarians, partly by the Saracens, whom the Devil armed against the seed of
the woman, after she fled into the wilderness, as we shall show at the chap.
12. to which times these things perteine: but here generally and obscurely
showed, because this place suffered not any ampler light. The other punishment
is against the Balaamites, against who^ he will use the sword of his mouth.
For we must observe, how he distinguishes these from the Church: of her he
said, I will come against thee, then turning his speech to the Balaamites, and
J will fight, says he, against them. But what is it to fight with the sword
of his mouth? Whether to inflict the punishments which he has threatened in his
word? Certainly Paul says that he had in readiness, wherewith to punish all
contumacy, 2 Cor. 10.6. And Jeremy is set of God over the nations and
Kingdoms, to root out and destroy etc. chap. 1.10. For there is no weapon in
the whole armory of the world so effectual on both parts. Wherefore seeing by
the judgment hereof all fornications and Idolatries are appointed to a just
punishment, worthily may he say, that he will fight with that sword, according
to the rule whereof the pronounced judgment is exercised. But now when in an
other place it is said of Antichrist, that Christ shall consume him with the
spirit of his mouth, 2 These. 2.8. (which manner of speaking what force it has,
we have learned by experience, to wit, that his errors convinced, his lies
detected, then his fraud and deceits set in the open light, he shall be brought
to destruction) these words seem to have the same meaning. And certainly after
that the Church was for a while scourged by those Norther and Souther
barbaria^s, Christ began to vex those Perganie^ impostours with the light of
the truth: for about the year 1120, arose certain godly men, which preached
openly that Antichrist was come: that the holy days, Ecclesiastical broken
songs, prayers for the dead, pilgrimages, oil, extreem unction, and the rest
of that sort, were superstitious things: Work Trip. and Henric. Mon. Thol. To
these were added in a short time after the Waldenses, the Albingenses and
Parisienses, who published a book of the perils of the Church, and many other
private men. From thence began this fight, which was soft in the beginning,
terrible rather in the shaking of the sword, then in wonding: but after coming
to a just and full battle, as after we shall see, which has fallen out
prosperously to the godly hitherto by the grace of God: but most unhappily to
them that dwell at Rome in the throne of Satan.

17 He that has an ear; Let every one drowned in the Romish superstitions
give ear, let him attend and hearken, in what account with God is that
unmaried Vicar of Christ: of what price is that famous and much spoken of Rome,
that Chair of Peter, the pillar of truth, mother of the faith and of all
Churches; to wit, that chief Prelate, that wicked Balaam: the very city which
is renowned with the vain praising of men the gate of heaven, is the very
palace and throne of the Devil. Neither let any think that hatred does wring
these words from a man that is an adversary: but let him compare the prophecy
and the event, which if he shall see to agree in all things, let him know that
he is warned of the danger, not so much by the words of man as by the H. spirit.

To him that overcomes I will etc. The reward is threefould, hidden Ma^na, a
white stone, and an unknown name written upon it: Every one of which fit the
times in a wonderful manner. As for Manna, it is the meat of the wilderness
ministered from God, when there was no means to have other bread. And in this
Pergamen state, when the company of the Nicolaitanes and Balaamiticall
offspring, that is, Roman Jdolaters possessed all places, the Church was
conversant in a waste, unpleasant, and terrible wilderness, whether we shall
see the woman betake herself flying from the Dragon, chapter 12. But Christ
feeds the same with the meat of the wilderness, as once the Israelites. For he
will not be wanting to his in the most hard times, but bestow abounda^tly the
joy of the Spirit, whereby not only they may be preserved in life, but also be
very glad as for the greatest joys. Therefore this Manna is the same meat,
with the fruit of the tree of life in Paradise, as has bin observed before,
ver. 7. but the manner of ministering of it is diverse, there in a most chaste,
pure, and flourishing Church, it was the fruit of the tree in the mids of the
paradise of God: here the truth being despised, contemned and trod under foot
and utterly opressed with most thick darkness, it is Ma^na the food of the
wilderness: this meat should be hidden from the world, and they should suppose
the^ famished, who had fled into this wilderness, as the Egyptians did think
the Israelites for this cause would perish sudde^ly. But God did sustain his
extra ordinarily with this bread of Angels.

Yet there is this difference between the Manna of the Pergamen people, and
that of the Israelites: For this every way was spread rond about the tents:
that was dispersed peculiarly to every one of the saints, who did not dwell so
thick together in so great number as the Jsraelites in their tents; but in
certain rare dens, far removed from the eyes of the world. From whence the
Manna of these is hidden, theirs manifest, like to that which was gathered from
the common allowance of the people and by the commandment of God laid up in a
golden pot, which the people had no power to see afterward, Exodus 16.33.34.
Heb. 9.4. Which in a more excellent figure did shadow out the heavenly food.
For the other Manna being kept above one day was full of worms: this abode
pure and incorrupt through all ages, a lively and express image of the
immortal food. Therefore this Manna does not ly openly about the tents, in
the way of every one that will gather it up, but is given from the golden pot,
as much as may be sufficient to maintain life. And certainly unless Christ by
hidden means in those most corrupt times had provided for his, they had bin
utterly undone, as touching their salvation.

And J will give him a white stone: The second reward. Aretas reports that
such a stone was wont to be given to master wrastlers striving on the theater.
But it is not likely that that custom is here regarded: For that was only to
the entering of the fight, and not to the rewarding of the overcomer. In the
plays called Olympiques, that the champions should not run together rashly,
they pulled stones out of a sylver pot, and those on which they did fall being
marked with the same letter (for they were two by two marked with the same
characters) were committed in the fight by the judges: neither do I think
that there was any other use of stones in plays. In judgments they were used
to an other end, to wit to give voices. In which thing they were diverse,
according to the sundry laws of the peoples; sometime hollow and bored
through, by which they did condemn, sometime full and solid, by which they did
absolve. Some time also they were distinguished only by the color, the black
condamning, the white contrariwise absolving. So Vlpian on Demosthenes against
Timocrate: The stones sometime bored and not bored: some time black and white.
To the same purpose the Scholi^ste of Aristophanes in (...). But that of
Alcibiades is famous, who in the judgment of life and death would not believe
his mother, least peradventure she unwares should put a black stone for a
white, Plutarche in Apotheg. of the King. He does allude therefore to that
manner of absolving in judgments. But wherefore now is there a second, yea a
third reward, which in the former Churches was but one? The use of the godly
did so require. For because those few and rare faithful, in so great a
multitude of the ungodly, were hated of all, condemned of schism, error,
heresy, and I know not what wickedness, an absolving stone is promised them.
That although they should be guilty by all men's suffragies on the earth, yet
they might know most surely, that they are judged guiltles before the heavenly
tribunal. How great a solace is this against the reproaches of the world? Be of
good courage, if God justify, who shall condemn? Romans 8.33.

And in the stone a new name written: A third reward. He persisteth in the same
custom of judgments: in some of which their names were written in the stones,
who came to be judged. Aristides being desired of an unlearned and one that
knew not who he was, that he would write to him the name of Aristides in his
shell, he wrote his name into his own banishement: Plutarch in Apotheg. of
Aristides. Here the like custom is showed. But the new name to be written in
the white stone is the child of God, such as the faithful perceive and
acknowledge themselves to be by the testimony of the Spirit, Romans 8.16. Which
also avayleth against the railings of the world, to who^ they should be as the
filth and ofskowring of all. But why do thou vex thy self with thought of
so great contempt, seeing thou art with God in the honor of a son? This name
also is unknown to all, except to him that receaveth it. For the world knows
us not, 1 Ioh. 3.2. Therefore their testimony is of noe account, on what side
soever. But besides behold the solitarines of those times, wherein the elect
were no less unknown to the world, then the way of salvation signified now by
the hidden Manna.

Analysis.
Such is the Epistle to the Church of Pergamus, Thyatira growing.
This to the Thyatirens is entitled also to the Angel: then he declares that
he that sends is the son of God, with fiery eyes, and feet like fine
brass, ver. 18. The Narration prayseth the increase of Godliness, ver. 19. but
reprehendeth for suffering of Jesabell; whose naughtines he describes, first
by the kind of sin ver. 20. secondly by the hardening ver. 21. and
punishment, which is notable both for the nature of the punishment it self,
which is diverse according to the manner of the delinquents: For Iezabell her
self is punished by the Bed: They that commit fornication with her, by great
affliction ver. 22. and her sons with death: as also by an excellent
testimony of all Churches, of the just and severe judgment of God ver. 23. To
whom finally he annexed a counsel against this wickedness (the way whereto he
shows by gentle entreatie, laying noe other burden upon them ver. 24.)
requyring constancy, ver. 25. and persuading thereto by the reward of power over
the nations, verse. 26.27. and the morning star ver. 28. The conclusion ver.
29.

Scholions.
18 And to the Angel of the Church of Thyatira: Thyatira is so called as it
were Thugatera, as we have showed at the first chapter. A name well concurring
with the thing. For the godliness of this Church is growing, as a daughter newborn, which always grows up, till she has attained to a full maturity. In
which respect it is opposed to Ephesus: which being of full age the very first
day, or shortly after, the further she proceeds, as hasting to old age,
became weaker every day, while at length the natural heat being extinguished,
she fell into the coldness of death. And here is the first bending from the
North, to wit, Pergamus, toward the south, but further to the East, being
distant, according to Ptolemy, about four score English miles. The Antitype is
the time from the year 1300. unto 1520.

These things says the son of God: Now Christ makes himself known by his
name, eyes, and feet: every one of which do appear more clearly from the
Antitype of what sort they are. As touching the name, now first of all it
offers it self, not expressed before either in the things seen or heard in
the first chapter. There was mention of the son of man, ver. 13. but the
whole vision did declare sufficiently that he was the son of God. It seems
here to be used, as though now he would return out of Egypt. He had bin exiled
now a good while, but in the renewing of the Church he returns as it were
home, beginning more familiarly to be known to his, from whom he had seemed
before time to be far of. The fiery eyes, are those spoken of in the first
chapter fourteen and fifteen verses: by whose clearenes he shows to the
Thyatirens, that now the time flourishes wherein the light of the truth should
dispell darkness of errors and falsehood, as it flies at the sight of the fire:
as came to pass about the year 1300. when a new company of Teachers arose, by
the judgment of all which the Pope was strangled, and began to be spoiled of
his estimation, which he had kept now a good while by fraud. For they did
maintain earnestly, that the Imperial Majesty ought to be prefered above
other, and that the Pope had noe power over it. Among these were Ockamus,
Marsilius, Patavinus, Dantes, John de Ganduno, and many other.

The feet like fine Brass do teach, with what kind of torment the Roman
Balaam should rage against the faithful feet of Christ, he should deliver them
to be burned in the flame, endeavoring to quench one burning by another. Which
cruelty he has not exercised now the first time, but has brought it to noble
infamy, by more frequent burnings then ever before. The fires shyned through
all Europe many Martyrs burnt every day. But notable before others were John
Hus, and Hierome of Prage, who a noble pair of feet like fine Brass did shine
in the furnace of Constancy in the eyes of all our world. But Antichrist was
deceaved who thought to have consumed those feet by fire. For now at length he
has had experience, that these feet are not stubble, but fine Brass, which
shines more in the fire, and is not consumed.

19 I know thy works: The works which are rehearsed, Charity, Ministration,
Faith, and Patience perteine to private duty, rather then public office:
asthough this Church were hid in some secret members, and was not famous in an
excellent administration of things. Such was doubtless the state of the
Thyatirian City: It is plain touching the Antitype. For although there were
every where many excellent men, who did defend the truth by writings and
lively voice, yet no public Churches companies were constituted or set in
order. Or if any were, as about the end of this periode men began to meet
together somewhat boldly, they obtained not a lawful reformation.

The chief praise was of their Love one to another, but not that feigned,
whereby men promise largely, but perform nothing, but whereby both by deed and
work they help where there was need: whereupon unto charity he adioineth
ministration. Their mutual Faith also was excellent free from all fayning and
treachery. For this Faith seems to be a fruit of that which is properly so
called, to wit, Faithfulness, whereby they regarded from the heart one an others
goods. When it signifies a Trust in God for Christ's sake, it is wont to be set
in the first place, as the fountain and welspring of other virtues; which
peradventure deceaved the old Interpreter, and caused him to set this word
before the other, contrary to the truth of the Greek copies: For so he
reads, and Faith, and Love, and Ministr^tion, and Patience. Patience was
seen in suffering the calamityes wherewith they were troubled continually by
the hatred and plotting of the Roman Prelat.

The last praise is of their last Works, which are more then the former. For so
does read the Common translation, the Complutent Edition, and the Kings
Edition, who is also used by Robart Stevens, in his Edition thus, And thy last
works more then the first, to wit, by putting out the second and.

And so indeed the sentence runs better; especially seeing works are
rehearsed in the beginning of the verse: which if they were set down again,
and not read together, peradventute the repetition should be superfluous. As
touching the matter, it is an excellent praise to grow in godliness, and to
exceed the former times in the fruitfulnes of good works: which thing indeed
befalls them that are planted in the house of the Lord, which in old age are
fat and green, Psalm. 92.15. Whose way shines as the light, it shaineth more
and more to the perfect day, Proverb. 4.18. So this Church always increasing and
proceeding further and further, grew stronger every day from small beginnings.
About the year 1300, many strong courageous men sprung up, faithful
deffendours of the truth, but about seventy years after, John Wicklefe added
much to their beginnings: he made clear the doctrine in far more points,
and confirmed that more plentifully with arguments, which they had barely
searched out. And fouty years after followed him John Husse and Hierome of
Prage: by whose preaching and martyrdom there was made a far greater
increasing. The Bohemians followed these, who openly did fall away from the
Roman Antichrist, and appointed a more reformed worship in their assemblyes.
And then the minds of all the godly became stouter through all Europe, who
more bouldly professed the truth, howsoever they knew, that they did it with
the danger of their life. Neither did Thyatira stand still here, but about the
year one thousand five hundredth, she powered out largely a new plenty of most
learned men: who gave noe vain hope of a fuller and clearer light to break
forth by and by after. And these are the last works more then the first.
Worthily therefore she is Thugateira that is, a daughter growing so notably,
even as the waters running from the Temple, which at the first being small,
after full of shallow places, could not at the last be passed over for the
deepnes, Ezech. 47. And so in this first bending from the North, was made the
first pair of contraries; For this growing Thyatira is directly opposite to
Languishing Ephesus, which became omission, leaving, as we have showed, worser
in the last times, by the continual omission of labor and watchfulnes, then
also heaping up superstitions, till at length all care of true godliness awas
abated, and so in the two following Churches it became always worser: Now at
last it began to return, and to oppose three other Churches to these three, as
we shall see in each one of them.

20 But I have a few things against thee: The reprehension is, that the woman
Iesabell was permitted to deceave the servants of God with her vain shows,
Therefore either their negligence, or faint heart, or both are blamed; whereby
it came to pass, that she dealt not with the wicked according to their
deserts; but they were suffered to sleep securely in their sins. Who this
Iezabell was in the Thyatiren City, the old Hystory shows not. From this
place we understand, that in the same place there was a certain Chief and
famous woman, an Idolatrice, Sorceresse and Harlot, like the ancient Iezabell,
which was the wife of Ahab; yet by thus much more furnished to destroy, because
this showed her self openly an enemy and adversary to the truth: that would be
accounted for a Prophetisse. From that which follows, appears that she was
taught to the naughtines in the school of the Nicolaitans, of which she
became a school mistres, teaching others the same rules. For the Heretics
abused the labor of women to sparse abroad their poisons. Simon Magus has his
Helena, Carpocrates his Marcellinam, Apelles his Philumenam, Montanus after in
the latter times, in places nigh to this Thyatira, his Priscilla and Maximilla.
In the Antitype the thing is clearer. For this Iezabell is Rome Queen,
Idolatrice, Sorceresse, Whore, Killer of Martyrs, Prophetisse, the head of all
Churches, and the whole way of salvation, which never yielded to any heresies,
and many such like, with which we shall see her adorned by the Holy Spirit
partly in this book, partly she boastingly sets forth her self impudently.
Lately we learned tha the Pope was signified by Balaam, now we have the city
showed by Iezabell. Both which perteine to the describing of the same Synagogue
of Satan, see in the Bishop and City, are things very nearly conjoined. And
how does it fit the times, that the Spirit does set before our eyes now such a
city? How long time did the Pope deceive under a show of godliness, as the
Hypocritical Balaam in the former ages about the beginning of increasing
honor and reputation? but after he was growe^ to an inmeasurable greatness,
lifted up above Kings and Emperors, so as now all me^ quaked at the very name
of the Pope of Rome, his Rome became the Queen Iezabell, an impudent and
painted whore. Balaam therefore and Iezabell declare the same kind of impiety:
only they are distinguished by the increase an times. Rome in her infancy, as
Balaam, handled her matters more warily and secretly: she pretended that she
could not speak, but that which the LORD should put in her mouth: being grown
to full age, as the Prophetisse Iezabell preaches openly that she cannot
err, and that she is the rule of faith and all godliness; That abused the
labor of Kings to bring in and set up Idolatry: This by her own authority
commands to commit fornication and to eat things sacrificed to Idols, in
exacting the worshipping of Idols and Images. Who can admire enough the
singular art of the Spirit, who has so lively set forth this matter. This then
is Iezabell: the holy men of this time shaking too softly and modestly this
peste, have therein so much the less approved themselves to Christ our head,
who would have no earnestnes spared in repressing so great impudency. Learned
men have dealt some what more boldly and freely, then they had done in former
times: yet they used not that earnestnes that was meet in a cause of this
sort.

And I gave her time to repent: In these words is showed the stubburnes of
Iezabell. Christ dealt some while patiently with that impure Thyatiren woman:
so also with the city of Rome, the stormy trouble of Barbarians being quieted,
and the Longobardes being overthrown. Nevertheless this peace brought noe
amendment, but increased rather the apostasy, while they came to this height
of impudent Jezabell. For we shall see that after those times all ungodlines
did grow, the Papists striving to oppress the former dimnes with infernal
darkness.

22 Behold I will cast her in a bed: The punishment of Iezabell. The bed is
sometime to delights and riot, as in the Prophet, sitting down on beds of
yvory, and abounding upon their heds: Amos 6.4. Sometime to sickness and
weakness, as, The Lord will upholde bim on the bed of feeblenes, and turn all
his bed in his sickness: Psalm. 41.4. Of which in this place? Not of delights,
although this be a great punishment, to be given up to the occasion of sinning:
but of grief, as appears from this, that by and by after follows, where
they that commit adultery with her, shall be cast into great affliction.
Therefore the Thyati^e^ woman has languished. Rome also has bin sick since
the year 1300 co^suming more every day, as being sick of a consumption. For
since that time palenes has covered her face, her stomach is grown weaker, her
soul is become heavy, and her flesh consumed: yea her infirmity has grown so
far, that if thou behold her at this day, thou will say that she is a dry
carkase in respect of her former plight and good liking. O the infinite wisdom
of God, which even in one word, has given so lively image and picture of a
time so far of Could the languishing destruction of Rome be noted out more
elegantly and evidently? God would not have her perish on a swift or speedy
disease, that the peoples should not forget her, but with a wasting consumption
to be corrupted and wax rotten, both to the end that her lingering punishment
should be an image of the eternal pain, and also that she might be a
spectacle to many ages, whom she had led in error so long a time. Certainly
unless Rome do feel and acknowledge this her consumption, she must needs be
sick, not only of a consumption, but also of a Phrenesy.

And those that commit adultery with her: The punishment of the adulterers,
who are the Kings and Princes of the earth, as is after in the 17. chap. 2.
Unless these shall forsake the whore, they shall feel great affliction. Have
not yet the Kings learned this sufficiently by experience, the most fierce and
savage Turk on the one side vexing the Emperor, the Spaniard on the other
side? Remember the ages past since the year one thou sand and three hundred,
in which Iezabell began to languish: Who can attain to declare the great evils
which Transilvanie, Polen, Boheme, the house of Austriche, the Emperor, The
Venetians, the Spaniards, have suffered at the hands of this barbarous Turk?
Did not this your affliction begin at the same time, wherein Iezabell Rome was
cast into this her sick bed? Why do ye not observe that your adultery, which
this whore has brought forth, and caused all these evils unto you? But this
calamity hitherto, while Jezabell lies sick in bed, is nothing to that
wherewith at length ye shall be punished, unless ye renounce betime her
ungodly commerce and society, when she shall yield her last breathing, as we
shall show afterward. Is it then now time o ye Princes and Peers, to fly
like cowards from the true God unto the whore of Rome? They have noe pardon or
excuse, who bewitched with her beauty while she flourished, companied with
her. What torment awaiteth your wretched lust, who do now embrace a stinking
carcass? For the love of Christ provide for your selves in forsaking with all
speed this Harlot, least suddenly at length ye be overwhelmed (when your
repentance shall be too late) both with the most grievous calamityes of this
life, and also those that shall be endless.

23 And J will kill her children with death: The third punishment is of her
children. These are the Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops Bishops, Priests,
Jesuits, and the rest of the whole troop of this Hierarchy. Christ will
destroy by death all those, not only by this first, but also unless they
repent, by the second. This is yet to come, begun after a sort, but now
shortly to be accomplished, as after shall be declared.

And all the Churches shall know; The Churches testimony of the just and severe
judgment of God. For at length the other multitude of Christians shall have
experience that Christ is such a one, as he has declared himself always in
his word. His long patience has almost taken away credit from his holy
threatenings, but in very deed he shall show at length, that they were not
vain terrors of words, but which shall bring most certain vengeance in their
time: and this partly begun, partly is yet to come. What reformed Church does
not see the long continued languishing of Rome, and praise the just God and
celebrate him, crying out, O the deepnes of his judgments? But there shall be
a more plentiful argument of his praise, in her last and full destruction.

And whereas he says that he searches the reins and hearts, in the same he
shows to what end his eyes were like a flame of fire ver. 18. to wit, because
not only his servants should approve themselves to be sharp sighted in
searching out the deceits of this whore, but also Christ should show him self
such in administering of things, laying open the impiety of Rome, howsoever
colored with many coverings.

24 And to you J say and the rest: Now he comes to the Consell, as we have
noted in the Analysis, teaching how they should defend themselves against this
wickedness of Iezabell. And it is given to you and the rest of Thyatira, that
is, to thee the Angel with the company of thy colleges, and the rest of the
Church which have abode in sound doctrine, as Theod. Beza has expounded very
well. The common translation, the Complutent Edition, and others do put out the
particle and, but to you I say the rest of Thyatira: But Aretas does read the
same, whith whom other written copies do agree. From which particle it is
evident, that not only the last clause does perteine to the Church, but also
the whole narration, although it respects chiefly the Angel and speaks to
him by name. The same judgment is to be holden of the rest, for there is the
like reason of each one.

And who have not known the deepnesses of Satan, as they say: But who are they
which say? As far as seems to me, the teachers of this heinous wickedness:
asthough they should brag that they alone did know the deepnesses of Satan,
to perceive all his cunning and subtilityes, and together also to know the way
whereby they may resist his mischievous devises, and therefore that they
permitted confused lust and buggery, or at least whoredom, for to avoid a
greater evil: that the other teachers which the common sort hold true
Ministers, are simple men and unsk^lfull, altogether ignorant of Satan's
entreprises. The name of Satan seems not to be cast in their teeth of John
in reproach, but to have bin used of themselves willingly, in that sense which I
have said. So ungodlines is wont to vaunt it self, challenging to her self
alone the power to loose and deliver others, when her self is on every side
bound with the snares of the Devil. Wherefore the greek word is more fitly
translated by the old Interpreter, who have not known. For the Spirit does
rather check the boasting of the wicked, then praise the integrity of the
faithful.

J will lay no other burden upon you; That is, I will denounce no more grievous
thing against you, as well expound it Theod Beza. A burde^some Prophecy was
wont to be called Massa, that is a Burden. These words then show, that noe
notable calamity should invade this Church. Which ought to be believed so to
have fallen out in the city of Thyatira. We know that it has come to pass in
our part of the world, there having happened no other notable mutation,
besides that which was spoken, from the year 1300. by the space of 200. years
after and somewhat more. For from that time the Turk waxed strong, but this
perteined to the affliction of Kings, that committed adultery with the whore,
as we have showed at ver. 22. The true Church gets no great loss thereby,
but that it is a grief to hear, that men of Christian name, should be trod
under foot so cruelly of a most wicked enemy. Otherwise while the Turk vexed
the Roman whore and her adulterers, the truth springing up again got leave
to grow.

25 Yet that which ye have, hold till I come: He exhorts to constancy, that
they keep faithfully the things gotten. Neither is this exhortation only a
precept what they ought to do, but a Prophesy what should be done, as often
else where. Therefore they should go forward in the light of the truth,
neither should suffer themselves to be driven from the right way. And the
coming of which he speaks is a fuller reformation, whereby Christ being
banished from us as long as superstitions and errors do reign, when they are
taken away does come to us, and gives the confort of his presence. Therefore
this sparkle of truth should continue alive, while at length it should break
out into a flame, to wit, even to the times of Luther, as by and by we shall
see.

26 For if any shall overcome etc. And he that overcomes and keeps to the
end my work^s I will give to him etc. in stead of and to him that overcome^h
and keeps J will give, etc. an Hebraisme, such as is also in the chap.
following, ver. 12.21. where the nominative case is put absolutely, by defect
of the preposition lamech, as in Psalm. 11.4. Iehova, in the heaven is his
seat: that is, of Iehova, or as touching Iehova, his seat is in heaven: So
Psalm. 18.31, God himself, his way is upright, for Leel Deo, that is for God,
or, as touching God: that of Paul is like, (...) etc. Romans 8.3. which does so
trouble the Interpreters, not marking this Hebraisme, whether to adunaton be
the nominative absolute* the sense whereof is, for as touching the
impossibility etc. But the end which he here mentions, is not of this life,
but of this period; which should then cease, when a perfiter reformation should
come.

I will give him power over the nations: The reward is double, of power over
the nations, and of the morning star. We have said that the rewards are
applied to the times, and do signify those good things, which the saints enjoy
in this life, howsoever they be also pledges of future things. Power then over
the nations, is power over the enemies of the Church. This name once lighted
upon all, as many as were not the people of Jsraell, but strangers from their
laws and covenant, now of the Gentiles themselves, all that profess Christ
syncerely are counted among the Israelites: The other multitude, that openly
despises the truth, or embrace it only in name, do stick still in their
former mire, and are called by the old name of G^ntiles. There were therefore
Gentiles among the Thyatirens, namely Iezabell with hers. Among us Rome with
her Adulterers and children. Neither must we doubt but that the Thyatirens
obtained victory against Iezabell, as ours against Rome and her followers. For
when Luther arose, some Princes of Germany, departed from the service of the
Roman whore: Who^ at length after some struggling, they cast to the ground and
trod her under foot. The same came to pass by the grace of God in many other
places. Therefore this promised power is the society of the victory against
Papists: which at this day all reformed Churches enjoy: whereof in short time
there shall be a full triumph as after in his place, by God his help, we shall
show.

27 And he shall rule them etc. These are the attributes of the former power.
To rule with a rode of iron, is mightily to subdue and to compel to obedience
will they nill they. Which was done of the Protestants Prince in Germany and
elsewhere, Who turned the Papists out of their Monasteries, Collegies, Temples,
Grounds, and other goods, and bestowed them on former uses, to wit, to the
maintaining of godly teachers, widows, orphans, schools, or finally on
whatsoever could make to the promoting of Christianity. But the Papist cries
out that this is sacrilegious and tyrannical: Let him cry out as much as he
will: the more he mourns, the more we do acknowledge the hard iron rode to
be upon his back. Therefore as many of the Thyatirens as should preserve even
to the end, the truth kindled among them, they should see this joyful day
with their eyes and should be partakers of the victory. Not that it should be
neefull for them to be living at that time, which arose about the year 1300:
but because that is wont to be attributed to all which are of the same
condition, that happens to any of them, to wit, to them which should be alive
at the end of this period. For so the communion of saints require that that
which is a few should be alls.

And as the potter etc. It is without any hope of restoration, even as the
fragments of earthen pottes, which are for no use. Let then the Roman Pope
sweat and move every stone, that he may recover his former authority: he
striveth in vain, his fall is unrecoverable: he shall find no glue, whereby
his earthen vessels may again be joined together. That in the end, As I have
received of my father, signifies that this power shall not be obtained,
without blood, For Christ first suffered, and so entered into glory. So
Christians after some dangers and battles, yea overthrown in war, as we
know to have fallen out in Frederick Saxon, Philipe the Lantgrave, and their
armies, shall obtain this dominion over the Papists, as we shall show more
fully in his place.

28 And I will give him the morning star: An other reward noe less agreeing
to the times. This star is Christ, as we shall see after in the 22. chapter
where he has thus, I am the root and g^neration of David, that bright morning
st^rre: so called, partly because in this life he imperteth to the saints
himself a pledge and first fruits of the true glory, least through a long
desire they be discouraged in their minds: partly he takes to himself this
name in respect of the diverse administration of things. When he shines fully,
he is both the morning star, the Day and the Sune; but when he gives a less
light, but so yet that he gives hope of the perfect day following by and by, he
is the morning star, the Precursor of the Son. And we must know (that
which shabe clearer in the exposition following) that a most bright light of
truth, of all godliness and religion shall shine upon the earth, when our
brethren the Jews shall be converted to Christ. Seeing therefore that then
shall be the full day, that renewed Church which goes nex before, is the day
star, which in the morning being seen nigh the Horizon, shows that the
fountain and spring of light will straightway appear. And this Church is that
reformed, which succeeds the Thyatiren, taking his beginning after the year
1520. Which the full restoration of the Jews follows at the heels, as the
Sun the morning star. That which is here but barely avouched, as much as
may be s^fficient to illustrate this place; the sequent treatise shall add
proofs. Wherefore in this place the promised morning star, is that sweet
communicating of Christ, which one shall enjoy in the reformed Churches,
whereof he shall be enrolled a citizen: which communication, shall be followed of
the full happiness of the saints, as great as can be on earth, shortly after.

29 Let him that has an ear; The usual Epilogue, but to be observed by
reason of his diverse placing. For to what end in the 3 first Epistles is the
reward set after the co^clusio^: In the 4 last this Epiphoneme holds always
the last place? First the Spirit teaches this, that there is a certain
difference between the three first and four last: which we have observed,
distinguishing all the seven into the three f^rst Churches growing worser, and
the four last waxing stronger after sickness and feeling themselves somewhat
better. Secondly there may be an other reason, which I gather from the event,
that the rewards in the three first, as to eat of the fruit of the tree of
life in Paradise, not to be hurt of the second death, to eat of the hidden
Manna etc. were not paid on the sudden and in one moment, but perteyned to a
time far of and delayed.

Whence do follow the Epiphonemes, as though after the admonition, they should
give time to deliberate: but in the four last they go before the Epiphoneme,
as if the admonition once given, there should be no place left for to take
counsel, but the thing forthwith should obtain an issue, beyond all
expectation, together the deeds and sayings. And so we know it came to pass
in the reformation begun by Luther, which we have showed to be a reward in
respect of the Antitype of the Thyatiren state. Who would have believed that
from so small beginnings that thing could have gone so far at length? Luther
indeed thought nothing less, then any alteration or defection from Rome: or
who could have expected in so small a space so great a change of things? But
now was the time, when there should be power over the nations; and therefore
the matter once begun, proceeded of it own accord, an alteration of those
things being made in a moment, whereat the world then not without cause was
astonished, and at this the enemies do at this day behold with so heavy eyes.
It seems that there shall be the same suiftnes of the following rewards, which
a man shall see given before he shall hear that they were to be given: and
therefore in place they go before the admonition, which also noe less they
shall go before in time. You therefore o Pastists, you again I speak unto,
if peradventure the Spirit has given any of you ears, that you may hear:
attend diligently those things, which have bin spoken. See what a one is your
Rome which you embrace with so great reverence, and whether you ran the last
year to celebrate your wicked Iubiles: she is not a holy virgin, as you are
persuaded falsely, but a most impudent Jezabell, a most cruel murderesse of the
saints, from whom we ought rather to fly into any wilderness with Eliah, then
to run to her by sea, by land, leaving at home the most chaste spouse of
Christ. Behold also that this sorceresse had lyensike now many years agone:
(can you otherwise deny it?) which calls the Turk to come upon the Christian
world, expels our brethren out of their places of abode, turns them out
from their goods, spoiled them of their children and wives, and constrayneth
them to be carried away into most cruel servitude, and heapeth many calamityes
upon us all, which are far of from that burning hatred. And not only these
things at this present, but which shall bring finally an horrible death upon
you her children. Can it be doubtful to any, who shall weigh diligently these
things with himself; but that we ought to flee very soon and very far from
this plague and mischief? The Spirit give you ears to hear; I will speak
noe more; to them of whom the truth is esteemed, a bare signification of the
^ill of God shall be sufficient: let him be filthy still, who shall contemn this.

I will turn my self to the unfoulding of those things that remain.

Chap. 3.
AND to the Angel of the Church which is at Sardis wrighte: These things
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars: I know
thy works, to wit, that thou art said to live, but thou art dead.

2 Be vigilant and strengthen the things that remain, ready to die: for I have
not found thy works perfect before God.

3 Remember therefore how thou have received and heard; and observe, and repent.
That if thou do not watch, J will come against thee as a thief, neither
shall thou know what hour J will come against thee.

4 Notwithstanding thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled
their garments, and therefore they shall walk with me in white: for they are
worthy.

5 He that overcomes shall be clothed with white garments, neither will I ever
put his name out of the book of life, but will profess his name before my
father and before his Angels.

6 Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

7 And to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia write: These things says he
that is holy and true, which has the key of David; which opens and noe man
shuts, shuts and noe man opens.

8 J know thy works: behold I have set before thee an open door, neither is
any man able to shut it: because thou have a little strength, and have kept my
word, and have not denied my name.

9 Behold I will give those which are the Synagogue of Satan, that is, of
them which say they are Jews and are not: Behold, I say, J will cause them to
come and worship before thy feet and to know that I have loved thee.

10 Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from
the time of tentation, which shall come upon the whole world, to try the
inhabitans of the earth.

11 Behold, J come quickly, hold that which thou have: that no man may take
thy crown.

12 Him that overcomes, I will make to be a pillar in the Temple of my God,
neither shall he go forth any more: and J will write upon him the name of my
God, and the name of the city of my God, that is, of the new Jerusalem, which
comes down from heaven from my God, and my new name.

13 Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

14 And to the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans write, These things says
Amen, that faithful and true witness, the beginning of the work of God:

15 I know thy works, to wit, that thou art neither cold, nor whote, I would
thou were either cold or whote.

16 Therefore because thou art lukewarm, neither cold nor whote, it shall come
to pass that I will spewe the out of my mouth.

17 For thou say, J am rich, and increased with goods and need nothing. And
know not, that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind and
naked.

18 I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that thou may be
rich: and white garments, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of
thy nakedness may not appear; and that thou anointe thine eyes with eye salve
that thou may see.

19 As many as I love J rebuke and chastise.

20 Be hot therefore and repent. Behold J stand at the door and knock, if
any shall hear my voice and open the door, I will come into him and suppe with
him and he with me.

21 He that shall overcome, J will give him that he may sit with me in my
throne, as I have overcome, and sit with my father in his throne.

22 Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.


The Analysis.
THERE be three Epistles of this chapter: One to the Sardenses, an other to the
Philadelpphienses, the last to the Laodiceans. Neither are they without cause
included in one chapter, seeing they are of nature somewhat diverse from the
former. For the former were further distant one from an other, so they had
Antitypes of a longer time: But these are both severed one from another with
lesser distances, and also we shall find the Churchches directly answering
unto them, to be of a more conioined time. The Epistle to the Sardenses after
the inscription to the Angel, describes the Se^der from the seven Spirits,
and seven stars: after it adds the Narration. Which reproves him, that he
carries the name and some show of life, when in very deed he was dead, ver.
1 but together also he teaches the remedy, which is double: the first
consists in confirming the other things that are ready to die. For it should
come to pass, that by the just judgment of God many should die, who so should
punish the neglect of lawful and just ame^ndement, ver. 2. The second, that he
should remember what things he had received, and should repent. Which
admonition, lest he a should negligently regard, he is sharpened by threatening
of his unexpected coming, ver. 3. After he prayseth some for their pure
garments. Which praise contains the reward, both proper to them, and also
common to all conquerers ver. 5. Which is threefolde, white clothing, a
permanent name in the book of life, and his professing of him before his
father and the Angels. All which are concluded with the usual Epiphoneme ver.
6.

Scholions.
1 To the Angel of the Church which is at Sardis: Hy^ ca^
Sardis is the second of the Churches rising again, going yet further in the
South, and growing in a more ample light of truth. The Antitype is the first
reformed Church, begun of God by Martin Luther of Wittemberg, a town of Saxe
upon the river Albe, in the year 1517, when that holy man opposed himself
against the Roman Questors selling for money the forgivenes of sins to the
people. The truth began to be revived under the Thyatiren state, but noe
reformation followed; This was first undertaken at the time which I have said.
For which cause we shall find no mention in these three Churches of this
Chapter, either of Balaam or Jezabell. For they were pure from the fault of
this whore, whose fellowship they renounced utterly. But yet notwithstanding
seeing the same should not be done of all after the same manner, but a
threefolde difference would be found in them, in like manner they are shadowed
out by three cities according to the beginning and condition of every one. The
first, after the impudency of Iezabell restreined, is Sardis. And the first
after the Roman impudency weakened, is the Germane Church of that time, which
even now I have set down. Only the indifferent and good readers are to be
entreated that they do not think me to descend to this or that
interpretation by any ill will, but in good faithfulness to follow that sense,
which the printed steps of the Spirit going before, seem to me not darkely
to point at. I know how fearful a thing it is even to hurt the estimation of
any brother with wrongful suspicions, how much more heinous a sin it should
be to cast any blot rashly upon any whole Church? And certainly as in all my
life I desire to put far away all virulency of tongue, so especially I have
thought always that I must take heed that I make not the name of God a cloak
for my lust. Let not then the office of an Interpreter be any fraud to me,
speaking either here or in other places of things present otherwise
peradve^ture the^ many either would or expect. It is an impious and detestable
thing, to play the hucksters with the word of God, in speaking rather according
to the pleasure of men, then the truth of the thing it self. Therefore all as
well hatred as favor set aside, if we shall see that that which is uttered
agrees with the truth, let us quake rather at the threatenings of the most
just God, then be angry with him, who to the end that we may not be oppressed
unwares with the evils hanging over our heads, has endeavored to his utmost
power to reveal the hidden truth. Which I hope I shall obtain easily of all
the godly, so far shall it be from them, to reprehend mine industry: with
which hope supported, I will proceed to my purpose through Gods help.

These things faith he that has those seven Spirits of God, and those se^ven
stars: In the description of the sender of the Epistle, of those Spirits which
are rehearsed, there was no mention made in the vision of the first chapter.
They are fetched from the common inscription of the Epistle in the 1 chap. ver.
4. They are seven for the abondance of all gifts, which that number usually
signifies. Christ has in his own power, that being the keeper of the
storehouse of the heavenly grace, he bestows the Spirit on whom he shall
think good; Whereupon he says, that he will send the Conforter from the
Father: John, 15.26. who should receive from Christ, and show unto us, Io.
16.14. The Stars are in the right hand, chap. 1.16. Likewise in the Ephesine
Church, wherein we have heard is declared the safety of the ministers, whom
Christ carries in his hands, chap 2.1. To what end then is this repeated a
fresh? Was there wanting now any other honor spent wholly on the former? in no
wise, but only because the convenience of things, and not any vain novelty,
is sought. Because Sardis should find the same safegarde of Christ in
defending her Pastors, which he had showed in Ephesus; not without cause does
he use the same similitude, wherein there is so great conjunction of things.
But of Sardis the History speaks not a word: Which thing in her Antitype is
most clear. For he that gives the Spirit plentifully, to whom and when he
will, shed out in those times so great plenty of all gifts, as no where else in
these last times. Good learning had bin already as buried, being driven away
for many ages by the rusticity of the Scholastiques: until at length, after
the wonderful art of printing was found out (which cunning flowed from the
same fountain of the Spirit) many excellent wits were raised up to search out
the truth. Among which were, John Picus, Mirandulanus, Angelus Politianus,
Platina, Trapezuntius, Gaza, Hermolaus Barbarus, Marsilius Ficinus, Pyrbachius,
Ioannes de monte Regio, Aldus Manutius, Rodolphus Agricola, Ioannes Iovianus,
Pontanus, Philippus Beroaldus, Ioannes Reuchlinus, and many other most learned
men; Whose chief labor was in setting forth the tongues, arts, and other
humane learning: but how great an entrance was made from hence to find out the
mysteries of salvati^^, the conjoined times have taught. For by and by after
came Martin Luther, Philippe Melanthon, Erasme of Roterodam, Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, Capito, Blaurerus, Bucer, Musculus, Calvin, and many other most
learned men, so many lights of the Christian world, who being helped by the
studyes of those former, brought forth again the truth, covered with long
filthiness and uncleannes, dissipated the Romish darkness, and dispelled utterly
as smoke hither and thither all the subtilities of the enemies. Does not Christ
worthily take upon him self this ensign of the seven spirits, enriching this
time with so great plenty of gifts? Neither was less famous his power and
grace in conserving safety to the Pastors. Who would not have thought that
Luther in so great hatred and envy of all men, for whom almost the whole world
laid wait, even also he under whose feet the Emperors once were compelled
to subject their necks, that Luther I say, should have dyed a thousand
deaths? But peradventure troubles being raised up he did scarce endure; yes by
the space almost of thirty years he abode in the battle safe, even from privy
assaults, with which the Pope is wont to make away those men, whom he cannot
conquer with open war and force: and at length lying sick in his bed and
giving up his soul to him that gave it, he slept quietly in Christ. What
should I speak of Melanthon, Peter Martyr, John Calvin and the rest of the
valiant Herolts? Bucer being buried a few years before, at length turned to
dust, was dug out of his grave, or rather an other buried there latelyer,
that they might show their cruelty even in the burning of his ashes, whom they
could not, nor durst not hurt, while he lived. Who then has not seen the
stars in the right hand of Christ, so wonderfully defending his servants
against all force of adversaries? And ought not the fresh memory of these
things, to give consta^cy and courage unto all, that reposing themselves in the
same protection, they may go boldly to the deffense of the truth every one
according to his calling? There is not indeed the same express promise of
other times, yet there is always the same crown, for them that fight lawfully.

J know thy works, that thou art said to live, but art dead: A reprehension
for their counterfit life, of which the Angel bears a show, being void of
truth: from whence Sardis may be called Hypocritical. The force of which
notation is manifest from the name it self. For Sardis as Sardian laughter,
such rather in show, then in very truth; so called of the city Sardis, even as
the Sardonian laughter, of the Island Sardonia, as Erasmus notes from Plutarch.
For that kind of herb ranunculus in English trowfoot, by which the mind is
taken away, may grow as well in Lydia as in the Il^nd. This Church was counted
alive but was dead: like unto this laughing, which feigneth ioyfulnesse, in the
mean time full of deadly sorrow. And from hence it is evident how Sardis is
opposed to Smyrna; This found all outward things most troublous, so as she was
almost held of all for dead; yet in the mean time live a true life, and was
most acceptable to God: That abroad in the judgment of men liv^th and
flourishes excellently, yet within, death reigns, true godliness being
banished: From whence is made the second pair of contraryes, as was observed
in the common analysis of the seven Epistles. But in what thing consisted this
fayning, as far as concerns the city Sardis, it is not clear to us from
the history: there flourished in the same place not very long after, the famous
Melito, celebrated by Eusebius in his 4. book chap. 26. But hence it appears
that the matter was brought to that case when Ihon wrote, that although the
Angel seemed to himself, and peradve^ture to some others, excellently well
furnished with all things unto salvation; yet that he wanted many things
necessary, and abounded in the contrary. We know that they which are alive
outwardly, may be dead either in ignorance of doctrine and corruption, or
through carelesnes of Godly duties: as Christ calls them dead, which were
void of faith and knowledge of salvation, John 5.25. And the Apostle calls
the wanton widow, dead when she is alive, howsoever she had given her name to
Christ, 1 Timothy 5.6. In which respect also works are called dead, Heb. 6.2. as
declaring that they are in deed dead that give themselves up to the study and
love of them. It may be that partly through neglect of godliness, partly by
corruption of doctrine the Angel of Sardis fell into this dead life. If the
doctrine had bin quite extinguished, which in deed is the soul of the Church,
she could not have obtained even the name of any life. We have said that the
Antitype, because of the following order of things, was the first reformed
Church, springing up in Sax^, when Luther began to teach. For the Thyatire^
Church have some bla^me for suffering the Roman Iezabell. This first, as Iehu,
labored that the painted and shameless whore should be cast out of the window,
so as she did sprinke the earth with her brain. From whence it comes to
pass, that she is not rebuked so much as in one word in respect of this.
This Church then has the name that she is alive, for the truth restored,
which in wonderful manner she has manifested; and also for the excellent
courage, whereby she weakened and trod under foot the Romish tyranny, shaking
of the same not only from her own neck, but also giving the same to be
derided of the whole world: yet she is dead, having some errors and
corruptions of no small importance, chiefly that consubstantiation of the body
of Christ in the sacrement of the supper, which many other absurdities
followed, which do spread like lep^osy, and take away the life of the members
living by themselves. Notwithstanding these things are not to be understood of
every man, but of the whole police and form of the Church, which is apparent
to the world: the image and proportion whereof, the Spirit purtrayeth to us.
Which also is to be observed in the rest.

2 Awayke and strenhthen the things that remain ready to die: The first reme^y
is of diligence in confirming the rest; who, if it were not with all speed
looked unto, should rush into the destruction of death. By the which it is
taught, that if the Teachers would bestow faithful and diligent pains, in
cleansing the whole doctrine and godliness, they should take away from many the
occasion of falling: but if they shall carry themselves over negligently in
this matter, there would be a lamentable ruin of many. In the Antitype the
thing is so clear, that any man may bewail it with tears, rather then to
prosecute it in words. For how many excellent men has that monster of
Vbiquity cast headlong into death? The seeds whereof Luther sowed in the year
1526. and 1528. in a disputation against Zuinglius and Oecola^padius. But they
ought to had bin pulled out again of his books, at least after the
controversy was brought a sleep, least lurking as it were in the furrows,
they should break forth at length into deadly hemlocke. But Luther himself
was careless thereof, providing after the manner of men rather for his own
estimation then, as was meet, for the safety of the brethren. Moreover I do
find lack of thy faithfulness and diligence, o holy Philip: because thou
have not thrust through so foul an error according to his desert.
Peradventure thou thoughtest that it was to be handled more gently of thee,
partly in favor of thy friend, partly because thou supposedst that it might be
abolished by silence more easily then by sharp inveiging of words. But the
errors which are not refuted, seem to be allowed, and their estimation
grows so much the more as they are dealt with more gently: for they are
gangrenes, which gentle remedies do not heal but make worse. While therefore
neither of you watches nor does his duty, many die: how many I pray, and how
great men? An huge number in deed of all degrees: of which the principal as
standerd-bearers were Johannes Brentius, Iacobus Andreas, Selnecerus,
Kirchnerus, Chemnitius, and others of that sort, who have increased this
monster of Vbiquity, of it self horrible, with so many and notable errors,
that there has bin scarce at my time any other more foul and deadly.
Lamentable in deed is the fall of the famous men, whose labor was once
courageous and no less profitable against the common enemies. And what a crown
had they received, if they had continued in the same warrefarre, and had not as
cruel Elephants turned back of the enemies, wasted their own friends. But my
office is of an Interpreter and not of a quereller: and therefore I leave of
these things. This death invaded not only some perticalar men, but also many
whole cities and provinces, as may appear by the book of Concord published
in the year 1580. which is not of so great force to stablish the error with
the consent of so many, as to testify this miserable calamity of the brethren.
And to this error touching the Supper of the Lord, and person of Christ, were
many other also added, to wit of Original sin,, of Free will, of
Justification, of Good works, of the Law and Gospel, of Indifferent things,
and of Predestination. Therefore death assaileth with a manifoulde dart: how
great must the slaughter be, seeing she casts to ground even with one, great
troops of men?

For J have not found thy works perfect; The reason why so many fell into
death. The Church of Sardis, as far as it seems, admitted not the sincere
truth of God, but retained some Ethnike superstition. The Church of Germany did
indeed cast away many Popish errors, yet in the Sacrament of the supper, she
stick still as it were in the clay of bodily presence, not as Rome, dreaming
of a changed substance of bread and wine into a true and real flesh and blood,
but no less contrary to and disagreeing from the truth, conioining the true
flesh and blood together with the outward signs, affirming that he is present
here on earth. This leaven Luther never cast out, but contended fiercely with
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius, for to defend and retain the same. Neither would
God, which afflicted so grievously the Corinthians for the profanation of this
sacred mystery, so as many were weak and sick, and many slept, 1 Cor. 11.30.
have go away unpunished the neglect of amending in this point. Of which
punishment to come some proof was made, when Luther was constrained for the
defense of an unjust cause, to fly for succor to Vbiquity and to confirm many
other things touching the manhood of Christ, which are contrary to the truth.
But for the heat of contention, he could not so well consider and mind, that
from those beginnings and flourishes, he should understand God to be angry. How
did he not beware of that error which did draw with it so great a multitude of
wicked opinions? Why feared he not, what might have happened to others, having
tried in himself, into what case he himself was brought in disputing? But his
eyes were holden, that he could not forsee for the time to come, and turn away
this so grievous punishment from his people. Wherefore their works were not
perfect, because a full reformation was not used, but only one error changed
into an other noe less grievous. And God is wont often times to punish sin
with sin.

3 Remember therefore etc. The second remedy is, to remember and repent; Theod.
Beza translated thus, remember what thou have received. And so indeed some
time the word pos seems to be taken. For that of Mark take heed what thou
hear, chap. 4.24. Luke has it thus, take heed how you hear, chap. 8.18. But
when he said even now, that their works were not full before God, he seems
not so much to exhort, that they would retain those things which they had
received (for so they should have continued in their former errors) as that
they should remember the manner of receaving: So as pos in this place ought to
remain in his own proper signification, denoting rather the quality, then the
substance of the thing. He warns therefore the Sardenses, that they go back
to the first institution, and amend things fallen into decay, after the rule
of that alone: Even as also the Germane Church, that they mind what Luther
propounded to himself at the beginning, and make their reformation according to
that rule But he regarded noe other thing at the first, then that all humane
inventions drive^ away, only the divine truth revealed in the scriptures
inspired of God might prevayle. For so in the preface of his assertion of the
artickles condemned by the Bulle of the Pope Leon x. First, says he, J will
that they bear me witness, that I will not be compelled with the authority
of any at all, how holy a father soever, unless as far as he shall be approved
by the judgment of divine scripture: Again, Let the first principles then of
Christians be none other but the word of God: but all men conclusions be
fetched from hence, and again to be reduced thither and tried thereby; Those
first of all ought to be known of every one, and not sought out by men, but
men to be judged by them; Whereupon also he rehearses that of Augustine in his
3. book of the Trin. be not bound unto my Epistles as unto the Canonical
Scriptures etc. Therefore we may not cleave in the books of Luther, as the
Vbiquitaries do, and they which corrupt the Sacrament by the late devised
consubstantiation, but as he thought he must be wise only out of the
scriptures, so all his writings are to be brought back to these holy balances.
Why do we give greter authority to his books, then either he to the books
of others, or himself would have to be given to his own? A matter indeed of
great moment, and in which alone consists the turning away of the eminent
evil. Unless men turn their eyes to these things, and have their ears bent
to hear their voice, and also those things performed which they shall
command, an other scourge remains for Germany more bitter then that, which
even hitherto has afflicted her not lightly. What godly man takes not great
grief minding the destruction of so many brethren by a pernitions error, so
long conte^tions of minds, so sharp battles both of words and weapons? But he
must needs be more vexed, when he considers with himself, that there is not
yet an end of these evils, but some greater thing to hang over their heads,
unlese they repent betimes. I could not but warn the brethren of the danger,
least I should hear with my great grief, them to be afflicted and full of
calamity, who^ I desire in Christ Jesus to flourish. And I hope that howsoever
my judgment shall be troublesome, yet my good will shall not be ungrate.

If thou shall not watch I will come etc. The peril that he threatens is his
coming as a thief, and that in an unexpected time. He does not expressly
mention what kind of evil shall come, although in some part it may be
gathered from the similitude: which often times is used in the scriptures to
signify the invasion of the enemy, but seeing the next words have respect
hitherto, neither shall thou know in what hour I will come against thee,
peradve^ture he means some other thing, to wit, a certain force and violence,
such as thieves use in robbing houses. Who often times not only do spoil the
masters of their goods, but also commit adultery with their wives, and
defloure the virgins, and compel by torments, to confess where the money is
hidden: which having once gotten, that their wickedness may not be bewrayed,
they kill all without difference either of sex or age. Therefore Christ
seems here to threatene^ the like outrageous fiercenes of some cruel enemy.
Of whose coming we may not define by the judgment of the flesh, seeing it
shall not be known in what hour he shall come. Neither must we labor much to
search out, who this enemy should be. The Spirit who has determined that his
coming shall be sudden, would not have him known by name. It may be, that it is
the Turk, to whom the raynes may be loosed a while, till they be looked unto
which are to be punished. But whether it shall be he, or some other, we may
not sleep securely, and neglect reformation, because we see noe danger at
hand: but we must think how it may come upon us in a moment. And it is to be
feared, that this which is threatened shall no more be avoided, then that of
removing the Candlestick from the Ephesine Church, chap. 2.5. These things
depend on the condition of repentance, to which the ears of men are deaf
even the greatest part.

4 Yet thou have a few persons, in the greek it is a few names, that is, a
few men, as Act. 1.15. and after in this book chap. 11.13. In these words he
comes to the other part of the narration, which pertains to comme^dation.
Which always at other times is wont to take the first place. But this new
disposition and setting in order is not done rashly, teaching that in the
latter times shall be some, who refusing errors should embrace the truth. As we
know was done, when the book of Concord began from this occasion, and so
many visitations undertaken, that the Calvinists, as they speak, might be
rooted out utterly. For such men followers of true godliness and judgment, were
conversant in the most inward bowels of this Sarden state. Beside many free
Cities, Strasburg, Heydelberg, Marpurg, Newstadt, Breme, the peopell Anhaltine
etc. who opposed themselves against the forgeries of the rest. In every one of
those places famous lights now and then did shine, which driving far away
that darkness, gave a joyful day to their flocks.

Which have not defiled their garments: The garment is Christ himself, the
common clothing of all the faithful: of which in the parable, Friend how
came thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment, Mat. 22.12. And Paul
more plainly, For all ye that have bin baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ, Gal. 3.27. But it has a diverse signification according to the diverse
respect of things, into which it is referred. In respect of God, it belongs
to justification: in respect of other men, to sanctification and profession; in
respect of our selves, to honor, glory, triumph, joy, etc. Therefore these
Sardens, kept their profession of Christ sincere and entyre from all the filth
and pollutions of those monstrous opinions. Although they also which by
repentance did awake from those errors, may be said to keep their garments
also pure. For they that are in Christ, are not esteemed according to their
former foulnes, but according to their present apparel, wherewith all their
fomer uncleanness are covered.

And therefore they shall walk with me in white, to wit, garments. These are
the same garments with the former, but a little differing in respect; for those
were of profession, whereby the valiant soldiers of Christ did appear to
others: these are of glory, triumph, and joy, which they shall enjoy both in
themselves from the feeling of Gods love shed abroad in their hearts, and also
which they should receive from the praising of others, who shall praise God in
their name, who has bestowed on the^ fortitude and victory. A white and pure
gown in a solemn mirth is commendable, both among the Gentiles and also the
people of God. From whence the wise man alluding to this manner, Let, says he,
thy garments be white always, Eccl. 9.8. But especially I think that of Mark
is to be regarded, where some step of this celestial glory appeared in the
shining garment, so white as snow, such as no fuller can make on earth, chapter
9.3. At which sight Peter being overwhelmed with unmeasurable joy minded this
one thing, which way he might have bin able to enjoy it always. So this shall be
a most a^ple reward for the saints in which they shall so heartily delight, that
they shall desire no greater thing in this life.

And if any should ask the brethren themselves, whose these garments ar, I
doubt not but they would answer, that this joy is of more value, which they
obtain by Christ in retaining his truth, the^ that they would change it with
all the delight of this life. Certainly great is their glory among all the
godly, which we pray with all our hearts to be perpetual to them.

For they are worthy. The Papists are glad in their own behalf for this
words, as an excellent patron of their merit of condign worthiness: but let
them remember that this merit is attributed to the garment not to the body,
that is to the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, wherewith we are
clothed as with a garment, not to our inherent holiness; For not to defile the
garment, cannot be of more estimation, then the garment it self. And seeing
there be sundry significations of the garments, as we have showed, the
worthynes arises not either from profession of good works, whereby the saints
are seen of others, neither from the joy of the Spirit, which we our selves
feel within us, but from this alone, that the father counts us righteous
being clotheth with his son. He therefore is worthy that is clothed, though
not of every use of garments, but only of that peculiar respect, whereby we are
presented blameless in the presence of God: even as a man sees, although not
the whole man, but only that part, to which the faculty belongs.

5 He that shall overcome etc. Some copies and the common translation read thus,
He that shall overcome, shall be so clothed. But the reddition of a similitude is
unusual, where there is no question: unless peradventure they be referred to
the former verse, as though he should say, as they that at all have not
assented to errors, shall walk with me arrayed in white apparel, so they that
after some striving shall depart from the same, shallbe clothed with white. As
though the first reward were perteining to them that fell not, this to them
that repented and forsook their errors, with which they were possessed before
time. Of which sort were many in Germany before the book of Concord was
published, when in most universityes the chief teachers understood the true
doctrine of the supper of the Lord, and the opinions of Vbiquitie and corporal
presence in the supper, every where were contemned, as witnesses Georg.
Sohnius in his exposition of the August. Co^fes. which appears more clearly
from the Synod of Desdrense, in the year above 1571, where it was ordained by
the common consent both of all the Superintendants of the Dukedom of Saxony,
and also of the Doctors of the Vniversityes of Lypsia, and Wittemberg; That
the Vbiquitie of the body of Christ, was an horrible profanation of all the
articles of the Creed, and a renewing of all Heresies, Gallobel. in the year
1592. And since that time a perfitter light breaking forth every day, many were
raised up from their drowsines, and opened their eyes to the truth. Whom also
even as well as the other, he adorneth with white garments, who gave a penny to
them that were hired at the eleventh hour, Mat. 20.9. Such then is the first
reward, two yet do remain.

And I will never put his name out of the book of life; The second reward
applied to the times. For because very many in these times should fall from the
truth, and many cities, peoples, provinces, regions, should consent to error
(as at this time it is evident how far and wide the contagio^ spread abroad,
flying also over the sea and infecting those Northern regio^s Gotia and Suetia)
by which their approving of error they should blot their names out of the
register of the saints, and should cut of from themselves the hope of life,
unless they should repent, least I say, the falling away of so many, should
trouble the saints, he bids his conquerours to be of good courage; Christ
himself would set them free from falling, howsoever they should see infinite
numbers to rush down violently on their right and left hand. For it is he
alone, who first calls us back from error, then sanctifyeth and confirms
us in the truth, least at any time we should revolte from it. Therefore
howsoever this reward be full of confort, yet it teaches that the time should
be lamentable through the fall of many. For to betray and forsake the truth,
is not a light matter, as many suppose, who easily are carried away with every
wind of doctrine, but it is an argument of a man of no reckonning with God.
But how, will thou say, can they be blotted out, which once were written in the
book of life? especially seeing that this book is the book of the Lamb, as
in the chap. 13. 8. that is, wherein those that are written, the Lamb
acknowledges them for his, and counts them heirs of eternal life: neither
is there any of those that are given to Christ, that can ever perish, Ioh.
6.37.39. and 17.12. I answer that these things are spoken in respect of us. For
there is a twofolde book of life, one, as I may say, of vocation, an other of
election. Into the first are put all, who by the preaching of the Gospel are
taken into the fellowship of the Church, who rightly do seem unto us to be
partakers of life, and endued with the hope of eternal salvation. For the
scriptures are wont to speak so generally, giving thanks to the Father, who
has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light:
Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the
kingdom of his dear son, in whom we have redemption by his blood, the
forgivenes of sins etc. So the Apostle speaks of the multitude of the
Colossians without difference, chap. 1.12. And after the same manner every
where in other places. Yet men may be put out of this book. For many are
called, but few chosen, Mat. 22.14. And it is declared after in the 7. chap. by
an exemple, Dan and Ephraim being passed over in the rehearsing of the tribes,
as soldiers put out of wages, and cassed out of the register. For God of old,
as in a certain visible shadow of this book, commanded the genealogies of each
tribe among the people of Israel to be kept diligently. Whereto also perteined
that of raising up seed to the dead, that his name should not be put out from
his people: Deuteronomy. 25.6. In which respect also the Psalmist wishes to certain
reprobates, who held a place in the Church, like true citizens, that God at
length would separate them from the congregation of the Saints and manifest
them to be mere hypocrites, Psalm. 69.29. Wherefore all are put out of this
kooke of life, who forsake the fellowship of the holy Church, either through
error and heresy, or wickedness, or other cause whatsoever: not that for this
cause they are blotted out of the book of Election, but because by this way
they make manifest, that they were never written in this book; as John says,
they went out from us, but they were not of us, 1 Ioh. 2.19. But the other
book, to wit, of Election is never spotted with any blottes, but the names
once written in, do constantly remain in the same without rasing out.
Although these books are not so open and evident, that they can be read of all
men without difference: but it is declared to every one severalty by the Spirit
that is found in this register, in what estimation and account he is.

But J will confess his name: The third reward is of confessing their name.
Which shows not only the falling away of many, but also that others shall be
compelled by force: So as there is great need of the power of the Spirit,
least any weakened by the injuries and threats of adversaries, do forsake the
truth. For the confession of their name before his father, is for the confort
of confessing Christ and his truth boldly and without fear. So sending his
Apostles to preach, furnishes and instructs them against the fear of
affliction, Mat. 10.32. And who knows not to what inhumanity and cruelty
proceeded the hatred of them who call themselves Lutherans, against the
professors of the truth? In the year 1580. was obtruded upon the Ministers of
the Churches, and Schools the book of Concord, avouching the execrable
error of Vbiquity. A subscriptio^ was commanded in the name of the Princes,
the refusers were proclaimed Sacrame^taryes, or put out of their places. In the
year 1591. Christian Duke of Saxony being dead, Paul Kreilius Chaunceler,
suspected of Calvinisme as they speak, was cast into prison: Vrbanus Pierius
Professor of Witte^berg, was lead captive into prison: Gunderma^nus of Lipsich,
committed priso^ner. In the year following was appointed a new visitation,
they went through all Saxony: they that would not subscribe to the articles,
were removed from their offices. What should I rehearse the broyle of Lipsich
the year following, when all the university men on every side assembled
together to break open violently the houses of the Calvinists? Or the savage
cruelty of the Dressenses against the dead body of Jac. Lassius, to which they
denied a grave among the wicked, because being alive he was a lover of the
purer truth? I recite these few against my will, and I would be ashamed to
me^tio^ them, but that the brethren were not ashamed to commit them. But how
much better is it for you to hear these things of your friends, the^ of your
enemies? These as much as they ca^ do exaggerate with words your evil acts,
unto your perpetual shame and of all religion: I do only show the congruency
of the Prophecy, that seeing in what account you are with God, ye may think
earnestly of reforming the errors and making peace with the brethren. God give
you to see that way, whereby consenting to one truth, you may turn away the
judgment from your heads, which otherwise will overtake you. In the mean time
if I shall prevail nothing with you (which estimation I pray may be far from
you) yet I shallbe glad to admonish the brethren, that they be of good courage,
who do endure troubles and calamieyes among you. Christ will not be ashamed of
them before his Father, if they shall abide constantly in their profession.
Fear not therefore the stately look and countenance of men, but being
grounded upon this hope, that which ye have worshipped in darkness, profess
now openly and in the eyes of all.

6 Let him that has an ear hear; Ye therefore brethren of Saxony, for Jesus
Christ sake give ear and hearken, what action the Spirit charge you with.
Your praise is great in respect of your first combat, and breaking off the
yoke of the Romish tyranny, yea of you that in this were the first of all: But
the Cananites left in your land, are come to be thorns in your sides and
eyes. Those few errors neglected at first, by the just judgment of God have
brought forth new errors: by the contagion whereof true godliness being driven
away, and together with it true life lost, there is left unto you a Church
defiled with horrible death. Neither is this the end of evils, but some new,
great and sudde^ calamity shall come upon you u^lesse you shall obey forthwith
the Spirit giving you warning. Therefore let that unhappy obstinacy depart and
be packing, and take those counsels, which may promote the truth, recall
again the banished life, and may procure the salvation and safety of every one
of you. And do not only give ear, but let all hearke^ and learn by your
evil, how great danger it is to cherish the least error in the matter of
religion.

Analysis.
SO is the Epistle to the Sardi, this to the Philadelphians is inscribed like
wise to the Angel: He that se^deth is notable for Holiness, Truth and the key
of David: which he carries not idle, but with the same opens and shuts,
the supreme power being in himself ver 7. The Narration recites first the
good things, both present, of an open door, which is illustrated by his cause,
a little strength and the constant observing of his word ver. 8. and also to
come, both of subduing their enemies, ver. 9. and also of ministering help in
the common t^ntation; of which also a reason is rendered, from their patience in
the profession of the Gospel ver. 10. After he provokes them unto a care of
conserving that which is good, because his coming is at hand, and there may be
danger of their crown to be taken away ver. 11. Then is there a great reward,
when he shall be made a pillar, and shall have written upon it the name both of
God and of the new Jerusalem, and the new name of a son, ver. 12. To all
which is added in the end the common conclusion.

Scholions.
7 And to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia; We have showed at the first
chapter ver. 11. that Philadelphia is situate in a dangerous place, and
therefore not so frequent of cityzens, who did dwell scatteringly in the
fields, fearing the often quaking of the city. But she carries a sweet name,
and which alone contains within it all virtues. Neither found out the Apostle
Peter any thing, when he would exhort to all godliness, which might commend more
fitly the same unto us then brotherly unfeigned love, 1 Pet. 1.22. How well this
name do fit this Church, which is reproved of no sin openly! But as it was
truly godly because of brotherly love, so is she lowly and not famous, both
through a continual fear of danger, and also solitarines of the cityzens, who
dwelt here and there, and in waste places, where they could get safe dwelling.
Wherein she is altogether contrary to Pergamus a towred and proud city, as
before Sardis to Smyrna, and Thyatira to Ephesus. And so there is made 3. pair
of contraries. It lies from Sardis toward the South, having an increase of
greater light, as becomes a reformed Church. She is set in the second place
after Sardis (for this is the first after Iesabell overcome) where by is showed
that her Antitype is the second reformed Church, which should arise after the
Germane, and this is the Church of the Helvetians, Suevia, Geneva, France,
Holland Scotland. I join all these into one, because they live almost after
one and the same kind of laws and ordinances, as touching the things that are
of any moment. Neither does the distance of place break of that society which
the conjunction of minds and will does couple. Yea this dispersio^ does agree
chiefly to the Philadelphians, whom we have showed to dwell thicker and more
frequent in the fields then in the city. Whereby it comes to pass that this
thinnes of ^he citizens takes up much place, though the citizens are not so
many. We shall find that this Church which I speak of arose a little while
after the Germane; when Vlricus Zvinglius began to teach at Tigur in Helvetia,
in the year 1519, and the reformation was begun the fourth year after, to
wit, in the year 1523, at which time no Papist durst enter into combat
against Zuinglius, who did defer the judgment of all controversyes to the
arbitrament of the sacred scriptures. They of Constance, Basil, Strasbourg,
Geneva and others, followed their steps. Where it is to be observed that the
former Antitypes were distinguished by longer intervalles: these three last as
they have types less distant one from another by space of place, so they are
joined one with an other with a nearer conjunction of times, neither are they
divided so much by ages and limits of years, as by laws and customs. For
after the first receiving, which happened to some later then to others: we
shall see that they did all flourish together.

These things says that holy one, that true one, who has, etc. A description
of him that sent the Epistle: whose two first properties are taken out from the
nature of the son of God, which yet are not rehearsed expressly in the
vision of the first Chapter: They do greatly help to declare the
administration of this Church. Touching the city Philadelphia it self, we
find no other thing, but that in the age following, there abod in that place a
famous congregation of the faithful, over which Demas had the charge, as is
gathered from the Epistles of Jgnatius. In the Antitype, a divine power
specially shines forth sanctifying the Church, by kindling the desire of
godliness, and in making it in Christ Jesus fit and cheerful to every good
work. Let my words be without envy, the true doctrine sounds no where
purer, the worship less corrupted, more flourishes the faithful diligence of
the Pastors, is performed more willing obedience of the people, nor greater
reverence of all religion among all degrees. But this holiness seems chiefly
to respect manners. In which thing is not to be passed over that famous
testimony of John Bodin, speking of them of Geneva; Of whom that thing, says
he, is praise worthy, if any thing any where in the earth, and which makes a
common wealth to flourish, if not in riches and greatness of Empire, yet certainly
in virtues and godliness, namely that censure of the Popes, then which nothing
greater and more divine could be devised to bridle men's lusts, and to repress
those vices, which by no means could be amended by any humane laws and
judgments. How be it that this restraint is directed after the rules of
Christ, first privately and friendly: after some what more sharply: then if thou
obey not, there follows an heavy, grave and effectual prohibition from the
holy things; after the interdiction, is the punishment of the Magistrate. And
so it comes to pass, that those things which are punished no where by the
laws, are there restrained without any force and stir or great ado.
Therefore noe whoredoms, no drunknesses, noe daun^ings, noe beggars, noe idle
persons are found in that city, Those are his words in Meth. of History chap.
6. Worthyly is the sanctifyer of the Church to be praised, who has wrought,
that they should will and effect these things according to his free good will.
There is the same care and fruit also of the rest, according to the measure,
which Christ vouchsafes to every congregation of them. Neither is his truth
less excellent, both in as much as he is a Prophet in teaching, and also a
Surety in promising. We shall see this double truth in the following Church
to be distinguished by their proper words; both which the Greek word true
seems to contain, when it is put absolutely and by it self. And as touching
truth of doctrine, where is it more pure and more sincere in the whole earth?
The whole Papacy has here his throat cut. The Anabaptists, Antitrinitaries,
Arians, and such like monsters raised up again from hell, partly in Germany,
partly in Transylvania, have found no where a fiercer enemy: What also has it
not assayed, that she might pull away from the Germane Churches their errors?
Neither does she keep only the doctrine of salvation incorrupt, but also
she both delivers and teaches in writings and exercises in practice a
sincere manner of administering, whereby salvation is bestowed. Certainly the
whole will of God is communicated with his saints, so as Christ takes to
himself not undeservedly this praise of true in governing this Church: He does
also perform plenteously that which he promised, that he would keep safe and
sound those that seek him with an upright heart. What have not endeavored the
Franch man, the Spuniard, the Savoya^, the Pope, to root out them of Geneva, a
small people, and environed on every side with enemies, and shut up from all
aid of friends? Nevertheless it flourishes yet still thanks be to God, and
shall flourish hereafter, while all her adversaryes burst with envy: as long as
she shall continue in this holy order. The French Church has been preserved
hitherto, no other wise then the three children in the furnace. Who would have
believed that the Low Countries had been able to resist and withstand the
raging Philip, the cruel Duke d'Alve, and so many bloody Tyrants? But true is
he, who has promised this honor to his saints, that they should bind the
Kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron, Psalm 149.8.9. And
that I may not speak of every each one, they can be safe only by thy
protection, o most high God, who art constant in all thy promises, whom both
enemies almost infinite do persecute with deadly hatred, and also to whom many
of their freindes through envy wish not very well.

Who has the key of David: The third property pertains also to the same
administration. Christ opens and shuts, to whom he has thought it good,
the entrance into the kingdom of Heaven, by his regal power. Which faculty in
deed he bestows upon all his, which do declare and preach the word purely
and syncerely, but which is principally to be seen in that part of government,
whereby obstinate sinners which will not yeilde to admonitions, are delivered to
Satan by the Ecclesiastical censure, and are cast out of the Church, which is
the Kingdom of Heaven: according to that, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose in earth, shall be loosed
in heaven: For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am J
in the mids of them: Mat. 18.18.20. By these therefore is showed, that the
power of opening and shutting, of binding and loosing is very effectual in
these congregations and more over also the whole administration of the
censures. And what godly man does not thank God from his heart, and extolleth
not with worthy ptayses the holy pains of this Church, which restored
discipline fallen into decay, and brought it back to the rule of truth and
use of the primitive Church?

But it is to be observed, that this key was said before to be the key of Death
and Hell, in the first Chapter and 18. verse, by one part denoting the whole
force of them. Therefore that key is to be feared, which locketh up the gate
upon the wicked being thrust into Hell, howsoever they despise the same with
security: And yet notwithstanding no less pleasant to them that fear God,
because it unlocketh to them the doors, by which they may enter unto life. But
why is it called of David, seeing it is of Aaron rather, whose office was to
keep away the leprous and unclean from the holy things, and to shut up the
Temple against them? Certainly the Priest only could pronounce men unclean: he
was not wont by an ordinary and proper power to use force to compel the
disobedient. Christ both King and Priest is very mighty in both facultyes and
powers, and ioineth together both in this Church: who not only rayseth up
Pastors, that they should denounce men unclean, but also together adioyneth
the civil Magistrate, that he should give his ready and diligent labor to the
Pastors in this. So before Bod. the punishment of the Magistrate follows the
debarring from holy things. Therefore both swords are drawn in this Ch but
severally by those to who^ the one and the other belongs. And indeed this
society is most sweet, seeing all the industry of civil Magist. ought to have
respect thereto, that we may live with all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.

The words seem to be taken out of Isaiah chap. 22, 22. J will lay, says he,
the key of the house of David upon his shoulder, when he opens no man shall
shute, and when he shuts no man shall open; But in this place the word
house seems to have been omitted purposely; for he says not, which has the
key of the house of David, but that has the key of David. There is a
difference, because that seems to perteine to an inferior minister, and that
only in the family of David, this to a supreme Governor, and that of a whole
kingdom. So the omitting of one word, puts a difference between the type
and the truth, Eliakim and Christ. See also Isay 9.6.7. The Complutent Edition
and the Kings Bible read somewhat otherwise, who opens and no man shall shut
the same, who opens not, and no man shall open: Arethas has, except him that
opens.

8 J know thy works: behold I have set before thee an open door: He enters
into the narration, and first of a present good thing. And it is an open door:
Which sometime signifies the faculty of preaching the Gospel: From whence
Paul would have that it should be earnestly desired of God in his behalf, that
the door of utterance may be opened to him, Col. 4.3. And that speech may be
given unto me in opening my mouth, Ephesians. 6.19. And worthily is it so called,
seeing by the word a door is opened to us into heaven, which being taken away
and removed, the door is shut and looked, so as noe man can enter in, Luke
13.25. And not only the faculty of the Ministers is the door, but also the
readiness of the hearers, as, For a great door and effectual is opened unto
me, and there be many adversaries, as though he should say, although there be
many that do resist and strive against the truth, yet there are many, whose
desire is prompt and ready, 1 Cor. 16.9. And again, coming to Troas to preach
the Gospel, and a door being opened to me in the Lord. This door is opened,
when the hearts are opened to receive the truth, as Lyd a, whose heart the Lord
opened, that she might attend to those things which were spoken of Paul, Act.
16.14. But although the name of door be attributed to those a part, yet most
of all the door is then opened, when all these things meet jointly together,
the word, discipline, the care of the Magistrate and of the people. Then is
there free leave to pearce into the consciences of men; unto which an entrance
is shut up after a sort, where any of these shall be wanting. This then is that
open door, whereby this Church was famous. Which in deed no strength of wit
has opened, which consists either in the virtue of speaking, or in the
sharpenes of wit and prudence in understanding, but only that chief
key-bearer, who has given freely that which no man could have obtained by
humane strength. How ungodly therefore do they, which do check by
reprochefull words, that which Christ has conferred for an excellent benefit?
They whet their tongues against heaven, yea against God himself: But they
shall not escape u^punished, let them clatter as much as they will.

Neither can any shut it; The end^vour of the adversaryes has not ben wanting;
some have loboured to bar these doors by slandering, reproching, inveighing,
with all manner of contumelyes: others by force and weapons, as it were by a
rushing down violently to shute this gate, but he has perfo^med his promise,
who has confirmed that none shall prevayle: the enemies have lost their
labor, and have got no other thing the^ shame in the world, for their cruel
mind against the truth, and puni^hement at Gods hand, meet for their
deserts. Let the experience of the time past be a confirmation against future
fear.

Because thou ha^t a little strenth: The common translation has, because thou
have a little virtue, the sens^, if I be not deceaved, being w^ll expressed
which depends on that which follows, neither is it absolute of it self: as
though he should say, because although thou have but a little strength, yet
thou have k p^ my words. And in deed the fortitude in the greater danger is
more famous. And this manner of speaking is frequent among the Hebrews, who
use the copul^^ive v^u, for the discretive particule: (the custom and manner
of whom i^ frequent with John) as, Neither shall any straw be given you, and
ye shall deliver the whole tale of brick, for, yet shall ye deliver etc. Ex.
5.18. So, And behold an escaping remaining in her, for, yet shall some remain
who shall escape, Ezech. 14.22. Afterward also John in the same manner, And
men raged in heart, and blasphemed and repented not, for, and yet repented not,
chap. 16.9. If he had praised a part their small strength, how should there not
be in the same thing much depravating. For this is wont to abound, where that
which is opposed, is but little and small. Sardis had a few names, whereupon
death had possessed the greater part. Neither would the Spirit have passed over
in silence the corruption, if he had found any worthy reprehension. Therefore
the common translation ought here to hold in that sense which I have showed.
This Church is of weak strength, which dwells here and there, and the
greater part under a popular state, one only people enjoys a Monarch for
their patron. But neither is this Church able to do much either by her own or
by her friends riches. Therefore the greater is the praise of thy fortitudo o
Philadelphia: who have not yielded to the threats of the adversaryes, neither
forsaken the truth, by being dismayed with the vain fear of men.

1 Behold I give of the Synagogue of Satan; Here is a def^ct of the word some,
I will give some of the Synagogue of Satan, of those which say that they are
Jews. This is the future good thing, as we have showed in the Analysis, and
it may be manifest from the latter member of the verse, Behold I will make
them come: unless peradventure this verb of the present tence didomi,
respects the present time, wherein some of the Jews submitted themselves to
this Church, for a token and pledge of a full subjection afterward, which it
may be the last words mean. We showed upon the chapter 2.9. how they which by
nation are Jews, do ly saying they are Jews, to wit in bragging that they
are the only people, when in the mean time they refuse Christ, in whom only
we are counted children, and do continue and rest in the abolished ceremonies
of the law. By which things they have made themselves to be the Synagogue of
Satan, and not a congregation of saints, whatsoever they affirm to the
contrary in words. In the Antitype are Jews as many as entangled in errors,
challenge to themselves alone the truth, faith, salvation and promises of God,
speaking of nothing, but the temple, the temple, of which sort were the Arian
Bishops under Constantine, Constance and Valence, and such as are at this day
the Romanists, glorying no less in the Chyre of Peter, then of old the Jews
in their temple. These only will be Catholics: their Church to be the only
spouse of Christ, that noe salvation can be found, out of their congregations.
But let them deceave themselves with as goodly words as they will, by their
true name they are false Jews, in show only Christians, who gather
congrega^ions in the honor of the Devil: God acknowledges the^ not, which
thrust upon him an other worship, the^ that which he has appointed from
heaven. Some of these therefore are give^ to this holy Philadelphia, seeing
there are many daily, who^ God of his singular mercy plucketh out of the jaws
of Antichrist, and enlightneth their eyes, that they may acknowledge and
embrace the truth. Among which are Peter Vergerius, Peter Martyr, Hier.
Za^chius, Martine^gus, and many other, both Italia^s and other nations: who
first being papists were afterward converted to the truth.

Behold J say: Excellent doubtless was once the victory of the Phlladelphia^s
over the Jews, and no less famous shall be at length the triu^phe of this
Church over the Papists. Hitherto we have fought with the^ by pen and ink: but
the time shortly comes when they shall be rooted out by weapons, chiefly by the
labor of this Church, as after shall be showed more plainly. Rome shall be
destroyed of some other, but being overthrown, holy Philadelphia shall pluck
up by the roots the remnants of the Popish kingdom, so as no name of it
shall be left, as we shall show in chap. 19. For this worship of the false Jews
pertains to that time, when the Romish beast being cast into hell, all his
hosts shall be killed with the sword that comes out of the mouth of him that
sits upon the horse.

And they shall know that J have loved thee; For hitherto thou art made a
mocking stock, neither do unthankefull men acknowledge any love of mine, by
the singular gift of godliness, which I have bestowed on thee: But then I will
adorn thee with those things also which are in account with the world: thou
shall set up a token of victory over thy enemies, and shall enrich thy self
with their spoils, that every one may be compelled to confess that thou art
dearly beloved, who^ contrary to all hope they shall see increas^d so
wonderfully. O holy Philadelphia cherish thy hope with these things, neither be
grieved in mind whatsoever the world says otherwise.

10 Because thou have kept etc. My word and doctrine which I have taught the
world with great patience, and which is also to be preached always with the
like patience: which I see thee to have used to thy great peril, and yet thou
have abode constantly in thy duty.

J will keep thee also etc. But what is it to keep from the hour? Would not
God suffer the te^tatio^ to touch the Philadelphia^s at all? It could scarce be
done that they should be free altogether in the common calamity of all the
world. To keep therefore is to deliver, as the Lord did keep them out of the
hands of their enemies; that is, delivered, Iud. 2.18. as though he should
say, I will not suffer thee to be overcome in that te^tatio^, but I will give
thee strength, by which thou may not only bear conragiously the calamity,
but also overcome and be victor. But what is this hour of te^tatio^? In the
type it self, that persecution doubtless under Traian, which Philadelphia
together with all the other Churches sustained. Neither is it to be omitted why
in the Epist. to the Ang. of Smyrna, he said that the same affliction was of x
days, which in this place he included in one hour: in both places he
respects the co^curring of the type and Antitype: there because under
Co^sta^tine, Costa^ce and Vale^ce (within which times we have showed that the
Antitype of the Smyr. Church is to be limited) there should be a long calamity,
raging in the greatest part of that space, he defyned that affliction by x.
days; in which he noted both the years, so many as Traia^ should go on with
rage, and also that long delay in the Antitype under the Christian Emperors;
But seeing in the Antit. of the Philad. Church there should be affliction far
greater then all, yet short, he has joined the same trouble of times in one
hour in the type. This te^tatio^ therefore yet to come, which shall come upon
the whole world is the last fight of the Romans Antichrist in the west, and of
the Mahumeta^ Turk in the East; very terrible in the whole preparation; but on
which the Church shall carry away the victory, to be preferred far before all
the triumphs and the victoryes of all men. Of which is here give^ a taste the
full declaration is reserved to his own place.

But seeing in this battle there shall be a common victory of the whole Church,
and here seems to be promised some thing proper to this alone, peradventure
this tentation shall be an other, which shall go before that war. And before
we have heard that in the Church of Germany some grievous thing does hang over
their head. For he threatens that he will come as a thief: Then also in the
Church following we shall see that some storm is to be expected. Wherefore it
is to be feared, that shortly this tentation w^ll come upon us, and shake the
Christian Churches with an horrible tempest. Besides the coni^cture of this
place, the sins which reign every where, not without caus^ indeed may
increase this fear. It shall be profitable for every one to prepare himself,
that he may stand firm in that day. And we may g^ss^ at the greatness of this
tempest in some sort from the very words themselves. For they promise that
this alone shall be kept pure, sound and undefiled: whereto belongs also the
reward of Pillars, ver. 12. What then shall be done with the other Churches? The
future disturbance of all things seems so miserable, that there shall be left
noe face of any Church any where besides. For it seems that those Churches at
length shall by the just judgment of God come to nothing, which have not
regarded a full reformation.

11 Behold I come quickly: Hitherto the good thing: the way to preserve is by
constancy, unto which he exhorts, first by his quick coming. The
Philadelphike Church felt the hour oftentation, by and by after this writing.
For Traiane succeeded next after Domitian: under whom John received this
Revelation. Neither shall the new restored Philadelphia find it to be long,
before all these things be performed. Within two hundred years after she was
borne again, she shall see the issue and end of all these things, as the
Prophesy following shall declare with God his help.

Hold that which thou have, that no man may take away thy crown: Go on
courageously in the raze wherein thou have begun; keep thy sanctity of
manners, purity of wholesome doctrine, severity of heavenly discipline, least
if thou shall begin to relent any thing in this matter, an other take thy
crown from thee. But what crown is this? The honor which she shall receive
from the enemies brought under her and worshipping before her feet, ver. 9.
Which manners of rewards do depend on the duties of godliness, unto which they
are propounded, and are taken away some time from the saints for a correction
of their cowardlinesse. Wherefore they do unskilfully, who transfer these
things unto eternal life, as though that could had been taken away from the
elect, or at the least wise, as though they should always waver as for an
uncerten and doubtful thing, of which they could have no sure hope, as long as
they dwell on earth. It may come to pass, and always it comes to pass,
that the wicked may deceave themselves with a false persuasion. But the elect
have the Spirit, who witnesses that they are the children of God, neither can
he, the author of all truth, either deceave or be deceaved, Romans 8.16.
Although if any think that there is the same reason of the earthly and
heavenly reward, of which they will have that to be at least a type, the same
thing may be answered truly and rightly, which we have said before touching
the book of life, ver. 5. That many are called, but few chosen. Now the
crown may be taken away from them that are called not persevering, the which
for a time they did hope for: in which respect it is called not without cause
their crown. But how do they tryfle, who wrest unto the elect, that which
pertains to the called only, because they invy that others should have that
certenty or asseurance of salvation, which themselves feel not! As touching
the words, take it is here the same with that of Mat. 5.40. and take thy
coat, that is, take away.

12 Him that shall overcome, I will make a pillar; word for word in the greek,
He that shall overcome, I will make him, for, the overcomer I will make, or, as
touching the overcomer, J will make him; an Hebraisme of the nominative case
absolute, such as we have observed in the chap. 2.26. The reward is, that he
shall be like a pillar in the Temple of God, that is, he shall abide firm and
stable in the Church of God, neither shall he fear any ruin or fall, in what
manner soever the rain shall fall, the floods shall come, and the winds shall
blow, and all things at one brunt shall fall upon it. He alludeth unto those
two brazen Pillars, placed in the Temple by Solomon, which did figure out the
stability of the children of God, 1 King. 7.15. And so is this Church by the
grace of God, not defiled with schism, and foul apostasy, as lately we have
seen the Sarden Church: which taking noe care of a full reformation, by the
just judgment of God lost many cityzens, losing them as a fig tree her
unripe figs, so far of is it that they should be a Pillar. Philad^lphia
should be free of this sorrow: not because she should see some Apostates, who
should feign godliness for a time, but because those few should more commend
her faythfullnes in trying and casting out of Hypocrites, then cast upon her
any blot of schism and defection,

Neither shall he go out any more: The pillar is declared by a double
property, one of continuance, an other of a name written upon: the first is
signified in these words, and he shall go out noe more: the force of which
seems to be this, that they may meet with a secret doubt, which peradventure
might trouble some bodies mind, because when the city was taken by
Nebuchadnezzar, those pillars were broken and the brass of them was carried to
Babylon, Ier. 52.17, Least any should fear that the same should befall him,
namely that although for a time he shallbe placed in the Temple, yet at length
he should be banished away, he bids them to be of good courage. For he
promises that this pillar shall be such, as no Nebuchadnezzar shall ever break
in peaces, neither ever carry away by any force. The Son abides in the house
for ever, Ioh. 8.35. The bond woman with her son is it cast out, but the heir
shall live always in the sight of his father, Gal. 4.30. and c.

And I will write upon him the name of my God. The name written is three fould,
of God, of the new Jerusalem, and a new name of son; All which are spoken
according to the manner of the Pillars in the Temple the figure whereof the
Spirit here declares, pointing unto it as with the finger, by the same thing
teaching by the way, that nothing was ordained there in vain, although it
might seem to be of never so small moment. Solomon adorned the two erected
pillars with two names: The one on the right hand he called IACIN, that is, he
shall stablish; That on the left hand BOAZ, that is, in him is Strength, 1
King. 7.21. not only showing by the matter it self of the pillars, but also
by the names, in what firm estate the elect do stand before God, both present
and future. For the present the children of God have strength in themselves:
for the time to come, God will so stablish them by his grace, that they can
never fall away from him altogether. Although that I may put you in mind also
of this further, that they seem to signify the two Churches: by that on the
right hand Jacin, the Church of the Jews, which God at length in his time
should stablish, having not yet gotten stablenes, because of their harneded
heart, whereby they should refuse Christ, when he should come: by that on the
left hand, Bohaz, the Church of the Gentiles, because of the present strength
which should be in it, when she should embrabce Christ at the first hearing.
So Christ would write names upon those Pillars, better then those Jacin and
Bohaz. For first he will imprint the name of his God, that it may be manifested
to all men, that they have bin set at liberty to be Gods chief treasure and
riches, as it comes to pass in things marked openly, which do show by their
titles to every one that looks on them, whose they are. In which sense it was
said in the 9. ver. and they shall know that I have loved thee. In which
respect also holiness to the Lord is written upon the belles of the horses, in
Zachary 14.20. The second name is of the new Jerusalem, of which in chapter 21.2
to which time this reward pertains: from whence it is clear that these 7
Epistles respected not only the present condition of the 7 cities, but by the
way of types to contain a long following age, eve^ as we have interpreted.
But so far as pertineth to new Jerusalem, we will show in this place, that
it is not that city which the saints shall enjoy in heaven after this life, but
a Church to be expected on earth the most pure and most noble of all that ever
have bin hitherto. The rewards in a peculiar manner do serve the times, and if
this felicity shall be after the resurrection, it shall be common to all the saints,
not proper to this Philadelphia. This therefore signifies both that the
Philadelphians shall continue until that restauratio^ in which new Jerusalem
shall come down from heaven, and shall be conversant among men, and also shall be
joined with the same in a league and fellowship, shall be endued with that
heavenly city, and enjoy the same Law, privilege and happiness. At which time
all shall acknowledge thy reformation not to be a thing devised of man as
contentious men affirm, when they shall see the same ordinances to flourish in
new Jerusalem. The third name is the new name of son: What can be new unto
him? namely that which is not yet acknowledged of the world. Hitherto he has
suffered the tyrants to bear rule and to tread under foot the name of
Christ, as though he were a King only in title, who should have right to
reign, but should want pover. But at length he shall rise up, and shall take a
clubbe into his hand: he shall destroy all his enemies, he shall give the
triumph to his spouse, and shall be celebrated King of Kings by all men through
the whole compass of the earth. Unto the society of which glory he shall take
his servants, he shall deliver them from the calamityes, wherewith they are now
oppressed, he shall give them power over their enemies, and shall bestow on
them the whole glory of his Kingdom, as much as mortal me^ ca^ receive. And
there is some difference between a new name put absolutely as in chap. 2.17.
and a new name of son. For that pertains unto the certenty of adoption by
Christ, which faith was very weak in the Pergamen state: this belongs to the
society of the Kingdom, which shall be communicated with his in the last times.

13 Let him that has an ear hear; Hear therefore Philadelphia and rejoice,
thou art low and nothing esteemed, but God will exalte thee. Only go
foreward constantly and augment your care and diligence, slake and assuage it
nothing. Neither regard the skoffes of the wicked, who shall bring upon
themselves sorrow, and to thee a crown. Shortly there shall be an end of thy
warfare. In the mean time we will pray for thy peace. Do thou again join
thy prayers with ours, that Christ would bestow the same things upon the rest
of thy brethren, which he has so greatly approved in thee. Fare well. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Chist be with thee, Amen.

Analysis.
SO is the Epistle to the Philadelphians, the last remains to the Laodiceans,
whose inscription is to the Angel, like to the former. The description of him,
by whom it is sent, is fetched from a double property, first of Truth, partly
in the promises, in that he is Amen, partly in the Doctrine, in that he is the
falthfull and true Witness; secondly of power, whereby he is the beginning of
the creature of God, ver. 14. The Narration first reproves and shows the
greatness of the sin, both secretly omitting the making mention of any good
thing, as in the former Churches, and as also openly, both by comparison of
coldness, as a lesser evil, ver. 15. and also by the punishment to be
inflicted, the vomitting out of his mouth, ver. 16. After he teaches the way
to heal them, both by opening the cause of the disease, which is a false
persuasion of their own worthynes, and ignorance of their misery, ver. 17. and
also in prescribing a remedy to be sought from Christ alone, ver. 18. And not
this alone, but also by persuading the use of it, as well by the chastising of
sons, if they shall neglect it, ver. 19. as also by his readiness to apply,
ver. 20. and by the reward, ver. 21. The last end is the Epilogue, to hear
what the Spirit says tu tho Churches, ver, 22.

Scholions.
14 And to the Angel of the Laodiceans: Laodicea situated at the river Lycum:
was once a great city and famous, abounding both in cityzens and riches, and
also in all other things, as we showed in the first chap. ver. 11. It was built
by Antiochus the son of Stratonice, and for his wife Laodice her sake, called
this city Laodicea, as it were, the Princess and ruler of the people, to whom
she should administer justice and make laws. From whence we call her
Glorious, great both by name, and also in their owe opinion, which boasts
that she is rich, and wants nothing, ver. 17. It is from Philadelphia more
toward the East then the South, being distant from it according to Ptolomy not
above tenth scruples. She is the third city since there was mention made of
Jezabell, the reproach of whom Sardis took away from the Churches. She has
this proper to her, that she has none, to whom she can be opposed, as in the
former Churches. Unto Ephesus was opposed Thyatira, to Smyrna Sardis, to
Pergamus Philadelphia, Laodicea the seven has noe fellow. The Antitype is the
third reformed Church, which before I note or show, the unjust suspicion and
offense of some men is to be put away by entreaty. No disease or corruption of
mind has moved me to seek out an odious application. No man's either riches
or honors, God is witness, grieveth me. I am content with my little. Neither
have I counted any thing to be more foolish, then to please ons self by
displeasing others. But how dishonest and filthy a thing is it, to sit as does
the fly upon the soars of the brethren? My soul has always abhorred such
dealings. But when I considered that these seven cities were set forth for a
type of all Churches among the Gentiles, and then also perceived the course it
self of the time, and the mervaylous concurring of all things, I durst not
unfaithfully hide the truth with silenee, least I should make my self guilty
of others blood. Far be it, that I should distaine willfuly that Church which
through the mercy of God has brought me forth, nourished and sustained me,
which I desire in my daily prayers and labor, to be most blessed. But seeing
the soar cannot be cured, unless it be touched, neither truly touched without
grief, I thought I must not refuse to cast my self against what troubles
soever, rather then to betray the salvation of her, of which every one of us
ought to have greater regard and care then of his own. Verily he that
gathers the tears of his children in his bottle, knows that I have not
viewed round about this Laodicea with dry eyes. I could not but morn from the
bottom of mine heart when I beheld in her Christ lothing us, and very greatly
provoked against us. Wherefore let no man blame me for that, which not so much
my will, as the duty of a faithful Interpreter compels me to bring forth.
And I hope that the lovers of the truth will not despise and refuse so equal
and reasonable request: with which hope supported, but especially with his
aid, who is the leader of my way and life, I will gird and make my self ready
unto the thing it self. The Antitype I say, is the third reformed Church, that
is, ours of England. For all the purer Churches are comprehended in this
threefolde difference: For either they presist and continue in those steps
which Luther has traced out, such as are the Churches of Germany, especially
of Saxony, and those next bordering of Suerland and Danemarke; or they abhor
that error of Consubstantiation, as all the rest with one consent: which yet
do not agree in all things, but follow a differing manner of governing and
administering, the French and their companions one, our English another, a
certain propre and peculiar one. Whereupon there are three distinct severally,
unto which the three types Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, after that Iezabell
was overthrown, that is the yoke of the Romish tyranny shaken of, do answer.
And to the last Laodicea, the English does agree, whose last original takes
her beginning at the year 1547. when Edward the King of most famous memory,
came to the rule and government of the common wealth, but then at length she
was confirmed and stablished, when 11 years after our most peaceable Queen
Elisabeth began the kingdom. Most mighty King Henry her father had expelled
the Pope, but retained the Popish superstition. And before he began to stir
any whit, even against the Pope, the Churches of Germany and Helvetia were
founded. The Scottish Church is later in beginning then ours: yet by right it is
numbered with them, with which it agrees in ordinances: into whose times she
is cast, which is to be esteemed rather from the agreement of things, then
alone from the difference of time. Wherefore our English Church alone
constituteth the Antitype answering to Laodicea; as she which began last of
those, in which there appears noe difference of any moment.

These things says that Amen: Amen is used as a proper name and uncha^geable,
as before he that is, he that was, and he that comes. This threefoulde
property pertains thereto, that it may teach what manner of one Christ would
show him self in governing this Church. The first is fetched out of the first
chap. ver. 18. although Amen there wants the article, neither is it read at
all of the common Interpreter, yet notwithstanding this place gives conjecture
that it ought to be read. The second is taken not out of the vision of the same
chapter, but from the inscription of the common Epistle ver. 5. Neither is the
third found in express words, but in the 8. ver. he is called the beginning
and the end, from whence this seems to proceed, the beginning of the
creature. The two first propertyes perteine to the double truth, one of
promising, the other of teaching: in respect of that he is called that Amen,
according to that of the Apostle, In him are all the promises of God yea and
amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. in respect of this, a faithful and true witness. As
touching that, Christ takes this name upon him now, because he should show
himself very clear and famous in performing his promises. But what are they?
All blessings of heaven, of earth of cattle, of children, of peace, of war,
of good health and the like, to them that obey the voice of the Lord: but all
contrary things to the^ that refuse. Deuteronomy. 28. Which how they were performed to
the Laodiceans is not plainly apparent to us, being destitute in this point of
the light of the History. As touching our England nothing can be more clear
then the excellent goodness of God in this thing. For the space of these 42.
years and more, what abundance of all good things has been powered forth upon
our Island. He has given us a most peaceable Queen, excelling so in all
praise, as no age has seen the like. Together with her he has given peace.
What good thing has not issued from thence? From hence the laws are in force,
judgments are exercised, every one e^ioyeth his own, injuries are restrained,
wa^tonnes is repressed, the nobility is honored, the common people goes about
their work with all diligence, arts do flourish, handicraftes are used,
cities are built excellently, riches increased, infinite youth grows up, the
fields abunde with corn, the pastures with cattle, the moutaines with sheep.
What should I use many words: hence is a port and place of refuge opened to
the banished for Christ's sake: affoardeth aid to them that are oppressed by
tyrants, neither have we almost any other labor, the^ that we may help the^
that need, and all this even while our ears do ringe of the noise and
tumulte of the nations round about us, no less then as the waves of the sea.
England never had so long quietness of days. At which our felicity strangers
are astonished, our enemies are grieved, we our selves almost know it not.
But praise be to thee most true Amen, who has given us this ease and rest. In
bestowing largely upon us so many good things, thou have showed truly to the
world, that thy Gospel is a guest not going away scot free, which dot so
abundantly bless those that receive and entertain it. Keep and continue
these good thing unto us, yea thou will keep them, which art Amen, if we
shall keep and defend thy truth.

That faithful witness and true: The second property is of truth in
teaching. For these things perteine to the prophetical office of Christ, as
has bin said in the first verse of the first chap. where he is called
faithful, because of the diligence of labor, whereby he is exercised in his
office with very great faithfulness, to whom the FATHER has well committed a
business of so great moment; true for the soundnes and syncerity of speech,
without all, even the least spot of falsehood.

In this kind of truth he should manifest him self in wonderful manner in
this Church. But touching the city of LAODICEA, we have noe more then before.
In the Antitype those former riches of his grace are in this thing, if it may
be, surmounted and excelled. And to what end were all the good things, if we
could not have the wholesome doctrine of truth? But ever since the first times
of our most peaceable Queen, he has raised up continually diligent and
learned Pastors and Teachers. who have preached the word purely and
syncerely. Neither at this day are many wanting by his infinite mercy, who
bestow all their labor in imperting to his people the whole will of God, and
that pure and uncorrupte from all leaven of falsehood. Although not without
cause in deed, one may mervayle how in so disorderly custom and license to
do all things that they will (excepting the diffaming of the dignityes) the
doctrine has continued so long whole and sound.

But he that is a faithful and true witness, sanctifyeth the Pastors with
the truth beyond all hope: in whose lips he dwells even hitherto:
allthough by many not obscure tokens he threatens that shortly he will go
away, unless betime he be met with.

The beginning of the creature of God: The last property which is of power. For
whether we interpret the greek word fort beg^^ning or for dominion, it
comes to the same end, seeing it is necessary that all things be subject to
his gouvernement, who in the beginning made them In which respect Christ has
showed himself wonderful also among us. What has not the Pope of Rome
endeavored and undertaken, that he might trouble our peace, partly by
execrations, excommunications and bulls, sounding an alarm to open rebellion:
partly attempting privily, Jesuits being sent by stelth, and other privy
murderers who should kill the sacred Princess with sword, poison, torments,
divelish arts, or any other way. We knouwe that not long ago the Prince of
Orange was set upon with desire to kill him,, by a popish cut throat, and was
killed. Late is the memory of Henry King of France, whose murder Iacobus
Clemens a monk attempted and accomplished. And Henry the fourth who now
enjoys the sovereignty, escaped hardly the bloody hands of John Castle the
Jesuit, being stricken through the iawe bone with a knife, and two of his
teeth dashed out. But our Queen assailed of many at many times, with sundry
treasons, has been kept whole and sound from the least harm. From whence was
this I pray? Was opportunity wanting to these wicked men. The alone Prince of
the creature, to whose beck all things obey, has laughed to scorn and
deluded the counsels of the wickel, repressed the endeavors of the ungodly,
and made frustrate their subtle devising, and restrained them least they
should touch his anointed, nor hurt the nurce of his Prophets. His power is
noe less famous in briddling the Spaniard, with whom we make war now so
many years. What is there that he does not think to effect by his riches, who
alone procures trouble almost to all Europe and other parts of the world? The
invincible navy of the year 1588, swallowed up in hope our whole country, our
lives and goods. But good God how was he disapointed without any labor of
ours, through all the seas cost asunder, scatered here and there and broken in
pieces? He came out one way against us, and fled seven ways from before our
face. This is thy praise alone o most mighty Governor, whom the winds, the
waves, the hearts and hands of men will they nill they do obey. O ye Kings why
do ye not regard? Why do you not learn, ye that judge the earth? Will ye
fight yet still against the Prince of the creatures to your own destruction?
If ye shall go on to be so made, we in the mean time will betake us under
his wings, by whose defense alone we stand safe against all your assaults.
Such is then the threefoulde property whereby Christ shows him self to be
seen in this our Laodicea, to wit, constancy in promising, syncerity in
teachting, then an invincible power in defending.

15 I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot. In declaring the
greatness of their sin, he makes no mention of any good thing, contrary to
that of the other Churches, none of which was of so desperate estate, noe not
Pergamus neither Sardis, as to be void of all praise. But this evil, as
though it could not endure the fellowship of any good thing hears nothing but
reprehension, without confirmation of any honesty. Not but that there were many
singular men, whose faithfulness and diligence the Spirit might approve (for it
can not be but that where Christ is a faithful and true witness, there some
should take singular pains) but because he respects the common form and
outward face of the Church, namely of what quality it is, not so much for her
own sake, as for the administration of the Angels, which was such, as he that
considered the matter but with indifferent eyes, he shall judge her worthyly to
be void and empty of all virtue. It is an horrible evil which refuses all
fellowship with goodness. And althoug by this silence, we may be able to
conjecture, how grievous the disease is, nevertheless afterward it is
described more plainly of what quality it is: and first, for more perspicuity
and clearnes, by a denial of contraries: I know, says he, that thou art
neither cold nor hot, but some thing compact and joined together of both.
Whereupon this evil consists of a temperature and mixture of certain
contraryes. Now he called him cold, who with a quiet mind can endure that the
duties of godliness should be neglected and despised, little or nothing at all
regarding what manner of worshipping either he himself or other do hold: him
hot, who do boil with a right affection and desire through vehement heat
and fervency, as scalding water, seething in the pot with a certain restless
motion, for so the Greek word zestos do signify, of which sort are they
which can by no means suffer superstitions and ungodly religions, but do try
all lawful means, that there may be an amending. For hot, is not here
sinful, as is a rash zeal as it comes to pass in habites, in which both
extremes do swerve from the right: but it is of praise: As Apollos being
fervent in Spirit, Act. 18.25. And Paul exhorts that they be fervent in
Spirit, Romans 12.11. If by excess he should degenerate from the truth,
lukewarmnes, holding the mids, there were some consideration of honesty. But
fervency or Zeal is an affection, following the love of holiness, with a great
and earnest affection of mind; whose defect, whether that more removed of
coldness, or this, nigher of lukewarmnes, is blamed. And lukewarmnes placed in
the mids of these extremes in that, whereby a man staying himself from
committing grievous sins, embraces godliness, so far as may be enough to
maintain the reputation of an honest, prudent, and civil man. The College
then of the Laodicean Pastors, was as it were a Senate of prudent and moderate
men in the matter of religion. Even as at this day the lukewarm have the
report commonly and in every place. Yet it is not plainly mentioned from what
mixture of things this lukewarmnes did arise. Before these times of John, Paul
bids the Collossians, that they should say to Archippus, who then was the
Pastor of the Laodicean Church, that he would look to fulfill in the Lord, the
ministry which he has received, Col. 4.17. From which things appears that
the Pastoral faithfulness began then to shake and lean, which afterward fell
most shamefully, when the Spirit sent these Epistles to the Angels. In our
England the matter is more clear, where there is such a form of Church
established, as is neither cold nor hot, but set in the mids, and made of
both. It is not cold, in as much as she professes the helthfull, pure, and
entire doctrine of salvation, whereby we have bid fare well and forsaken the
Romish Antichrist, and have risen from that cold death, wherein we lay before
time. Hot in deed she is not, whose outward government for the most part,
is yet still Romish: In the degrees of their Clergy, in Elections, and
Ordinations, and whole administration of the Censures: Which mixing of the pure
doctrine and Romish regiment together, makes this lukewarmnes, whereby we
stand in the mids between cold and hot; between the Romish and Reformed
Churches, of both which we are compact, as Martin Bucer of godly memory,
complayneth in a certain Epistle sent to a most beloved friend of his, at
Cambridge, written in January 12. in the year 1553. He in the times of King
Edward the VI. was used among other, who should determine the reforming of our
Church. But in what things both his own and Peter Martyr his authority
prevayled he himself manifests in that Epistle even now spoken of: for so
he writes: Whereas thou put me in mind of the purity of the rites and
ceremonies, know thou, that there noe stranger is asked concerning those
things; yet of our selves, when we may, we fail not to do our duty by
writtings, and in presence, and chiefly that the people may be provided of true
Pastors, after also of the most purity, both of doctrine and ceremonies. And in
an other place, There be some who by most humane wisdom and vanishing
cogitations, would join together God and Beliall, by the leaven of Antichrist.
These things he did write, which we at this day find by experience too true.

J would thou were cold or hot. I would to God that thou were either wholly
Romish, or at lenght admit a full reformation. He shows the horrible
greatness of the evil by comparison, wherein he prefers a wicked and noe
religion, before this mingled lukewarmnes. But does not lukewarmnes come nearer
too good? From whence then has it more fautie? Certainly sin is more sinful,
where grace is more plentiful. The fall of the Angels in heaven, left to
themselves noe way to obtain pardon. The sin of our first parents was more
wicked being committed in paradise: most foul was the Idolatry of the five and
twenty men committed be tween the gallery and the Altar it self, Ezech. 8.18.
God will be sanctifxed in them that approach unto him; and suffers more easily
his grace not to be known, then to be despised: The servant that knows his
masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Wherefore if
Baal be God follow him; why halt ye between both? As though it were hard to
judge whether were better. God abhors to come into this trial. There is
more sound judgment in him, who not knowing the truth, continues in his
superstition, then in him who being somewhat enlightened, is tossed this way and
that way, uncerten still what to follow. Therefore a mean here is worst of
all: which under a show of prudent moderation and tranquillity; is honored of
the world, which God esteems less then his next extreemes on both sides. It
is then better to fall away to Rome? Be it far from us. For in this place
Christ prefers the blind Papists before those Angels, who bewitched with
ambition and covetousnes, do refuse holy reformation. He says not that the
condition of the whole Church is worser, to which the true food of salvation
is ministered, whereof noe power is granted in the Romish Church.

16 Therefore because thou art lukewarmne etc. The aygernesse also of the
punishment, discovers the horriblenes of the sin, which seems to be
confirmed with an oath; For the greek word which Theod. Beza translateth,
therefore, the common Interpreter has, but, and it is of one swearing and
confirming by oath in this place, as though he should say, So, or thus let this
or that be done to me, as it is certain that I will vomit thee out of my
mouth, After which manner the word So, is used by the Latynes, as in that Ode
of Horace, So the mighty Godesse of Cyprus etc. as it has been observed by
Henry Steven. And with the Heb. Aeen is the same with sic, as in Isa. So he
bare our sorrows, that is, certainly, cha. 53.4. and Eccl. chapter 8.10. and in so J
saw the wicked buried, that is, truly, certainly, as some would. And such
silence is often used in execrations; Therefore I swear in my wrath, if they
shall enter into my rest, Heb. 3.11.

It shall come to pass that J will vomit thee: As it comes to pass in
meats, which either hot or cold, are retained of the stomache because of the
exceeding quality, which causes feeling, and exciteth the stomach to embrace
it: but that which is lukewarm, because of his nigh and familiar heat,
neither in entering is felt, neither being entered is it for that cause digested,
but remaining idle, and bringing at length trouble by his tarying there, is
thrust out of doors with vomiting as an unprofitable guest. But we must beware
that similitudes be not wrested, beyond that which they do intend, as though
naughty and wicked men should remain constantly in Christ, as cold meats in
the stomach. For such were never in Christ: neither does he tell what he does
approve simply, but what he prefers. Furthermore the things are referred to
his externe administration, whereby he bears longer with the notably
negligent, or rather all together strangers then lukewarm, as the experience
of all times proves, and at this day we see in the Romish Church, which
although she has forsaken utterly the truth, has flourished a long time,
when in the mean time God rebukes forthwith the true, neither differreth
chastisment unto any long time, if he shall see them slacking a little their
earnest affection, and to lean more to lukewarmnes. But what is it to be
vomited out of his mouth? Will Christ, in whose mouth and lips the very
truth rests and abides, take away his truth from this Angel, delivering
him up into absurd opinions, and that he should believe lies again? The
itching desire of many men at this day, to give again to the people monstrous
and rejected opinions, makes this interpretation probable. We know what is
taught within these few years in the Schools, is preached usually in the
assemblyes, is disputed at the public Comices, and was published in print the
last summer. But this should be the punishment as well of the people as of the
Angels, to whom it seems to be proper. Therefore I have noe certenty touching
this matter. Surely the event will declare shortly. In the mean time let us
know that this shall be a fearful punishment: for first Christ will take great
pleasure. in rejecting from himself this Angel. For what can be more
pleasante to a man that has a disposition and will to vomit, then to be eased
by and by of the cause of his grief? Even as Moses threatens to the Apostate
Jews, that Jehovah will so rejoice in destroing and rooting them out, as
before he rejoiced to do them good, Deuteronomy. 28.63. Secondly because he will cast
out this Angel with great dishonor. For an unclean place is sought for
vomiting: howsoever Antonius in the assembly of the people of Rome governing
the public business, filled his own bosom and the tribunal with gobbets of
meat. Thirdly, that the Angel shall never recover his former dignity. For
far be it that the Prince and Author of all cleanness, should ever return
to his vomit, But this punishment was not to be inflicted to the whole
Laodicean Church, but to the Angel alone, that is, to all lukewarm Pastors,
partly because of that which we spoke even now, partly because the Church is
wont to be mentionned expressly, where she is entreated of. As unto the
Ephesine Angel, I will remove thy candlestick out of his place, chap. 2.5. It
shall therefore be peculiar to the Ecclesiastical men without the destruction
of the whole Church. Neither is it to be doubted but the same at length
happened to the Laodicean Angel, which here is denounced: The which thing is
also certainly to be expected in his Antitype, unless she shall prevent it by
repentance. For it shall come to pass that that faithful witness shall
overthrowe this whole Hierarchy, and not always suffer men, seeking only
honors and riches, not those things which are Christ, to enjoy even this false
f^licity. Certainly a great and reproachful judgment abides those lukewarm
ons. Of which though they be troubled with noe fear, as having with their
terror put to flight all the noise there of: yet though all shall hold their
peace, he will not deceive, who has threatened that he will punish. It is also
to be feared, that the Church may feel some adversity through contagion and
consenting to. Such as are the Angels, such becomes she for the most part:
and none is so ignorant of the matters, who sees not plainly that the whole
body is sick of the same disease. But have mercy upon us o thou beginning of
the workmanshippe of God; deal not with us according to our sins, thou
know our making, that we are dust and ashes. How should not earth wax cold?
Raise up in us the burning heat of thy love: dissolve J pray thee our ice:
neither suffer us to please our selves in our miparted godliness, but kindle us
with thy heavenly fire unto a full heat and fervency, that we may both avoid
thy lothsomnes of us, and may always enjoy that pleasantnes, which thou give
to them whom thou love: Amen.

For thou say I am rich: Thus was the nature of the sin. The cause is
double, a false persuasion of their own worthynes, and ignorance of their
misery. That grew from their wealth, which was of earthly and not spiritual
riches, for against these he opposes the riches, which he bids the Angel
to buy of him in the next verse. Neither could he have been lukewarm if he had
expected spiritual riches from any other then from Christ alone: but rather
thoroughly cold, and altogether a stranger from grace, being become void and
separated from Christ, Gal. 5.4. But he seems to have abounded in earthly
riches, because of the wealth of the city which we spoke of chap. 1.11. For
which cause peradventure Archippus was more negligent of his ministry,
whereupon Paul would that he should be admonished: Col. 4.17, although small
fruit seems to have followed thereof, seeing that even unto these times of
this Revelation, there was so great matter of boasting: and that also not newly
bred, but gathered from old time. The abondance therefore of things for this
life, begat this lukewarmnes. And it is noe new thing, that prosperity does
steal away our minds, and draw men away from God. This warning is often in
the law, that they should take heed to themselves, least being fullfedd, and
filled with good things, they should forgeth Jehovah. And the boasting is
threefolde, the first of the present wealth: The second of long continuing; The
third of a perfect and absolute to every use. For so the words require, that J
am rich, should be referred unto the present riches: I have been rich, unto
those that are past; I want nothing, unto a certain fulness. From which further
must needs spring a certain persuasion of a permanent state, and also constant
felicity for the time to come, And it is to be observed that he brings in
this Angel boasting in his own words: otherwise then was done hitherto; and
yet this not in vain, seeing nothing is uttered rashly of the H. Ghost. But as
touching the Anghel of Laodicea a clearer application offers not it self: In
our England the congruency is so manifest, that nothing could have bin
expressed more lively. For what other cause can we bring of our lukewarmnes,
the Popish gouvernement mingled with the pure doctrine, then the love of riches
and honors? Men suffer not this hope to be taken from them: but they had
rather have a half godliness, together with the inioying of their riches,
then a full and perfect reformation with the loss of them. Yet least they
should seem to prefer any thing before the truth with dishonor, they praise
some what proudly our present happiness in the published books and in the
assemblyes: as we may see from the writings of many men, which have come forth
in these last years. Not without cause therefore the Spirit makes this Angel
vaunting him self, but in the same setting before our eyes our notable
glorying. And we have said that the first bragging was of the present riches.
How does our Angel triumph in this respect? and lifts up the head above
all other reformed Churches? In other places there are poor and basse
Pastores, almost of a vulgar state and condition; nor of any greater authority,
then their godliness and learning can procure unto them, But our Bishops are
Peers of the Realm, superior in honor to many great states: also in riches,
company of men and maid servants, in magnificence of houses and all the other
pomp of the world, equal to any even the greatest Earls. How rich is the
rest of the Clergy? The Deanes, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Chaplains,
heaping and gathering together many benefices, as they call them, do match
Squires at least in early revenues. Do not this amplify and increase very
greatly the glory of the Church, that her ministres do shine in garments of
silk and Velvet, do walk in the streets with the retinue of noble men, and
so drive far off the contempt of the ministry? Where can thou see after
the Pope expelled, a Church to rejoice of so rich things and of such
prosperity? No where in deed; neither do I envy or grudg at it; only our
rejoicing is not good. And would God that our riches did serve to the promoting
of Gods glory, rather then to the hindering thereof; but they have brought in
this miserable lukewarmnes, while that we may retain them, we make noe
reckoning of true godliness. The second boasting is of the long continuance: For
this plenty it not new, but which has been confirmed now by the space of two
and forty years. With how great prosperity of all things. Who may be so bold
as to reprove the condition of this Church as maimed and imperfect, which the
experience of long time has approved to be most happy? Not I in deed,
unless prosperity were an argument rather of Gods patience, then of man's
Justice. In the third place he vanteth that he wants nothing: What telst thou
me, says he, of other reformed Churches? I see no cause why other reformed
Churches, should not imitate ours, rather then we them, seeing we are
inferior to them in nothing. The answer to the admonition made to the
Parliament, page 226. Yea why do thou call me back unto the first Church?
As though we were to be bound with the first beginnings and principles, as
with fetters: And it were not lawful for us, to alter those things, which at
their first original were not so profitable, as at this day they seem
hurtful, this is in a certain Apol. of the government of the Church, page 81,
A bold, that I may not say ungodly, assertion, to affirm that any thing
ordained of the Apostles, should be noe less noxious to our Churches then
profitable to them, for which they were appointed. But I remitte this to the
heat of contention. In the mean time let such a man know, that the Apostles
Church was most perfect, and was not to be made perfect by the inventions of them
that came after, but that all other are to be tried and examined by the square
thereof. That saying of the first Council of Nicen is to be celebrated, which
is, Let the old customs hold. And that also of Tertullian against Praxeam,
Behold, whatsoever is first, that is true: and whatsoever s later, that is
false. And it is not to be doubted, but that Paul taught Tim. most fully how he
(hold behave himself in the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. Is all that
instruction abrogated for oldnesse? Should the time teach better and more
certain things, to which those Apostles should give place?

Surely the Church, as Adam in the first beginning was purest; the farther she
proceeds, the more filth she gathers, unless God extraordinarily make the
light to shine out of darkness, as lately in this last age. That first Church
was the garden of Eden, as we have showed in chap. 2.7. The Church of the
following ages compared with that, was a wide and barren wilderness. Perfection
is not to be measured by multitude of professors, or by amplitude of riches,
but by the integrity and pureness of God his institution and abundance of
heavenly gifts. Let it be then enough to praise men's inventions, let us tread
under foot the sacred truth in comparison of them.

And know not that thou art wretched; The other cause of the evil is the
ignorance of their misery. For prosperity blinds the mind of the world, that
it cannot see in deed in what state it is. Therefore in many words he
declares this misery, because in so deep a drowsines a light upbraiding would
not cause any feeling. he makes a fivefold degree of it. Of which the two
first are as certain common accidents; the three last do show the very kind of
the disease. For the remedy is threefold, of gold, of garments, and eye salve
in the verse following, and teaches that the disease consists chiefly in
these three things. The accidents are referred either to his own sense, or to
the compassion of others: in respect of that, the Angel is wretched, in
respect of this, miserable. A man is wretched, who is consumed with some great
sorrow, whether it aryseth from a public calamity, or from some private and
domestical grief. And there is none placed in any dignity whatsoever, who can
keep himself from this anguish, whereupon Kings in the tragedies lament that
they so often are wretched. Such heaviness of mind did lie once upon the
Angel of Laodicea, as is at this day in our England. How, will thou say,
where noe public calamity presses? The Spirit speaks of private sorrow, as
is evident from the glorying of this Angel, for which there can be noe place
in a common mourning and sorrow. but this interior grief does torment miserably
the English Ang. For how great griepes does he feel, who desires exceedingly
riches and honors, and cannot get them? Or at least who cannot enjoy securely
those things being gotten, whom many godly and learned men do inveigh against
with most grievous words? and not this only, but also do prove manifestly
from the truth of God, that such dignityes are unmeete for the ministers of
Christ, and that they cannot stand together with the faithfulness of Pastor and
Bishops? How must it needs be that these disturbers should be very grievous,
especially seeing this opinion is now favored of the multitude: and the
nobility has perceived plainly long a go the truth of it? If one could open
the breast of this A^dgell, doubtless he might see his heart almost consumed
with this grief, howsoever without all things are joyful, and the common
wealth flourishes with happy tranquillity. And I doubt not but that the Angel
will confess, that I have touched his most inward sense in this thing. This
Angel is miserable to others; not to the wicked Papists, to whom the former
grief is not sufficient, but to the godly brethren, both at home and in other
nations, who being free of all partiality do acknowledge the condition of the
Bishops and other Clergy, who do give themselves wholly to ambition, and
labor for honors, to be miserable and unhappy, howsoever it does very greatly
please our selves. For what is worthy of more pity then to see brethren snared
with the vain glory of the world, altogether to desire and to enforce
themselves to get earthly dignityes, and to make shipwreck of the heavenly
crown? If they had always lain in the snares of the Devil, the thing were
not so much to be lamented; but after that they have escaped from his snares by
the wholesome knowledge of the gospel, be entangled again in the same by this
way: what godly man cannot both be grieved at their change, and also bewail
the common misery of us all, which by a thousand means are drawn into the
same destruction? Such therefore are the accidents, grievous indeed of
themselves, yet but as a flee biting in comparison of the disease it self:
which now let us touch, as gently as we can, and with the mind only to
heal, and not to exasperate it. The first matter to be purged is poverty. And
konwest not, says he, that thou art poor: Of what sort of poor? not poor
in Spirit of whom Christ speaks Mat. 5.3. for this is a blessed poverty, that
a wretched. Also the Angel boasts that he is and has been rich, and that he
wants nothing, so that he is far from that holy humility. This poverty
therefore is the timorous beggar lives, which both quaketh at the sight of a
richer man, nor either speaks or does ought, but to the pleasure of a
mightier man, and also which susteineth the wretched life by begging money and
relief: For the greek word ptacos, poor, has the name both from
fearfulnes, and also he is noted with the same name of him that laying at the
gate of the rich man, desired to be filled with the crummes, which fell from
his table, Luke 16.20. Which of these agrees to our Angel? Is not all this
dishonest covetousnes removed far from so great riches as are ministered to
ours? I would to God it were in deed: but here as always I am compelled to
admire the infinite wisdom of God, who has opened our secret impostume, with
a word so fit for the thing, as nothing ever could be spoken or thought more
fit. For first, how servile a fear possesses the Angel, from hence may
easily appear, that he speaks almost nothing, which he thinks may
displease any one. The Bishops do fear the Peers: the Parish Pastors, the
Bishops, whom they perceive to be ready to scourge them, if any provoked at
home, will crave their aid, especially if he can object their mind to be out
of love with some ceremonies. So reprehensions are silent, naughtines reigns,
the hand of God is heavy upon us, and whither the matter will grow at last,
prudent men fear not without just cause. But chiefly the beggary of asking is
notable. For run over with your eyes and minds the whole Clergy. Will ye
that we begin at the weakest? Those that they call Curates, both in very
truth and also in the judgment of all men, are beggars. In whom we may see
that which was threatened to the family of Ely, men bowing themselves for a
piece of silver, and a masell of bread, and requiring to be joined to one of
the Priests, that they may eat a piece of bread, 1 Samuel 2.36. In the rest, who
through their greater abundance walk more underpropt, what running up and
down? what bountiful giving and bribes? What importunate and earnest
entreating? How great flattering intisements of humble service and soothing of
all duties, that they may procure to themselves Ecclesiastical offices? Very
many do fly unto the Kings Court, or to the house of a most noble man the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal. For these places are like the beautiful gate of the
Temple of Solomon: in this, men enter in great multitudes, and there is great
hope of carrying away the penny, Act. 3.2. Others follow the States and
Peers, to whom they become either domestical Chaplains, or that I may so
say, vassals: For what cause I pray? That as soon as any Benefice, as they call
it, shall happen to be void, they may enjoy the same by the gift of their
Lords. And this is thought to be an honest way to get an Ecclesiastical
charge. But is not this flattery mere beggary? In obtaining a divine office is
favor any whit less dishonest then money? If we will weigh the matter
rightly, it is of the same fault and blasme, to enter either by bribe, or by
favor. The other rabble is diligent about the common sort of Patrons in the
Country, in whose Porches they set, flatter and speak fair to their wyves,
flatter their children, Win their fervaunts by gifts: and in every place
behaveth himself like wretched beggars. Some more craftily, even as they,
which sit in a way having two paths, and in public ways do offer pilled
rods and sticks to them that travayle by, to the end that they may get some
money: so they either by bountiful giving of present money, or by agreement to
give a certain yearly rent, do make a way for themselves.

But thou will say, this is the corruption not of our Laws, but of the men.
Certainly as long as this way to obtain Ecclesiastical charges holds, which
hitherto has prevayled, noe remedy can be brought for this beggary. Have we
not known this sufficiently by experience? In the late assembly of all degrees
of the Realm, a sore and heavy ordinance was made against it; has ought ben
effected thereby? Nothing at all, but only that the thing be done more warily
and subtily. We avayle nothing with our laws, where the Laws of Christ are
not kept. But that we may proceed, when the thing is begged of the Patron,
how much less business remains to the unlearned route, to obtain
Institution of the Bishop? Here not only humble request must be made to the
chief Lord, but to the Examiners, Grooms of the chamber, Clerks, Buttlers,
yea to the less Jack, not because ignorance shall keep him from an entrance,
but because he is wont to bring most gain to the servants, who has need of
more favor. There is noe Tower made so strong, which an ass laden with
Gold does not vainquish. Neither any almost so unlearned or foolish, which
takes the repulse. But what engines and crafty means are used, let them look
to it.

There is the same consideration of Prebendaryes, Archdeacons, Deacons. Are the
Bishops themselves void of this avarice? What means then that often
attending at the Court and on the Peers of the Realm? Why wait they not till
they be sent for? Why are they not pulled against their wills from their
studyes? Yea if any should appeal to their consciences, whether are those
fat manoures and farms of their Bishoprikes let out to hire of their own
accord to farmers that longed for, or promised bribes to the adiutours of their
dignity? But are they only beggars in suing for the office? Some indeed are
come to that beggary, that if their seat be to be changed, they pay not their
first fruits, except they have raked together shamefully some alms from the
poor Rectours under the name of a benevolence. Thou art therefore a Beggar o
thou English Angel. And therefore with thee it is ordinary and usual, that
the best are passed over, and others less worthy, are in better estimation.
For as we bestow some alms upon the blind, lame, and those that are full of
sores, we stop our ears against them, whom we see to have a body well
liking and in comely apparel, so men of a blind mind, deformed and maimed
doctrine, and witty understanding, do gather together much alms, when they
that have more learning and far better judgment, are sufferred to hunger and
to perish through famine, which comes to pass either because they cannot cry
out so stoutly, or because they are more ashamed to beg, or because men have
less pity of them.

But it is not my purpose to plead their cause, thy beggerlines o Angel, is
to be reproved of me, which will thou, nilt thou, thou can not but
acknowledge, if thou wey the thing with thy self in earnest. Thou do abou^de
indeed in riches, but nothing is more filthy then the way of getting them.
Shall the beggar, after he has filled his purse with asking alms, cast away
his patched cloak, and in silk vaunt him self to be rich and wealthy? What
other thing is thy boasting, then the bragging of riches, which thou have
gathered most dishonestly by begging? And yet I do not speak these things to
that end, as though the stipend of the godly Pastors, who holily both enter
into and execute their office, should be mere alms. For the labourer is
worthy of his wages; neither can this distribution be said to be freely
bestowed, any more then is any made to one which lives of his public office.
God which made the earth, has so given it to the children of men, that he
reserveth a portion to himself, which he has bestowed on them, who earnestly
bend themselves to holy things. Therefore the Patrones do not give of their
own, when they do appointe the yearly rents to the Pastors of the Churches
for their pains, but deliver them to those, to whom they are due, and of which
they have been the keepers only. We speak not, I say, of such special
persons, but generally of the state of the Clergy, the manner of which is so
ordained, that the Angel manifestly grows rich by alms, and in deed is noe
other thing, then a Lord Beggar. There is added to beggary blindenes, whereby
the evil becomes far more grievous: For what is more pitiful then a blind
beggar, whom necessity constreineth to seek his living abroad, and the want
of sight suffers him not to seek? But this is a blindness of mind, whereby a
man being deprived of a witty and prudent mind, cannot provide for himself
touching things profitable and honest before God and men. The Angel then being
void of this wisdom, sins even so in administering his office, as of late
he sinned by beggary in the manner of getting. And this is the worst kind of
blindness, which for the most part, neither acknowledges his own darkness,
neither can suffer patiently admonition: yea does use the staff whereby he
ought to have tried the way, against him that shows him of the danger. Yet
thou art to be admonished o miserable Angel, how froward and angry soever
thou shall be: it may come to pass, that at length thou may see, and be
wise: if not, at least wise I may be without danger of setting a stumbling
block before the blind, if I have seen the pit and not showed it him. And
that I may deal with thee more favorably, I will make thy self judge,
whether thou be better sighted then I accuse thee: although this be
unreasonable in ons own cause, wherein thou must needs be twice blind. Call
therefore to remembrance with me, your last constitutions, which are wont to be
wisest, handled in the Convocation at London, and published in the year 1597.
what medecin do thou make for the Church being sick? First thou decreest
that fit men be admitted unto Ecclesiastical holy orders and benefices, as
they call them. The title in deed recreated many, and very many did judge thee
now at length to use thine eyes. This kind of men has made the Church sad a
great while. There was hope of remedy when thou should see and acknowledge
the disease: For of evell manners do arise good laws. But how wisely have
thou met with this evil, and satisfied men's expectation, wey well with thy
self, after give sentence. Thou know that it was ordained in a statute of
the Realm, that none should be admitted unto holy orders, but he that should
be four and twenty year old at least, and have brought before the Diocesan
the testimony of such men as the Bishop knows to be of sound religion, both
of his honest life, and also of his professing the doctrine of our Church; yea
have been able to render a reason of his faith in the latin tongue: or at the
least has been endued with some special gift of preaching. Although this were
long ago enacted, the Church has been greatly troubled with a new rabble of
most unworthy men. With what cautions then have thou helped the imbecility of
the law? For wise and quick sighted men are wont, when they have perceived the
weakness of the law, to help with more sharp laws for that point, whereby
they see the impudency of men to break through. Thou in deed have established
many things, but I pray, what serves for the worthynes of Ministers, That noe
man be received to holy orders, unless at the same time he shall exhibit the
presentation of himself to some benefice then void? or, who shall not bring a
certificate from some Church, wherein he may serve the cure of souls, that is,
where he may play the Curate under some one in reading of prayers: or who has
not ben appointed in some College; or at least who is not to be admitted of the
same Bishop unto some Benefice, or to a Cure. To what Idiote or any the worst
man may not these things perteine? But thou proceedest and addest other
things as vain as these: Moreover if he shallbe, say thou, of an other
Dioces, unless he shall bring dimissory letters, be full four and twenty
years old, and has taken some degree in the University (which last is
required only in men of another Dioces), finally that holy orders be not
given, except on the Lords day, or holy days. Excellent ordinances in deed,
for which the reformed Churches may be ashamed. What do these things profit
at all, that a fit man be admitted? What that after should be ordained
ministers either more learned or more honest? Will thou on the H. Spirit crying
by Paul, who is fit for these things, obtrude a man with a presentation, with
a Certificate, with Dimissorye letters; or who has been licenced on the Lords
days? But I will not debate the matter harder, only I appeal to thy
conscience: What I pray have you provided in this matter, who have covered the
wall ready to fall with such foolish plastring? What touching plurality of
Benefices? Thou decreest that it is to be restrained. And well in deed: for it
is an heinous thing, that one should be a sheapheard of sheep, which he
feeds not, or at least should receive any fruit from them, which take noe
profit from him. It were meet therefore, that here thou should bring forth
whatsoever skill thou have, to cure this evil, which not only the divine
oracles, but also common sense condemns of sacrilege. What remedy then do
thou apply? Namely, Let no man enjoy this faculty, unless he be at least a
Master of Arts, and a public and fit preacher of Gods word: A notable
Physician in deed. What have Masters of Arts deserved so ill at your hands,
that thou would have those first burdened with so great a sin? Thou
confessest that Plurality is an evil thing, and to be corrected, yet thou
permitest this mischief to them: In deed it is a notable privilege of their
degree, whereby they first are licensed to be evil. But whether thoughtest thou
that the destruction by these means would slay more secretly? There are so
many, thanks be to God, as if all, let by no other religion, should use of
the liberty of thy constitution, more parishes, I believe, should want Pastors
resident with them, then at this day they want. So thou do stay and
repress prudently the evil by augmenting of it. But peradventure it is enough
for thee to deceave men only with a title and pretense of repressing
plurality. Moreover there is an ordinance made touching hospitality in the
Benefices cared for. And this is the calamity of our Church that the Ministers
do not feed the poor with beef. That of binding the Regulars to make
sermons in their own proper persons, would seem to belong to a sharper
sight, unless peradventure it should call them away from other places, where
their labor is more necessary; I let pass the Matrimonial ordinances. That
is worthy remembrance touching excess about Excommunication to be reformed.
For thou see it to be defiled shamefully with many pollutions: I would to God
thou would see and regard as well those things, which belong to the holy
and lawful reforming of it. But why do thou first deny, that herein any
thing can be inovated or altered without a great mutation to the whole
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and of very many laws of this Realm; yet
afterward thou would reduce the same to his ancient honor and dignity?
Would thou make a reformation without an alteration? Thou will have nothing
to be changed, that the laws may not be violated, yet thou pretendest to
recall the former comelines. It pittiest me that thou can not see thine own
blindenes. But by this provision thou have openly showed what reformation we
must expect, such indeed by which noe amending may be made. Therefore the
Title might had been enough for this thing. Yet that thou might seem to do
that which thou do not at all, thou usest a certain form of ordinances. For
let us see how they answer and agree to the promise. First thou ordainest,
That in grievous crimes, the sentence be pronounced, either by the Archbishop,
Bishop, Deane, Archdeacon, or Prebendary, in his own person. What is this
ancient use of prononcing the sentence by them, whose names, except only the
Bishop, had not ben heard in deed in the Church, as long as the true honor
and dignity of excommunication remained? Why is there noe place left for the
Pastor of every congregation to whom once it belonged to pronounce the
sentence? Peradventure it makes noe matter to him what is done to his sheep,
or it may be that he is not fit, nor endued with judgment and wisdom enough.
In very deed this fea^e might peradventure have prevayled some what in time
past: But now it ought not, seeing thou have set us free enough from it in the
first book of the Decrees.

For it is not to be doubted, but that he that has been furnished with
Presentation, Certificate and the other things, with which thou have in the
same place instructed him, should be fit enough and more then fit unto every
part of his office. Or if I must deal with thee in earnest, what lets that
the Pastor using the counsel of others, and making diligent inquiry, may not
pronounce the sentence, as well, as either the Bishop or Prebendary, or any
other? But thou will say, we will not have this matter to be handled by common
advise, but to stand to the judgment of one alone. Is this the meaning of thy
reformation, and yet dare thou make mention of the honor and dignity of the
ancient use?

Christ commanded to tell the Church: Shall any one sustain the place of this
Church? One in deed for order sake did pronounce the sentence, but the matter
was judged not by his sentence only, but by the advice of the whole assembly
and Council. Neither would PAVLE have the Jncestuous man to be excommunicated,
but when the brethren were gathered together, and consented, as we read in
the first Epistle of the Corinthes, chapter five, verse fourth. And so the
Church for some ages after, as is clear from Origene, Tertullian, Cyprian and
others. Wherefore I would mervayle that thou do promise so boldly concerning
the former and ancient dignity, but that I knew that blind men fear not the
faces of men. But what if this thine amending which thou pretendest does lay
open a way to impunity of grievous crimes?

The Commissary as long as it perteined to him, twice at least every year did
compel the Church Warde^s by virtue of an oath, that they should present wicked
men: Now while he should do that, there is noe cause peradventure, when the
Priest associated with him cannot denounce the sentence against such man. And
in deed it is not to be hoped for, that the Church Wardens willingly will flee
unto the Bishops, Archdeacons or Prebendaryes, whom they know not where they
may find, or who peradventure are far of from them, and a journey cannot be
made without charges, when being present, and that at other men's costs, they
can scarce be driven by oath to bewray the guilty. Thou ought to have minded
these things, and not to have used a remedy worse then the disease it self.
Secondly thou speak of Excommunication for contumacy, which has noe new
thing from thy former decrees. But the repeating of the old manner, is with
thee a reformation, least peradventure any box should want a superscription,
although there be nothing in it. I pass by the Change of Penance, the foul
things of the Officials, the excess of Apparitors (of taking away who^, you
ought rather to have entreated, then of moderating them) and Registers. Thou
thy self how may speak how well thou have used thine eyes, who passing
by many great evils, either art wholly occupied about tryfles: or if
peradventure thou have touched any weygty matters, thou make them either
worse by curing, or in deed nothing better. Certainly by many reasons thy
blindness is proved. But Christ open thine eyes: I will not so much deal with
thee by words, as for thee by prayers. For I have not purposed the handling,
but only the judging of these things. The third part of the disease is
nakedness: garments are used that we may provide for shamefulnes. Out of
which when one is put, his ignominy is set openly in the sight of men,
according to that of the Prophet, Behold I am against thee, says the Lord of
hosts, and will uncover thy skirts, unfolding them upon thy face, that J may
show thy nakedness to the nations, and to the Kingdoms thy nakedness, Nah.
3.5. Therefore this nakedness is a reproach, dishonnour and contempt, whereof
this Angel is sick. For it cannot be that our Clergy should not be contemned
of men, who manifestly and clearly do see how beggarly Ecclesiastical
stipends are sought and desired: how filthily and negligently the holy offices
are administered: how all care of the flock is naught set by, and the study of
Gods glory is cast away. When I say men see these things, can it be that they
should not despise the Angel seeking only his own things, not those which
are Christ's. And the Angel himself at certain times sees the same thing in
some sort, as can testify the often complaints of their public sermons,
although he knows not the cause, or he would not know it, fearing more, as
it were, the remedy then the disease. But it appears plainly, how greatly he
is despised, from that which happened a few years since. A certain man set
forth books, who called himself a Marrer of Prelates in which he dealt boldly
with the Angel, How acceptable to the people were those merry conceits in
words? How plausible almost to all men? How gladly and greedily, and with
how great pleasure were they received every where? Noe man is so ignorant and
unskilful in things, but that minding the time, he may say thus with
himself, For Jehovah has poured contempt upon the Princes: those that honor
him he honors, and the despisers of him shall be made light: he has made our
Priests to be abject to all the people, because they have broken his Covenant.
These things, I say, a man considering with himself, had not swerved from the
truth. For if there had been any estimation of the Angel, men would rather
have mourned, then laughed, and delivered those writings to the fire, before
they would had worneth them with fo often handling and looking on them. I would
not tell thee these things, unless the Spirit did affirm plainly, that thou
do not know thine own nakedness. That false glory wherein thou flourishest,
suffers thee not earnestly either to mind or regard what men speak and
think of thee. But learn from hence if thou be wise, how servants going
before in great number, and having chains, and a great troop of serving men
folloing after, are of no force to drive away contempt, and to deliver from the
despising of the common people: or if thou can not perceive these things so
well in thy self, behold the Papists, and the Pope their Prince, how does he
now stincke for his desert with the greatest part of men, contemned, naught
set by, vile and hated of all the godly: whose feet notwithstanding some
Princes being bewitched, yet do kiss, and then whom, noe mortal man has been
in time past of more imperial majesty. Remember our former Prelates, whose
riches were greater then thine, their authority greater, their power more to be
feared: yet because the common sort of people did see them to be mere
gluttons, how did they deryde them? The pride of our Wolsey was mocked openly.
For the honors of this world are fig leaves, or as it were torn and ragged
clothes, which cover not the nakedness, but make more deformed through the
loupes. Mind these things, and be not proud of thy golden feathers, but
rather where thou art naked, cover thy shame, least through vain boasting of
the part adorned, thou lie despised with the common people for thy other
deformity. And thus at the length I have opened this rotten sore; if my pains
and travail shall be acceptable, and if being cleansed it does far well, how
great thanks shall I give to our God? but if the evil only shall be stirred up
and provoked, and the handling shall disquiet them that are sick: I will
conforte my self with the conscience of duty, and the usual wages of the
Physician.

18 I counsel thee to buy of me Gold: Hitherto the cause, now the remedy is
taught: both from whence it is to be fetched, and by what means, and also what
is the matter of the medicine it self. It is to be fetched from Christ alone,
he alone has borne all our infirmities, and alone yet can heal our griefs.
The way to fetch is by buying: not because he requires a price; for he sells
wine and milk without money or changing of my thing, Isayah 55.1.2. But
because he will have a desire to be brought, even as in getting of things with
great cost: in which together also he shows the dignity of the remedy, which
otherwise is not dear at any price. The medicine is threefolde, after the
manner of the disease, which we have showed to be threefold, Gold, white
garments, and eye salve: Gold is set against poverty: white garments do cover
nakedness; and eye salve does help against blindness. We have said that
wretchedness and misery were accidents, which forthwith vanish, when their
fountaynes are taken away. Of what sort every one of them is, may easily be
understood by their contraryes. Gold is opposed to the riches and poverty of
the Angel, that is, to the hegging of Benefices and Ecclesiastical Offices.
For the former riches are not true, and do not let but that the Angel may be
the most base and vile beggar. But the Gold of Christ drives far off this
beggary. It is therefore that most holy manner appointed by Christ himself, of
calling, choosing, ordayning, and appointing Ecclesiastical men, every one to
his office. Whereby Pastors do not seek for the office, but are sought for:
are not promoted for a peace of money, but for goodness and virtue, not for
favor, but learning, not at the will and pleasure of any man, but by the
election and consent of his flock. Christ will have this Gold to be bought of
him, because he himself has described plainly this whole way, end has not
left it free to men to deal in this matter at their pleasure. As long as the
thing shall be in the power of one Patron and Bishop, there will never be
wanting bribe givers, and such as will suffer themselves to be corrupted with
rewards. But if Christ rule be kept, this begging poverty would flee away
never to return again. For this gold is tried in the fire, proved often
times and wholly fined. We see the excellency of it in the primtive Church, and
also among our neighbors at this day. It dreadeth not any touch stone, it
fears not any fire, it bursteth nor asunder by any knocking of the hammer,
but it abode invincible in time past, and yet does abide, with the great glory
of them that are made rich thereby. White apparel is opposed to the former
honors and nakedness, that is, contempt. These garments also Christ's will have
to be bought of him, having them most precious and most praise worthy. For what
contempt can come to the^, who^ their worthynes has chosen, their learning
ordained, their holiness put in authority? Whom many have earnestly desired for
their tried godliness, do admire for their diligence in teaching, do fear
because of the most free truth, and reverence as exemples of all virtue and
honesty? Be an exe^ple, says Paul, to the faithful, in speech, in
co^versation, in love, in spirit, in faith, in chastity, let no man despise thy
youth, 1 Timothy 4.12. Behold the way to deliver from contempt. These garments are
full of majesty, with which youth being covered, is not despised. And so once
the Prophets went adorned: whose hairy garment had more estimation with all
men, then the silk and vain painting of others. Those wicked men and skornes
of the Prophets, who were together with Iehu, when the Prophet having entered
in, did lead him out from the company, unwares did show what good opinion of
the Prophet they had fixed in their minds. What, say they, would that made man
have with thee? Ye rather, why do ye made men ask what that made man would
have? But their tongue spoke according to their wicked custom: their desire to
know did show abundantly what authority and credit they gave to him
secretly; whereupon when the message was known assuredly, they created him
King whom the made man had anointed for King. The Baptist with his leather
girdle and garment of Camels hair was safe from the injury of the Priests,
because of the honor, wherewith the common people honored him. The strenght of
the divine institution is great, in which God himself gets authority,
either by the voluntary obedience of men, or by some punishment inflicted from
God. There is no need of the show of earthly riches and honors, which at the
first is wont to dazell the eyes of the unskilful, but at lenght when the
vanity of it is perceived, it is no less despised them frogs fallen from the
air. Therefore garments are to be bought of Chr. by which alone our nakedness
is covered, appearing otherwise very deformed, whatsoever clothes thou put
upon it. Eye salve of old was all kind of medicine, made in that manner, that
is might be kept while need should require. At lenght the name remained
chiefly in those, which are prepared for the diseases of the eyes: because the
Physitia^s have used abonda^ce of it. Here it is applied against the blindness,
namely the wisdom of the flesh, and ignorance of spiritual things. We read
that a certain sensible thing was made of the spittle of Chr. and of earth, Io.
9.6. as it were by the knowledge of Christ by the word that proceeds out of
his mouth, and also the knowledge of our selves, who made in the beginning, of
the earth, savor nothing but the earth. Both these are to be joined together
and to be kneaded into one lump, they profit nothing asunder,

For our misery being known particularly, brings forth desperation; and
Christ being received without the feeling of our own unworthynes, is
unprofitable and unfruictfull. And yet we are no table to mix and compou^de
together these things, but it must be obtained of him, who came into the wo^ld
to judgment, that they which see not, should see: and they that sce, should be
made blind: Ioh. 9.39. First therefore we must remove our own wisdom, which
as long as it reigns, does possess us so wholly, that it leaves noe place
for true and heavenly. For o Angel, would thou have devised a reformation
taken wholly our of thine own brain, unless thou had swelled full of the
opinion of thine own wisdom? Overlooke thy decrees, where is the Spirit
called into counsel? By what authority of Gods word is the amending of things
confirmed? After what exemple of the purer Church, are our matters being fallen
down, corrected and amended? There is a deep silence of all these things; nowhere is heard, either Paul, or any other witnesses of the holy truth, upon
whose credit the things established might rest and stay themselves. I believe
thou shall scarce find a Synod, even in the corruptest times, in which the
divine authority is more dumb and speechless. This opinion is to be laid away
o Angel, thou must acknowledge that thou art earth, and that thou have noe eye
salve in thee, till thou shall be mollified with the heavenly spittell, and
subdued into a linamente. Depend therefore on the mouth of Christ, from whence
flows that which is profitable to doctrine, to confutation, to correction, to
instruction which is in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, to
every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16.17. From hence is conpounded that eye salve,
which will take away the skales of the eyes, and endue thee with that sharpnes
of sight, that thou may see plainly, how thou ought to behave thy self
in the house of God. Neither must thou give ear to them, who not only
unskilfully, but also ungodly cry out, that the rules of these things are not
to be fetched from this shop. Christ would not seth forth himself to be a
seller of eye salve, unless he had it both abundantly, whereby he might healpe
our want, and also it were not lawful to buy it from any other. So then the
medicine is threefould, Gold against poverty, which earthly riches ease not:
white raiment against nakedness, which the honors of the world hide not: Eye
salve against blindness, which the wisdom of the flesh takes not away. From
which now at length it may be understood, that those riches where of in the
former verse the Angel boasted is not the righteousness of faith alone, as the
counterfeit Ambrose prateth unwisely. For those riches rested not on Christ
alone. Whereupon he warns that he would buy gold of him, which he should do
in vain, if before the Angel did abound in the same. But the righteousness of
faith has all his treasures placed in Christ alone; of which he is made
partaker, whosoever believes truly, and renounceth all other righteousness,
John 6.48. Romans 3.7. Therefore o Ribera, draw rather water out of a pumeise
stone, then overthrowe the righteousness of faith from this place. But such
trifles of thine do fall of themselves down, that I need not spend time in
confuting of them.

19. As many as I love etc. An exhortation to use the remedy: and first from
the chastising of them whom he loves. A reason in deed of very great moment.
Whosoever is either among sons, or among the reprobate: If he receives noe
son, whom he rebukes and chasteneth not, what shall be done with the
multitude of the rest? An horrible destruction remains for them, whom he will
spare never so little, who do not suffer his own children to escape
uncorrected. Therefore a chastisement is at hand, unless thou repent betime,
and that very grievous and full of trouble, as the very words themselves do
show: which are wont to be used for a confort in a bitter affliction, wherewith
the mind is so stricken as if it were forsaken of God. Therefore he says they
are sons, whom he beats with so cruel punishements, least through the
grievousnes of the punishment, they should despair of his fatherly goodness.
Therefore it is not time now to strive and to contend with mutual hatred and
reproaches, but the ears are to be lift up to the alarm of Christ, and we
must either think forthwith of the remedy, or some great and lamentable
calamity is to be expected shortly. And it is to be observed that he does
rebuke and chasten; that is, convince and punish. These two things are to be
joined together. Punishment is unprofitable where words are silent, stripes
are fierce. From whence chastisement is well called discipline, wherein the
offender feels pain and learneth together. But what shall then be the fruict
of so long and spiteful contention, when the convinced and chastised son
shall be compelled, will, he, nil he, to singe a contrary song? Were it not
better to give now ear to learn, then to expect that sorrowful changing of
our judgment? Although Christ in deed has convinced already, seeing now by
the space of many years, many notable men do labor in this thing, that the
brethren may understand the truth. What remains now, but that at length he
fetch out his rods and chastise those whom he has rebuked so long time
without fruict.

Be hot therefore, Strain therefore thy zeal to the utmost. The translation
persisteth in the former metaphore, but the Spirit speaks now properly,
teaching that the former heat, was nothing else then zeal. Forsake, says he,
thy lukewarmnes; purge out all the Romish leaven, that thou may hang no
longer in the mids between the reformed and the Antichristian Church: cast
away for his sake honors and riches, who for thy sake was most despised and
most poor. Let faithful Pastors be appointed for the several congregations;
let them that have charge and rule be compelled unto deligence, let the
chaungers and corrupters of the doctrine be repressed: let the censures be
restored to the Pastors over their flock. And dispute not with Christ, how
profitably the Polity used of the enemy may be joined with the Gospel. He
that reproves in his people the manners of the East, and would not have his to
be shorn after the similitude of the Gentiles, will not easily suffer this
society with Antichrist, which our carnal wisdom minds. This is the force
of this zeal, which unless we shall receive forthwith, we shall undergo
some sharp chastisement.

Andrepent; Repent of the injuries which thou have done to the brethren, in
casting some into prison, in turning others out of their goods, in depriving
many of the power to preach the word, in reproching and traducing all with the
odious name of Anabaptists. Thou know that they have no fellowship with them
in any of their errors. They that reproove thy superstitions, teach most
purely and holily concerning the Magistrate: who^ they honor no less
faithfully and reverently, then any other whatsoever. If I should say that he
were esteemed more holily and religiously of them, then of all other, I should
not ly. For they that cleave to God with most firm minds, are such as observe
most his decrees, and in all true obedience yield up themselves to him, who^
they acknowledge to be ordained of God among men in his fear. That was a
notable calumny, whereby both thou have deceived the Prince, and also have
procured hatred to thy brethren. But thou saw that this weapon was most
ready at hand, and to the^ hurtful above al other. Repent, and wash a way thy
former offenses with tears, forget thy riches which the more thou love, the
more pain shall thou feel. It is forsaken with much ado where it cleaves so
near the heart. But Christ is determined, unless thou repent betime, to spue
thee out of his mouth.

20 Behold J stand at the door: A second reason persuading to use the remedy,
taken from the readiness of Chr. to dwell with the^ that shall receave him.
which belongs to every one of the me^bres: that former respected properly the
Ang. but why does he say that he stands at the door and knocks? Why
opens he not the door and goes strait in, especially seeing he has the
key of David, wherewith he opens and no man shuteth? above in ver. 7. These
things are spoken most elega^tly and most significa^tly in respect of the
Laodicea^ Church and ours: in which Christ stands at the doors, an entry in
some sort stopped up against him. The Philad. Chur. in which once flourished
Gods ordinance, and in whose Antitype it is force at this day, all the relics
of Antichrist being thrust forth, has the door unlocked and opened: and
especially because of the true use of excommunication restored, whereby the
gates of heaven are both shut and opened, and also the doors of every ons
conscience are opened, that Chr. may pass in without any tarrying. For where
good heed is taken to every ons manners, and according to the present occasion
men are admonished, reproved, cut of, received again, and the other things are
performed faithfully and diligently, with the regard had of every ons
salvation, all doors and bars of the heart are cast down and removed, and
in very truth the gates then lift up their heads, that the King of Glory may
enter in. But when as England is lukewarm, because of the contagion of the
Romish government (as once Laodicea for some such like mixture) and has not
any administration of the censures, granted unto lawful Pastors, as Christ
has appointed: as often as the word is preached, Christ stands knocking as
it were at the doors shut, to whom no other way is open into men's heart, the^
by the word: whose power we read to have bin great once, when in one sermon
three thousand were converted, Act. 2.41. Neither is it at this day of it self
less mighty: yet there is a diverse raison of a Church to be gathered, and one
gatthered. God shows himself extraordinarily bountiful in inviting his
people, which after he has gathered together, he will have them to grow by the
way appointed. As touching the fruit of the Gospel therefore, the people
receaveth no less loss of so excellent an ordinance, the^ the Angel does
acknowledge himself maimed and lame, being spoiled of his lawful power. This
key is wanting to our Church, and therefore it is noe mervayle if Christ be
hindered that he cannot enter in readily, seeing the doors are shut. But are
we the^ destitute of every good thing? in no wise, but we enjoy still a
double good thing wholesome to the elect: the first of which is the going in of
Chr. unto those that do open to him. The 2 is their most sweet setting down
with Christ. That is the most sweet solace of receiving Christ, which the
Saints perceive, as often as at the word preached they feel their hearts to be
opened by faith, by the work of the Spirit. For then he enters in and suppeth
with us, in imperting himself most beningly and sweetly: even as he bad
Zacheus desiring to see him and clyming up on a wild fig tree, to come down
and to make ready for him entertainment at his house. Luke 19.5. And he suppeth
not going away scotfree, who does give them that thus embrace him, that they
be made the sons of God, Ioh. 1.12. He again, entertaineth us, that we may
suppe together with him, as often as with pure minds we come to the Sacrament
of the Supper, wherein he feeds us with his own flesh and blood most
sumptuous delicious dainties, above all that can be spoken or thought.

In which sense it is spoken in Luke chap. 13.29. Then they shall come from the
East and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit
down in the kingdom of God, that is, men shall assemble together to the
Gospel from all quarters: shall embrace the doctrine of the kingdom, and
shall be partakers of Chr. truly, whose pledges they shall take, bread and
wine, sitting down at his table in celebrating his sacred supper. For he
speaks of the calling of the Gentiles, whose faith and assenting to the whole
truth, he signifies by one sacramental action. These guests now Christ would
call, when in the mean time the Jews, of whom he speaks in the parable, did
abhor and despise the way of salvation, as we see it has come to pass now
for the space of many ages. Whereto pertains that which in the same place the
Jews excluded do allege, requiring an entry for themselves because of their
former familiarity in eating and drinking in his sight; ver. 26. as though they
should say, O Lord, we communicating at thy table, have feasted merrily with
thee, in eating of thy sacrifices, will thou lock the door now against us?
For in this respect the meat of the sacrifices was the same thing to the
Jews, that the bread and wine is to us. Neither are these things
notwithstanding so to be taken, as though the elect were limited within the
bounds of this life; but because the supper which is made on earth, is a
pledge of the eternal feast in the heavens. These things therefore prove,
that a double and great good thing do abide in the English Church, that is to
say, the preaching of the word and the lawful administration of the
sacraments. In both which Christ bestows him self upon hispeople, keeping a
mutual feast with them, he first being received of us by hearing, secondly
entertaining us again with the supper-of his body. O we therefore most impure
as often as we fly from and forsake hearing of the word, for we refuse Christ
to be our guest: O wicked despisers that we are, as often as we withdraw our
selves from receaving the sacrament with our brethren. For we despise Christ
bidding us to supper. But these things are added for the singular confort of
the godly. For who would not quake and think of flying very quickly from this
Church, when they should hear that the condition of the Ministers is hated of
Christ, whom not repenting he will vomit out of his mouth shortly, unless by
the words of Christ himself they were assured of their communicating with him?
Praise be to thee therefore most meecke Lamb, who finding the door shut
against thee, do not depart quickly, being moved with anger and fury, and
deprive us of all means of salvation, but leavest yet an abondance of thy
self to all that do open to thee knocking by the word, and despise not thy
most sweet inviting by the Sacrements. Therefore wicked and blaspehmous is
their error who do fall away so from this Church, aa if Christ were banished
wholly from hence, and that there could be no hope of salvation for them that
tarry there. Let them mind here Christ feasting with his people. Will they be
ashamed to sit down there, where they see Christ not be ashamed? Are they
holier and purer then he? But why do they not convince themselves, by their
own experience? They cannot deny, but that they believed in Christ before they
made a separation from us: whence came this faith? Came it not from our
preaching in our Church? Can any then preach except he be sent? Romans 10 13.
etc. Why then do they so perversely refuse, for some blemish in the outward
calling, that word, whose divine force they feel in their hearts? Althoug the
fruict it self does noe more free from blame our corruptions, then a true
child, adultery. And therefore, neither may we either take pleasure in them,
nor they forsake and fall away from us for some blemishes; Wherefore return to
the unity of the Church, which has begat and nourished you. If you fly from
this Christ, who suppeth with is elect in our assemblyes, and welcometh them
again, ye shall find him no were. In the mean time let us also mind how
great evil we call for upon our selves, who by holding hard our
superstitions, do throw our brethren into so great danger. Certainly if that
has any weight, which the truth himself once confirmed, it were better for
such men, that a millstone being hanged about their necks, they were drowned in
to bottom of the sea, Mat. 18 6. I wish health of mind to both. But more over
this place is to be delivered from the fraud of the Papists, who will have it
to be in the power of men to open to Christ knocking. Whether, says
Bellarmine, does he not know, that they cannot open? Should he not be a fool,
who would knock at the door of his niggbour, if he knew certe^ly that none
were within, who could open? in his first book of grace and free will, chap.
11. I answer, he should not without cause be a fool, if his only end of
knocking were, that he mitght enter in: But Christ knocks at the door of the
reprobates, whom he knows neither to be willing, nor able to open, not that
he may enter in, but partly that he may upbride the^ with their impotency
gotten by their own fault: partly that he may increase their condemnation. For
so speaks the Evangelist expressly, Therefore they could not believe John.
12.34. Why then uses he words to them, who have not ability to believe?
Christ himself shows: If I had not come, says he, and spoken unto them,
they should not have had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin,
Ioh. 15.22. Therefore he spoke unto them, that for the contempt and hatred of
his only begotten son, their condemnation migh be the greater. Such are the
powers of the natural man, as is the love of the truth in the Papists, who
seeing it, refuse it wickedly.

21 To him that overcomes J will give to sit, word for word in the Greek is,
He that overcomes I will give him, in stead of I will give to the overcomer;
by the nominative case absolute, as was observed before chap. 2.26. This third
reason is taken from the reward of being a companion and partaker of his
throne: Not because the glory of every one of the children shall be equal to the
honor of the Man Christ: but because the glory and majesty of the head, shall
redounde to every one of the members. Therefore the thrones are not peculiar to
the twelve Apostles of which see Mat. 19.28. but common to all the elect.
Althoug in a certain peculiar manner they are attributed in the same place to
the Apostles, as it may be we will show in an other place. And we have said
often that the rewards are fitted unto the times, and to contain a Prophesy,
which is here also to be respected. Christ therefore mentions the throne which
he obtained, after his sacrifice finished on the cross: showing that the like
things are to be endured also of his, afterward they shall be partakers of his
throne. Therefore by this making mention of it, he lesseneth the affliction,
and so the consolation of it he sets himself for an example, as though he
should bid us look upon him, and not to be overcome of any troubles, when
we see that he ascended into his throne of supreme dignity by this way. And
we know how much this contending for reformation has cost many and excellent
men, whose sufferings shall not be forgotten, although they be not recited of
me. Only let them confort their faintnes of heart with the expectation of his
throne. What thoug they be trod under foot, while they shall see others to
flourish with the dignity of Peers of the Realm? Christ has prepared for
them a throne with himself. Let noe man regard an earthly chair: as hitherto
they have confirmed abunda^tly, that they are far of from such desire,
whatsoever ambitious men prate otherwise, who do conjecture of other by
themselves.

22 Let him that has an ear hear: Now therefore thou whosoever have felt
Christ to be thy guest, and have tasted again of the daintyes of his table,
left up thine eats and atte^d to the thing which the Spirit says to the
Churches. Let man go, and rest not in him, but regard the convenience of all
things from the beginning to the end. And complain not of the newnes and
strangenes, as though thou would appoint Christ, to whom and when he should
reveal his secrets. We know that somethings have bin sealed up unto the
determined time. But if it be needful, that thou confess it to be a divine
truth, let us all endevoure earnestly, Princes, Peers, Angels people, that we
may turn away the evil that hangs over our heads. What an horrible thing
is it to be vomited out of the mouth of Christ with loathing and abhorring? The
land vomited our once the Chananites, and they were destroyed utterly. Shall
their punishment be lighter, whom not the land, but Christ himself shall spue
out? Therefore let us use the remedy seriously. We have need of zeal, whereby
we may attain a full reformation: We hang yet between Heaven and Hell: The
contagious vapor of the Romish marsh does molest and annoy us; our sylver
hitherto is foul with dross: our wine is mixed with water: Christ will suffer
no longer such Angels that are in the middle? What if this mine admonition be
the last token and sign to thee of bewarring? Let us therefore give ear, and
not whet our teeth against the stone that is hurled: But let us quake for fear
of the hand that threw it. Thou o Christ, who tookest lingering Lot by the
hand to pull him out of the city, open our hearts who are slow and prolonge
the time, that we may obey thy warnings and exhortatio^s.

Chap. 4
AFTER I saw, and behold, a door was opened in heaven: and the first voice
which I heard, as it were of a trumpet talking with me, said, come up hither,
and I will show thee what things must be done hereafter.

2 Then straight way J was ravished in spirit: and lo a throne was set in
heaven: and one sat upon the throne.

3 And he that sat was to look on like a Jasper and a Sardin stone; and round
about the throne was a rain bow in sight like unto an Emerald.

4 And round about the Throne, were four and twenty seats, and upon the
seats I saw four and twenty Elders sitting, clothed with white raiment: and
having crowns of gold upon their heads.

5 And there proceeded from that Throne lightnings, and thunders, and voices:
and seven lamps of fire burning before the Throne, which are the seven
spirits of God.

6 There was also before the THRONE a Sea of glass, like to Crystal, and in
the mids of the Throne, and which compassed the Throne, four beasts full of
eyes before and behind.

7 And the first beast was like unto a Lion, and the second beast like unto a
Calfe, and the third beast having a face like a Man, and the fourth beast like
a flying Eagle.

8 And the four beasts every one of them by themselves, had six wings round
about, and within were full of eyes, saying day and night without ceasing,
Holy, Holy, Holy LORD GOD that almighty one, which was, and which is, and which
is to come.

9 And when those beasts shall give glory, and honor, and thankesgiving to him
that sits upon te throne, to him, I say, that lives for ever and ever.

10 The four and twenty Elders shall fall down before him thaat sits upon
the throne, and shall worship him that lives for ever, and shall cast their
crowns before the throne, saying.

11 Worthy art thou o Lord, to receave glory, and honor, and strenght; because
thou have created all things, end by thy will they are and have bin created.


Analysis.
HITHERTO has been the Prophesy of particular Churches: that of the whole
Church follows; which propounds first the matter summarily in this chapter:
afterward specially in the rest of the chapters. This contains a new calling
of John, consisting in the thing seen, a door open in heaven, in the first
voice heard of a trumpet, ver. 1, and lastly in the effect, whereby he was in
the Spirit forthwith, in the beginning of the second verse: and also the
universal type of the future Church, which is described in the rest of the
whole chapter. Whose Prince as it were the center, is most glorious by the
Throne, most delectable in sight, shining with heavenly brightness round about,
ver. 2.3. The members of this center, as it were the circunference, are the
four and twenty Elders, full of majesty, reverend in their seats, age,
holiness, and crowns of gold, ver. 4. The things acco^panying these persons,
are partly gifts, which God has bestowed on the holy congregation; partly the
worship it self, which the congregation of the faithful does yield unto him.
The gifts are first of protection: whereby proceed from the throne lightnings,
thunders, and voices, for the punishment of the wicked world, because of their
entreprises against the congregation of the saints, ver. 5. Secondly, of
sanctification, whereby he presents the holy congregation blamesse before him,
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, of these the interne are the
seven lamps burning before the throne, ver. 5. The externe and their
instrumental causes, are, the Sea of glass and the Beasts; whose place,
number, eyes of the body, the proper countenance of every one, and adorning of
wings, are described in the ver. 6.7.8. Afterward their office, ver. 8. And
the worship that is given to him that sits on the throne is thankesgiving,
in which the Beasts go before, as the captains and standerd-beates of the
public congregation, ver. 9. Afterward, the other body of the Elders
follows, both in adoration, ver. 10. and also in consent to the same
glorifying, ver. 11. after that custom, whereby God is worshipped in the
christian congregations. Such is the congregation of the Godly before God; and
some such might be always, although not evident and visible to the world in
equal glory at all times.

Scholions.
Afterward J saw; Those things being declared which are of some short time,
now the Spirit, those bounds being enlarged, pursues with a continued order,
those things which should show the common and entyre face of things from the
time of this writing unto the last end. The handling of which things will be
admirable, neither will be accomplished and performed without his aid alone,
which showed these things first to his servant. Trusting therefore to his
grace, I will proceed in the work begun. Unto the finishing whereof, howsoever
other things shall be wanting, certainly faithfulness and diligence in searching
out to my power, shall not be wanting. These first words are perteining to a
new preparation, unto a new prophesy. For John is noe more conversant on the
earth, but is taken up into heaven, where through a door opened he beholds
wonderful changes of things that were to be known by noe other way. Therefore
the manner of the Prophesy following is diverse from the former. That former is
straighter, even as also the place where it was seen, a small Island compassed
with the sea: this spread far and near passing all measure, even as also the
heaven it self containing all things within his compass. Furthermore a certain
visible print and sign of things to come was there to be seen in those
seven cities. For the Churches that after were to be enlarged and increased,
should be pourtrayed and drawn out by the will of God, according to the
present image and figure of them, but there was noe token or show among mortal
men of the things to be spoken of in this second prophesy. For the peculiar
judgments, of which there is most speech here, are to be fetched from that
secret revelation alone. Unto the heaven then, where liberty of this vision was
given, is added afterward the book sealed with seven seals: then noe
creature sufficient to open the same: nor any sufficient power of any one,
except of the Lamb only, as we shall see in his place. All which things, as
they declare the excellency of this Prophecy, so they require our greater
attention and earnest bending of our minds to them. As touching the words,
the first voice is heard, because there is the same author of both Prophecies:
and sounds like a trumpet, whereby the things heard may be made more certain
and out of doubt, and might be perceived the better of John, as has been
observed at chap. 1.10. It bids to come up hither, where only the things
might be seen, of which there was noe tracke or path made in the earth. And he
would not that he should see a far of as through the door, by which means
he might be deceaved, or not see the thing plainly enough, but that he should
be present and before him, that he might have a certain and undoubted knowledge
of the things. But that which follows is not void of doubting, how he may
say, that he will show a vision of things which must be done after these. For
whether should the following Prophesy not take her beginning, before that
former of the seven Churches should attain his end? But in them we see is
entreated of things of our time: or if we respect the bare types, many
things to come were fore showed; moreover in those things that follow it
shall noe less appear that John- does tell of things agreeing with their own
times: so that the words cannot be so understood by any means. Wherefore
neither is that distribution firm, wherein the whole Prophecy is distinguished
into things present and future. The Spirit follows not such distribution,
but mixeth many future things with present as they are counted. Wherefore these
words, after these things, are not refferred, in respect of their beginning,
to the end of the former prophecy, but unto the present age of John, yea unto
that very moment, wherein the Spirit revealed these things: from whence a new
beginning be in taken, he describes the continual course and term of time of
the whole Church, and annexeth those things which could not be understood
sufficiently from the former types. Therefore Theod. Beza well translated heta
tauta by and adverbe hereafter. But in respect of the end, not without cause
this second Prophecy, is counted after the former, as being of a far longer
time, reaching unto the last coming of Christ, whereas that former is termined
with far narrower bounds. From these things therefore there are, as we take
it, two things chiefly to be observed: First, that from this place those things
only are handled, which do follow the time of the revelation made. For so he
speaks plainly, And J will show thee the things, that must be done
hereafter. Which being marked of certain Interpreters, I mervayle was not
observed in their expositions: But the times through the whole treatise to be
confounded so by a whirlewinde, that all things were wrapped in most thick
darcknes. We being taught by their exemple, we will borowe light from hence
for the exposition following. The second, that this Prophesy belongs to the
whole Church, which is neither tied to any particular Churches, nor is ended
with any other bounds, then the whole frame of the world. The Spirit set in
the first place, that particular Prophesy, that he might relate common things
commonly, without interrupting of the narration.

2 Therefore I was suddenly ravished in the Spirit: Here is the same authority
altogether, which was before, as well from the person calling, as from the
person called. For it is the same holy inspiration of God, which he mentioned
in the first chapter verse 10. But what need was there of a new inspiration?
Had the former ceased, that in a certain distance of time it might be kindled a
fresh? Without doubt the instinction was continual without intermission: but
he says that it was suddenly in the Spirit, because the Spirit did frame him
to receave new visions, unto which he perceived himself prepared forthwith.
The whole Revelation seems to have been finished in that one Lords day, chap,
1.10. and therefore that there fell out noe intermission after that it began
once to be exhibited.

And behold a Throne was placed in heaven: Such was the preparation by a new
calling: now he comes to the common type of the holy Church. The description
of which was necessary before he should enter into the other Prophesy. For when
as her manifold dangers and notable alteratio^s were to be rehearsed, her
flight, return, false friends, open enemies, cou^terfait Sosiae, who should
vaunt themselves under the show of her, and many other things of that sort
were to be declared, with which she should contend and have to do, it was
needful, that first a certain form and image of her should be pourtrayed,
which is the principal point of the treatise following, lest peradventure in
so great sturres and troubles, we should suppose her to have been wholly
extinguished and abolished, or at least wise her face being not known, we
should be the more hindered from acknowledging of her.

Werfore we shall find this Type to be common to all ages, as of which there
is mention made in the fourteen chapter of this book and third verse. Where
the companions and followers of the Lamb sing a new song before the four
Beasts and the Elders. And again nearer to the ending of the Prophesy, the
four and twenty Elders and the four Beasts fall down and worship God, as may
be seen in the nineteen chapter of this book and in the fourth verse.

So in other places, as speech is made of the true Church, so far as any
thing is to be done in the public assembly, she is noted always after the
manner of this type. For we may not think that any congregation on earth is
to be found of so absolute purity and sound perfection, as is here described,
but that all the holy assemblyes of the elect, are counted such in Christ,
before God the Father, although much terrene dregs be sprinckeld upon them,
according to that, The Church to be sanctified by Christ, and to be purged by
the washing of water through the word, made also glorious, without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but to be holy and without blame, Ephesians. 5.26.27.
An exemple of which description we have here set before our eyes. And for that
purpose besides, that we should conform all our assemblyes unto this rule:
even as Moses was commanded to make the frame of the Tabernacle, and all his
implements, altogether as was showed to him in the mount, Exodus 25.9. But the
type of our Church is showed in the very heavens, according to the more
plentiful glory, wherewith the Gospel shyneth above the Law: But how much
the more diligently all things are to be considered Seeing therefore we know
the drift of the vision, let us search out the exposition of the several
things. First, the head it self of the Church is described, such as the true
members do always confess and worship; both by his sitting in a Throne in
this verse, and also by the similitude following. The sitting declares the
majesty and glory of the most high God, and noe less his steady and stable
dwelling among the Saints, in whose assembly he has placed his throne of
dignity, to go to noe other place. And because there is but one throne and one
that sits on it, we know that God is one in nature, power, majesty, glory,
and that there is not any other beside, who rules in the mids of the saints.
Therefore the holy Church, worshippeth and prayseth with all honor and
reverence the one only supreme Jehovah.

3 And he that sat, was to look on like: Aretas, the Complutent edition, and
the Kings Bible do not read these first words, and he that sat was but they
add by and by to the end of the former verse, these following words, like in
sight; Our books and the common latin translation do distinguish more plainly
the sitting and the similitude; which thing in describing the true God, seems
that it ought not to be omitted. This verse shows a little more fully of what
sort this one God is; of whom yet it sets forth noe image but only a
certain kind of color, after those ancient representations made once to the
old people. You saw, says Moses, noe similitude in the day that Jehovah spoke
to you in Horeb, out of the mids of the fire, Deuteronomy. 4.15. For the same is
that one true God reigning in the Christian assemblyes, whom from the beginning
the primitive Church worshipped. And seeing that in the infancy of the Church
he showed noe image of himself, much less is any similitude to be expected in
this up grown and ripe age. This is a more familiar and fuller manifestation,
seeing beside one and the same essence, which the common glory notes, the
incomprehensible distinction of the three persons, is in some sort revealed by
the three precious stones, the Jasper, Sardin, and Emerald. For it pleases the
Spirit to use the delightful Jewels to disclose these mysteryes, because the
grace and beauty of these does most of all excel in this world below,
whereupon they may be most fit images of that pleasantnes, which exceeds
all created understanding; especially seeing the representation is rather of
the virtue then of any form. The first sight of the Jasper, resembles the
person of the Father: this Jewel is green, and not without cause called the
mother of Jewels, the kinds of it are so many, and the honor so ancient. And
what more fitly among pearls could shadow out the Father, who is the first in
order, always of a flourishing eternity, and of whom the other persons have
their beginning and original? The second sight is of the Sardin, whereby the
Son is represented. This Jewel is read of a fleshly color, from whence also
it is called a Carneole, fitly in deed being in his stead, who took upon him
flesh for our sake, and was made a man, like unto us. The third sight is of a
rainebowe, of the color of an Emerald, whereby the H. Ghost is noted. He
compasses the Throne round about, as in the book of wisdom chap. 9.4.
compassing the whole circuit of the divine majesty with an unutterable
sweetness. For the Emerald does show so acceptable, pleasant, and shining
greenes, that the eyes behold nothing more gladly. Yet this Raynebowe is not
like that which is commonly so called. For this is not over against the Throne,
but about the Throne: neither is it an half circle, but whole and full on
every side. For it is round about the throne: finally it is not of three
colors, as the true Rainebowe, but of one only and simple color of the
Emerald. Such therefore is that God, one in nature, three in persons, the head
and center of the Church; whom alone the faithful are in love with, and do
worship, taking pleasure most sweetly with all their hearts in his
incomprehensible sweetness.

And round about the Throne: So is the Head, now he adioyneth the body, like
the circumference of this center, as we have said. Which is described by the
place, the number of members, age, apparel and crowns. The place is double,
common, about the highest throne, and proper, the peculiar throne of every one.
The common, round about the throne, is before, behind, at the right hand and
at the left, that it may part the Rain bow (which compassed also the Throne,
but with a contrary situation, above, beneath, and on both sides) at the right
corners. Although the Rainebowe seems not so much to be divided or touched,
as to be included with this compassing of the Elders: which nevertheless it
should cut in the middle, as it were, if it were extended unto a full compass.
Unless peradventure the highest throne be set in the same plain place, in
which were the thrones of the Elders; for then the Rainebowe shall not be in a
contrary seat or situation, but shallbe compassed only with a longer
circuit, as the circumferences nigher the center are wont to be contained in
those that are further of. This common seat is attributed to them from the
manner of the saints, who are called his compassers, as vow and perform to
Jehovah your God, ye that stand round about him, Psalm. 76.12. And as Christ
promises, that he will be in the midst of them that shall be gathered together
in his name. Mat. 18.20. So in old time, the Tabernacle was set in the mids
of the Jews camping, Numb. 2. And this is for the confort of the Godly, whom
all, God receives without respect of persons, being alike nigh to all that
call upon him: least peradventure any should complain, that he is dealt with
all uniustly, as who being set in a latter place, has noe access unto God,
but by messengers and mediators. The proper place is every ons Throne. For
they sit upon Thrones. Whereby is signified that all are of a Kingly dignity; of
which an other mark is added in the end of the verse, namely the Crowns.
This honor the saints enjoy by Christ, who has made us Kings and Priests to
God and his father, chap. 1.6. Neither does he adorn with this benefit some
few excellent faithful ons a part, but receaveth all the elect into the
fellowship of the same honor. Every one knows, how this certain number of
four and twenty thrones, and so many Elders, tormenteth the Interpreters. Some
refer it to the twelve Patriarchs, or the twelve Prophets, and so many
Apostles. But the thing as it seems is far from the truth. For he speaks
of future congregations, not of those that were past, as before ver. 1. Then of
such, whose office is performed on earth, not in heaven properly so called: as
afterward we shall see, chapter 14.3. and 15.7. That I may not say that they
swerve wholly from the scope of this vision. Others apply it other way: but it
were to long to reckon, much more to confute all opinions. It shall be
sufficient to propound, that which seems most likely to me, and to put it to
the judgment of the godly. The Spirit alludeth to that distribution of the
holy offices and servants of the King, ordained by David from God into 24
orders, 1 Chr. chapter 24. etc. For first the chief Priests were distributed into
24 orders. After the same manner, the chief Levites that served the Priests in
the same chapter ver. 31. So the holy Musicia^s, chapter 25. and the Door keepers, chapter
26. Of those that served the King 24 thousands in their several
distributio^s, chapter 27. Therefore seeing the whole congregation of the children
of Israel, whether we respect the tribe of Levi, or the rest of the people
accounted after a sort for the Kings lot, whose affairs they did administer,
was distinguished into 24 orders: not without cause those Elders which are both
Priests and Kings, and are in stead of all the faithful serving Christ, are
rekoned in so many orders and by the same number. And together also is showed
by this number of 24, how much larger is the Church of the Gentiles, the^ was
that of the Jews. This was contained in 12 Patriarchs, as the chief heads:
that greater by half: that is many degrees, which a certain measure signifies
indefinitly, exceeding so in multitude of cityzens, as also in clearnes of the
things known. Whence the nearer they came to the times of Christ, so much were
all things in former time the clearer and greater. How clear made David the
service of the Tabernacle, the offices being described, their place assigned to
every one. But the Temple of Solomon surpassed all the former glory; all things
were made with larger dime^sions, accordind to the increase of the light of the
Sun approaching nearer. when Christ at length was exhibited, the Sun
attained to his height, by whose brightness all the former light vanished away.
So the^ is the number: as touching the age all are Elders, not because of their
feeble strength and wasted through old age, but for their gravity worthy of
reverence, and their mature judgments, by which they embrace the truth: then
also because they have a certain present possession of their dignity, such as
agrees to perfect men, and of a confirmed and strengthened age. Infants,
although they be worthy honor through the right of inheritance, because of
future hope, yet they want the present fruition of things. And in the whole
time in deed of the Law, the heir was an infant, and differed nothing from a
servant, brought into bondage under the elements of the world, as under tutours
and governors: but when the full time came, we are no longer under a school
master, but e^ioy the liberty of me^, so as all the faithful now ar called
Elders most sigifica^tly, Gal. 3.25. and 4.1.2. etc. White raime^t is the mark
of the Priest hood, Ex. 28.40. which office the believers in Christ do
execute, giving up their bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God,
that their reasonable service of God, Romans 12.1. The golden crowns of the
head, manifest the solemn majesty of a kingdom. For Kings do not always
bear their crowns, but in solemn assemblyes and where they will show
plainly their glory according to the present occasion. But there remains
still to these the solemn honor of royal majesty, whose crowns ar never put
off, except when they give honor to the supreme King: when their bare heads
ar more honorable then they themselves crowned with a Diadem.

The Complutent edition and the Kings Bible do not read, and they had, nor
Aretas: if they are to be added, the usual defect of the article is to be
supplied in this sort, who also had.

5 And out of the Throne proceeded: Hitherto the body. The gifts that do
accompany it, are first of Protection, for out of the throne come lightnings,
and thunders and voices: because for the Churches sake God in fearful manners
does punish the wicked; who are plagued for the contempt, tyranny, and iniuryes
which they have don to his singularly beloved spouse: and at lenght they do
feel the delaying of the vengeance recompensed abundantly with the sharpenes
thereof. The punishment of the persecutours are witnesses, whose rage and fury
God has always punished in this sort by his special providence. Otherwise
how could the truth have bin spread and extended even unto these times, in so
deadly hatred of the world? But he that sets on the throne do not permit
any to oppress his saints without punishment, he reproves also Kings for
their sakes, saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets noe harm,
Psalm. 105.14.15. For the Lord shall roar out of Zion, and his voice out of
Jerusalem, Amos 1.2. Why the^ is not the world wise at last, when it sees that
this is the fountain of all evils, because it does entreat so contemptuously
and unworthyly the Church? And the lightnings and terrible thunders, do
signify punishments, and not to be avoided by any means, as which do fall
violently upon men from heaven. But to what end are voices added? Surely
voices do note out often times the craking of thunders, as Exodus 19.16. And
there were voices, and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the
voice of a trumpet very loud: So in chap. 20.18. And all the people did
perceive the voices and the voice of a trumpet. But seeing in this place there
is express mention of thunders, the voices are referred to some other thing,
namely to the sound of the trumpet. For he does allude unto that fearful
sound of the trumpet in giving of the law, whereby the Israelites were summoned
to appear at the Tribunal seat and judgment. The sound whereof, when it
continued and waxed very strong, Moses said, I do fear and quake, Exodus
19.19. Heb. 12.21. For the expectation of judgment did more abash and trouble
their mind, then the present horror of some terrible spectacle: the fear of
which, the mind can sustain in some sort, unless it be troubled with the
conscience of sin: when it shallbe cast down with the feeling of this, it
quaketh at every show of evil, as if torments were prepared and by and by to
be undergone. The voices then here are some strange things betokening some
evil to come, or stinges of conscience, with which the minds are always
tormented, with expectation of some more grievous thing to come. This fear
shall be as a torture to the wicked, tearing and vexing with greater torment of
mind, then any present, though grievous calamity. Such then are the weapons
which are laid up in this armory: which in deed are drawn out and brought
forth in a readiness for taking of vengeance, even as the use either of the
whole Church, or the necessity of any of the saints privately does require.
Wherefore there is no caufe why they should fear the wicked world, for whose
defense so grievous punishments are prepared.

And seven lamps of fire: After the grace of protection, are declared the
gifts of sanctification: of which the inward are signified by the seven
burning lamps, after the account of the seven spirits which are before the
throne, chap. 1.4. For by the flame of these, those lamps do burn, with that
difference only, whereby the river differreth from the fountain. The which
thing the lamps do signify, vessels of a certain and limited measure,
whereas the Spirit himself is unmeasurable, and cannot be included in any
straight vessels. For which cause he was before most free, not limited by any
addition of any measurable quantity, where mention was made of him as of the
third person, of equal glory and majesty with the Father and the Son, chap.
1.4. And these lamps are called the seven spirits of God, both because they
are gifts that flow from the Spirit, and also there is a most strait joining
together of the effect with his cause. For they be most sweet fruits which
the Spirit created in the hearts of the saints, in giving them faith, hope,
charity, peace, joy, pray, and the other things with which the elect are
sanctified. They are likened to lamps of fire, according to the custom of the
lights in the Temple, which were to be lighted every day of Aaron and his
sons, Exodus 27.20. For the Spirit will have them to be kindled in the hearts
of the elect, by the labor of the Ministers, through the word and sacraments,
and not to be expected contrary to the order delivered to us of himself. There
is the number of seven, because of the manifold variety of gifts, wherewith
he adorneth the faithful: as every where that number is used to note an
infinite number. Last of all these gifts are compared to fire (for the lamps
are of fire, and burning before the throne) because they inlighten the mind,
and burn up the stubble of the inbread corruption, and kindle a desire of all
godliness, which John calls the Babptisme of fire, Mat. 3.11. And how great
confort arises from thence, that the name of the Spirit himself is attributed
to those gifts? Which are, says he, the seven Spirits of God: From which the
faithful may understand, that that force which they feel in their hearts
raised up of God, is a most sure pledge of God dwelling in them. Such then are
the inward gifts, of which the Church shall never be destitute: but some
congregation of the Godly shall be remaining always, in which those seven
lamps shall burn.

6 There was also before the Throne a Sea of glass: The first outward gift
which serves for those inward, as the isntrumental cause, is the Sea of
glass: which seems to be some very great vessel and huge lake after the
likeness once of the Sea in the Temple, of which 1 King. 7 23. Likewise he made
a molten Sea. This Sea is to be understood of such a vessel. For how can that
which is before the Throne compassed with a company of Elders standing round
about, be spread abroad on every side like the sea properly so called? The
circuit in deed of the Elders may extend so far as the compass of the
earth, yet it behooves us to remember that the thing was showed to John in a
type, that we should not think of any such unmeasurable space. Both the name
and the largeness of the vessel do show the fulness of all gifts, which the
Church does draw from Christ unto her salvation, who received the Spirit
without measure, and from whose infinite riches it is bestowed upon us, John
chap. first, ver 16. For to what end otherwise was there so big a vessel,
at which Aaron and his sons should wash their hands and their feet? For
cleansing whereof, some small pitcher or cruse would had sufficed? And in deed
this Sea shows very fitly a certain resemblance of the whole outward worship,
which is to be performed to God. The doctrine often time is compared unto
waters: Hoe, says Isaiah, whosoever thirsts, come ye to those waters: For
the carrying away of which, he commends no other buckets to be brought, then
the ears: Jnclyne your ear, says he, chap. 55.1.3. From whence the Ministers
are called waterers, 1 Cor. 3.6, Baptism also is signified by the Sea, through
which the Fathers passed, and were all baptized unto Moses, in the cloud, and
in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.1.2. Furthermore the water notes the spiritual drink
of the holy Supper: And all, says he, drank the same spiritual drink, ver.
4. By the same also prayers are signified, as the Israelites being gathered
together to Mizpa drew water and powered it out before the Lord, to wit, rivers
of tears, with earnest repentance wrunge from them, 1 Samuel chap. 7. ver. 5.
And noe less is it a sign of thankesgiving, as in the Revelation, they that
got the victory over the Beast, stood at the glassy Sea, having the Harpes of
God, wherewith they sunge his praises, chap. 15.2. Therefore this Sea shows
by right the whole worship: which in respect of the la^pes is like a Sea of
oil, wherewith their heave^ly fire is nourrished continually. But what manner
of one this Sea is, we must see from the Epithets; the first of which, he
says that to be glassy. How is this? Is it in respect of the color? There is
a glassy color and agreeable to the Sea: Whereupon Virgille describing the
Fairies, attributes the same to the Godesses of the Sea: The Nymphs did
spinne the fleeces of woll of Miletus, dyed with a deep color of glass,
Geor. 4, And again a little after, -- and all in their glassy seats, were
astonished: glassy not in respect of the matter, but of the color and
clearnes. So Ovid. There is a clear river more bright then glass, a sacred
fountain, Epist. Sapph. But glassy in this place is even, as of glass,
showing rather a shining matter that one may see through, then a color without
matter: whereto serves the other Epithet, like unto Crystal. Glassy, to wit
for a difference from the legal Sea. Which being made of brass, a thick and
dark matter, could not be seen through of any sight, 1 King. 7, 23. The face
of God did shine upon his, but under those rites and ceremonies somewhat
darkly: which thing also Moses declared, putting a veil over his face, that
the children of Jsraell should not look into the end of that which was to be
abolished, 2 Cor. 3.13. But contrariwise all we behold with uncovered face,
the glory of the Lord as in a glass, In the same place ver. 18. Therefore
their Sea is of Brass, and ours of Glass, and great is the dignity of the
Christian Church, in comparison of that under the Law, considering that our
worship does show us the most pleasant face of God, as it were through a most
clear glass, how amiable are thy Tabernacles, cried the Psalmist in that
darkness, Psalm. 80.1. But how admirable ought the most sweet countenance of
Christ to be unto us, whom we with Peter and those two disciples, do see
shyning as the Sun, and his garments made white as the light, Mat. 17.1.2. O
we blessed men, if we could have always our eyes fixed on this glass.
There is a certain incomprehensible majesty of God to be seen in that very
creature, but this knowledge is common to the reprobate, there is nowhere any
means to enjoy a saving sight, unless by this glassy Sea; God has
replenished it with most pure waters, both of knowing and worshipping him
truly: of both which he has laid up such abundant plenty in this sea, that
there is no need to fetch any thing from any other ditches.

And this ought to be the scope of all worship, that it may show us GODS face:
By how much the more either the doctrine or the ceremonies do hurt or stop up
our eyes in this matter, by so much the more do both of them swerve from the
right.

The other Epithete is Like unto Crystal: What need is there of this
second? In deed that he may teach, that that Glass is not only bright, but
even also most purely bright, which noe other mixed color does in noe sort
darken. For Crystal is, as it were, void and free of any color, approaching
the nearest to the purity of the air, which the eyes do pearse through almost
as easily.

Therefore noe humane devise and invention is powered into this Sea; but it is
pure from all filth added to it, and also perfect and absolute without any
thing detracted from it. As it is taught in Deuteronomy, 4.2. Such is the worship of
the Saints in Christ, in whom God the Father beholding his elect faithful,
finds noe thing in them colored, nothing maimed and imperfect, nothing
filthy and defiled. All worship ought to level hereto, and be framed after
this pattern. Others do interpret these things otherwise: some do refer
this Sea to the judgments of God; but enough was fore showed touching them, in
the thunders and lightnings, Others think that it signifies a multitude of
men living on the earth. But if this multitude be holy, it was noted before in
the four and twenty Elders. But if it be wicked what does it before the
throne? or how may the purity of Crystal agree unto it? There is noe need
that I should confute other men's interpretations in many words. The very order
of the things does show easily, what comes nighest to the truth, This only
I will say, which is common to this whole book, in every allegorical
interpretation, before all things the purpose of the allegory it self is to
be regarded, without which every interpretation shall be doubtful and uncerten,
and of noe weight: but if we shall know that well, and shall add to it
prudently the other circumstances, we may draw noe less constant sense from
an allegory, then from any other plain place.

And in the midst of the throne, and which compassed the throne four Beasts:
The second outward gift are Beasts: whose qualityes come first to be
considered, which respect the preparation to their office, if in a few words
we shall first see of what sorts the beasts are. Which is heard to be known
from the judgment of the Interpreters, they are in so manyfold difference, we
will propounde in a word, as we have begun and intended, that which seems to
be most nearly joined with the truth. They are servants and Ministers of God,
all whose labor is bestowed in preaching the word and in looking to the other
things which belong to the Ecclesiastical policy. For first, it is manifest
that they are men: for so they sing together with the Elders, thou have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, chap. 5.9. Secondly, seeing there is two
sorts of Redeemed: one of the people, another of the Ministers: the very place
in which they serve, shows that they belong to this second degree. For they
are conversant between the highest Throne and the Elders set round about.
Therefore they approach nearer unto God, and are as his messengers between
both. Hereunto is added, that they are leaders of the public action, as is
manifest after at the ninth ver. Lastly, they are represented so in wings,
eyes, and their whole shape, that they may be most furnished, to perform this
office. Neither are they any of the excellent men of the age passed, but
Ministers to come, to which sort of things this whole Prophecy is applied, as
that of the first verse has taught, I will show thee the things that must be
done hereafter. They are called Beasts because of that lively force of the
Spirit, whereby they are quickened, and that spiritual life, which they effect
in others, God working together with them. In which respect the like servants
of God, full of the Spirit and most nimble to dispatch all sorts of businesses
committed to them for to do, are named Beasts in Ezech. chap. 1. But if they
be Ministers, how may I count them among the gifts? The faithful Ministers
are of the chief gifts of God as he says of the Levites; Behold I have
taken your brethren from among the children of Jsraell: they are given you for
a gift, for the Lord to administer the service of the Tabernacle of the
congregation, Numb. 18.16. etc. And Paul, Let noe man, says he, rejoice in
men, for all things are yours, and Paul, and Apollos, and Cephas, 1 Cor. 3.21.
Most clearly to the Ephesians, when he ascended up on high, he lead captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men, some Apostles, some Evangelists, some
Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, chap. 4.8.11. These things being thus
established, let us now see the propertyes themselves. As touching the place,
they are between the throne, and which did compass the throne, both in the
mids of the throne, and round about the throne. Not in the very mids in
respect of the place, where one sat like to a Jasper stone, ver. 3. nor
because they did hold up the throne, as the Bulls Salomons brazen sea: under
which they were put in that manner, that their back parts lay hidden within,
their fore parts stood out abroad, 1 King. 7.25. For when the four Beasts
did fall down, how should not the throne fall together with them? For it is
read after, that the four Beasts did fall down before the Lamb, chap. 5.8.
But in the mids, has the same force, as to be between, or in some part: as
Abraham is called a Prince of God in the mids of the children of Cheth, Genesis
23.6. that is among, and so every where in other places. Wherefore Theod. Beza
has translated it plainly, between the throne, and which did compass the
throne. Whereby is signified, that the Beasts in respect of their office do
come nigher to Gods majesty, then the Elders, and in some part to touch that
seat, which shyneth with Gods glory, an evident argument of the administration
given to them. There is the number of four according to the state of the
Christian ministry augmented. For as the Christian congregation is twice so
great as the Legal: that consisting of four and twenty Elders, this of the
twelve Patriarchs: so there is a double respect of the Ministers, of four
Beasts, unto the four and twenty Elders, unto the one only tribe of Levi, in
regard of the twelve Princes of Israel. In respect of the Elders which sit
round about the highest throne, they are four beams of the two diameters,
dividing themselves into straight angles, by the which the circumference is
conjoined every way, and equally with the mids of the throne. So disposed
toward all quarters, by the four chief corners, that as the river of Paradise
divided into four heads, they might be able most co^modiously to water the
whole Church. These qualityes are yet more remote, them of the bodies and
wings are more nearly conjoined: The first of these are Eyes, of which the
Beasts are full, before and behind. The fulness notes the notable quicknes of
perceaving a thing, and the rich understanding of divine things, wherewith they
are endued by the gift of the Spirit: Such kind of Ministers Christ requires,
as be, the light of the world, Mat. 5.14. and that they go before the blind
in the right way, least they fall into the pit, Mat. 15.14. Which may be able
to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. That they be able, both to exhort by wholesome do^trine,
and also to convince them that speak against it, yea to stop their mouth, Tit.
1.9.11. For the Priests lyppes ought to preserve knowledge, and the Law is to
be sought at his mouth: for he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts, Malac. 2.7.
Therefore they that want eyes, either altogether, or for the most part, what
fellowship have they with these Beasts? What communion have the moules with
Argus? Let them therefore look to it, who do set for officers before the
Christian people, such as have but one eye, and such as are blind, what
answer they can make to him, who requires such plenty of eyes in Pastors.
Those that have refused knowledge, ar they not refused of the Lord, that they
should not execute the Priest office to him? Hos. 4.6. But the eyes both before
and behind, is a kind of knowledge, whereby they know both things past, and
also see things present, and resting only upon the divine oracles, do wisely
perceive things before hand. The Ministers being altogether like unto a
house-holder, which brings out of his treasure things both new and old,
Mat. 13.52. Such kind of knowledge both the ancient scriptures Moses, the
Psalms, the Prophets, and also the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles,
do minister. Out of these fountaynes may abundantly be drawn, that the man
of God may be furnished with eyes, both behind and before. God in Christ do
account all eyed Pastors, who according to the tale^t receyved, do instruct
faithfully, the people committed unto them, howsoever much humane ignorance be
in the best.

7 And the first Beast was like a Lion: Such is the common property of all the
Beasts; the proper form of every one is, of a Lion, first: the second of a
Calfe: the third of a Man; the fourth of an Eagle: Which four diverse forms,
almost all the Interpreters do refferre to the four Evangelistes. And so as
according to Aretas the Lion is John, the Eagle Mark: according to others, the
Eagle John. Mark the Leon. Augustine will have the Lion to be Mathewe, Mark a
man: so uncerten are they. But we may not think, that the Spirit was so
ignorant an artificer, that there should be need of his name to be inscribed,
to whom every picture does belong, or that otherwise the Lion, the Aygle and
the man, could not be discerned one from another. That of the first verse does
end the controversy about this point. Which must, says he, be done hereafter.
Which words do forbid to look back, and to mind that which is past, but
rather commands to expect some future thing. They seem therefore to
perteine to those gifts, wherewith every one of the faithful Ministers are to
be adorned in some part; besides those gifts of knowledge. For the eyes ought
to be common to all, every one ought to be learned: the other gifts may be
diverse, as God has give^ to every one privately for the use and necessity of
the Church. Although noe man can be void altogether of the other virtues, who
is indeed partaker of one. From whence Ezechiell attributes these four faces
to every one of the Beasts, chap. 1.6. And in deed there ought to bear sway
in each one, the courage of the Lion, the patience of Oxen, the prudence of
men, last of all the contempt of earthly things of the Eagles. Yet not without
cause some proper thing here is applied to every one severally. Peradventure
that thereby the Spirit may show in what principal virtues the Pastors should
excel others according to the four diverse seasons. The first age after John
gave famous men in all those virtues, chap. 6.1.3.5.7. Whose fortitude yet most
of all appeared, whereby they did both suffer and overcome the most fierce
cruelty of the tyrants. The age following after Constantine ministered Oxen,
when liberty was taken from the Ministers, and every excellent man was
oppressed under the yoke of Antichrist, with the burdens of humane ceremonies.
The Gospel recovering life again by Wicklefe and Luther, affoarded men, who
being weary of the Romish bondage, both desired earnestly and at length
obtained the Christian freedom. We do expect yet Eagles, which the calling
of the Jews, will give at length, when the Gospel shall be restored fully, and
brought to his perfect glory, which this Prophecy will show shall come shortly.
The^ the Bishops shall behold the Sun with steady sight, and shall search
out with mervaylous quicknes of understanding, whatsoever yet lies hid in
the truth of God: neither from our times and ma^ners, shall they basely creep
on the earth minding earthly things, but shall fly upon high, having all their
conversation in heaven.

8 And every of the Beasts, etc. Hitherto of the form of their body: the form
of their wings is described by a triple property, number, standing and eyes.
Every Every one has six wings, so many as had also the Angels in Isaiah, 6.2.
but not of like use, as it seems. For the Angels with two did cover their
face, with two their feet, with two they did fly. But the placing of them of
the Beasts is such, as it is not fit for this thing. For they are round about
them, behind, on their sides, before them, that they cannot serve fitly to
cover either the face or feet. Neither in deed are they given them for
flight. For what need have they to fly, who have the place of their abode
between the throne and the circuit of the Elders? Therefore they belo^ge to
aid and succor, by which they fly most readily into every part to help
others. Such an office is twofold in the Church, one of Helpers, an other of
Governors, 1 Cor. 12.28. That belongs to the Deacons and Widows: whom once
the Apostles appointed to look to the poor, and those that had any infirmity
of body, by a divine ordinance, least that they attending to such business,
should become less careful about prayers and the administration of the word,
Act. 6.2. etc. 1 Timothy 5.9. This office belongs to the Elders, who are
appointed to govern only men's manners, and are moderators of the discipline.
Teir office is showed by the eyes, of which the wings are full within. For to
what end else should there be new eyes in the wings, when before the whole
body was beset with eyes? In deed those eyes of the body are of knowledge and
science, and therefore do stick nearer, being in the body it self, which the
Ministers may as well want as their own eyes, which are joined to their body
with so near a conjunction: but these eyes of the wings, being removed a
little farther of, are placed as it were in a watch tower to search out every
ons manners, executing the Office of watches and wards, as the Apostle
shows, saying, Obey your Teachers, and submit your selves to them, for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, Heb. 13.17. And how
fitly is it that this kind of eyes is within and under the wings? For they
must look only to the flock, which depends upon them, as Peter warns 1
Epist. 5.2. They ought not to care for another flock; or at least they must
watch over the Christian people, For what have we to do to judge the^ that
are without: we must judge them that are within: God judged them that are
without, 1 Cor. 5.12.13. Such a Tabernacle was seen in the mount, as touching
his ministers; according to which pattern the Christian Church was framed by
the Apostles, whose besides the Pastors, ordained also these Helpers in every
congregation, which should govern the reformation of manners together with the
Pastors, whom Paul mentions, commanding that the Elders which rule well
should be had in double honor: specially they that labor in the word and
doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. For such are blind, and which in understanding do not
understand, who avouch that this two kind of Elders can not be proved from
this place. Further, what else shall we understand to be those Governements in
the 1 Cor. 12.28. then the office of them, who are appointed to this charge? In
the beginning of the verse Paul reckened up, Apostles, Prophets, and Teachers,
upon whom lies the administration of the word: unto which, after some other
things interposed, namely, namely Powers, Gifts of healings, and Helps, at
length he adioyneth Governements, that by this order interrupted and
discontinued by so great a space, we might know that these Governements, is a
certain distinct thing from the charge of teaching. Furthermore, of what sort
were those Elders, which were conversant together with the Apostles in the
Church of Jerusalem, Act. 15.4.6? Were they such as bestowed all their labor
in teaching the people in the public assemblyes? It is likely that the
Apostles abiding there, laid aside this care of teaching, and gave themselves
to execute a certain Lordshippe. A few years before, they suffered not them
selves to be pulled from prayers and teaching, Act. 6.4. but at length
peradventure this exceeding love was abated; they followed their ease, and gave
over the duty and charge gladly to the Elders. Away with this folly: the holy
me^ were not sleepy with slouthfulnes, neither did they affect ambitious
dominion over others, which they forbad others by their example, 1 Pet. 5.7.
But to their power laboring in that which was the principal, they used those
Elders as the eyes of the wings to take good heed to the holiness of their
flock. It is also evident from the use of the primitive Church, as was said
before in chap, 2.2. But first of all Ambrose is a substantial witness in
this matter, upon the 1 to Tim. chap. 2.4. Whence also the Synagogue, and
afterward the Church had Elders, without whose counsel nothing was done in the
Church, which by what negligence it is grown out of use, J know not, unless
by the slouthfulnes or rather pride of the Teachers, while they alone will be
thought some what: Such are his words: from which it does most clearly
appear, what sort of Elders the Primitive Church had; such in deed, who with
joint studyes and counsels regarded the dignity of every one together with the
Pastors. Ambrose complayneth that these were worn away (when those other
preaching Elders failed not in his time, neither could fail) and that by the
negligence or pride of the Teachers. And it is manifest from Hierome, that an
other kind of governing was by and by grown in use in stead of those Elders.
For he mentions to Rusticus, of the Ecclesiasticalll Senate: The Church, says
he, has a Senate, a company of Elders, without whose counsel, the Monks may
do nothing: And again: And we have our Senate of Presbyters, Gratian. C. 16.
q. 1. The Church. But the Senate was become much unlike to the integrity and
institution of the first time, as we learned even now from Ambrose: after
whose time and age men labor in vain to find out this kind of Elders, which
he complayneth to have perished and come to nothing before his times. Those
wings therefore together with the eyes are those Deacons and Elders: Of which
what picture more fit could have been given? In them is required simplicity,
in these, diligence; Romans 12.8. That first is signified by the eyes in the
wings: this second by the wings with eyes. From which first is perceyved how
necessary these Offices are in the Church. For they are the wings of the
Ministers. What is a bird without wings? Yet this lack is more dammageable,
because a bird being destitute of wings, perishes her self alone: the
Pastors being void of the^, the whole flocks are set in danger of
destruction. For they are wings of helping, as we have said, whereby aid is
ministered not so much to the Ministers themselves, as to the people. And seeing
the Apostles had need of Deacons, that a more necessary work might not be left
of them: could they by themselves observe every ons life, without the
hinderance of the administration of the word? Therefore they took to
themselves the wings full of eyes, which the Beasts have before the Throne,
and have taught by their own example, how maimed and lame the Pastors are, to
whom these wings are wanting.

Again, we learn, that these Offices are advantages, and additions, as parts
hanging to the Pastors, joined to them as necessarily, as wings to the body,
from whence they draw life, and by whose benefit they are moved and upholden.
And that therefore a divorse is not rightly made between them, as in the
common wealth of the Scaphusians, where none of the MINISTERS are present in
the Consistory, but learned men out of the Senate, and for the most part some
DOCTOR of the Laws is chosen among the Judges of the Consistory: See for
this, Josias Simlerus in his treatise of the Common Wealth of the Helvetians.

Neither are those excuses of any moment, whereby it is pretended, that another
manner of governing not less profitable is used in stead of ELDERS and
DEACONS, as it is done in England. Is it not, say they provided in a special
manner, for the poor, by the statutes of this Kingdom? And do not the
Churchwardens present wicked men unto the Commissaryes? What need is there of
other Elders and Deacons, especially indeed, seeing all that way is wholly
severed from all overseeing of the Pastors, to whom alone these wings ought
to be fastened, and not to any other body of Commissaries? God give therefore
Wings to the Beasts, that his people may be helped, all whose holiness almost
is lost, because the Pastors being destitute of their wings full of eyes,
there is none that with an earnest and true affection of mind, will look into
the diseases and sikenesses, and fly speedily for to heal them. Lastly our
brethren are to be entreated, that they will speak more modestly of the
ordinance of God, least giving themselves to reproaches and raylings, they be
found to open their mouth against heaven it self.

Day and night without ceasing, saying: Hitherto has been the preparation unto
their Office, now it follows, of what sort their Office it self is, which
is showed by their unwearisome diligence in praising the Lord. Which one thing
in deed shows sufficiently that these Beasts, by their charge and Office are
stewards of the Mysteries of God, to wit, Pastors, in whom he has put the
word of recenciliation, and whom he has made his Ambassadors, who should
entreat and pray the people in CHRIST stead, that they would be reconciled
unto God. It is in deed the duty of every one to praise God without ceasing:
Such diligence the Apostle requires in all Christians, saying, Pray
continually, in the first Epistle of the Thessalonians chapter five, ver. 16.
But especially it belongs to them, who ought to give themselves to this study
with their whole minds and thoughts. For as Paul councelleth Virgins, that
they might cleave fast to the Lord without any distraction, in the first
Epistle to the Corinthes, chapter seven, ver. 35. That should be the only
care of them, that bend themselves with all diligence unto holy things, all
whose business both in the day time and in the night is bestowed in meditating
on the things of the Lord: You, says the Psalmist, which stand in the house of
God every night, Psalm 134. ver. 1. Were there any prayers before day break,
or in the night time, as in the Monasteryes of the superstitious Monks? Not at
all: But this kind of speaking shows that their whole labor was spente in
worshipping the Lord: Such as then was the study of the Levites, and of them
especially, who departed not from the Temple neither day nor night, for the
space of the weeks of their course, in the second book of the Kings 11.5.
and in Luke chapter first, ver. 23. And such ought to be the care of all, who
deal with holy things by profession

They who are deteyned with the affairs of this life, because they have their
minds withdraen from the contemplation of heavenly things, worthily may be
said to leave sometime their care of serving God, by co^pariso^ with the
Ministers. Seeing then so continual a pains is required to the Ministers, may
they intermeddle with other Political and civil affairs? Shall they whose
minds ought never to be vacant from holy meditations, so far entangle
themselves with earthly cares, that they can mind very little divine things?
Christ, who alone was fit for every administration, would not be a judge to
divide the inheritance between the disagreeing brethren: Which office he
refused, not for any inability to perform it, but only for our exemple. To
whom also he has appointed bounds of our power, least by wandering without our
limits, we should be unprofitable both to our selves, and also to others. The
Princes, says he, of the Gentiles bear rule over them, and the Nobles
exercise power over them, but it shall not be so among you, Mat. 20.25.26. Of
which commandment when the Apostles understood this to be the meaning, that
they should take upon them nothing that might hinder never so little their holy
function, they would not suffer so much as that the care of the poor should be
laid upon them, though most nearly joined with godliness, that they might not
wa^der any whit from their duty. Therefore the Romish Antichrist, with his
Prelates, has ceased long ago in many ages past, to be in the number of these
Beasts. How far also are our Bishops from them, who have forsaken prayers
and the administration of the word, not that they may look to the poor, but
that they may handle civil affairs and enjoy the honors of this world? Whom
thou may see oftener in the judgment seat, then in the Pulpite, and to
differ nothing from the Politic Magistrates, but only in name and
apparel. Do they day and night extolle our God with meet praises of his
holiness? God open their eyes, that they may see how excellent things they
leave, for thing of no value, that at length acknowledging their error they
may return to better things, al trifling lets being cast away. The Psalmist
tells openly, that they are blessed, which dwell in the house of the Lord,
and that in this respect, because they praise God continually, Psalm. 84.5. What
then shall we change with this office, which so great King being destitute
of, envied, that I may so say, to others, through a godly zeal? But too much
it may be, is already spoken of this matter: too much in deed to him that
speaks the truth, but to all that love their errors, I do fear that they
will not be enough. The office of these Beasts is declared, not only by this
care, but also by the form it self of the thankesgiving, for they cry, Holy,
Holy. Holy: by which thrice repeated crying together, they praise the one only
Jehovah, seeing in repeating they say one certain thing: which one also they
acknowledge to be three, in repeating thrice, that which they gave to one:
whereby likewise they esteem every each one person of equal honor, commending
each with equal praise. For holiness contains within it all praise, which
signifies such a purity, which is sprinkled and mixed with noe spotte or
blemish. And this the Beasts do give to God, not only setting forth the same
so in words, but also in making the people holy, or at least in using that
labor whereby to their utmost power they may make them. From whence of all the
testimonialls of Gods praise, this chiefly does sound and ringe again in the
lyppes of them that serve God. Some books do repeat these words six times:
but Aretas agrees with our copyes, and these words are in other places of
Scripture, Isay 6.3. So is the title of holiness: this the Beasts do set forth
by a double kind of Power and Truth, whereunto pertains that distributive
nowne, which is, and which was, and which is to come, as was declared before,
chap. 1.4.7. And they mention first of all the Power, showing the
inco^prehe^sible glory of holiness, which is most hard where one has liberty to
do what he will. He that can do all things, and yet in the least thing
abuses not his power and authority, it must needs be that his glory exceeds
the comprehending of every mind. Again, how hard is it to keep the promise
which thou have made, when they to whom thou have promised do break their
promise almost every moment? O therefore the unmeasurable holiness of our God,
whose truth men's infidelity does not hinder.

9 And when those Beasts shall give: Hitherto the gifts, with which God does
notably adorn his Church, now the worship is described, to which the Beasts
and Elders together do earnestly bend themselves. The manner whereof is such
that the Beasts have the chief doing in the action, and go before the Elders
with their voice, as the Ministers are wont in the assembly of the people. For
these things are spoken according to that order, which God has appointed in
his Church, whereby all the people do give worship to God, the Minister being
the leader. But it is to be observed, that this action of giving glory does
differ in a respect from that of the former verse. For that perteined to
private care, which is continual, their whole office tending to this only
end: this is proper to their public function, and at certain time, as is
manifest from those things which follow in the next verse. As touching the
words, Theod. Beza translateth, when they did give, and so the other words
they did fall down, they did cast of, by the imperfect tence: but the property
of the time is to be kept, seeing a future thing is here foreshewed, and not a
thing past reported.

10 The four and twenty Elders shall fall down: The action of the people
governed by the conduct of the Ministers. And it consists in two things, in
gesture in this verse, and in words in the following. The gesture is
threefolde, of casting down themselves before him that sits on the throne,
of worshipping, and casting of their crowns. The first signifies their
cheerful have, that at the voice of the Beasts they fall down by and by. The
second, the just worship given to him, to whom alone it is due. The third,
the sincere truth of their mind, in performing this adoration, in that
putting off their own dignity, they acknowledge themselves his servaunts,
before whose throne they cast their crowns. But how, will thou say, do the
Elders fall down, when the Beasts do give glory, seeing the Beasts are
employed in this labor day and night without ceasing? Do the Elders never sit
in their thrones, but fall down always prostrate on the ground? We must
remember that which I said even now, that the private care of the Beasts is
one thing, their public action an other. That has noe intermission, this is
performed with certain respites: to this alone this throwing down of themselves
pertains. From whence there is a double argument, that all these things
belong typically to the Christian assemblyes on earth. There are noe set times
of worship in the heavens, but all that eternity is bestowed about this thing.
Secondly, neither shall there be any need of leaders and rulers to perform
the worship. For Prophecy shall then cease, 1 Cor. 13.8. much more the
Ecclesiastical Policy, which is ordained in respect of this: but every one
being a Priest, the^ not only by right, but also in practice shall praise God
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, without the mediation and help of
any other then himself. Seeing therefore this type is proper to the Church on
earth, let every one consider with himself earnestly, how greatly it
belongs to them, to frequent the public assemblyes with all diligence, that
as often as the Beasts give glory to him that sits on the throne, he may
fall down before the throne, and worship him that lives for ever. Certainly
they that contemptuously sit at home, and neglect the congregations of the
faints, or in the mean time make iourneyes and withdraw themselves in any
other unnecessary manner, show openly tha they belong not at all to that most
honorable company of the Elders. And let not any deceave himself, by his
honors, dignityes and excellency, as though the public assemblyes, were
either of the unskilful multitude, or of the base people, and that he might
either be present or absent at his pleasure: but let him behold here Kings
attending to the voice of the Beasts, nor that once or twice, and at certain
times, but whenever the Beasts give glory: that is, as often as they do
execute their public office. The praising of God of these, and their adoration
of God are joined always together: so that neither may any think that he is
free and discharged from his duty, neither to have performed it enough at some
few times.

11 Thou art worthy o Lord: The praising which the Elders use in words is noe
other thing then a subscribing to the crying out and shouting of the Beasts:
these celebrate the holiness, Dominion, omnipotency and truth of God. The
Elders now do singe together, thou art worthy indeed o Lord, to receave
glory and honor, which we and all thy creatures worthily do give to thee: as
though unto the sung of praises of the Ministers, the people should give their
consent, saying Amen. But how may God receive power? They mean the praise of
all virtue and power. Power can not be given to God otherwise, but only by
acknowledging and praising. Which then shines forth most clearly, when he
shows his strength extraordinarily, both in delivering his own and also in
destroying his enemies.

For thou have created all things: The people ought not only to consent to the
thanks given by the Ministers, in the mean time themselves being void of all
knowledge of their own, as it comes to pass in the Papacy, where after the
prayers not understood is sung Amen, by the unskilful common people, or some
as they will, supplying their place: but their consent ought to come from a
true faith, and that not confused and implicit, but of which a true sense and
feeling is settled in every ons heart peculiarly. For the God of reason,
requires a reasonable worship, not unknown, rash and void of counsel.
Whereupon not without cause is added from what fountain the declaration of the
consent of the Elders, to wit, from their own acknowledging of the exceeding
power of God both in creating all things, and also in preserving the same: and
noe less from the sense of his most free good will, by which alone being
moved, he made all things in the beginning, and governs and preserves the
same at this day, according to that saying, Who works all things, after the
counsel of his will, Ephe. chap. 1. ver. 11. For which cause, there is
repeated in the end of the verse, they have been created, that we may
understande that the will of God not only has rule in governing things at
this time, but also that it gave the first original to the same. And so is the
pattern of the Christian Church, so much the more famous then that of the
Law, by how much heaven in which John saw this figure, is more excellent then
the Mountain where Moses saw the Tabernacle. There is the same end and
purpose of both: of this that it might be a pattern of the worship to the
Legal people, which should hold even to the time of reformation: of that,
that it might be a type unto Christians, according to what square, they should
frame all their assemblyes, both generally and specially. Grant O most high
God that we may be found as faithful in bringing back all things unto the
Heavenly pattern, as Moses was unto that earthly.

Chap. 5.
AFTER I saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne a book
written within and on the back side, sealed with seven seals.

2 And J saw a strong Angel preaching with a loud voice, who is worthy to
open the book and loose the seals thereof?

3 And noe man was able neither in heaven, nor in earth, nor under the earth,
to open the book, nor to look thereon.

4 Therefore I wept much, because none was found worthy to open, and read the
book, neither to look thereon.

5 Then one of the Elders said unto me: weep not, behold that Lion of the
tribe of Juda, that root of David, has obtained to open the book, and to
loose the seven seals thereof.

6 Then J beheld and lo between the Throne and those Beasts, and between
those Elders, a Lamb standing as though he had been killed, having seven
horns and seven eyes, which are those seven spirits of God, sent forth into
all the world.

7 He came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the
Throne.

8 And when he had taken the book, those four Beasts and those four and
twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one harpes and golden
vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the saints.

9 And they sung a new song, saying, thou art worthy to take the book, and to
open the seals thereof: because thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God
by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.

10 And have made us to our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall reign on
the earth.

11 Then J beheld and I heard round about the Throne, and of the Beasts, and
Elders, the voice of many Angels, and the number of them was a thousand
hundred thousands, and ten hundred thousands.

12 Saying with a loud voice, worthy is that Lamb, that was killed, to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and blessing.

13 And every creature which is in heaven, and which is on the earth, in the
sea, and all things that are in them, I heard, saying, unto him that sits
on the Throne, and to the Lamb, be praise, and honor, and glory, and power
for ever more.

14 And those four beasts said, Amen. And those four and twenty Elders fell
down on their faces and worshipped him that lives for ever more.


The Analysis.
I have spoken summarily of the common type: the special Prophecy
co^prehendeth both the excellent dignity of this Revelation in this chapter,
and also the ev^nts themselves in the rest of the book. That thing is
declared first, in respect of the Creature; secondly, of the Lamb: In respect
of the Creature it is altogether unsearcheable, as appears, partly from the
signing of seven seals, ver. 1; partly from the testimony of all creatures,
which after the inquiry proclaimed, and the thing was caused to be cried by the
voice of the Angel, as it were of a common crier, ver. 2. then also after
trial made at last, ver. 3. all do acknowledge their own unablenes. Of which
lastly there is a sorrowful consequente, the weeping of John, which this
imbecility, and despair to enjoy so excellent a good thing did wring out from
him, ver. 4. In respect of the Lamb only it is able to be searched out as
first an Elder shows, who conforteth John, ver. 5. Secondly the La^be coming
at the same instant and taking the book, ver. 6.7; from whence at length
aryseth the singular joy and thankesgiving of the whole Creature, but apart
first of the Church, ver. 8.9.10. and of the Angels, ver. 11.12. After of the
rest of the Creature, ver. 13. Last of all the Church together subscribing to
the common joy and rejoicing of all things, ver, 14.

Scholions.
Afterward I saw at the right hand: the common translation has In the right
hand, as also the Interpreter of Aretas; but all the Greek copies with one
consent have at the right hand. They peradventure have put it in the ablative
case, because it follows after in the seave^th verse, that the Lamb took
the book from the right hand. But this is noe sufficient cause to depart from
the natural property of the words, when it may be that the weakness of the
creatures might be made to appear the more, the book at the first was not in
the right hand, but at the right hand: from whence if there were noe power to
open it being offered and laid before without asking, much less would there
have been any if he had held it in his hands. Afterward when the debility of
the Creatures was found out, the book was taken into his hands, that the
dignity of the Lamb might be the better known, not taking it up hastily lying
at his side, but receaving it from hand to hand. As touching the intent of
this vision, it seems good to the Spirit, after the lively representation of
the true Church in the former chapter, (which was to be laid as the fundame^t
of all the building following, before that he should come to the particular
Prophesyes) to put men in mind of the incomprehensible excellency of this
Prophecy, For we are wont, such is our slouthfulnes, to pass by very great
and excellent things carelessly and sleepingly, unless peradventure some body
pull us by the ear, and require instantly diligence, mentioning the greatness
of the thing. Least perchance the same thing should fall out in this place, he
sets before our eyes, that this is a Prophecy of that kind, which
contains in it all the dangers that at to be undergone of the Church through
her whole race on earth, yet wrapped in so great obscurity, that no created
mind can behold it a far off, much less unfolde the same to others. An
argument in deed most worthy to be known, and far most pleasant of all
things, opening to us the hidden Mysteries, with exceeding great desire
whereof men are inflamed: or otherwise in searching out of them, they torment
themselves rashly and in vain. And yet nevertheless it is not to be desired
only for this cause to know it, but because also it conteyneth events of that
moment, that it would be very hurtful and for rowfull to the Church, if they
should wholly be concealed. Therefore John wept, being privy to the dangers, and
together therewith also minding the lack of a guide.

And in deed the Church hardly holds on her course, though this lamp be
given her: How miserable had she ben, left utterly in darkness, and not
perceiving sufficiently either which way she should go forward, or where to
set her foot safely? John therefore had had just cause to weep, if there had been hope nowhere of opening the sealed book. But the sudden assault of
grief, bereft the holy man of understanding, and suffered him not to think in
whom there was ability, while at length he knew by the putting in mind of an
other. Therefore this Prophecy is famous for the worthynes of the argument,
excellency of the Mystery, plenty of fruict, but far way most excellent,
because he alone was found worthy to open the same, who by his death found
out a redemption for the elect.

This is that thing for which the Church on earth, the Angels in Heaven, lastly
the universal Creature rejoices greatly, and that not for a glorious show
without the truth of the thing, as the manner is in humane writings, in
which the things are amplifyed for to adorn and set them forth, but from a
true feeling and just cause of rejoicing, as hereafter we shall see through
Gods his help. In the mean time shall not this exceeding great joy of Heaven
and Earth kindle in men a diligence to read, a desire to understand, and an
endevoure to observe? It is in deed a thing worthy of our serious meditation,
into which I have digressed and discoursed in many words, because I see that
the Interpreters, either not to have marked the intendement of this chapter, or
at the least, otherwise then was meet, to have spoken nothing at all, of a
matter very needful and necessary.

A Book written within and on the backeside: The first commendation of the
Prophecy is from a Book, a copious writting, and Seven Seals in this verse.
That which is recorded in a Book, must without all controversy be certain,
being a faithful helper of the memory: whereas that which is noe otherwise
grounded then only upon the memory, may easily in continuance of time, either
be utterly extinguished, or at the least wise corrupted. Whereupon GOD bids
Jeremy, for the greater credit of that Prophecy, to write all the words that
he spoke unto him in a Book, in the thirty chapter of Jeremy and in the 2.
verse. So careful is he to provide against our doubting, that we should not
think otherwise of the things, then of such as are written in public books,
and graven as it were in brass, so as they can neither be altered nor
forgotten. The plenteous writing is showed, in that the book was written
within and on the back side, on both sides of the leaf. And he speaks after
the old manner of writing in somewhat long parchments, which afterward were
wound about some round smooth piece of wood, from whence they were called
volumes, and Christ is said to have unrolled the book, and rolled it up
again, as in Luke chapter 4 verse 17. And the outside (that I may use the
words of the most learned Theod. Beza) always remained clean, unless the
inside was not able to contain the whole writing, for then they wrote on the
outward part; which sort of writings were called exterior writings, as being
written on the back side. This so great prolixitie therefore, did contain not
only the chief points which peradventure might be included in some narrow
place, but also every most small things: so that neither is there any need to
seek and fetch ought from any other place, which pertains to the knowledge
of future things: and that we know also that nothing can be done without the
will of God. The Complutent edition and some others read without, but on the
back side, is more often used: from whence is written on the back side, as
we have showed a little before. Finally, how precious are these Mysteryes,
which God has with himself, sealed up with so many seals?. The creatures
could not so much as to look on the BOOK, as is in the fourth verse, much
less was there need of seals for to hid from them. But by these means he
will declare and manifest, how greatly we ought to reverence his secrets.

2 And J saw a strong Angel publishing; There is a great dignity of the
Prophesy, from the certenty, largenes, and scaling up; but now a greater
appears, seeing the highness thereof surmounteth every created Spirit. For it
is not of that kind, which the more prudent sort of men can comprehend by
any skillful foreknowledg, but wherein all must needs confess their
ignorance. The which for to show, he alludeth to the manner of Princes, who in
difficult things are wont by great rewards to provoke their subjects by the
voice of a Crier to try their strength, and there is almost none, who^ in such
business, some small hope will not thrust forward to make trial. If so be
that noe man comes forth, what is this else, than an open confession of their
imbecility. So the Angel is sent to enquire, who is worthy to open the book?
If noe man offers himself, let us acknowledge our own impotency, and the
power of our Mediator: and together also let us honor with due reverence
these holy mysteryes: for which cause God causes in us this feeling of our
own want of power, as of old in Adam, before who^ ere he gave him a wife, he
set all creatures, that noe fit helper being found, he might make the more
accounte of the wife given him.

Who is worthy: He makes not inquiry of the power and strength, but of the
deserte and worthynes. For even all the creatures if they should conspire
together, are able to do nothing, to wringe out perforce the things from God.
Whatsoever we obtain, we enjoy it at his will and pleasure, and by
entreaty, and the Lord being just in giving his things, regards their
worthynes, upon whom he bestows his benefits: whom unless either their own,
or an others just dignity shall commend, they can hope for noe good thing
from him. But if a bare foreknowledge of future things, shall be of so great
importance, in what estimation is the knowledge of salvation to be had?

3 And noe man was able: A free confession of the creature, that it is able to
do nothing herein. Let them therefore look to it, who do make her a
patroness for themselves in matters of greater moment. Why then should we
mervayle if noe man understands any of these things, not only among the
Gentiles, although the most quickwitted of them, but also not in the whole
Kingdom of the Papists, noe not that blasphemously unerring Pope himself,
with all his Seraphicall Doctors, arrogating to them selves the victory of all
knowledge, learning, prudence, and wisdom? These things surmount all humane
sharpenes of wit, least peradventure thou reject rashly that which shall not
please those our masters. And the distribution of things in heaven, in earth,
and which are under the earth, may be understood from the proclaiming of the
Angel; he made enquiry who was worthy? Therefore the inquisition perteined not
to the Devils, and souls punished for sins. For what hope or show of
worthynes could be here? Therefore the things in Heaven, are the Angels; they
in the earth, Men living: they which are under the earth, are the Saints
sleeping in their graves. Whom he signifies in this manner by that one part,
which comes nearer to our sense. In which respect Jacob says, and I shall
go down to my son mourning into the grave, Genesis 37.35. In these alone their
might be some question. Therefore that place is to cold for to kindle a
Purgatory.

Nor look thereon: for so has Theod. Beza: the common translation has look
upon: I should rather turn, look in. For so the sentence increases: seeing
this is greater, then not to open. The book could not be looked in, so long as
it did remain sealed: whereupon the addition would be superfluous in this
sense.

4 J wept therefore:) It is a lamentable thing in deed, that the Church should
want the gift of Prophecy. But John bewrayed his infirmity, having forgot, or
at least wise not minding, that nothing is so hidden that could be unknown to
our chief Prophet, and of which he would not teach his Church, so far as
should be expedient for his. Wherefore one of the Elders warning him that he
should not weep, does together with gentlely reprove his ignorance, or rather
forgetfulness: as though it were a shameful thing for a teacher not to know
that, which the common sort of the faithful should not be ignorant of.

5 Behold he has obtained:) Many as it were contending, but one obtaining the
victory before the rest. He seems to speak after the manner of the former
proclamation, whereby the thing was put as it were to a public strife and
trial, and in which Christ bare away the chief praise, yea the whole.

That Lion of the: A circumlocution of Christ the King, fetched from Genesis 49.9.
But what has the Lion to do with seals? Our sins did remove far from us,
all the mysteries of God: Which when Christ has by his mighty power abolished,
and conquered for ever the enemies the Devil and death, worthyly with this
name as a badge of the victory, he comes forth to obtain that for us, which
our enemies kept away.

The root of David; So has Th. Beza translated rightly the Hebrewe word, to
which the Greek word answers, and is some time taken for a root, as is in
Isaiah: He grows up as a tender plant before him, and as a root out of a
dry ground, chap. 53.2. But a root properly grows not out of the ground, but
that which springs from the root, nevertheless this in deed is such a
root, that also together it is the root of David, that is, the fountain and
welspring from whence salvation and life flow unto David: so that nothing can
be more significant then this word, neither has there been at any time any
root besides of this kind; See Psalm. 101.1. Mat. 22.43. etc.

6 Then J looked and behold between the Throne:: Word for word in the Greek
is in the mids of the Throne, as before in chap. 4.4. etc. The Lamb is in
the mids of the Beasts and Elders, to wit, in the assembly of the faithful,
in the mids of the Church.

A Lamb standing, as though he had been killed: The Lamb is described by his
triple off^^e: These words as th^^gh he has been slame, perteine to his
Priesthood, being eternal through the eternal power of his death: Seven
horns, declare him to be a King: Seven eyes (which are so many Spirits) and
the taking of the book, show him to be the chief Prophet. The skarre of a
deadly wound is a token that he once dyed, and teaches that the Father does
give all things to his Church for the merit and through the beholding of it.
For this is it whereby our Priest once entering into the holy place, has
obtained eternal redemption: Heb. 9.12. And in that he has once gat
redemption for the elect, shall he not also obtain all things for us, that may
avayle any way for our good? The seven horns is that supreme power, whereby
the man Christ sitting at the right hand of the Father, rules and governs
all things according to that, which Christ being raised from the dead, said to
his disciples, all power is given me in heaven and in earth. Mat. 28.18.
Therefore that most meek Lamb wants not those weapons, whereby he chaseth
away his enemies, althoug by his great patience he seems not to regard the
injuries which they do. And thou may observe, that it is not needful that
the parables and similitudes should agree in all things, seeing here to the
Lamb contrary to nature are attributed seven horns and as many eyes, that
is, gifts of the Spirit wherewith Christ endueth the faithful. They are sent
from him, seeing noe man can be partaker even of the least gift, unless he
bestow it on them. For God hears not sinners: but from his fulness we all
receive: and he being gone to his Father, sends the Conforter unto his, which
leads them into all truth, as in the Gospel of John chapter sixteen ver.
seventh and thirteen. A visible token whereof were once the cloven tongues
like fire sitting upon the Apostles, and that miraculous gift of speaking
suddenly with other tongues Act. 2.3. etc.

With which faculty not only the Apostles were endued, but afterward also
others embracing the faith. Neither are they only sent into all the world,
that they may confer the comfortable knowledge of salvation to the Elect: But
that CHRIST may search out all things that are done in his Church, yea which
are done in any other place of the world. Wherefore how great impudency is it
to thrust upon the Church a visible head, seeing the LAMB is furnished with so
many eyes, neither has them idle and unoccupied, but sends them forth with
all diligence into the whole world? The care of Christ takes not indede away
the Ministers, either Ecclesiastical or Political, which he has ordained:
But to feign and invent a new kind and degree, and that under a pretense that
CHRIST is absent, is proper only to that man, who is directly opposite to
Christ.

As touching the words; some Copies read, as is noted in the Greek Bibles
lately set forth at Frankeford, which are, that the relative may be referred as
well to the horns, as to the eyes. After which manner also Aretas reads this
verse. And the Horns may be said to be sent into the whole world, when CHRIST
puts forth his power in succouring his own servantes, and destroying his
enemies.

But it agrees more properly to the eyes, which when we turn toward any
thing, we are said to cast them upon the same.

7 He came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat on the
throne: There is a double consideration of Christ, one so far as of the
eternal God sitting together in the Throne with the Father, chap. 4. ver. 3.
The other so far as he is of the Mediator attending on the throne and
prepared and ready to perform those things which make for the salvation of his
people. There is the like regard of the Spirit, who as he is the Eternal God
partaker of the Throne, compassing the same about, as in the fourth chap. and
third verse. But according as he sanctifyeth the Church with created gifts,
there are seven Spirits before the Throne, seven burning Lamps, seven
Horns, and seven eyes.

8 Having every one Harpes and vials: A reioicing and thankesgiving of the
Church for this great benefit of taking and unsealing the Book. Therefore
they take unto themselves fit and proper instruments for this purpose, Harpes
and Vials, that is to say, Praises and thankesgiving. For Vials full of odours
are the hearts of the Saints, which the Spirit has filled with a fervent desire
of calling upon GOD: the Harpes perteine to gladness of mind: and reioicing in
prayers is the very thankesgiving.

But he alludeth to the manner of the Temple, where the LEVITES praised GOD
with Musical Instruments, and the PRIESTS had their Pottes and Bowls set
before the Altar, full of odours, as we read in the Prophet Zachary chap.
14. ver. 20.

Which are the prayers of the Saints: He speaks not of the offerring of
prayers for the dead, which are made of them that are alive on the earth, but
as I have showed in the former chapter, all that which is attributed to the
Beasts and Elders declares what exercises the Saints go about with all
diligence in the militant Church. So also after in verse 10. And we shall
reign, say the Elders, upon the earth, not preaching, doubtless, the Kingdom
of the souls departed, but of the holy men on earth. The hearts of these as
golden vials do breath out and yield up praises and thanks for those great
benefits, which are obtained for us by Christ. If the Elders of^er only the
prayers of other men, as the Jesuit interprets, they should be dumb in the
common joy of all things. Nay rather the benefit is theirs: for they
themselves shall reign, say they: therefore they offer not other men's, but
their own prayers.

9 And they sung a new sunge: It is called a new song, in respect of more
plentiful grace ministered now since Christ has been exhibited, then was in
old time under the shadows of the Law. The ancient people did not praise
the man Christ so openly and clearly, before he had taken unto him our flesh,
as at this day the faithful do praise him clothed with o^r nature; from
whence not without cause this more manifest praising is called a new sung. But
he alludeth unto the manner of the Law, where new and greater benefits are
celebrated in new forms of praises, conceaved of purpose; whereupon there is
so often mention of a new song in the book of Psalms.

And have redeemed us; Therefore the Beasts and Elders are men redeemed by the
blood of Christ: neither in deed some twelve chief men of the Jews, and as
many Christian twelve Apostles, with the four Evangelists. (For this whole
company was not chosen out of every Tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation,
but out of the nation of the Jews only) but of all the faithful in every
place: all which this holy company and band mustered indifferently from all
places of the world, do worthyly note out, as we have observed upon the
fourth verse of the 4. chapter. And it is said significantly, out of every
Tribe etc. not all Tribes etc. because all men are not redeemed by the blood of
Christ, but only the elect, as Aretas has well observed. 10 And have made us
to our God Kings; Some copies do read them, and so this whole verse in the
third person: but Aretas, and the common Latin translation, do read in the
first person: we have expounded these things before. But why do they mention
this benefit in the cause of taking the book? Because it is proper in deed
to a Kingly power, to prevayle with God, and to bear away those things from
him, whereof lately they had noe power nor ability. Wherefore they sing that they
are made Kings to God, as though they should say, that they not only are
Kings, because they have subdued Death, Sin, and the Devil, but chiefly
because they have God regarding their commodityes, and keeping nothing from
them, which any way may make for their good. This is that Kingly power, most
noble in deed and always to be praised. But where they say, they shall reign
on earth, from hence that is evident, which even now we said at the eight
verse, that this is the company of the militant Church reigning on earth. For
why should the Saints in Heaven having attained heavenly glory rejoice in an
earthly dominion?

11 And I heard round about the Throne and the Beasts: The glorifying of the
Angels, who apart from the Church praise God, of whom there is another
consideration the^ of men redeemed by the blood of Christ: for these being
fallen are restored, and they, are upheld that they fall not. And therefore are
placed without the circuit of the Throne and the Elders: to whom yet they are
next, on every side garding the Church, both that they may watch for her
safety, and also may rejoice in her behalf, for her prosperity. From whence in
the second place is rehearsed their gratulation, as though they would learn
every day more and more from the Church, the incomprehensible mystery of
redemption, in which they behold with such earnest desire, 1 Pet. 1.12.

A thousand hundred thousand. The common translation has not these words a
thousand hundred thousand: but Aretas, the Complutent edition, and other
copies read them. And so in Daniel 7.10. from whence this place seems to have been taken, albeit the Jesuit will have nothing to be added in the common
translation, of such purity is it. But where ought to be a greater number, then
where every kind of Creature which is in Heaven and beneath, with one consent
agree to praise the Lamb, ver. 13? Therefore he had better covered his shame,
if he would rather confess freely the defect, then to defend a manifest fault.

12 To receave power: Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, that nothing should
be so heard, which his power may not overcome: for he has deserved by his
death in such sort that he should have power over all things. Therefore by
right all praise is given unto him as to the most mighty, most rich, most wise
etc. the common translation for riches reads Godhead, without the authority
of any Greek copyes. Notwithstanding it must be so, because so it seems to
the Jesuits, that the old Jnterpreter has followed always the more
corrected copies. I would pass by such things, if the impudency of the
adversaryes did not compel me to make them manifest, at least in a word.

13 And the whole creature: All the Creature rejoice at this Prophecy, eve^
they also which are void of reason, because from thence they may perceive
plainly, that there shall be an end at length to their labors. Which time they
expect with earnest affection, much desyring to be freed from this yoke of
vanity, Romans 8.21.

And which are on earth: in the Greek it is and which are in the earth, that
is to say, which live in the overmost part of the earth, and under the earth,
which ly hid in the most inward bowels. The whole creature expects a
renovation, not only that which shows it self abroad and is to be seen,
but also which lies hid within in secret. But seeing here he speaks of
creatures void of reason (for it was spoken before of the whole kind of
reasonable creatures) who would had from hence built and erected Purgatory, but
men void of reason? But for want of other guests, they are compelled to stuff
their Popish banqueting chamber with bruit beasts.

And which are in the Sea, and all things which are in them: The common
translation corruptly has it thus, And which are in the Sea, and which are in
it: (...), by a change of gender, whereby figuratively persons are attributed to
the things created: See Theod. Beza.

14 And the four Beasts; The beginning and the end of the thankesgiving is
attributed to the Church, because this benefit does most of all belong to
her. Therefore her glorifying is double, one whereby she goes before all the
rest in praising: the other whereby she accords with the rejoicing creature.
But the four and twenty Elders follow the leading of the Beasts, as it is wont
to be done in the Church, where the people speaks to God, not so much in
their own, as in the Ministers words, and yield themselves wholly to his
government to be ruled, as touching religions and manner of worship, as we
have observed in chap. 4.9.10.

CHAP. VI.
After I beheld when the Lamb had opened one of the seals, and I heard one of
the four Beasts saying, as it were the noise of thunder, come and see.

2 Therefore I beheld, and lo there was a white horse, and he that sat on him
had a bow, and a crown was give^ unto him, and he went forth co^quering and
that he might overco^e.

3 And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second Beast saying
come and see.

4 And there went out an other horse red, and power was give^ to him that sat
thero^ to take peace from the earth, that they should kill one an other and
there was given unto him a great sword.

5 And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third Beast saying, come
and see. Then I beheld, and lo a black horse was there, and he that sat sat
on him, had balances in his hand.

6 And I heard a voice in the mids of the four beasts saying, a measure of
wheat for a penny, and three measures of Barley for a penny, and wine and oil
hurt thou not.

7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
Beast saying, come and see.

8 And I looked and behold a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was
death, and hell followed after it, and power was given unto them over the
fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death,
and with beast of the earth.

9 And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the Altar the souls of
them that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
maintained.

10 And they cried with a loud voice saying, how long Lord which art holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood,, requyring it of them that
dwell on the earth?

11 And long white robes were given to every one, and it was said unto them,
that they should rest for a little while, until their fellow servaunts and
their brethren be accomplished, who are to be killed even as they were.

12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo there was made a
great earthquake, and the Sun became blake as sack cloth of hair, and the
moon was like blood.

13 And the stars of heaven fell to the earth, as a fig tree casts her
green figs when it is shaken of a mighty wind. 14. And heaven departed away
as a scroule when it is rolled, and every mountain and Isle were moved out of
their place. 15, And the Kings of the earth and the Peers, and the rich men,
and the Tribunes, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every free man,
hid themselves in dens, and among the rocks of the mountains. 16 And said
to the mountains and rocks, fall upon us and hide us from the presense of him
that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. 17. For the great
day of his wrath is come, and who ca^ stand?


The Analysis.
SVCH is the Excellency of this Revelation: The Events do follow, which first
are the Seals: secondly the Trumpets: lastly the Vials. For all the rest of
the Prophecy is distinguished into three notable periode^, which contain the
chief alterations to come in the world, even unto the coming of Christ, every
one of which again is divided into seven points, so as from the last of the
former aryseth always the whole sequent period. As touching the Scales, there is
in every one a certain preparation, afterward the type of the future things.
And the preparation is partly common, whereby the Lamb opens each one in
order, partly proper to the four first, which besides have an inviting by one
of the four Beasts to come and see. There be six types of this chapter (for
so many seals are opened) a white horse, ver. 2. a read ver. 4. a black ver.
5. a pale ver. 8. The cry of the souls ver, 9.10.11. and great earthquake, to
the end of the chapter.

Analysis.
After J beheld when the Lamb had opened the first of the seals: Now the
Spirit enters into the events, which will instruct us touching all the
changings succeeding by course in the world, as far as is expedient for the
Church, and which are of any moment, unto the last end of all things. A great
matter and chiefly necessary to be known: but such as into which noe
understanding of mortal man can penetrate. Therefore whom in the beginning I
have prayed unto, him do I call upon again, having gone forward in some part
by his alone grace, that he will grant me happily to make an end of the
things that remain, who has granted me so to begin, as I am persuaded is
agreeing with his truth. Thou therefore most holy and most wise Lamb, who
alone have deserved to take and unscale the book, and not to that end that
thou should have these secrets for thy self alone, but that thou should
communicate them with thy Church, as far as shall be for her profit, grant, I
pray thee, unto me thy most unworthy servant according to thy bounteousnesse,
that perceaving clearly what hidden and secret things these seals contain,
I may reveal the same holily unto the world, to the edification of thy Church,
the ruin of Antichrist, and the glory of thine own name, to be published unto
all ages, Amen. In that we have distinguished the Events into three ranks,
we have the Spirit himself for our author joining the trumpets to the
seals, and the vials to the trumpets, in such sort, as that always the first
thing of that which follows, do arise out of the last of that which went
before. Therefore they bring in darkness upon themselves, who do thrust
together into one, the seals, the trumpets, the vials, and also the seven
Candlestickes, so as each one of every order should be joined one to another in
equal degree, as if the Father and the Sons should be equal, and should
run together the same term of years. Furthermore seeing the seals ar as it
were promises of future things, the tru^pets adversities approaching with
great noise: the vials, things that are powered upon men by little and little,
and come upon them unwarres, as we shall after see, and overwhelme them: it
seems not to be convenient, to co^founde these contrary things together, so
that the thing should be promised and accomplished all at once: and that the
same thing should be done openly and secretly at the same moment of time: but
let us come to the words.

When he had opened (says he) one Seal, that is to say, the first, as Theod.
Beza translateth it: for after follows, the second, third, etc. And so the
Hebrews every where use to speak. But before I proceed to the things that
are behind, that cold comment of the Jesuit is to be removed, who thinks
that the opening of the book is something diverse from opening of the seals:
as though nothing in the book could be read and showed unto us, before that
all the seals should be opened. Which opinion verily faineth unto us I know
not what book, of which we have received never a word written, neither do
we understand from thence ought touching things to come. For the Revelation
has nothing more besides the opened seals For out of them the trumpets come
forth, and again out of them the vials, as we have advertised in the
resolution, so as all the rest of the Prophecy is limited with those things,
that are contained in the seals, as we shall prove by manifest arguments in
their places. If therefore after all the seals opened he has found out some
book to be read, it is Apocryphe that is a hid book, the original and
authority whereof is not known, and which peradventure may lie hid in the
coffer of the breast of their Pope, but which to read and know the Church
has nothing to do. Furthermore it is needful for the clearer understanding
of the periodes, first the terms of time wherein things are finished and
every several article of them, to set down some entrance, from whence we
must begin: which surely we judge to be by and by after this writing of John.
For that saying of the fourth chapter ver. 1. I will show thee the things that
must be done hereafter, calls back John both to that moment of the
Revelation given, and also teaches to count from thence all things which are
delivered in the book following. Therefore there is noe need to have recourse
unto the first ages of the world, nor unto the Monarchies, nor unto the times
of Christ or the Evangelists, or in any such thing of the age past: but John
writing this Revelation by the commandment of God about the end of the
Empire of Domitian (as Ireneus shows in his 5 book against heresies, and
Eusebius out of Ireneus in the 3 book of his Ecclesiastical History chap. 18.
At the end of the reign of Domitian, about the ninety seventh year from the
birth of Christ) we think the beginning of the Seals, to wit of the first
period is to be set at that time, from whence we shall see every each thing
which follows to flow with a ready course stopped and stayed with noe uneven
places. The event in the unfolding will show what is the limite of every
Periode. These things being thus established, let us return unto the
declaration of the words, afterward we shall see the thing it self and
coherence thereof. The first preparation is of the Lamb opening the first
seal. For he is the word of the Father, who does minister unto us whatsoever
understanding we have of Gods will. And the events are called Seals, both
because they contain a mystery most hidden from the understanding of the
profane multitude Isay 8.16. and also because these first experime^ts should
be pledges of future things. Not that we should unders^a^d these to be bare
forshewings of things and empty promises, who do only denounce the troubles
in word, the execution whereof is commanded in some other place in this book
(for that is no where to be found) but that they are signs of that kind,
which bring together with them their e^ecution, and do give a firm pledge of
future things. He opens the seale^ in order one after another, and not all
together with one labor, both because the manner of the things to be done did
so require, and that also the whole Prophecy was not to be uttered at once, but
to be drawn (...) peece-meale, as it were for ab^^^ty of a d^yly p^ttance. The
second p^^p^^tion is of one of the four Beast^, calling John to come and see.
And this one Beast is the first, to wit a Lion, Chap. 4.^. But the ^^^st^ are
Go^^^^^ of the Churches, as has been observed in the foresaid pl^ce ^ho^e
labo^^ G^d uses to instruct others. These call men to see and obs^^^e, ^ot
only b^ca^se it is their office to forewarne the Church of th^^^ that ^re to
^o^e to pass, whether good or bad: but especially ^ee^ (...) thinge^ next to
come, should be notable through their faithfulness and di^^^^nce in this ^^^ter.
But the Lion speaks first, because they which first ^h^^ beg^^ne the co^bate,
should have like courage and success, no^ less pr^v^ili^g in th^^ they go
about, then Lions making their pray. The voice is, ^n it (...) ^^der, penetring
very far that it might be heard of many. C^^^ says he, and see, speaking to
John, representing now the person of the faithful, who likewise should be
stirred up by the voice of the ministers to observe th^se wonderful events:
which thing also is common to the three s^^es following, that being once spoken
here, it may be understood in the rest.

2 J beheld therefore, and lo a white horse: The first type is a white horse,
and the sitter on him with a bow and a crown. As touching the horse, he is a
warlike and swift beast: to which worthily God compares his actions, both here
and in other places, because with great courage and swiftnes, they will break
through, whatsoever men shall make against. Zach. 6. The white color is
ioifull, proper to some famous solemnity, as in the triumph of Diocletian and
Maximian: After, says Pomponius Letus, the chariot of the triumphers of gold
and precious stones, which four horses drew, comparable in witness with the
snow. But a rider is attributed to this and the rest, that we may know that
they wander not up and down rashly at their pleasure, but are ruled and
governed by the raines of Gods Providence. And it may easily be gessed what
manner of sitter it is from the analogy of the 8. verse. For there he is noted
by name, that sits on the pale horse, whose name, seeing it is death, his
name may be life or truth, that has so noble and pleasant a form. But
whereas he is furnished with a bow and crown and went forth conquering that
he might overcome, by the same things is signified, that an assault far of
shall be made, and that a notable victory shall ensue thereof: which should not
vanish away with the present success, but should even also flourish with
future happiness. For a bow is a weapon of that kind, as with which the
enemies are hi^te both far and near. But the Crown is a token of victory,
so as both in the horse and sitter on him, all things are joyous and
prosperous. So is the interpretation of the words, wherewith the History does
agree so wonderfully, that noe picture does more lively represente his pattern,
then the type of this seal, the condition of those times. We know that while
Traiane was Emperor, after John was gone from Pa^mos to Eph^sus, that is by
and by after the Revelation was written, a most lamentable persecution waxed
very hot and fierce, which raging even unto the fourteenth year, at length
by the letters of Pliny second Proconsull of B^thy^ia, it was some that
quenched and mitigated. Neverthel^ss^ the first Beas^ had not yet spoken. For
Pliny was a heathen man and noe member of the Church, much less the chief
ruler. Neither s^^^d the trouble wholly through his admonition, only this was
obtained, that the Christians should not be searched for unto punishment, but
only should be punished when they were brought unto the Governors and
accused, Eus. Feel. Hist. book. ^. 33. Wherefore the fight yet continued, and
Traia^ being dead, a few years after it waxed more fierce under Adria^: who
at length going on with rage unto the destruction of the name of Christians,
the Lion roared out, even the first Beast, as the thu^der. For God raised up
Quadratus the Bishop of Athens, and also A^stides a Philosopher citizen of the
same city, who as lio^s stoutly regarding not the danger of their life in
respect of the good of the Church, spoke to Adria^ by Apologies, then also in
face, pleaded the cause of the Christians. By which the minds of the faithful
were raised up with attente of the eve^t, and not in vain, seeing from thence
followed a great change forthwith. For the white horse and his sitter with a
bow and crown went forth: that is, the truth triu^phed joyfully when the
Emperor being overcome by the oration of those godly men did ordain, that noe
Christian should be condemned, unless he were convicted of some crime,
punisheable by the Civil laws. This was a manifest victory of the truth, and
a great token of future hapines, Eusebius. Hist. book 4 chapter 3. But her power was
more excellent under the next Emperor, Antonin Pius: about the beginning of
whose Empire, the Christians being again miserably oppressed from the former
hatred, at length Justin Martyr Leo, administering the word of God in the habit
of a Philosopher, (as says Eusebius. book 4.11.) wrote Apologies for the
Christians unto Antonin, to his sons, and to the Senate of Rome: whereby he
effected God working together with him, that it was enacted by public decree,
that noe man should trouble Christians in that respe^t, because they were
Christians, but if any would proceed to molest them, the ac^us^d, us^d should
be free and absolved from the accusation, although found to be such a one, but
the accus^r should be made subject to punishment: as it appears by the
Decree of the same Antonin, in Justin and Eusebius. book 4.13. Now surely the
truth triumphed wearing a crown, and the Emperors did lie down b^ing
stricken by the bow, who seemed to be far beyond the lot of private men. Yea
in the most remote countryer one Apology being thrown, the enemies were so
restrained, that they could attemp nothing against the truth. The same Iustine
also by his most learned writings, stopped the mouths of the Jews and
Grecians, so as the victory of the truth was famous, Eusebius. book 4.18.
Therefore this time next after John excellent for Apologies, and joyful fruict
of the persecution stayed, is the voice of the Lion, the first Beast, and that
only pleasant solemnity, which the truth did keep, being sit on the white
horse with the bow and crown.

3 And when he had opened the second Seal; So is the first Seal. The second
as touching the La^be that opens it, there is nothing new. But the Beast is
an other, namely an Ox, whose place was the second, in chap. 4 7. And we
know that this beast is borne to labor; not to be compared with the Lio^ in
the glory of overcoming: yet far more noble in the praise of enduring
sorrow. Neither is the voice here so terrible and roaring, as was that of the
thundering Lion, but vulgar and common: whence he says that he heard the
second beast, saying, which yet should have his force to stir up men to
hearken to the event.

4 And another horse came forth that was read: The second type is a read
horse, and the sitter upon him, to whom was given a great sword. Of the horse
we spoke at the second verse. That fiery color signifies war, contentions,
slaughters blood, as in Isaiah: Who is this that comes from Edome, with
stieped garments from Bozrah? Wherefore art thou red in thy garments, and thine
apparel as of him that treads in the wine press? chap. 63.1. The sitter on
him is furnished with power, because he should order the matter, not at his
own pleasure, but by an others commandment. Power is given, partly by word,
partly by sign. By word. leave being granted to take peace from the earth.
For so the verb (...) to take, is taken for (...), to take away, as we have
observed before in chap. 3.11. But the Earth in opposed to Heaven. And seeing
Heaven in this book does note out the true and holy Church, as after it shall be
manifest, the earth contrariwise signifies the ungodly world, from which peace
is taken, and not from the Church. Which is yet more plain from the
declaration of the power, which proceeds so far, that it should set me^
together by the ears, to kill one an other, as these words show, that one
should kill another, but the Church avengeth not her self by slaughter of the
enemies, much less by a certain fury in murdering her own friends. But this
butchery one of an other grows from the strifes and battles among the
Gentiles, whereby one should run headlong to an others destruction. Wherefore
it is not here spoken of the persecution of the Church, but of the tempest of
wars, wherewith the whole world should be shaken. Which is declared to be
very great by the sign and Instrument of the power, that is a great sword
given to the sitter on the horse. Which thing came to pass, after that
Antoninus Pius was dead. For his son Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus Verus, by
name a Philosopher, by deed a great enemy of the truth, being blinded with
the Heathens superstition, moved a merciless persecution against Christians.
Which that the second Beast might restrain he uttered a voice. For Justin sent
a second Apology to the Emperor, Eusebius. book 4.16. of the Eccl. Hist. Melito
Bishop of Sardi, and Apolinarius Bishop of Hierapolis do the same, pleading
earnestly the cause of the Christians, in books written to the same Emperor,
Eusebius. Hist. book 4.26. But the Emperor more learned then his Father, less
godly, received the defense with deaf ears. From hence the voice of this
Beast became the voice of an Ox, as which prevailed not, as before the voice
of the Lion did prevayle. But the Beast nevertheless after his lowing did
bear a grievous yoke of the former calamity. Justin himself, before in
strength a Lion, now in patience an Ox, killed for Christ his sake, obtained
the name of Martyr Eusebius. Hist book 4. 16. The residue did mourn under the
cross, without any rest given them. Notwithstanding howsoever the voice
prevailed not to appease the cruelty, yet it was instead of an alarm to warn,
the faithful how great evil was like to come shortly upon the world for
their cruel harde^ing against the truth. Peace shall be taken away straiteway
from men; seeing it should be most just, that they which would refuse eternal
peace, should not also enjoy this earthly; and they which so greedily thirsted
after innocent blood, should be satiated at length with their own blood.
Therefore by and by all things are on fire w^^ wars. The Parthians now
first of al^ af^^ Tr^ian^ fall away f^^^ he Romans. Thither the brother of the
Emperor goes, be in ad^^^ as a ^^^forte to the Empire, and at length a very
great disconfiture (...) he returns home with triumph; to whom this felicity
was bu^ (...), being suddenly dead of an Apoplexi^, wh^le he sat with his
brot^er in the chariot: Eutrop. Brev. book 8. Shortly after arose the war of
the people of Bohemia: so great as there has not bin the like in any time, as
the s^^e Eurropius says, worthily to be compared with the wars of Ca^th^g^:
which together with the Bohemians, the Q^^d^^, Vand^^s, the Sar^^^es, and
Su^ves, and all Barbary, from the C^^^^e of Pa^^onia even to the mids of the
Gaulles. Ho^^e mis^table was then the face of things, the same author
d^scribeth excellently after thi^ manner: For, says he, there was not rest any
where from war, and through all the East, Illyr^^um, Italy, France, battayles
were hotely applied: these were earthquakes, not without the destruction of
cities, inundations of rivers, often pestilence, kinds of locusts hurtful to
the fields: so as nothing at all almost whereby mo^^^ll men are wont to be
wasted with very great sorrows, can be spoken or thought, which raged not when
Antoninus was Emperor. Those are his words. It was a great and cruel sword
which was moist and drunken with so much blood. If any do think that war
was noe strange thing to the Romans, neither to be like to be true, that a
thing so common and ^^uall should here be signified, let him compare the Empire
of this Antoninus with theirs which went before: he shall see that the war
had ^^^^ed by the Providence of God for a long space, to the end that this
iudg^^ent of God, when it should come to pass, might be more famous. A^^^^us
his father governed the whole world by his sole authority, noe war being made
for the space of three and twenty years. Sextus, Aurelius Vul^r: Had^ianus
also had peace the whole time of his empire, except that once only he fought
by his Viceroy; Eutrop. Brev. book 8. Was not the thing worthy observatio^,
that after the peace of 44. years, all places should be suddenly troubled with
the burning flame of wars? Every man sees that there is so great agreement
of all things, namely of the Prophecy, Time and Event, that it cannot be
doubtful, but that the Spirit pointed as it were with the finger to this only
thing. Tertul. in his Apol. that a notable peace was granted at length to the
Cristians by this Emperors decree: but this came to pass after the war of
the Marcomanes, in which having tried the singular help of God against the
enemies by the prayers of the Christians who were soldiers in his army, he
could not but provide at length for their safety, who had brought health both
to him self and also to his Empire. And yet he lived not long after this
war, the next year after the triumph departing this life.

5 And when he had opened the third seal etc. The Beast of the third seal is
a man, chap. 4.7. mighty in reason and experience of things. Not but that the
former Beasts were of this same force also and power, but because this should
be the chief thing wherein the third Beast should excel. The voice also of
this is more obscure, then was that of the first: which yet should be
sufficient to teach the faithful what punishment God would take of the world
for their sake.

T^^^ I beh^ld, ^^d lo^ a bla^ke horse: The third type is a black horse, the
sitter on w^^^ he ^^^th in ^i^ ha^^ ^^^es, being commanded to bring in a dearth
al^^ (...) the B^^^s, yet so as he should not hurt wine and oil. Therefore as
^oa^^ng this ^orse the bl^^ ^olour sitly agrees to the hunger starve^, who
(...) a body without blood without juice, and without color: as Ier. Lam.
(...) pure the ^^o^ ^ow is their bew^y become more dark then (...) 8. Also
through hunger the eyes are dim, and covered with da^^^^ (...) eyes rece^ed
light, when he had put his hand to his mouth. 1 S^^. ^^.28 (...) which the
s^^ter has in his hands, is called (...), w^^ (...) to wit the beam of the
bala^ce, on which the s^oles do ha^ge (...) the whole. A s^^ instrument for
famine, seeing (...) as weighed.

6 And I (...): Th^s v^^^^ is the (...) being in the mids of the Beasts: chapter
5 6 (...) uni^^s^ll administration of things being (...) B^t se^^ng this voice
is ^^^^d, among the Bea^^, neither as (...) go^^ out from (...) ^lace by the
same is signif^ed th^^ the very (...), but yet which alone should know the
co^^ll (...).

A measure of whe^^ etc. The Inter^^^ (...) he ^^^en quantity of this measure
some give to it 3 (...) 8. ^^esichius (...) are as it were ^ood divided: which
in one word (...) called commonly Dem^ns^on, a s^^ m^^^^re of corn. Atheneus
spea^eth ^ore d^^inctly of it in his 3 book D^^opsi, showing for how long a
t^me this allowanc^ was, calling it the s^stenance for one day. Aristophanes in
(...) bring^th somewhat a more full light where (...) twitting the servants,
says whom I have taught to fashion four loaves of bread to a Choenix, to wit,
a measure of corn. Therefore Chocnix contains so much corn, as would
suffice to make four loaves.

The Scholiast adds, that four great loaves were made of a Choenix, and 8
small ones: (...) signify corn in general, in this place wheat, or meal of
wheat, a dearer provision then barley, three measures of which are not sold
for more then one of wheat; for a penny, understand shall be fold, or some like
word. Denarius is a latin word, being worth ten pieces of silver. The ancient
writers make it equal in weight and value to the Attike dram, that is seven
pence. It is of three kinds, as some will have it, one of which is worth after
our accounte seven pence, an other eight, an other ten. And thus much of the
corn: as touching the other sustenance, he says, and oil and wine, hurt not.
The latin translations read the words being displaced, thus, and wine and
oil hurt not: the meaning is, yet wine and oil hurt not, after the manner of
the Hebrews, the copulative being put discretively. The words wine and oil
cannot be referred unto those that went before, as though he should say, a
measure of wheat shall be sold for a penny, and three measures of barley for a
penny, likewise wine and oil for a penny: Iunius on this place, thou shall not
do uniustly, for the words oil and wine are the accusative case of the
following words thou shall not hurt, and not the nominative going before the
verb, as the words, measure and measures are. Wherefore all succor for life
should not be taken away, but only necessary things should be diminished. Oil
and wine which serve for delicious dainties, should be left unhurt, because it
had seemed good to God to punish the poorer sort first, the Princes and states
being reserved as dainties from famine to the pestilence. For whom the famine
could not consume, because of their riches and abundance, those the pestilence
should eat up and should kill with a speedy death, as in the seal following.
So are the words. The event is not so plainly mentioned of the
History-writers, as were to be wished, who do gather only the more notable
things, and do easily pass over for the most part things vulgar and common,
especially, when as this famine consisted only in the scarcity of corn, and
not in a dearth of all victuals: Yet God would have some tokens of it to be
apparent, as far as might suffice to set out of danger the truth of the
Prophecy. Commodus the son of Antoninus did succeed his father, who being
Emperor there was given by the mercy of God some breathing: I think, because
from the Emperor himself alone, man kind should have plague and pestilence
enough. Pertinax and Julian follow: both of a short reign, and therefore
less hurtful. At length Severus enjoys the Dominion, a cruel author of a
most grievous butchery, whether of his own accord, or by the instigation of
other men. Then the third Beast cried out, admonishing the faithful that God
would punish the wicked loathing spiritual food with a great penury of the
sustenance of this life. For Tertullian, who^ by right thou may call a Man
excelling in wit in good judgment and in learning, who has almost as many
arguments as words, who through anger falling away unto the Heresy of
Montanus, by his infirmity also showed, that nothing perteining to a man, was
alienate from him: this Tertullian, I say, sent a most learned Apology written
against the Gentiles, to the Nobles of Rome, by which at least secretly, as
writes Franciscus Zephyrus, they might have knowledge of the common cause of
Christians, seeing that openly they might not. Neither did he think that only
the Princes of the Roman Empire were to be called upon of him generally, but
also by name Scapula the President of Cartage, if peradventure he might tame by
these means his cruel mind. He shows him the true cause of the public
calamityes, to wit, that the wicked world by persecuting the truth, did bring
upon themselves those sterilities, that after sowing time the harvests were
lost, that deluges arysing from showers of rain and fearful tempests marred
all things. For so he speaks, Yet we must needs be grieved, because noe
city shall carry away scotfree the shedding of our blood: and also as under
Hilarianus the President, when concerning the floores of our burials, thy cried
together, they shall not be treshing floores, they were not their floores. For
they have not done their harvests. Which words show plainly, that there was
great barrennes in those times, when as there were noe harvests: and therefore
as it seems, those floores were given to the Christians, wherein they might
bury their dead, when through the great barrennes they were to noe use for to
lay up corn. And why should we not acknowledge here the black horse, seeing
the Sun in the assembly at Vtica, had almost quite lost his light, and that
not by an extraordinary eclipse, but being placed in his high and exaltation?
as witnesses the same Tertullian to Scapula. Neither did this want of
sustenance torment only the wicked Gentiles, but also did troble the
Christians, for God will have wordly goods to be common to the profane: and
afflictions to his own children, that all of like fellowship might prove both
his lenity and severity: Tertul. in his Apol. So then the event does agree with
the Prophecy, punishing the world with an other scourge, even famine, which
could not be raised from their drowsines with that great sword and destruction
of wars. The Jesuit will have the black horse to be understood of
Heretics, although according to his wonted error, he has noe regard of the
time. For he refers these things to the fortieth year of the Lord, when
Mathewe wrote the Gospel: wherein he passes over the bounds set of the
Angel, I will show thee the things, which must be done hereafter, chap. 4.1.
Many Heretics indeed arose in the time of that respit which the Church
enjoyed under Commodus, as Montanus and others of that sort: but seeing the
former Horse, and that which follows, do note bodily calamityes inflicted
upon the world for iniuryes and violence offerred to the truth, it were
unmeete to transfer this which is placed between them, into an other kind,
especially seeing there is a manifest consent of the History. Neither must we
think that a famine belonging to the common people, is a lighter matter, then
that it should be meet that men should be forewarned of it. For it was the
purpose of the Spirit, to appointe these first calamities as pledges of the
following Prophecy: from whence they are called, Seals, as it were
confirmations of the other things which are to be delivered, that the truth
of these predictions being perceived, which should follow in the next times,
the faithful might be noe less without doubt touching those things which are
to be expected in the last ages. Therefore these Seals, are as the three
kiddes, three loaves of bread, a bottell of wine, Likewise a Viole, a Tymbrell,
a Pype, and a Harp, with which men meeting Saul, made a more undoubted
persuasion in him, touching the promised Kingdom.

7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
Beast: The fourth Beast is an Eagle, flowing on high, and little esteeming the
things that are on earth, chap. 4.7. He stands in equal degree with the
last former Beasts, and do not attain that power of the first, whose roaring
sounded out like thunder. Yet nevertheless by his Eagles cry he instructs
the faithful touching the evil to come, whom he bids come and see how
great destruction should come upon the world by and by.

8 And behold a pale horse: The fourth type is a pale Horse, the Sitter on
who^ is described by his Name, Follower, and the business committed to him. The
color of the Horse is (...), which properly signifies being green, and a
thing so green as grass: Some time it is taken for the deformity of herbs
waxing dry, which have lost their color, from whence it is taken for palenes,
which is the color of a thing withered, as pale fear, because fear makes
men pale: and Constance the Father of Constantin the great, was called Chlorus
for his palenes, as says Zonaras in Diocletian. That sickly color does very
well become the Horse on whose back sits Death himself: where he that
sat, is used for to him that sat. Which kind of speaking is according to the
Hebrews, as was observed chap. 2.26. Although least any should think it to be
against the rule of Grammar, and through his own ignorance impute barbarism
to the holy writer, we have also examples in other tongues of most eloquent
authors. Livius speaks thus, The learned, says he, in religions and common
law, when duo ordinarij Consules, two ordinary Co^suls of that year, one
perished by the sword, the other by sickness, denied that the substituted
CONSVLL could have an assembly of people to choose officers. Where duo ordinarij
Consules, is put for duorum ordinariorum Consulum, that is, of two ordinary
co^suls. So Salust. Therefore in the beginning Kings (for that was the first
name of Government on the earth) being diverse, part exercised their wit, part
their body. Many things of this sort are noted of learned men, of whom also it
is observed that this manner of speaking is very usual with the Grecians.
First, to the rider the name Death is given. From the proportion whereof names
also be given to the former, so as he that sits on the white horse, may be
called truth: on the red horse, war: on the black horse, famine: Which I
do mentione, because I see that some little to the purpose, do feign here the
Devil and I know not what others to be the Sitters. Now the Sitter is named
Death, for excellency sake, both because the plague of this seal should bring
more swifte destruction, and also because it should annoy with more kinds of
killing. The third scourge of God is wont to be the Pestilence as in Ezechiel.
That they shall fall by the sword, by famine, and pestilence, chap. 6.11. The
which notwithstanding is not here made the captain of the rank, but only,
mustered into the place of an ordinary soldier, as we shall see by and by.
The companion or rather waiting made of Death is (...): which in latin is
commonly translated Hell, but it would be more fitly translated Grave, which
also the greek word signifies, and so it ought to be understood in this
place: especially seeing many holy men should die together with the rest, whom
it were a wicked think to judge to be swallowed up of the Hell of the damned.
For as touching that the Jesuit does think, that Hell does follow to devour
Traiane, whom he will have to be this Sitter, we shall see in the applying
how fond a thing it is: that I may not say how carelessly he mixed and
confou^deth all things, who brings again to Traiane the Prophecy which was
passed beyond Severus. Secondly power is given to the Sitter, and together also
is limited with his bounds, and there was given them: where some books do
read the order being changed, and power was given to him over the fourth parth
of the earth, and the common Latin translation, for the fourth part of the
earth, reads, over four parts of the earth: by these means the whole world
being made subject to their dominion, against the consent of all the Greek
copies. But now it is a detestable thing to think after the Tridentine
Decree, that the common tra^slatio^ was not corrected according to the best
Greek copies. Although a good sense in deed may be drawn from the words,
that the four parts of the earth, may note the largenes of the countries in
which the destruction should go on with rage: even as the fourth part of the
earth; the multitude of men which should perish by this death.

The Power is defined with a four fold kind of destroying, with Death
sitting on the horse, which he uses as his Ministers. Wars and Batells lead
the first army, whose weapon is a Sword; Want of food guides the second
host: the third the Pestilence, (for by death he means it) to whom is
attributed the name of the gender, because it takes men away with a most
quick destruction, and sets before our eyes a most lively image of death:
and the^ also it is wont to be always the follower of Famine. And in many
mother tongues it is called Mortality. The last scourge is of Beasts, a scourge
much used in former times, as I will send upon you the Beasts of the field,
Levit. 26.22. So, Also when I shall send my four sore judgments upon
Jerusalem, even the sword, and famine, and noisome Beasts, and Pestilence,
Ezech. 14.21. An exe^ple whereof we have, when the Lord sent Lions among the
new dwellers, who succeeded the ten tribes carried away, 2 King. 17.25. or it
may be that Beasts, be taken metaphorically, for men mighty on earth and made
like Beasts, a frequent name in the scriptures of Tyrants and wicked Princes,
as of Pharaoh: Thou art like a young Lion among the nations, Ezech. 32.2. And
famous in Daniell is the nothing of four Kings by so many Beasts, that is, a
Lion, a Bear, a Leopard, and the fourth terrible Beast, to wit, a Centaure,
compact of many: chap. 7.4.5. These are then the bands of Death, which now
joined together, he would spread abroad into the world, when the gates and
ways were opened, which before were several plagues. And that it is also so
come to pass the coherence of things do teach it. After Severus the state of
the Church was quiet, until at length the Empire came to Decius. Maximinus
troubled somewhat, but he being killed a while after, his madness and life was
short. But Decius neither feared with the calamity of wars, nor any whit
moved with the scarsity of victuals, both which he might easily perceive, the
slaughters of the innocents to have brought into the world, commanded that
rigor should be showed toward the Christians, with all kind of torments. Then
the fourth Beast spoke, for Cyprian being indeed an Eagle, a contemner of the
world, and of the things that are very much esteemed of other men: who at his
first conversion bestowed all his goods upon the poor: who earnestly reproved
the covetousnes of other men in heaping up patrimonies: sharply rebuked the
pride of them that preferred themselves before others: reprehended swelling
insolency, and immodest boasting of confession, and by all means, openly
avouched, that these scourges were provoked by such sins. This Eagle, I say,
flying so much the more higher, by how much the more he did abase himself, in
writing against Demetrianus Ethnicus: showed plainly, that this was the chief
cause of all evils, wherewith the world was tormented, that the Gentiles did
persecute so barbarously the harmless worshippers of Christ: whom the world
after their manner through envy charged, for to be the cause of the common
calamityes: but that holy man did put away those calumnies, and declared
manifestly the true fountain of all the evils. Neither was his voice false,
God forthwith approving it by sending into the world diverse and sundry sorts
of horrible destruction. Decius himself was swallowed up in a golfe-mire of a
marsh, not bequeathing himself to death for his country, after the example of
the old Decius: but going down as it were quick into Hell, for a just
terror of all merciless Tyrants. Gallus and Volusianus by and by after felt
the wrath of God, who are famous for no^ remembrance of their notable acts, but
only for the destruction of mankind. For first when these reigned, the sword
slew an infinite sort of men. For the Scythians when Decius was gone, and
when first the yoke of tribute was laid upon the Rom^nes (which how much
blood it cost, any man may easily conjecture) altering forthwith their act, did
make invasions, did drive away spoils, did violently enter in, often times by
a very great army by land and by sea, did wast Dardania, Thracia, Thessalia,
Macedonia, and the country Hellas: part did molest Asia with the spoiling,
rasing, and destroying of many cities on every side: By whose example also
other enemies did arise: the Parthians did take and hold by force Armenia, and
did pass through into the part of Syria; which mischiefs when Gallus and
Volusianus, make ready to withstand, they are both killed of the soldiers.
Aemilianus a three-moneth Emperor was chosen of the same into their place, and
of them killed. Valerianus comes alive into the enemies power, and is made a
footstool to Sapores, for to get upon his horse. The sword then played his
part greatly, leaving scarce any part of the world free from slaughters. The
famine gave occasion both to Demetrianus of calumniating the Christians, and to
Cyprian of defending them. Do thou, says he, speaking to Demetrianus,
marvayle and complain in this your obstinacy and contempt, if the earth be
foul with the standing of dust, if the barren clotte brings scarce fainte
yellowish and wanne herbs and grass, if seldom rain descend from above, if
the beating hail makes the wine feeble, if a subverting whirlewinde do
break in pieces the olive trees, if drought do stop up the fountain and c?
From which it is clear how grievous the condition of those times was, as
concerning vittailes. And although the unte^peratnes of the Heaven had not ben,
there was calamity enough from the continual wars to spend up all the
store: seeing it must needs be, that the fields and country were forsaken,
the tillage of the earth was neglected, that the cattle were not regarded, the
corn laid up was burnt with fire, and that all succor of life was destroyed.
From whence the sword has Famine joined with it, as an unseparable companion.
The third weapon of death was the Pestilence: then which noe man will say
easily, I think, whether at any time, there has been any more sharp and
grievous, either for continuance of time, or for multitude of those that
perished. It arose first under Gallus and Volusianus, beginning at Aethiopia,
it was spread almost through all the East and Weast; it made many cities wholly
empty of cityzens, and continued whole 15. years, as Zonaras in Gallo, and
Dionysius of Alexandria in an Epistle to the brethren, do describe lamentably,
the cruel fierceness of it: and together also makes mention of the former
calamityes, giving a most clear testimony of the fulfilling of this Prophecy
in those times: After the persecution, which he spoke of a little before, there
followed both wars and famine, which we endured together with the Gentiles:
bearing alone the things, wherewith they oppressed us: yet even alike
partakers of those things which both they brought upon them selves, and
suffered, and again we rejoiced in the peace of Christ, which he gave to us
alone: But when both we and they had been cased a very short time, that
pestilence entered, a thing more terrible to them then any terror, and more
lamentable then any calamity, and (as one of their own History-writers said)
which alone exceeded the hope of all men, yet not such to us, but an exercise
and trial inferior to none of the rest: for it absteined not in deed from
us, but it came on with far more violence against them. These things has he
in Eusebius. Hist. book 7.22. Cyprian from this sorrowful and unwonted evil,
took the argument of his book touching mortality. As for the Beasts, if they
be taken properly, I remember not that I have read any notable damage and hurt
done of them at this time: although it is noe light conjecture that they did
much harm in the Eastern and Southern countries. In some ages coming after,
when also the famine and pestilence became worse and worse, men were afraid of
the dogs, least being accustomed to eat their carkases cast forth abroad,
afterward they should desire the^ alive for meat: whereupon they set
themselves to kill the dogs, Eusebius. book 9.8. neither could it be, but when
food failed in the fields, and men were less able to defend themselves, that
many were devoured of the Beasts.

But if we refer them to cruel men and tyrants, in noe man's remembrance at
any time were there so great troops of Beasts in every place, spoiling and
renting men in pieces. For when Gallienus was Emperor, who after Valerian was
taken, reigned alone, so many tyrants arose, who took to themselves the name
of Emperor, as there were not so many since Caesar was Dictator, to that time,
in so long a row and continued rank of EMPEROVRS. Thirty are recorded by
Trebellius, who at one time, in diverse cou^tryes, invaded the Empire: in which
also certain women scoffed at the name of Roman. How great a dismembring of
men must there needs be, when so many Beasts strove at once about the Empire?
Such then are the three Seals, every one notable for their scourges: the two
former for their special, the last for all these kinds of punishements,
wherewith the world was to be punished, for despising and vexing the truth.
For when the milder correction prevailed nothing with their stubburne hearts,
almost all the hosts of death are sent in upon them, even as also the event
has most fully approved. Neither yet are these evils so proper to this one
age, that they can agree to noe other; but they are the common punishements of
the contemners of godliness; Lev. 26. Ezech. 6.11. etc. And afterward after
these times of Gallienus, one may see the Famine and Pestilence did consume
all, when Maximinus reigned in the East, Eusebius. book 9. 8. But there is so
solemn a Prophecy of them in this place, both because the next times after
John, should be famous for these punishements, which men should procure to
themselves for despising the Gospel, and also because they should be
faithful hostages, pledges and seals of the future events, that were to be
expected many ages after.

9 And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the souls
etc. Of the fifte seal there is noe Beast, by whose voice John is invited to
see. And that not without cause, but because this secret should pass over, men
being not stirred up by any public solemn cry, to observe the event, as was
done in the former; neither certainly does the History report, that any man
performed any such labor, in which respect such an office might be attributed
unto him worthily. Furthermore, this Seal consisted partly in rehearsing
things past, partly in reporting an eve^t of that kind, which is wont to
glaunce by without perceaving: especially seeing our natures ar so disposed,
that adversities do abide more surely in our minds, then prosperityes.
Wherefore seeing the Seals are made like unto the events, it is no mervayle,
that noe type is set forth here, to which noe event should be answerable.

J saw under the altar the souls: The fifte type is the souls of the Martyrs
lying under the altar in this verse, requiring vengeance against their enemies,
ver. 10 and receaving answer ver. 11. Which three members do respect three
times, to wit, the time past, present, and to come. The souls lying under the
altar declare most finely from the consequent, what went before, that is to
say, in what co^ditio^ the Church was during those former seals, and with how
great cruelty of men she contended. We have heard in deed the truth
overcoming, we have learned also that war, famine, and pestilence with their
companions possessed and spoiled all things, but there was noe mention yet, in
what state the true worshippers of Christ were in the mean time: allthough
from the victory of the truth, their conflict may be gessed, and from those
calamities anoying the world, that great wrong was done to the godly, for
which cause the enemies were so sharply punished. But the thing is made
manifest now by this complainte of the Martyrs killed, that is to say, that an
infinite quantity of blood was shed of men that worshipped the Son of God,
from that time in which John wrote, unto the end of the reign of Galienus,
whither the former seals have brought us. And what place is there that have
not heard of these horrible massacres all this space of time? Tratan, Hadrian,
Antonin Ver, Maximin, Severe, Decie and the rest, not Emperors, but Murderers
have defiled all Histories with guiltless blood But he that follows brevity
may not reckon up severally the innumerable murders. Although who could be
able to rehearse them if he would, seeing the Ministers of the wickedness
confess themselves not sufficient to kill them, that came running together to
punishment of their own accord. For so a certain man Tiberianus, who had the
chief doing of things at Palestine, reported to Traiane, as Suidas declares
in his Traiano. Pliny a heathen man being moved with the multitude of them
that were killed, obtained some ceasing, or at least a certain moderation. So
pitiful was the condition of the Christians, that the enemies had compassion
on their calamityes: read the 3 4.5.6.7 book of Eusebius, where almost every
page is washed with blood. It is noe mervayle, that the saints being wearied
with so continual slaughters, do ask at lenght some delivery. So is the
meaning of this verse, but the words are yet to be made clear and delivered
from the slanders of the adversaries. From whence then is this fetched, that
the souls of the Martyrs lie under the Altar? Without doubt in that r^sp^ct,
that David used often, as in Psalm. 27.5. For in the time, says he, of trouble,
he will hide me in his Tabernacle, in the secret place of his pavillon shall
he hide me, and set me upon a rock: and again, thou do hide them in a
privy pl^ce of thy presence from the pride of men: thou keep them secretly
in a cottage from the strife of tongues: Psalm. 31.20. But it is known that the
Tabernacle both according to the parts, and according to the whole, was a
shadow of Christ. Wherefore to be hidden in the Tabernacle, is to have Christ
alone for the place of their succor and refuge, by whom alone we are covered
and defended against all assaults of the adversaries. From hence it is apparent
why the Souls are said to be under the Altar, to wit, that we should
understand first from thence, that all the salvation also of the Martyrs
consists in the alone Death of Christ, under the which the holy champio^s
hiding themselves as under a shield, can appear safely and boldly before God;
and that they do not merit eternal life to themselves by the shedding of
their own blood for Christ his sake, as the Papists wickedly dote: but to have
need of this covering, without which otherwise they cannot stand in the sight
of Gods majesty. Secondly that we may know that all the children of God must
be conformable to the image of their first borne brother: Romans 8.29 and must
walk the same way to heaven, wherein he has gone before us, that is to say,
by suffering of troubles, being made sacrifices and oblations, and to be killed
with many anguishes. For which cause Paul says, that he in his flesh for the
body of Christ, does fulfill the rest of his afflictions, Col. 1.24. And the
rest or defects he calls conformityes, and not satisfactions, either of
worthynes or merit. For whatsoever remains yet to be suffered of any of the
saints, that is wanting after a sort to the afflictions of Christ, who judges
all our calamityes his own. These are common to all the faithful, who have
place alike under the Altar: but especially to the Martyrs, whose sufferings
are famous before the rest. For which cause this covert to hide in, is
attributed to them by name. Seeing then they lie under the altar in this sense,
after the usual speaking in the scriptures, how wickedly does the Jesuit
wrest these words unto the Idolatrous custom among them, of dedicating
Temples? Whose manner is to bury the bodies or relics of the Martyrs under
the altar in the Churches, which they dedicate to them: and afterward to call
the Church by his name, whose relics are there buried, as though more respect
were to be had to the relics under the altar, then of him whom they will have
to be sacrificed on the altar. Would the Spirit have respect to this custom,
whereby very great injury is done both to Christ, and also to his holy Martyrs?
To Christ, because he is spoiled of his honor, and thrust beneath his
servants. To Martyrs, because they are made robbers of his glory, for
maintayning whereof they shed their blood. Neither are the Jesuits content to
abuse these words unto the defense of Idolatry, unless also they destroy that
which was well built of others. Bernard in his third sermon of the Saints,
taught from hence, the holy souls loosed from this prison of the body, not
forthwith to enjoy perfect blessedness, but to wait for full happiness at the
last judgment, rejoicing in the mean time with great and huge comfort: I
dispute not how such doctrine is not drawn necessarily from this place: the
sentence seems to be true and agreeable with the other scriptures. For so
David speaks, when J awake, I shall be satisfied with thy image, Psalm. 17.15.
Neither did Paul expect a crown before that day, in which it shall be given to
all that have loved the bright coming of Christ; 2. Tim. 4.8. Neither would
God that the ancient people should be made perfect without us: much less is
it like to be true, that one of the essential parts, should attain absolute
happiness without the other, Heb. 11.40. They that would (more boldly then
becomes modest Christians) that the separate souls, should have a clear
sight of God, in whom as in a glass they behold all things, past, present,
and to come: what reason do they give, why the souls under the ALTAR not
content with this sight alone, as if they were ignorant do enquire of the time
of vengeance? Many such things ought to have restrained the Jesuits not to
fight against a true sentence. But they saw that unless they should give to
the separated souls full happiness in the clear beholding of God, the
Jnvocating of Saints would be overthrown, and that there were no reason left,
for to show why we should implore their aid, seeing it was not the manner
before Christ was exhibited: but let it be sufficient to have touched in a word
their crafty dealing.

For the word of God: Which most constantly they have professed and preached,
as chapter 1.9. And for the testimony which they maintained, in the greek which
they had, peradventure in this sense, that they were counted Christians by the
testimony of others, as 1 Timothy 3.7. But he must be well reported, eve^ from
them that are without: as if for the word of God, should belong to them, who
by their profession have procured to themselves the hatred of the wicked: but
the testimony which they had, to them that are manifested by the judgment of
other men.

10 They cried with a loud voice: Hitherto the first member, which has opened
the condition of the time past: now the present state under Galienus, is
showed by a cry. Through yrkesomnes of continual trouble, a deliverance from
it at length is asked; seeing they have endured more the^ enough. This cry
shows the manner of Gods justice, which cannot suffer unjust murders
unpunished: in which sort the blood of Abell is said to have cried, Genesis 4.10.
But how great is the patience of our God, which is provoked by a cry to
punishment, before that he prepares to it? But whither did the saints bear
the former injuries without speaking, neither cried out before this 5 seal?
Without doubt they did always sigh under the cross: but now first of all
mention is made of the crying, because the time was not far of when they
should be delivered from those sorrows. For God is wont when he will bestow
any thing upon his children, to stir up their hearts to fervent prayers, both
that they may more esteem the good thing obtained, and also that they may
learn how great a regard he has of us that call upon him with sincere minds,

How long O Lord which art holy and true: They set forth God with those titles,
whereby they may stablish and increase their faith, as it ought to be done in
all right invocation. For because he is holy, he cannot let go unpunished the
ill deeds of the world, especially seeing he is also true and has made large
promises touching the blessedness of his people.

Do thou not judge and avenge: Judgment pertains to the knowledge of a
matter, vengeance to the performing and executing of the thing judged, which
signify punishment toward him that does wrong: yet chiefly I think the
delivering of the innocent party: from whence it is construed often with a
preposition, as in Luke avenge me of my adversary, chapter 18.3. Where the widow
does not so much desire fervently the punishment of the adversary, as her own
deliverance. So David 1 Samuel 13. and the Lord avenge me of thee, so has
Tremelius. I would rather translate the words thus, and the Lord shall deliver
me from thee, as also the Greek Interpreters have it, the Lord deliver me
from thee: for he does not wish evil to Saul to his face. And such a thing is
it which the Souls require, to wit, that God at length would after so long a
trial, deliver the Church from the power and tyranny of the enemies, and that
he would not suffer it to be oppressed always with the yoke of the wicked. That
this is the sum of the request, it is known from the grant. That is not
denied them which they desire earnestly, but it is differred to some time,
which being accomplished, they should receive the thing so much desired.

11 Then long white robbes were given to every one: Montanus omitteth the
white robes, and reads, and it was given to them that they should rest. Other
copies read in the singular number thus, and a white robe was given them; and
so Aretas and the common translation, and there were given to them every one
several white robes. The answer made to the souls is evide^t by a sign and
by a speech, by both which is declared what should be the next coming
co^ditio^ of the saints. The robes are give^ for a sign, which are garments
ha^ging down eve^ to the heels, fit for to hide all deformity in the body,
as Cyrus of the robe in Xenophon: it seemed to hide, if any should have any
defect in his body. Fit vesteme^ts for the saints, and meet for Christ to
give them. But whereas the robes are white, that pertains to an orname^t used
in time of joy, as we have showed at chapter 3.4. But now they are give^ to every
one, not so much for the souls cause themselves, in so much as they enjoy
gladness in the heave^s, but for to signify the things to be done on earth. For
wa^ted they robes all that time from Traiane to Gallienus? Christ promised that
he that overcomes shall be clothed in white array chapter 3.5. How long is this
promise differred? It is not to be doubted, but that the race being run out,
there is some reward of the labor. Therefore these robes are not they of which
it was spoken before, which are given by and by after the labor is ended, but
of an other kind, signifying that the saints should have merry days on earth
for a time, which they should celebrate as it were with white gowns, as is the
custom in the time of solemn mirth. The answer made by word comes to the
same end, which both commands them to rest, and also s^tteth down limits
how long it should continue, namely, a very little time, until their fellow
servants were fulfilled, which should be killed, even as they were. In sum a
joyful rest for a short time is fore showed, which at length a new slaughter
of the faithful should follow: which at length being finished, that should
come to pass which the holy souls desired. The History witnesses, that the
thing fell out after the same manner. For after Galienus, succeeded Claudius,
Quintilius, Aurelianus, Tacitus, Florianus, Probus, Carus and his sons, and
at length Diocletian: through all which space of about forty years, unto the
ninetinth year of Diocletian, there was a time of a white gown, and of
joyful mirth, free from the murders and spoiling of the saints, the Emperors
themselves being restrained of God, that they might not interrupte and hinder
the peace granted. Which calmnes Eusebius. describes eloquently in the 8. book
and 1. and 2. chap. of his Hist. For being about to write of the sorrowful
time of Diocletians cruelty, he prepares him self a way, by the remembrance
of the former happiness. He professes himself unable to declare according to
the worthiness of the thing, how great every where among all men was the
credit and liberty of the Christian truth: How great was the mildnes, says
he, of the Emperors toward ours, to whom they committed authority and rule
over the Gentiles? whom they suffered without punisheme^t and bouldly to
profess their religion, held in great estimation, loved entirely, and counted
most trusty to them, as that Dorotheus and Gregorius. Also the Governors of
the Churches found noe less courtesy, assemblyes were celebrated with very
great company of people, the accustomed houses were not able to receive the
multitude, but it was needful to build new and larger. Certainly the whole
narration casts a savor of mirth most convenient to these white robes:
neither is there need of any other comment and exposition of these garments
and of that rest, which the holy souls are commanded to take. But this
felicity remained uncorrupted, until Diocletian disturbed it. For this one
only conflict was remaining to their fellow servants, which at length being
past, they should enjoy the thing much desired: neither should any rage of
Tyrants afterward trouble them, as before times.

12 Afterward I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo there was a
great earthquake: Neither has the sixth Seal any Beast to make attention,
because men were attentive enough by the answer given to the Souls under the
former seal. For it was said that one only strife remained. And in deed it
might easily be understood, that the time was not far of, when an end should
be put unto public murders, seeing all degrees of men did incline with so
great gentleness to the truth. But this Seal has both some thing proper in
the rest of this chapter, and also common in chap. 7. That is the last trial
of the Seals: the first part of which contains the going on of the
sorrowful Tragedy and all the former calamityes, ver. 12.13.14. The second
the joyful isue in subduing the enemies and appeasing all hurliburlies, ver.
15.16.17. As touching that, Aretas reports from the monuments of Andreas,
that very many said, that this earthquake was a passage from the persecutions,
which were brought upon them for Christ his sake, unto the time of Antichrist.
And so the scriptures are wont to call some notable alteration, an earthquake,
as where it is said: yet once more I will shake the earth, Heb. 12.26. It
signifies the remooving of those things that are shaken, as Saint Paul
declares. And in the old Testament, the going of the children of Jsraell out
of Egypt, is called an earthquake, as Psalm. 68.9. The earth was moved, and the
heavens dropped at the presence of God. Those Interpreters have touched the
point according to the truth, but only they did miss in this, that living
under Antichrist, they expected him yet to come, not knowing that he was come
long a go. Which error of the ancient Fathers (as who being further of from
the last event, were less able to perceive the matter it self) the Papists
snatch to themselves greedily: and here they make a very great gaping and
distance of time, leaping over from the times of Traiane, in which they
conclude the former Seals, unto the last end of the world, which they reserve
to their Antichrist, as though by this earthquake, all judgment of that which
is right had fallen unto them. But whether is it likely that a whole thousand
and five hundred years, and yet to come, we know not how many more, have bin
passed over with silence, and that all the rest of the Prophecy was stuffed
together into the narrow straites of 3. years and an half, as Fraunces of
Ribera the Jesuit will have it? It is indeed a profitable abridgement and a
short way to set free his Lord the Pope from a very great fear. For it could
not be, but as often as he should behold his face in this glass, he would
seem to himself to be Antichrist, unless the Jesuit now did make it
apparent, that all that, was but a phantasme which made him afraid. That
nothing is here spoken of the present time, neither of that which is past
through many ages, but that all the speech following, is of the time yet to
come. But we will put away this smoke and mist through Gods his help, neither
will we suffer that the Pope seeming to himself a triksy fellow, should love
himself to destruction: and also will make plain, that the Jesuits, do not
interpret but moke the scriptures.

And the Sun became black: These figurative and hyperbolicall speeches do
show that there should be a persecution, the most fierce of all those which
the Church endured at any time from Christ's birth till now. For so the
Prophets are wont to speak when they point at any great calamity, as Isaiah,
He will clothe the heavens with blacknes, he will make their covering as a
sack cloth, chap. 50.3. And Jeremy, When I behold, says he, the heavens,
they have noe light, chapter 4.23. and the heavens above shall be black ver. 28. but
most plainly in Ezechiell, speking of the overthrowe of the Egyptia^s, When I
shall put thee out, I will cover the heavens and make the stars thereof
dark; I will cover the Sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not make her
light to shine: all the clear lights in the heaven I will make dark upon
thee, and bring darkness upon thy land, says the Lord, chapter 32.7.8. Many such
places do teach, that these speeches are not to be refferred to the last
judgment only, as some do expound, but also to other times: which those
ancients did see, of whom spoke Aretas even now, who would have these things
to be understood of the passing over to Antichrist. This blacknes of the Sun
and the other disturbance of the creature, pertains to that horrible
slaughter, whereby those wicked men Diocletian, and Maximinian endeavored to
root out the Church. For we shall see that the Su^ne and Moon does note
stably through this book, the chief ornaments of the congregation of the
faithful: so that the Sun may signify the Scriptures, the Moon that
excellent glory of godliness whereby the saints do shine, after they have
borrowed light from the^. That both these should be miserably defiled by this
common calamity, this seal shows it. The accomplishement whereof is recited
by Eusebe, book 8.2. For when the Emperors in the nineteenth year of their
reign, ordained by publik decrees, that the books of the holy scriptures
should be committed to the fire in the mids of the marked: we saw, says
Eusebius, with these very eyes, that the sacred Scriptures, inspired of God,
were cast in to the fire, in the mids of the market place: and in the same
place a little after, the Kings letters patents did fly to and fro in every
place, whereby it was commanded to abolish the scriptures. So this Sun as a
sack cloth of hair notes not only generally, that the public joy should
be turned into very great sorrow, but also especially that outragiousnes,
whereby cruelty was exercised against the sacred scriptures. Neither could it be
otherwise, but when the fountain of light was darkened, the Moon which has
her light only borrowed, should fade away into the dark color of blood, as
almost always it happens, when she is kept from having society with the
Sun.

13 And the stars from heaven fell to the earth; The stars were Ministers
and Pastors of the Churches, chap. 1.20. In which signification they are used
both here and in other place afterward. Many of the^ through fear should
revolte from the truth, which is showed by the falling from heaven to earth.
Neither that only after many dangers and diverse calamityes, whereby being
weakened they should yield, but in the very first assault, they should fall
down as green figs, that is, with very little ado, even at the first
rumor of peril; for the fig tree most easily loses her fruit before
maturity, neither tarrieth almost for the violence of storms, but with any
light blast of wind, makes an untymely birth, that I may so say, Plin. book
16.26. Of which thing the Spirit makes mention, in so fine a similitude, that
the faithful being forwarned, should not be discouraged with the so easy
falling away of many. Eusebius shows that the thing fell out altogether as it
was here foreshewed. For after that first decree of demolishing the temples and
burning the scriptures, there was added an other not long after of apprehending
the Pastors of the Churches, and compelling them to sacrifice to Jdoles: Here
many courageously persevering, were not overcome with torments, but an infinite
sort of others, being astonished a good while before through fear, were
weakened at the first assault, Eusebius. book 8.2. by the which he shows the
sudden fall of many.

14 And the heaven departed away: The heaven every where in this book
signifies the universal purer Church, and it properly to be at length her
dwelling place, and in the mean time in such sort by her represented, that it
has not any more lively image on earth. These things therefore prove that the
calamity rested not in the Governors alone, but that the whole face of the
Church was covered with so black darkness, that it could be seen almost no
where. Let the same Eusebius. be read in the 3 book chapter 3. where he bewayleth the
miserable wasting of it, with lamentings borrowed from the lamentatio^s of
Jeremy, chap. 2.1.2. Likewise from Psalm. 89.39 etc. Yet notwithstanding this
desolation should be but as the foulding of a book. A book is not destroyed
when it is rolled up, but remains as great as it was before, it becomes
indeed less evident and apparent in the sight, being reduced and brought into
a far straighter room: So likewise the Church should loose nothing of her
syncerity, howsoever her glory might seem to be quite abolished. But the
similitude of a folded book is taken from the ancient custom, wherein books
were not bound into leaves, but were rolled up as little wheels, whence they
were called volumes, as Aretas has nored, The Hebr, says he, did use rowles,
that which is books with us: in the same sense it is said in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, chap. 1.12. and as vesture shall thou fold them up, that is, thou
shall deface all their glory as of a vesture folded up, whose gorgeousness and
beauty cannot be seen. The Hebrews have for it Tach^liphem, thou shall
change them, Psalm. 102.27. the which is translated by the Greeks significantly
thou shall fold up: seeing the Psalmist speaks of such a changing as is
altogether contrary to the nature of the heavens. For the heaven is R^q^^hh,
stretched out, spread abroad as a curtain, or as a mortal plate divided: but
rolled up it cease to be Raqiahh: so the Church is made to be spread through
all nations, and to imp^rt to them, as the heaven to the earth, light, warmnes,
and life it self: but now for a time it should be rolled up, neither should
any glory of it be seen abroad. Where the^ was the visible majesty of Rome in
the mean time, when the heaven departed away as a book folded up? But they
have goodly provided for them selves touching such dangers, who have cost of
all these things unto the last day: but how amiss and wrongfully shall be
showed by and by at ver. 16.

And all mountains and Islands: There is nothing so firm, which this tempest
should not remoove, nothing so far of, whither it should not go and be
spread. The word mountain notes that, and the word Island, this. It is a great
storm, which does either scatter the little hills of the earth, or which does
rage but in the bordering and low places: but that which does either cast and
drive away the Mountains themselves, neither stays in the continent, but
also flies over the sea into the Islands, must needs bring extreme
destruction. Eusebius beginning this boisterous storm at Nicomedia, pursued it
by the very footesteppes through all Syria, Egypt, Cappadocia, Cilara and
Phrygia; book 8. but being as it were weary with travayling, and loathing so
sorrowful a narration, he came not to our Europe: although Thracia, Italy,
Spain, France being nigh to them, and our Island Britanny somewhat further of,
ministered noe less plenty of Martyrs, although the moderation of Constans,
caused all things to be more mild in these countries. The eight book of the
Ecclesiastical history of Eusebius. expounds these three verses largely.

15 And the Kings of the earth, and the Peers etc. Thus far is the
Epitasis, now follows the Catastrophe joined together with the former
troubles. For in the mids of the rage and heat of this calamity, Christ
would show forth his divine power from heaven, and as it were raised from his
sle^pe, would appease suddenly the tempest by his word alone, as he did in time
past being awaked by his disciples. First at the sight of him Kings and the
Peers of the earth should flee away, and should hide themselves in most secret
dens. For what other thing drove Diocletian, and Maximin Hercule, that
having the sovereign power of things, and a most fervent desire to root out
Christians, when also they had continued their fury unto the second year,
resigned the Empire suddenly and returned to a private life? A thing, says
Eusebius, never heard of, to have come to pass at any time, book 8.13.
Neither without cause does Ignatius cry out, o wonderful thing and unknown
till this age, that of their own accord, neither old age pressing them,
neither the weightines of things, both brought themselves into order. Eusebius.
lays the cause upon their phrenesy. Nicephorus also upon their rage, arysing
doubt less from thence, because they saw that they labored sore in vain to
destroy the Christians. But they touched not the true cause: from hence they
should have learned this, which is it and noe other: The Lamb at length
showing himself to be the avenger of his Church, inwardly and secretly did
stinge their minds with the conscience of their wickedness, and fear of
vengeance: whereby he drove these me^ even against their wills unto this unheard
modesty. The thing is manifest from Maximianus, who, after that stinge of
conscience waxed somewhat weak, it repented him of his fact, and left no
means unattented, for to recover the scepter which he had laid down. An other
of the Emperors, who succeeded those that gave over their place called
Gallerius Maximianus exercising tyranny against Christians, the same Lamb
vanquished by an horrible disease, and drove him to recantation: an exemple
whereof see in Eusebius. book 18.17. Maximinus also being made Emperor in the
East by Galerius, at length against his will acknowledged Christ to be the
King, and gave free leave to his worshippers to live after his precepts and
ordinances, Eusebius book 9.9.10. Maxentius that Roman Tyrant stricken with fear
by the same Lamb, feigned himself to be a Christian for a time. Sabinus and
the other rulers of the Provinces, following the authority of the Cesars and
Augusts desired to win the Christians favor also by a feigned gentleness, and
to hide themselves from the wrath of the Lamb. So great a fear of the Lamb
came upon all degrees of me^, that every one thought himself well provided,
who could get any corner wherein he might lie hid in safety.

16 And they said to the Mountains: It is an argument of exceeding
desperation, when they esteemed all evil but light in comparison of his wrath,
from which they would redeem themselves with any most grievous damage
whatsoever. Diocletian being sent for by the letters of Constantine the great,
drunk poison for fear. Maximianus ended his life with an haltar. Gallerius
perished of a most foul disease. Maximinus prevented the death that was nigh
to him from Licinius, by a voluntary death. Maxentius took for him self a
den in the very bottom of the great river Tybris. So in diverse manners the
Tyrants desired to be hid from the sight of the Lamb. Many men from the
lykenes of speaking, do think that these things are to be referred unto the
last day.

But noe man can deny, that these same kinds of speaking are applied of the
Prophets unto other and also unto the last calamityes. And they shall come,
says Isaiah, into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth,
for the fear of the Lord, chap. 2.19. Likewise Hoseah: And they shall s^y to
the Mountains, cover us, and to the hills fall upon us. When yet
nevertheless he speaks there only of the carrying away into Babylon, chap.
10.8. Therefore the likeness of speaking has small force to effect that which
they would have. Moreover neither can the consideration of the time suffer that
interpretation by any means. For seeing the time of the Trumpets and Viol^ is
of long continuance, as we shall show in the things that follow, the sixth
seal must needs be a great way from the last day, especially seeing the first
Trumpet shall not begin to blow, before the seventh seal be opened. This
one thing may be sufficient to convince that strange interpretation.

17 For that day comes: In which the Lamb would do that for the souls which
they desired, ver. 11. would take deserved vengeance on the enemies, would
break the yoke of the Tyrants, would take away the power of assayling with
public persecutions, would set his people at liberty, neither would suffer
them to he vexed any more for a long time, as after chap. 20.2. of any enemy
of this kind. Therefore the Church now could not be withstood by any forces,
that she should not get out of trouble, and obtain the sovereignty of things,
even as the experience of the same times has showed plenteously. Now
therefore we see the wonderful Prophecy of the six Seals, in which have been
disclosed the things of chief moment, from the time of the Revelation given
unto the reign begun by Constantine: surely in so express types and image of
the things to be done, that although peradventure some will accuse the
interpretation of novelty: yet every sincere and equal judge will mervayle
rather, that the same has not ben observed of others before time, the^ refuse
this as strange. If any desire to understand more fully touching the six
Seals, let him read the seven last books of the Ecclesiastical History of
Eusebius, which may well serve him in stead of an ample and sufficint
Commentary.

CHAP. 7.
AFTER that J saw four Angels standing on the four corners of the earth,
holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the
Earth, neither on the Sea, neither on any tree.

2 And I saw an other Angel coming up from the East, having the seal of the
living God, who cried with a loud voice, to the four Angels, to whom power
was given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying,

3 Hurt ye not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, till we have
sealed the servaunts of our God in their foreheads.

4 And J heard the number of them which were sealed: there were sealed an
hundredth an four and forty thousand of all the tribes of the children of
Israel.

5 Of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Ruben,
were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand:

6 Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of Nepthali
we^ sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve
thousand:

7 Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Levi
were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Jssachar were sealed twelve
thousand: of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand:

8 Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of
Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.

9 After these things I beheld, and lo a great multitude, which noe man could
number, of all nations, and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the
Throne, and before the LAMB, clothed with long white robes having Palms in
their hands.

10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation comes of our GOD,
that sits upon the Throne, and from the Lamb.

11 And all the ANGELS stood round about the THRONE, and about the ELDERS and
the four Beasts, and they fell before the Throne on their faces, and
worshipped God.

12 Saying, Amen, praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and power, and
might be unto our God for ever more, Amen.

13 Then spoke to me one of those ELDERS, saying unto me, who are th^se, and
whence came they, which are arrayed with long white robes?

14 And I said unto him, LORD thou know^st. And he said unto me These are they
which come out of great affliction: and have washed their long robes, and have
made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

15 Therefore are they before the throne of God and serve him day and night in
his Temple, and he that sits on the throne will protect them as in a bower.

26 They shall hunger noe more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the
Sun light on them, neither any heat.

27 For the Lamb which is in the mids of the throne, shall feed them, and
lead them unto the lively fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes.


Analysis.
HITHER To that which is proper to the sixth Seal: that which is common
follows, that is to say, a certain general pourtraiture of the whole future
Church, even unto her last end. Which is distinguished into two times: The
first is in which the true worshippers are defined with a certain number, who
are called the sealed by a peculiar name; the occasion of whose sealing are the
four Angels, prepared to show rigor against all men, standing for this
purpose on the four corners of the earth, that they might restrain all
provision of food for salvation ver. 1. Afterward the Minister of sealing, who
exempteth the elect out of the multitude of the destroyed, coming from the
East with full power, and noe less valiantly executing the office committed to
him, forbidding with a loud voice that they should not proceed in their
intent, until he have sealed certain that were to be taken out, ver. 2.3. But
how great the number of the sealed is, it is showed generally, ver. 4.
Specially of what Tribes, and how many of every one, ver. 5.6.7.8. And this
time belongs chifly to the trumpets. The second time is of an infinite and
innumerable multitude: whose citizens ar described partly by those things which
John himself could understand by himself, to wit by the things seen, whence
they were, where they stood, and in what apparel ver. 9. Likewise by the
glorifying of God heard, both of themselves ver. 10. and also of the Angels
consenting to the same ver. 11. and more fully praising God in their behalf
ver. 12. Partly by the instruction of an Elder, whereunto a way is prepared by
a question ver. 13. and a confession of ignorance, in the beginning of the
verse following: afterward a full doctrine is added, which shows that they
came out of great affliction, but that now they are blessed through the
imputation of the righteousness of the Lamb ver. 14. testified by their
constant desire to serve God, and of him again by his defense ver. 15. then
also by an eternal freedom from all evils ver. 16. and last of all by the
fruitio^ of good things ver. 17. And this second time for the most part is of
the Viols.

Scholions.
1 After I saw four Angels: This whole Chapter belongs to the sixth seal,
wherein a new common type is set forth of things that are to be done
afterward. The former was common to all the three periods, chap. 4 This
contains only the two latter, to wit, the Trumpets and Viols. For the Spirit
rejoices for perspicuity and consolation sake, to set before our eyes often
times, certain common figures, both that the things may be more apparent, and
also that the event beheld a far of may recreate the mind, being in
heavines. But when after that isue of the former calamityes, which was spoken
of in the end of the former chapter, the seventh seal should bring in
diverse sorts of troubles, before he comes to declare them, he sets as it
were this table in the sight of all men, in which viewing the future image of
the holy Church, we should know assuredly, that the same can in noe wise be
abolished and clean taken away, howsoever horrible te^pests might seem to
appear and cast down all things to utter destruction. This purpose of the
Holy Ghost being considered, will free us from the great confusion, wherewith
the Interpreters are wont to shuffle together all things, and to cast upon the
most wise distributour of the times, a wrapping and intangling which cannot be
unfolded: which surely if ever elsewhere, it is most of all shunned in this
book, whereby it shall be made manifest, that the Spirit is not a lover of
confusion, but that he alone is the principal author of all right and prudent
dispensation.

Four Angels: These are not the four Angels of the last time, which is yet to
come a little before the end of the world. For their endeavor in holding back
the wind goes a little before the sealing, as the next words make plain. But
they that are sealed must reign a thousand years on earth, and those not
reaching to the end by some ages, as we will show by the help of God at the
twentieth chap. ver. 4. But it grieveth me to contend so often with this
Jesuitical Monster: that I may make short, if every verse almost do not
disprove this exposition, let it obtain what authority it can. More over
neither are these good Angels, when as that which they entreprise pertains
rather to the destruction of souls, then of bodies. Certainly the prohibition
does not altogether take from them the power of hurting, but restrains it
only for a time, till the sealing was finished, which is apparent to have been
done, before that the Trumpets do blow. Wherefore they rush in together with
the Trumpets, being already prepared to bring in trouble, and stayed only with
the let of sealing: as soon as that should be dispatched, they should fly
greedily upon that, from which they would not refrain themselves, unless they
had been constrained. Therefore both they do bring those four mischiefs which are threathed by the four first trumpets, and also unhappy and pernicious
effectors of so sorrowful events. They may be showed by name from those
Trumpets, so that the First may be called Contention, the second, Ambition, the
third Heresy, the fourth, War. These four Angels did take to themselves the
four corners of the earth, each one being ready from their stations to bring in
that mischief, which in the next words is mentioned. For as soon as any
tranquillity appeared, when now Diocletian was driven away, and the other
Tyrants: the Bishops began forthwith to be given exceedingly to privy
discords. What means assayed not Constantine the Great to quench this raising
flame, who appointed a Synod at Rome, and commanded Miltiades and Marcus to
sit in examination of the controversy against Caecilia? But when the Synod was
not able to end the strife, he appointed for chief doer in the same business
Aurelius Bishop of Syracuse: whom together with his fellows in office, he
commanded to go from the City Arles in France, and the matter being heard
again, to set them at one, that were at variance. The counter-writings of
Constantine touching this thing are to be seen in Eusebius. book 10. 5. The
Antichristian ambition sprung up in the times of the Apostles, least we should
think that it failed now in playing her part: But now, says Paul, you know
what lets, that he should be revealed in his time, for the mystery of
iniquity works already. 2 Thessal. 2.6. And surely one would scarce believe,
but that those arrogant boastings of the Chair of Rome, with which the
Decretall Epistles do abound, were forged of the posterity, and afterward to
have bin ascribed falsely to the ancient Fathers, so impudent and vain are
they, unless Firmilianus had proved, that they are their own, at least for a
great part, whose names they bear. For speaking of Stephanus then Bishop of
Rome, He that so boasts, says he, of the place of his Bishoprike, and
avoucheth that he holds succession from Peter, upon whom the foundations of
the Church are set, showing plain enough, how the Bishops then were given to
boasting, among the Epistles of Cyprian, Epist. 75. This same age was famous
by the beginning of the Heresy of Arius, whom we have said to be the third
Angel. Neither was the Northern Barbarousnes, which had brought long ago
the Romans under the yoke, quiet in those times, as may be seen in Eusebius. upon
the life of Constable. book 4. Albeit that in stirring they prevayled not: yet
there wanted not a desire to troble the state, that we may easily now
acknowledge the pro^tnes of these four Angels. And they did in such sort
divide the world among themselves, that Contention did invade with force from
the East; Ambition from the West; Heresy from the South: War from the North:
the chief quarters of the world being so occupied, that the holes out of which
the vital wind should issue, were altogether stopped from the earth, as shall
be made more plain in his place.

Holding the four winds of the earth: We have seen the Angels and their
standings, their endeavor is to take away the wind from the earth: the four,
says John, winds of the earth, which yet is one by nature, but diverse
according to the countries from whence it blows. But this wind is not
properly to be understood, seeing such a calamity has never befallen, albeit
many ages now are past, since this Prophecy was accomplished. For if it were
proper, how should not the stopping up hurt as well the sealed, as the
reprobate, who dwelt together and one with an other? I therefore understand the
wind, to be the force and faculty of the Holy Ghost, whom Christ co^pareth to
the wind, John 3.8. the wind, says he, blows whither it listed, so is
every one that is borne of the Spirit. For as of old that disordered Chaos,
and seed of this our world could not otherwise consist, then as it was
quickened of the Spirit, who moved himself upon the waters, Genesis 1.2. So
neither does this earth nor sea, nor trees come to the feeling of any vital
strength, unless that sanctifying wind does lie upon them, from whose
breathing they do as it were draw their life. It is not indeed in the power
of any creature to restrain the force of the heave^ly Spirit: yet the truth
being stopped, which he used as his chariot, not without cause the passages may
be said to be stopped, whereby he should blow to our good.

That the wind should not blow upon the earth, nor upon the sea etc. Now the
things are reckoned up, from which they would had restrained the wind: to
wit, from the Earth, the Sea, the Trees. The Earth before, were the Heathen
Nations, as chap. 6.4.15. Afterward it seems to signify always, not men wholly
repugnant to the name of Christ, but the common sort, and mixed company of the
corrupt Church, which has succeeded in the place of the Gentiles, as chap.
8.13. and 12.9.12.13.16. and 13.11. etc. The Sea signifies, the doctrine,
sometime true, and then it is placed before the Throne within the co^pas of the
Elders, where it is of glass, and like to Crystal, most clear and most
pure, as chap. 4.6. More often it is brought to show false doctrine, in which
sense, it rests and is quiet as in his channel, in the bosom and embracing
of this earth, which it does fasten together with his humidity, though gross
and brinish, through secret passages, least being by nature easy to be reduced
in powder, and not cleaving together, it should be dissolved through her
atidity. For unless there were some band of consent among the counterfeit
citizens, even the wicked assemblyes could not stand. The trees we
understa^de to be me^ from chapter 9.4. where co^ma^deme^t is give^ to the Locusts,
that they should not hurt any tree, but only the me^ that have not the seal of
God in their foreheads. Now the exception is always of the same kind, of which
that is, from whence the exception is made: and therefore when as men are
excepted, it must needs be that the trees also are men: not indeed of the
basest sort, and condition, but who show themselves above others with their
high dignityes, and lift up their heads among the rest, being more famous in
the Christian Assemblyes. But if the Angels would have hurt only this earth,
sea and trees, why was there not free leave granted them? Because in that vile
heap many of the elect lay hidden, who were to be provided for: for their
sakes the Angel from the East would have the confused multitude to be spared,
neither any hurt to be done to any, until order was taken for them for whom it
was necessary. The wicked gain the deferring of punishment for those few
good, whom they have dwelling among the^. And I saw an other Angel which was
come up from the East: in greek which did ascend: some copyes do read coming
up: the Hebrews figuratively do take these words to ascend and descend,
for to depart, to go forth, to go, to return, as he went up from Jerusalem,
that is, he returned and left of to assault it, 2. King. 12.18. But it is well
joined with the rising of the Sun, because the Sun seems to ascend from
the East, until he be come to the mids of heaven. The first occasion of
sealing being declared, there is now described by what Minister it was done.
Whom both the respect of the time and all circunstances do prove to have been
Constantine the Great. He succeeded in the Empire, after that the Lamb had
thrust out Diocletian, and the other Jdolatrous Tyrants. But he came up from
the rising of the Sun, having come from the Eastern countries to receive the
Empire. For being a young man he served in war under Diocletian in Syria. But
after his virtue had procured him envy, so as often through secret trecheries he
was in peril of his life, he was compelled to get himself out of the East as
speedily as he could: and to go to his Father. So Eusebius writes he was
provoked to flight for his safety: in the life of Constantin orat. 1. Zonaras
says that he was given of his father for an hostage to Galerius, of whom when
he saw that he was hated through envy, and that in the battle at Sarmatia he
was cast forth of set purpose to danger, and again for the same intent
commanded to fight with a Lion (both which battles he executed with good
success) by flight at length he escaped away to his Father: and together also
by these means avoided the danger and obtained his Fathers Empire, the seat
whereof afterward he placed at Bizantium. Therefore whether we respect his
first return from the East, or mind the decrees which after the Empire was
established, touching the worshipping of the true God by Christ, did fly often
from thence into that part of the world that was under Rome: the History
agrees very well with the Prophecy: but that former seems to come nigher to
the meaning of the Holy Ghost, because of those things that follow.

Having the Seal of the living God: Both himself instructed in the true
knowledge of God, and endued with very great authority to spread abroad the
same unto others: whom while by his own exemple and zeal he provoked to
embrace the truth, he is said to mark them with the seal of the living God
and to take them for Gods chief treasure. He cried with a loud voice,
promoting the truth by Edicts published, removing far of to his power, all
that which might hinder the amplifying of it. He did repress for a time,
according as it was appointed of God, those four Furies of H^ll which were
prepared to hurt, whereof we have heard at the first verse. He restreined the
Ambition of other men, by his own majesty. How great labor did he take to
pull up by the roots all contentions, who esteemed nothing more excellent then
to seat peace among the Bishops that were at variance? Moreover in the very
Nicene Council, he cast into the fire bills given to him, wherein the Bishops
accused one another, adding this one thing, Christ commands that our brother
should be forgiven, who desires to obtain forgivenes, Socr. book 1.7. By
which moderation, albeit that he could not pull up the root of bitterness from
these co^te^tious men, yet he brought to pass, that the branches could not
burst forth so plentifully as they otherwise would. The Arian madness he bound
with fetters of Brass cunningly wrought at Nice as speaks Evagrius book
1.1. He overcame in many battles the Sarmatians, and the Goths, and almost all
the nation of the Scythians: so as they durst attempt nothing afterward for
some long time. This was that voice which revoked the Angels from their
entreprise, until that should be performed which would be for the good of the
elect.

3 Saying, hurt not the earth etc. until we have sealed; until is an adverbe
of time most commonly: some time of place, as (...). etc. Xenoph. Cyrop. 5.
Whither does this latter agree better here, that they should work their
purpose only within certain bounds, that they should not enter into the
bounds of the godly? If they must have absteined from hurting, while all were
sealed, it seems they must have stayed until many ages, much more beyond the
time of Constantine. The sealed that are mentioned in the first trumpet, chap.
9.4. were not yet borne, when Constantine reigned: much less they, of whom
there is mention made cha. 14.1. Which things seem to make against the
signification of time: but neither is there an easy reason of the place. For it
is no where read that all the elect were gathered together and shut up in any
one country, as in old time the Israelites in Goshen, where they should be free
from the common evils. It remains then, that we understande it figuratively:
so as till we have sealed, is all one as if he should say, till we have laid
those foundations, by which both the elect now living may be Gods own, carrying
upon them his mark, whereof also the foot steps may remain unto the
posterity by continual succession. So as he may be said to seal all, who was
only the beginner of sea^^ng. But he sealed, proposing before the elect a
pattern of sound doctrine, chiefly in the Nicene Council, laboring that the
pure^^s of the truth might be defended against the fraud of Arius and other
wicked men: whereby the faithful might acknowledge one true God, and his only
e^ernall and coessentiall Son Jesus Christ, in whom they should put all the
hope of their salvation: which after in chap. 14.1. is said to have the name of
the L^mbe and his fathers name written on their foreheads, least peradventure
any Jesuit may dream, that he speaks hereof the sign of the cross. We
must observe furthermore, that sealing is always of a few among many. For it is
a saving of labor to leave the greater multitude without a mark, and to
distinguish by some token the fewer number. These things therefore prove,
that howsoever the Church flourished outwardly in very great glory, when
Constantine enjoyed the sovereignty, yet in the mean time had a very sm^ll
number of true godly men. Which we ought to remember carefully, that we may
understand more easily those things, which in more words are spoken touching
this matter, in the repetitio^ of the same time, chap. 11.1.2. and 12.6. etc.

Jn their foreheades: The true worshippers are marked in the foreheads, openly
showing their faith: for with the mouth confession is made unto salvation, Romans
10.10. Its all one to Antichrist if his slaves do receive his mark in their
hand: which according to the occasion, they may either shut or open, chap.
13.16. For he permits all manner of counterfaiting to them that are his, so
that it may help any thing to the enlarging of his Kingdom.

4 And I heard the number of the sealed; Such then was the cause of sealing:
now he comes to the general number of the sealed. Ar^tas will have to be
signified in this number of an hundred forty and four thousand, that every
one of the Apostles multiplied his talent twelve times. Certainly the diligence
of the holy man is much to be commended, who thought nothing in this book so
small, which might not be worthy of searching out, and of which it should not
be lawful to seek out a reison soberly, so that the analogy of sound
doctrine be kept always. But when I consider diligently in my mind this whole
second periode, of which these sealed are, the Spirit seems to have chosen
out most divinely that number, which may represente before our eyes a lively
image and pourtraiture of the Church of the same age and time. The number is
long, and indeed of an huge length, but of a lesser breadth by a thousand
proportion; teaching, as it seems to me, and as it has been found true by the
event, that the present true Church for all that space of time should be very
slender, narrow, obscure, and scarce perceivable, such as in this proportion
is a long figure: and that the dignity of it is not at all to be esteemed from
the present amplitude, but from the length only, that is, by the during and
continuation of time, in whose long space, a sufficient number of the elect
should be gathered together. For example, let there be drawn a Geometrical
figure, whose lines are in every part alike distant one from another, whose
shorter side is one foot long, divided into twelve parts: the other side a
thousand feet long, whose void space contains this number: surely the
figure shall seem to be almost of noe breadth, but the sides being severed by
so small a distance, will make a certain show of lines coincident and meeting
together. Such should this Church be, whose longer side, the number of twelve
thousand out of every Tribe does make: the shorter side, that small number of
twelve, which is of the Tribes. Learned and good men will easily acknowledge
what I mean: and if any thing shall be wanting in my conjecture, they will
rather add of their own, whereby it may level the righter at the mark, then
blame me for my paines-taking. Doubtless there is so great a consent of the
History, that the conjecture is to me more then probable. But let the other
brethren judge of it, to which I submit this and all the rest of my writings.
But yet this whole number was not sealed at once and together, in the time that
Constantine lives on the earth, but figuratively one part is here put for the
whole, upon whose first fruits only the mark was set, whereas the rest in
course of time should be sealed, every one according to the consideration of
their age, as we said at the former verse.

Of all the Tribes of the Sons of Jsraell: Are these then natural Jews, or
are they not also Gentiles, adopted Israelites? as in the Romans 2.28. For he is
not a Jew, who is one outward, but which is one inward. Also, ye know that
they which are of the faith, are the children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. And again,
peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16.
Therefore the name is common as well to the Gentiles as to the Jews. Neither
will the consideration of the time suffer that the natural Jews should here
be signified.

This sealing was begun by and by after the tyranny of DIOCLETIAN was utterly
abolished, as we have showed before. And to this number only is ability given
to learn the New Song, as we shall see in the foureteenth chapter and at
the third verse. Which in these times was not proper to the Jews, neither ever
shall be.

But if this concerning the time shall not be granted me, and if this sealing
is to be expected a little before the end of the world, as the Jesuit will
have it, how shall, after the sealing of the Jews, as he judged, an other
infinite number come to the Church, as is taught in this chap. ver. 9. seeing
that the Jews shall not be called, before that the fulness of the Gentiles be
come in, Romans 11.25. Furthermore it shall belong only to the sealed to learn
the sunge, but if the Jews alone shall be sealed, at whatsoever time at length
it be done, what shall become of your most holy Rome, and Christ's Vicar, who
shall have noe place among the sealed? But we will deliver the most blessed
Father of this fear. This described form of the primitive Church
comprehends both those sorts of people indifferently, so as they all, as well
of Gentiles, as of the Jews, who love the sincere truth in their heart,
shall be found in this number of the sealed. And indeed the writers do make
mention, that some of the Jews came to the Church in those times: but let them
be Jews, they shall not be Israelites alone, since the stop of the partition
wall is broken.

5 Of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand: Hitherto the general sum, now are
reckened the particular companies, of which that whole is made. In which these
things are to be observed, first, that there is an equal number out of every
tribe. For God bears good will alike to all the elect: neither has any just
cause of complaining, that more respect was had of others, them of him.
Secondly, that some of the ancient tribes are passed over, and that new are
put in their places: For there is no mention made of Dan or Ephraim, but in
place of them come Levi and Joseph. Some allege this cause, why Dan is
omitted, for that Antichrist should arise out of that tribe. What lets then,
that there should not be two Antichrists, seeing the name also of Ephraim is
omitted? Surely the distinction of the tribes would had bin very profitable to
discern Antichrist from other men, which God undoubtedly would have kept entire
and safe, that his Church might beware of him, if he would have had this enemy
to come out of this nation. But the true cause of passing by them seems to be
this, that the tribe of Dan in time past revolted to the Gentiles: and Ephraim
was the causer of the rest to rent the Kingdom, and persuader to institute a
new worship, whereby the ten tribes fell away from God: for Jeroboam was an
Ephratite. I King. 11.26. Wherefore neither does he mention him, but asce^deth
unto the first Patriarche, teaching that the names of the wicked shall be blotted
out of the book and cathalogue of the living, as we have observed at chap.
3.5. Thirdly, that in the rehearsing there is noe order kept, either of
beginning or dignity. And yet the names are not rashly gathered together ( as
leaves flying in the hollow rock of Sybille) although peradventure it will be
a very heard thing to find out any reason, why they are set down in this
wise: yet nevertheless let us assay to do it, trusting in God his help. The
countries do seem unto me to be noted, from which God would gather out his
elect, in all this space of time when the Church lay hid, and would severe
them from the vile and naughty persons of the world, in the same order of
places, wherein the Tribes of the Israelites long ago took up their seats
in the promised land: to wit in this manner, that Juda should signify the
Southern part of the Church: Ruben and Gad the Eastern: Ascher and Nephtalim
the Northern, and the west part: Manasse partly the Eastern, partly the
Western, who dwelt on this side and beyond Jordan: Symeon and Levi that part
which was spread here and there and one with another: Issachar and Zabulon, the
Northeast part, to wit the Sun raising: Joseph and Benjamin the middle
countries. For we shall see that after Constantine was dead, there was such a
wandering progress, as it were, of the Church. For in the first times her
purest part seems to have been in Africa, as it were in the Tribe of Judah: the
which most of all then was free from the Arian Heresy, thoug brought forth by
Aegypte next neighbor: and in the mean time infinite uncleanness had
overflowed the rest of the world. And this purity continued from Constantine,
till the invasion of the Vandals. Then Reuben and Gad succeeded; For when that
barbarous people pestered the whole West and South, that which rested of the
hope and face of the Church, did all flourish in the East. But when the
Saracenes at length destroyed also this vinyarde, our Britanny and the
Northern regions, lying toward the west, as Asher and Nephtalim flourished
greatly: when more then two thousand Monks of Bangor refused to take upon them
the Romish yoke: for which cause the Britans did undergo a grievous
persecution, raised up by one Augustine a Romish Monk. The sequent age gave
Manasse, partly the East, partly the West, when both Leo Isaurus, and also
Carolus Magnus with joint endeavors though somewhat disioyned in respect of
places and times, assembling Councels condemned worshipping of Images. The next
times were most miserable, when now Antichrist was come to his highest power
and dignity. Now the truth did lie so trampled under foot every where, that
the Church could not be seen in any certain places of abiding: but the sealed,
as Simeon and Levi did lie hid confusedly, and here and there, known to God
only, removed far from the sight of the world. In the ages following after,
the seal passed over unto Issachar and Zabulon, that is, to the Northern
people, lying toward the Sun raising. For there are read famous conversions
in this time of the Polonians, Saxone, Danes, Suevians, and Norwegians. And
although the conversions came by the labor of superstitious men, yet
nevertheless is was the seal of God and profitable to his elect. For where
the doctrine is corrupt and contaminate with errors, there the grass is
better then the stalk: the seed new sown is purer the^ the greenness waxing
to an herb For they that are first converted, do hear only of faith and
the way of salvation by Christ, but waxing more grown, they are wont to be
corrupted and marred by the superstitions of their teachers. Last of all, the
end now of those that were to be sealed approaching, true citizens were chosen
out from the middle regions, as it were out of the Tribes of Benjamin and
Joseph. For about the year a thousand two hundredth arose the Waldenses at Lion
in France, who making separation from the Church of Rome, professed a more
pure doctrine, with the loss of their riches and lives. From hence did spring
the Albingenses about the city of Toulouse, who afterward were spread through
all Germany and Bohemia, whose lot did not f^ll neither about the furthest
South, nor to the utmost North part of the world: but a middle place of
dwelling was given them among their brethren. I run over these things
briefly, rather dis^losing, then thoroughly handling the matter: but they that
plainly perceive the History, from these few things, I know, will admire
and reverence the mervailous wisdom of God together with me.

9 Afterward I beheld, and lo a great multitude, which noe man could number:
We have spoken of the sealed, and comprehended them in a certain number: the
indefinite multitude can neither be declared by the number, neither is said to
be sealed: not that any of the elect and perteining to the king dome of God, is
in the mean while without the seal (for this is necessary to every one of the
faithful) as though there were a way opened for any man to go to heaven
without faith, as a certain great man of blessed memory, seems to
interpret, moved of a good affection, but not very warily nor truly: but
because by reason of the huge multitude, which should profess Christ openly
and syncerely, there should be noe need of a privy mark of distinction,
whereby they might be discerned from other men. For sealing belongs to the
Church lying hid, when a disordered multitude of superstitious and wicked men
bears sway, in which there are a few good men, known to God, and regarded of
him, as in Ezech. 9.2.3. but where the godly worshippers are sufficiently
manifest in their number and multitude, there is no use of this sealing. These
things therefore teach, that after that darkness, wherewith for a time the
Church should be oppressed, it should rise up again at length into the light,
furnished with very great multitude of true Christians, which out of all
nations should embrace the truth, and profess the same openly and without
fear. And this plentiful harvest began about the year 1300. at which time
the sealing ceased. Not that this huge multitude was apparent so suddenly at
once: but because the first fruits were brought forth, with which continual
increase a^ length should yield this great company not to be numbered, as we
have shew^d in his place.

Of all nations: not by every Tribe, as before, out of certain separated
cou^tryes, but from all in common, Germany, France, Britannie, Italy etc.
For he alludeth to to the ancient manner of the Church. As long as the time of
sealing remained, the elect were few, as in time past the Israelites, while
they alone were the chief treasure of God above all nations of the world; but
after that time was ended, then true Christians were in greater number. as also
the former people of God, was increased very greatly, when the Gentiles were
taken into the Church. Surely this repairing should be like to the first
calling of the Gentiles: even as we know it came to pass after the Waldenses
and Albingenses, when many learned and faithful men rose up, who defending the
truth boldly, gathered together many lovers of true godliness.

And they stood before the Throne: gathered into the Church, and acknowledging
Christ truly as chap. 4.3.4. etc.

Clothed with white robes: see chap. 3.4. and 6.11.

And Palms in their hands: which cannot yield under any burden. A fit mark
of them who at length do lift up their heads, against the wills of all their
enemies. They should get the victory of Antichrist, which afterward is said to
get the victory of the Beast, and of his image, and of his mark, chap. 15.2.
By this one word he notes their fight and triumph.

10 And they cried with a loud voice: word for word, and crying, and so the
verb were must be understoode. Also the participle is put collectively with
the nowne multitude, as before the participle, standing. The great admiration
of Gods bounteousnes in restoring his Church should draw from the Saints
crying and showting for joy, who should not hold it sufficient to acknowledge
the exceeding mercy of God with their accustomed voice. Al though that crying
may signify also a bold profession of the truth, which durst scarce mutter in
former ages: but at length should despise the enemies and obtain perfect
boldness. We and our Fathers have seen with our eyes this thing brought to
pass. There is no man which has tasted of true godliness, but he gives God
thanks from his heart, for the light of his truth restored in these last
times. And although the Romish Antich. does gnashe his teeth together for
a^ger, yet we cesse not to praise boldly the great name of G. so as the world
ringeth with the saints voices. And why should not we as joyful victours cry
a loud, who have palms in our hands, and by the grace of God the necks of
our enemies put under our feet?

God grant that we may extol him always with meet praises for his infinite
goodness, least making small account of so unmeasurable grace, we bring upon
our selves some lamentable trouble, whereby the joy of our triumph may be
distained.

11 And all the Angels stood: see chap. 5.11. The ancient mirth of the Church
shall return, at which the Angels shall be glad, both themselves consenting to
the joyful showting of the Saints, and also lauding God apart in their
behalf.

12 And power and might: that is, let the praise of power and might be given un
to him. For God shows a mervaylous power in delivering his Church. The
Saints indeed do bear Palms, but the victory is gotten by the strength of
God alone. How merciful is our God, who will have the pains to be his in
consuming the enemies, and the triumph to be ours?

13 They which are arrayed in long robes. Hitherto this multitude was described
by those things which may be perceaved by the sense: now he comes to the more
perfect instruction by communing with an Elder. And first he convinced John of
ignorance, whereby the knowledge received might be the more acceptable: together
also teaching, that the faithful people, whose person John now represents,
shall be as ignorant of the truth of this type, when the time of fulfilling it
shall come, as John in this place, until they be taught of the learned
Ministers, after which sort John is here instructed of the Elder. Nevertheless
it shall appear from those things, which follow, that the Elder demanded not
of the general innumerable multitude, but of one certain kind contained in
that great company. Who yet all are in one apparel, and rejoice in one name,
because they shall cleave one to another both in consent to the same truth,
and also by a continual ioining together of the times, who also shall at
length be partakers of the same glory.

14 Thou know: As though he should say, I know not, thou know. Wherefore
this company is not the same. which he saw lying under the altar, chap. 6.9.
etc. For in that place he understood that they were killed for the word of God,
neither had he any need to be taught again: but as it is a new troop of the
godly, whom by his ignorance he declared should be unknown to the world,
suspecting nothing less.

These are they which came out of great tribulation: The Elder did ask two
things, Who are these and whence came they: John is ignorant of both of the^.
The Elder therefore teaches him: but answering only to one, that is to say,
whence they came: which yet also should disclose the men themselves. It was
indeed a great affliction, which the Church suffered under Antichrist, that
whole time, wherein the faithful were known only by the mark printed on
them: and not that only, but also some ages after, as it shall be made manifest
afterward. Yet I do not think that this is meant in this place, but that it
is called Great for excellency sake, for the greatest of all that ever was
since the world was made. Which surely Moses will tell us of in his so^g in
these words: For fire was kindled in my wrath, which shall burn even unto the
bottom of the grave, and shall consume the earth and her increase, and set on
fire the foundations of the mountains. Upon the consumed for hunger, and
wasted with scab, and bitter pestilence, I will send also the teeth of beasts,
with the venom of serpents of the earth. The sword shall kill without, and in
the chambers fear, both the young man and the young woman, the suckling with
the gray headed, Deuteronomy. 32.22 Moses sung that these evils should come upon the
Jews, for their falling away from God. Which albeit they strike a certain
horror into men, even by the words rehearsed, yet they scarce touch the least
part of those calamityes, wherewith the most wretched nation is wasted by the
space of a thou sand six hundred years, even to this very day: which times I
doubt not but Moses has showed in those words, that I may put you in mind of
this by the way. Who can number by counting, how great evils those ancient
Jews, who killed the Lord of life, and defiled their hands with the blood of
the Apostles, suffered in the destruction of the city? Noe History shows that
there was ever made so horrible a slaughter. The enemy him self refrained not
from tears, acknowledging the strange murders beyond the cruelty of any war.
You might think that the whole nation was here destroyed utterly, especially,
when they who were left in that utter ruin, were sold to be slaves, were
thrown to the wild Beasts, were made mocking stocks in the theaters: finally
were not exempted from death, but reserved unto torment. Indeed a few years
after it seemed to have been revived, but it was to endure new calamityes, like
as in the Comedy, the heart of Prometheus being eaten, was restored often
times. For Hadrian killing again this people most miserably, forbade them
their native soil, and dispersed them into all quarters of the world. Since
that time they are dispersed, vacabondes, banished from their own country and
land, wandering through the whole world: without Governor, without God for a
King: yea, that I may use the words of Terlullian in his Apologet. to who^ it
is not so much permitted, as that according to the right of strangers they may
salute their Fathers land with their feet. There was never noe calamity of any
people, either for the kind of punishment so grievous, or for the length of
time of such continuance: there has not ben any spectacle so clear of God
being offended: not any so fearful exemple of his eternal wrath. Neither yet
should there belesse trouble a little before that time, when God shall give an
end to this so long misery. At that time, says Daniell, when there shall be a
time of trouble, such as has not ben, since it was anation, even unto that
time: which, that it is to be understood of the last sharp assault before the
full restoring of the nation, we shall sometime show more clearly, if God
will. Therefore whether we respect the present casting of of this people, or
that future calamity, at their receiving again into grace, this great
affliction is proper to the Jews, who together with the remnants of the
Gentiles, being revived after the tyranny of Antichrist, and with them which
shall then first open their eyes to see the truth, shall make that great
company, which noe man could number, ver. 9. These things are confirmed from
that happiness, which follows in the next words, which pertains to this
present life on earth, and not to that future in the Heavens, the sound
fruition whereof shall not come, before that there be made one sheepfolde, the
elect Jews being chosen into one Christian people, as we shall show at chap.
21.22. From which it is now manifest, seeing that this indefinite number is
made partly of the Gentiles, partly of the Jews, whose calling ought to be
expected a long time after that sealing, which was spoken of before, that
those definite and sealed ones were not Jews. Furthermore sound peace and all
perfect happiness shall follow the calling of the Jews, as in the next words
it is declared briefly, but more largely at chap. 21. and 22. But when the
sealing was finished, there remained yet much of that great affliction. All
which shall more appear in the things that follow.

And have washed their long robes: At length being converted by faith unto
Christ, and clothed with the imputation of his only righteousness and holiness.

15 Therefore they are before the Throne: as before in ver. 9. chosen into the
Church, and gathered into the assembly of the faithful.

Day and night: without ceasing. For then the fallings away shall be ended, and
they shall cleave constantly to God, even to the last end.

Jn his Temple: Yet there shall be noe Temple there, as chap. 21.22. But in that
place is understood the abolishing of the ceremonies, which they shall regard
no more for the worshipping of God thereby: here is a pilgrimage yet on earth
from the Lord, where we have need of the coming between of outward means for
to worship him: of which there shall be noe use in the heavens.

They shall hunger no more: They shall want nothing, neither shall any
adversity trouble them, which is signified by hunger and thirst; moreover also
all causes of calamityes shall be driven far away: the Su^ne shall not burn
them, neither shall there be any heat, which shall bring scarsity: the whole
creature shall consent to further the happiness of the holy people. Here the
things are set before us in few words for a taste, which shall be declared more
at large afterward.

17 For the Lamb that is in the mids of the Throne shall govern them. Now
the cause is rehearsed of the former happiness, to every part of which it is
distributed conveniently; shall govern, answers to those words, shall not
hunger: shall lead them to the lively fountains of waters, respects the
thirst, which he said should be sufferred no more: and shall wipe away all
tears, has regard to the heat of the Sun, which he promises shall not be
trobelsome afterward.

From their eyes: The tears falling from the eyes. Montanus has (...), as it
were abiding in the eyes: as if God by drying thoroughly the eyes, should leave
no faculty to weep. Isayah, the tears from all faces, chapter 25.8. So then is
the common type, while the trumpets and viols endure, that is even to the last
end. About the beginning and proceeding of the Trumpets, the number of the
elect should be sealed: about the end there should be a more joyful, more
plentiful, and more evident multitude, which afterward under the viols
increasing every day, at length should have their brethren the Jews joined
together with themselves, when there shall be a full happiness at last, so great
as can be expected on earth, which shall not be discontinued again by any
general miseries of the times, until Christ himself shall come to judgment.
This common type is to be declared by every member in those things that are
behind, according to the several mutations, and notable events, that shall
happen this whose space.

CHAP. 8.
AND when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about
half an hour.

2 And I saw the seven Angels which stood before God, and to them were given
seven trumpets.

3 Then another Angel came, and stood before the altar, having a golden
censer, and much odours were given unto him, that he should offer with the
prayers of all the Saints upon the golden altar, which is before the throne.

4 And the smoke of the odours with the prayers of the Saints went up before
God, out of the Angels hand.

5 Afterward the Angel took the censer and filled it with fire of the altar,
and cast it into the earth, and there were voices, and thundrings, and
lightnings, and an earthquake.

6 And the seven Angels, which had the seven Trumpets, prepared themselves to
blow the trumpets.

7 So the first Angel blew the trumpet, and there was hail and fire mingled
with blood, and they were cast into the earth, and the third part of the earth
was burnt, and the third part of the trees was burnt, and all the green grass
was burnt.

8 And the second Angel blewe the trumpet, and as it were a great mountain
burning with fire, was cast into the sea, and the third part of the sea became
blood.

9 And the third part of the creatures, which are in the sea, the livings
things I say dyed and the third part of the ships were destroyed.

10 Then the third Angel blew, and a great star fell from heaven, burning as
a torche, and it fell into the third part of the rivers, and into the
fountains of waters.

11 And the name of the star is called wormwood, therefore the third part of
the waters was turned into wormwood; and many men dyed of the waters, because
they were made bitter.

12 Afterward the fourth Angel blewe the trumpet, and the third part of the
Sun was smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the
stars, so that the third part of them was darkened, and the third part of the
day was darkened, and likewise of the night.

13 And I beheld and heard one Angel flying through the mids of heaven,
saying with a loud voice, woe, woe, woe to the inhabitans of the earth,
because of the soundes to come of the trumpet of the three Angels, which shall
blow.


Analysis.
THE common type being declared, the Silence, which is proper to the seventh
seal remains. Which, of what it is, is declared in the first ver. Afterward
he proceeds to the following period of the trumpets, which is comprehended in
the compass of this, and is distinguished into seven trumpets: the
preparation of which is double, common, and special: that, consists first in
the seven Angels, furnished with so many trumpets, ver. 2. Afterward in one
other Angel, who executes the office of the High Priest, as it appears from
the furniture, in respect both of the instrument and end, ver. 3. and also of
his ministry toward the elect, ver. 4. and against the enemies, partly by
casting fire into the earth, partly in raising up from thence voices and
thundrings and great perturbation, ver. 5. The special preparation is of the
seven Angels making themselves ready unto the business appointed to them. The
Execution also has likewise some thing common, to wit, a warning by the blowing
of the trumpets: and also something special, even the proper effect of every
blowing of the trumpet: which is distributed in the four first lighter, and
the last three, heavier. They are handled in the rest of the chapter, by their
distinct articles. At the first blowing of the trumpet, there was hayle and
fire, ver. 7. At the second, a burning mountain is cast into the sea, ver. 8.
At the third, a star fell from heaven into the rivers, ver. 10.11. At the
fourth the third part of the sun was smitten, ver. 12. As touching the three
last more grievous trumpets, the preparation common to them is had in ver. 13.
where the Angel flying through the mids of heaven, denounces with a
mourning voice more horrible calamityes from them following.

Scholions.
1 But when he had opened the seventh seal: Such then is the sixth: the
seve^th seal follows, whose effect, which proceeds from the opening, is
called Silence, which sometime is used for any resting, as why are ye silent
in bringing home the King, that is, why do ye rest, 2 Samuel 10.11. Sometime it
is opposed unto tumulte, from whence, the still waves of the waters, Psalm.
107.29. Of which sort is this silence made in Heaven, that is, in the Church
on earth, which often times is called of Christ the Kingdom of Heaven. The
space of this silence is about half an hour, surely very shorth, which should
almost end as soon as it should begin. In which is taught, that the Church
afterward shall enjoy for a small time happy rest, after that the open enemies
should be driven away, and that confortable Angel Constantine the great, should
arise from the East. For this silence is joined together with that subduing of
the cruel enemies, wherewith the sixth chapter was concluded. For the common
type, of which sort was the whole seventh chapter, does not interrupt the
order of things. And indeed such quiet days followed by and by after those
trumpets. For Maxentius being overcome at Rome by Constantine, and Maxentius in
the East by Licinius, how glad a day appeared to the Church through the whole
world? How great delectation, how great joy, how great triumph was there of
all degrees? How pleasant was it that the prisons were opened, that men were
called back from the mines, that their feet were loosed from bounds, that
their necks were delivered from the axe? Neither only to have these things,
but also an Emperor, of which never any man before did so much as dream, who
endeavored exceedingly to adorn by all means that he could, every one of the
meanest that was named a Christian. Eusebius triumphed not without cause,
singing with the words of the Psalmist, Go to, see ye the works of Iehova,
how he makes desolatio^s in the earth, causing wars to cease unto the end
of the earth, how he breaks the bow, and cutteth in pieces the spear, he
burns the chariots with fire, book 10. 1. Now both the Augustes, as well
Licinius as Constantinus, with one mind did procure diligently, not only the
peace of the Church, but also the ornaments of peace, as it is apparent from
the Decrees published in the name of them both, Eusebius. book 10. chap. 5. etc.
But this was a short peace, and in very deed but of half an hour
continuance. For first, the Augustes themselves were at concord scarce one
three years space: afterward, when they were reconciled, Licinius assaileth
openly the Christians, and attempteth a general slaughter. There came more
over civil war, which waxed fierce among the rulers of the Church, the
Bishops themselves: who being void of all fear of the common enemy, did fall
one upon an other with the weapons of words, as if they had been weary of
peace, even as soon as they had tasted the sweetness of it with the top of their
lips. See Aurelius Victor of Caesar. part 2. Eusebius. book 10. 8. 9. and upon
the life of Constantine book 1. to the end and beginning of the second.
Furthermore those things which we have noted before at the first verse of the
seventh chapter.

2 And I saw those seven Angels: Such has been the Silence, from which at
length proceeds the second periode, distinguished from the former, because
the entrance into this, began not but at the end of the seals. For shall the
Tru^pets be aunswerable to the Seals, which are brought to their last end,
before the Trumpets be prepared to sound?

More over take away the TRVMPETS from this seven Seal, that which we leave
unto it beside and above the Silence of half an hour, is a certain small
thing, and more slender and baren, then beseems the dignity of it.

I see that such an opinion has pleased some learned and Godly men, but he
that shall mark and observe the thing diligently, shall perceave, that the
same is quite contrary to the method of the REVELATION. The Heralds of this
Periode are the seven Angels Trumpeters: The words themselves do not show
plainly whether these Angels were good or not They are said to stand before
GOD: but this is a doubtful kind of speaking, in so much as it may be
attributed as to the evil, so to the good Angels: and therefore it is said
that SATAN presented himself together with the Sons of GOD, before the Lord:
as we read in the Book of Job first chap. ver. 6.

But the proportion of the BEASTS in the Seals, and of the seven ANGELS
Ministers of the Viols, every one of which was clothed with Pure Linen, as we
shall see in the fifteenth chapter of this book and at the sixth verse, may
cause us to esteem and judge these Trumpeters in the same number of Holy ones:
especially seeing that the article, those seven ANGELS, has also the force of
nothing some that were known: of which we had none before, unless the finger
be pointed unto those seven SPIRITS of God, sent forth into all the world, of
which we have seen in the fifth Chapter and at the sixth verse. We said that
the four ANGELS of the seventh Chapter are the four first Trmmpets, but we
mean not the TRVMPETERS themselves, but the events which followed when they
blew those their Trumpets.

But the parts of this Periode are distinguished by Trumpets, because these
events should be more notable, more famous and manifest to all men, and as it
were sung with the public and loud voice of a Trumpet In receaving of which,
there is a certain preparation before they begin the work it self, because
by and by after the silence made, there should be given some token of the
troubles to come, before the rage should wax hot and be kindled. To which is
to be referred that Schime between Cecilianus and Donatus of Afrike, of which
we made mention before: the Apostasy of Licinius, and his wicked entreprise
against the Church. The Contention in the East touching the Lords Supper or
Passover: But especially the infection of the Arian Heresy, the which as soon
as it sprung up, began to spread quickly far and near, and to kindle so great
close and secret hatreds, that neither the scorning of the enemies on the
theaters, nor the most earnest desire of the EMPEROVR himself testified both
by his letters and tears, and also by the Embassage of Holsius Cordubensis a
most famous old man, could not avayle any thing at all to quench the flame: for
this see the second book of Eusebius, upon the life of Constantine, in his
letters to ALEXANDER and Arius. All these things as Trumpets, were given in
the sight of all men, as b^ing indeed sorrowful presagies of the future
blowing of the Trumpets.

3 Then an other Angel came: Hitherto the preparation of the seven ANGELS;
Now follows what manner of entrance was made to the events following in one
ANGEL: Whom we may not suppose to be any Spiritual substance, such as are the
ANGELS properly so called, that is to say GABRIEL, or any of that sort, as the
Jesuit would have it, but a Man, according as this Book of the Revelation is
wont to speak, in the which there is nothing more common and ordinary, then to
give and attribute the name of an Angel, unto Men.

Furthermore this heaven is the Holy Church on earth: the Altar the more inward
holy place of the same, the Ministry of the High Priest, which the Angels
properly so called do never execute: but the truth of which belongs only
to Christ, the type unto men only, who have a nature fit for sacrifice, about
which thing the office of the Priest is chiefly occupied: of which nature
seeing the Angels are void, neither can they represente the Priest. Neither
any where in the scriptures are these duties attributed to them. Furthermore
the ministry was done before the throne, where there is noe place for the
Angels, but in the compass of the throne: and of the Elders, and of the
Beasts: that is to say, they compass about the uttermost circuit of the
Church, watching on every side for the safety of it: whatsoever is within the
circuit, is the Highest Throne, the Lamb, the Beasts, the La^pes, the
Crystal sea, the Altar etc. of which things there is a necessary use in the
congregation of the faithful. I doubt not but that this Angel is the same,
which in the former chapter was said to ascend from the rising of the Sun,
to wit, Constantine the Great. For that which there summarily kept the Angels
from hurting until they had sealed the elect, that seems in this place to be
declared severally in what manner it was done. Neither does any thing let but
that the same man may be described in diverse manners, according to the diverse
nature of the things that are to be done.

And he stood before the Altar, the Greek has, at the Altar, Montanus
agrees unto it. Afterward it shall be clearly seen at chap. 11.1. that the
Church about this time was gone into the Temple, and had hidden her self in
the privy places thereof: wherefore not without cause he is said to stand
before the Altar, seeing he was the chief of them, who having escaped from the
corruptions of the world, went a part from other into the covert of the Temple.
But he stood not in this place as one of the common sort of the faithful,
but in the ornament of the Priest, having a golden Censer, and much odours
given unto him, that he should offer with the prayers of the Saints. How may
these things, will thou say, fit to Constantine? Surely as the type of the High
Priest to Jesus christ: whose person to represente is not proper now to one
certain kind of men, but is common to all the faithful; whom all Christ has
made Priests, and that not of the second, but of the highest sort. But why
should not he above all have the image of the Priest, in whom most of all did
shine the likeness of his Kingly dignity? well spoke he of himself in the
assembly of the Bishops, And I, says he, am here as one of you: for J will not
deny my self to be your fellow servant, in which name I rejoice most of all:
Socrat. book 1. chap. 7.

Having a golden censer: the greek word (...) signifies properly Frankincense
here is taken, for the Censer it self, as is manifest from the first verse,
where this (...) is filled with the fire of the Altar. But the golden Censer
was an instrument of the most Holy Place, Heb. 9.4. and belongs only to the
High Priest.

And odours were given him. Therefore this Angel is not Christ: who takes not
odours from any other, but he himself is a most replenished store house of all
graces, and gives to every one, as much as is needful. Those odours are a
most ample, both ability, and also will to make peace, which is the end of the
Priesthood, and of burning incense before God: in which respect the Lord is
said, to smell a sweet savor, when he accepts a Sacrifice: Genesis 8.21.

That he might offer with the prayers: These things are spoken according to
the ancient custom of the Temple: where the Priest burning incense within
upon the golden altar, in the mean time the whole people tarried without,
giving themselves to prayer, as in Luke 1.10. And the whole multitude of the
pepple prayed without in the time of the burning incense: from whence it comes
to pass, that it is said in this place to be give^ to the prayers: which
before time was wo^t to be joined together with them at the same moment. And
the prayers of the Saints are the godly wishes of the faithful, who earnestly
desired, that some remedy might be found betimes against the evils near at
hand, which they saw to before showed by many apparent tokens. For could it
otherwise be, but that the sincere minds seeing strifes, privy grudges, and
contentions reign every where, and to consume all things (I mean those which
we showed even now to have followed the half hour silence) should not
strive earnestly with God by prayers, that he would not suffer the truth
tryumphing over the tyranny of the enemies, to be abolished by the discords and
alterations of them that were of the household? But what other mean could
there be of appeasing controversies, then to gather together the parties
disagreeing one with an other, and when the matter was reasoned of on each side
friendly, by a good composition to draw them to be of one mind? This was it
then which the holy men desired that the present controversies might be taken
away, by a general Council assembled, and the future evils might be
prevented. Epiphanius reports that Alexander Bishop of Alexandria solicited
Constantine and required of him earnestly, that he would summon a general
Council, and that not of himself, but from the common advise of other
Bishops, whom he had consulted with about this matter, book 2. Tom. 2.
heresies 69. Ruffinus book 1. chap. 1. From which we may perceave what was
the common desire of all men. Only Constantine next after God could give
odours to this desire, that is, bring it to some desired issue: for, as says
Eusebius. It was in the power of the omnipotent God only, to cure these evils.
But Constantine alone of all men on earth to be the minister of these good
things, in the life of Constantine, in the 3. book of the said Eusebius.

Upon the Golden Altar: The Altar of incense, that was before the veil, as
Exodus chap. 30. ver. 3. Here it notes the company of the chosen saints, the
first fruits of the whole world, as speaks Eusebius: in as much as this
company doubtless did hold the place next to the most holy, as in old time,
the Golden Altar was set before the veil. And surely by right may this crown
of most holy men be called the Golden Altar, the great assembly of which comes
nighest unto the majesty of God, and in which the visible glory of God most of
all shows it self. Where, says Christ, two or three shall be gathered
together in my name, there am I in the mids of them, Mat. 18.19. Therefore it
must needs be that this company should have the next place to the Most Holy,
in the mids of which Christ himself did remain.

Which is before the Throne: Within the circuit of the Elders. For that is
said both here, and in other places to be before the Throne. Which whole space
God would have to be proper to the elect on earth, who approach next to the
Highest Throne, and are not separated by the coming between of Angels.

4 And the smoke of the odours went up: Thus far the preparation of the
Angel, now follows his Ministry: and first that which pertains to the
Elect in this verse, in respect of whom the smoke of the odours is said to go
up, that is they were made partakers of the thing which they desired so
greatly. The manner of speaking is taken from the same custom of the Leviticall
Priest, the similitude of whom he has used hitherto. Once every year the
Censer was to be brought within the veil, that the cloud of the incense might
cover the Mercy Seat, which is upon the Testimony, to the end that the Priest
should not die, as we read in the book of Levit. chapter sixeteenth, twelve
and thirtheenth verses. Also Incense was to be burned every morning when the
lamps should be kindled, as in the book of Exodus, chapter thirty, verses
seven and eight. Whose thick vapor ascending should pearse through the
veil, and should perfume with a most sweet savor all the inward most holy
place: a visible sign of our prayers, which do penetrate the heave^s, and by
the sweet savor which they cast forth through Christ, do obtain of God,
that which we ask. From whence the Psalmist says, Let my prayer be esteemed
as incense before thy face: Psalm hundredth and fourthy one second verse.
Therefore the smoke of the odours goes up, when our prayers coming before God,
do obtain for us that which we asked according to his will. And when the
holy men desired that some way should be taken, for the ending of that strife
by a general Council proclaimed, by these things is showed, that the thing
was granted them at length which they desired. For Constantine seeing that he
did try in vain all other remedies, appoints a general Council at Nice: he
comma^deth the Bishops to take public horses, and all to assemble at the day
appointed. Whom at last being gathered together, he most sweetly admonishes
touching the care that they should have to search out the truth; he with very
great equity hears the disputers against it: finally he governs the whole
business with such gravity and wisdom, that at length the wicked blasphemy
being condemned by common consent, the holy truth prevailed. By which fact of
his surely the thick cloud of the odours, went up from the hand of the
Angel before God, when doubtless by his care, pains, diligence, charges,
moderation of the whole business, so wholesome a thing, so much desired of all
the godly, was undertaken, begun, and brought to an end. Now he set a mark
in the foreheads of the elect, whereby they might be discerned from the base
sort of the ungodly. Therefore Constantine is that Angel, those odours given
him, which he should give to the prayers of the Saints, is the power to gather
a general Council: the Golden Altar is Christ himself in the mids of this
holy company: The thick cloud of the odours going up, is the whole matter
brought to an end most prosperously. And this is that time until which the
four Angels should keep the truce, of which we have seen at the 7. chap.
ver. 1.

With the prayers of the Saints: Prayers, peradventure by the want of a
participle, not of the preposition with, as if the perfect sentence were this,
And the smoke of the odours, which were given to the prayers of the Saints
went up, the word being repeated from the former verse, where was, that he
should give to the prayers: a thing very usual with the Hebrews, to
understand in the things that follow, the verb that was used before. But by
this reason the odours given should only ascend, and not also the other
prays of the saints, which also are odours, as we have seen in the fifte
chapter and at the eight verse,

Therefore by want of the preposition the sense seems better to agree: Yet
Theodorus bez have it with the preposition with, and not with the of as the
Common translation, and the Jesuit, who interprets it materially, that the
odours ascending were made of the prayers of the Saints, when it was said
before, that he should give to the prayers of the saints. But nothing that is
give^ to a thing, is made of the same thing, to which it is give^

Out of the Angels hand: Because he held a Censer in his hand: but which is
as much as if he should say, by the ministry of the Angel, Constantine
ministr^ng, whatsoever was needful for this matter.

5 After the Angel took the Censer, and filled it with fire of the altar: The
fact of the Angel, as far as it respects the wicked. But the full Censer
shows the greatness of the evil: the fire of the altar, the kind of it. That
was an excellent confession of the faith, which the holy Council published
against Heresies: which surely was like the coals of the altar, which the fire
falling from heaven kindles in the hearts of the Saints, upon which they may
burn most sweet odours in calling upon one true God in three persons. But
this same fire cast into the earth, that is this godly confession spread abroad
every where by the Emperors proclamations into the wicked world, or the Church
at least in name (for I told you that so the Earth signifies often times) how
great troubles raised it up forthwith? Doubtless even as that fire ca^t on the
earth by Christ* made all full of privy displeasures and broils while the
godly with the heat of it, were enflamed with a desire of the truth, but the
wicked were set on fire with hatred and envy, Luke 12.49. so this holy Decree,
a firebrand of the same heavenly fire, raised up a very great hatred in the
contrary wills of men. When the Trumpets were first given, they fought one
against an other, only with a d^ssenting of opinions, but the evil increased
now by the remedy, as cankers are wont. For after this Council came all manner
of calamityes, deceits and false accusations, which being showed here briefly
by the voices, thunderings, and lightnings, afterward are declared severally in
the first tru^pete. So therefore, that which was holy and wholesome to the godly,
turned to greater destruction and provoking to the wicked.

And there were thunders and voices: Some books have voices and thunders:
Aretas only thunders and lightnings, omitting voices and earthquakes, These
things do note generally what fruit of that Cou^cill should redounde to the
wicked. But thunders and voices seem here to be two words for one thing, to
wit loud thunders, as Ier. 4.29, they shall go into the very clouds, and
clime up upon the rocks; that is, upon the cloudy rocks by reason of the
height of them: unless peradventure voices be the same thing here, which they
were in the 4. chap. 5 ver.

6 And the seven Angels, which had: The second preparation of the seven
Angel, who now go about the business, of which before in the Trumpets that
were given, there was given some proof. For these things a^e spoken of the
executing of the work, as likewise the wife of the Lamb is said to make her
self ready, at the very marriage, after in chap. 19.7. Now therefore when the
prisons where broken, those mischiefs should fly out, which eve^ hitherto made
a stir in the inner parts: the four first of which are described in this
chapter, far lighter indeed then the three last: and therefore we shall
see, that albeit in a certain order of blowing the Trumpets they do assail,
yet they all do together come upon men with force, distinguished only by
short spaces of time to begin.

Prepared themselves to blow the trumpets: This sound of trumpets, seems
not to be a voice manifesting to John alone, that is, to the elect in the
Church, the trouble that should come, such as was that of the Beasts in the
first seals: but the divine administration, giving by the holy Angels so
notable beginnings to the facts: that by the same, as it were by a noise of
trumpets, all sorts of men should be awaked, for to consider the beginning of
things. Many things do creep upon us by little and little and secretly, so as
their beginning is unknown, and are grown old before they be perceived: but
here the beginning should be marked, and perceived plainly of any one, so that
the procedeing of them could not come suddenly upon any man, but such a one, as
would be wilfully negligent. Although the sound of a trumpet does cause rather
astonishment and fear, then teach the hearer knowledge. And so in deed it
comes to pass, that the further we proceed, the more obscure are the
judgments of the events. In the Seals the Beast does call John for to come
and see. In the Trumpets there is never a word: only a sound is given. In
the Viols, there is scarce any noise, but so far as the liquor powered out of
a cup does yield. Certainly as long as faith and godliness was sound, as in
those first times, small judgments did awaken the Church: but in these last
when iniquity is grown in use, we pass over even the greatest works of God
with eyes shut up and deaf ears. Which carelesnes of ours God both
discloseth and reprooveth by this increasing darkness of the signs. For less
light is not given from any lack of perspecuity in God, but only for a
reprehending of our future secutity.

7 Therefore the first Angel blew the trumpet; All things now being finished,
which hitherto caused a delay, at length the Angels sound the trumpets: at the
first sound a double effect follows. The first is a shower of hail, and
fire: The second the burning of trees and grass: the hail coming from heaven
and with a great noise, signifies the very great trouble, which from the
household servants of the Church, at least by outward profession, should fall
suddenly upon their own heads. But the fire mingled with blood, the fervency
of the same trouble, and increase even to the shedding of blood. But we must
remember that these mischiefs are set on fire with the burning coals of the
altar. Which thing is here manifest. For the matter was not deferred for any
long while, but in the mids of the Nicene Fathers the first Angel blewe the
trumpet: for the holy men had scarce approved the truth by a common consent
after they had considered the matter diligently, but the hail began to fall
down violently, and to make a wonderful great noise. Certain Bishops, verily
citizens of the Earth, making a pretended show that they were offended with
some words of the Confession, but in very deed inflamed with the coals of
the altar, labored to hinder the consent and to be against it so far as in
their power did lie. These were five, Eusebius Nicomedieosis, Theognis Nicenus,
Maris Chalcedonensis, Theonas Marmariensis, and Secundus Ptolemaitensis, who
maliciously alleging against the word Consubstantiall, would neither agree
with the rest touching the faith, nor subscribe to the condemnation of Arius.
This was a manifest beginning of the hail, which a while after fell in greater
abo^dance. For after that Eusebius and Theognis faigning an alteration of their
opinion, had recovered their former dignity, they went about this one thing, to
try by all means how that through the sides of Athanasius, they might pearce
the truth. And these cunning devisers looked so well to the matter, that noe
times have bin more troubleous through most impudent false accusations,
malicious surmises, lies, and unjust vexations: That Athanasius had killed
Arsenius, had ravished his hostess, had taken away craftily the provision of
corn at Constantinople, had ministered money to one that attempted an
alteration: and what time affords exemples of like impudency? The good Arian
Bishops removed from his seat Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, because he was one
of them that held the truth, a whore being brought forth, who objected unto
him dishonest conversation with her. Neither were these things done secretly
and privately, but that we may acknowledge the huge noise of the hail, in
assemblyes full of men, by continual runnings up and down from Thracia and
Alexandria into Syria, by wicked accusations, by appealings to the Emperors,
in abrogations of ungodly sentences, and approving of the same again, so as
the whole East had business enough by these means, and did ringe on every
side with the noise of this shower.

But the broile stayed not here. CONSTANTINE the son of Constanntie mingled
hail with blood, banished many, put many to death, How cruel a thing was it,
that he compelled by torments to consent to the wicked opinion, that reverend
old man Holsius of Corduba, to whom his Father gave so great honor?

But the outrageousnes of VALENS is almost uncredible, whereby the Church was
spoiled on every side, the faithful were cast headlong into the river Orontes:
cruelty was exercised by every kind of death. Surely that ship in which
under a color of sending four skore excellent men into banishement, he
commanded them to be burnt in the maine sea, was more unnatural then that
weak ship of Nero, in which he devised a death for his mother. And the
Bishops who of late passed all mortal men in impudency, strove afterward with
tyrants who should be most cruel. What slaughters did MACEDONIVS make through
all the East, Georgius and Lucius at Alexandria? It would ask a long time to
set down all: doubtless the former miserable times came again, the name
only of the enemy being changed: for those of the time passed were Heathen, but
these were false Christians Verily the wonderful and mervailous falling of
hail in and about those times, showed manifestly what was the state of
things: And hail filling the hand rushed down violently, every several
hailestone being as great, as the hand could conteme, as Socrates in the four
chapter of his book does say. And it seems that Gregorius Nazianzenus at
that time made that oration, whose inscription is this, when the Father held
his peace because of the calamity of the hail.

And they were cast into the Earth, and the third part of the Earth etc. So
reads Aretas, the Common Latin translation, and some other Copies: and so it
seems that it should be read, both that the greatness of the evil may be the
more perceived, and also that those things which follow may be understood the
more easily, this first being set down which is the chief. He comes now to
the second effect which was hurtful only to the wicked, the sealed being well
defended from the evil of it.

For, says he, they were cast into the Earth: which we have taught to signify
Earthly men, wholly addicted to the things of this life. But this shower rained
not upon the whole earth, but only upon the third part. But he calls it the
third, after the common manner, the whole being distributed in to three parts:
Which third part was the East, to wit, Asia, and the bordering places.

EVROPE and AFRIKE understood it rather by hearing then in very deeded. VALENS
and VRSATIVS Bishops, the one of the city Mursia in the country of Pannonia,
the other of Singidon a city in the Superior Mysia, did endevor and labored
much to fill those parts with this poison. But God who is merciful, did in his
kindness restrain and repress this mischief within the bounds of the third
part of the world, least that in overwhelming the whole Church, it would at
length destroy and overthrowe the same utterly.

And the third part of the trees was burnt: The trees are the foster children
of that Earth, of which I spoke even now, and those more strong and tall then
any of the rest, as after in the 7. chap. but the Green grass signifies the
new borne Infants of the Church, and the common multitude. But the tempest
seems to rage more grievously against the Grass, then against the trees: for
of these the third part only is on fire, but all the grass is burnt up. But
this whole grass belongs to that third part only, even as that third part
of the trees, are all trees of the East: from whence the condition of the trees
is nothing better, then of the grass. These things teach, that all of the
Christian name, as well the highest as the lowest, who lived in those countries
of the third part of the world, and were not in truth grounded and built upon
Christ, should be so miserably smitten with this storm, that they should make
shipwreck of their salvation. But you will say, that they were destroyed
before: that is true doubtless in Gods council, yet it often comes to pass,
that reprobate men do flatter themselves for a time, with a certain false
hope, and do with very great care delight to follow some outward religion:
which afterward the time does prove manifestly, to have been mere hypocrisy,
and a vain appearance of holiness: so those burnt trees and grass, should make
shipwreck of their counterfeit god lines, dashing themselves against the
rocks of so great ungodlines of the Bishops. And how could it be, but all in
whose hearts the truth has not taken deep root, either should be carried
into error, or, which is worse, should contemn all religion, should revolte
from Christ himself, should hate the worshippers of him, whom they should see
to be bent to this only thing, that they may raise up strifes, contentions,
and troubles? Well wrote Constantine in an Epistle to the Council gathered
together at Tyrus, he upbraided the Bishops, in that they did nothing else but
sow dissentions and hatreds, and those things which did tend to the utter
ruin of man kind: Socrat. book 1. 34. But there needs noe witnesses in a
matter not doubtful. The exceeding great mercy of God is rather to be praised,
which kept a few safe from this storm.

8 Afterward the second Angel blewe the trumpet, and as it were a burning
mountain: The first effect of the sounding of the trumpet of the second Angel:
is a great mountain burning with fire cast into the Sea: The second effect is,
the death of the third part of the creatures that lived in the Sea. As touching
the first, Mountains in the scriptures are Princes, States of a Realm, Lofty
minded, and all of that sort, as Isaiah says, that the day of the Lord shall be
upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, and
upon every high tower, and upon every strong wall, chap. 2.14.15. From whence
it seems here to note Kingdoms, Principalities, Honors, Dignities, the
Pomp of the world, and Train folloing great men, and the Ambition of such
things. This Mountain burns with fire, as Vesuvius or Aetna, because the
desire of honor and riches is fervent, neither are men wont to be occupied
coldly in getting such things. It is thrown into the Sea, because the
ambition of these things is cast into the doctrine, a new decree of the
Council being made, touching order and honor, of which their Ancesters never
had a thought. For we have showed before, the Sea to be the most pure doctrine
of the true and heavenly Church, chap. 4.6. but of the earthly and false, the
foul and gross, chap. 7.1. Seeing then that this is the meaning of the words,
we shall find that the second Angel by and by after the first sounded the
trumpet among the same Nicene Fathers. For after that sentence was given
touching the coessentiall nature of the Son, of celebrating the Easter upon
one and the same day, and of Miletium, they turned themselves unto the making
of Canons, by which the Ecclesiastical Discipline should be ruled. Among
other Canons, they make a Decree touching the Primacy of the Metropolitanes,
that the Bishop of Alexandria should have authority over all the Churches, in
Egypt or Lybia, and Pentapolis: because the Bishop of Rome had the like
custom: Likewise as in Antioch and the other Provinces, let the honor of
every Church be reserved. And that no man ordained without the will and
knowledge of the Metropolitan, should be counted a Bishop: that honor also be
given to the Bishop of Jerusalem, and consequently that he may receive honor,
the dignity nevertheless proper to the Metropolitan City remaining. Surely
this burning Mountain was cast into the Sea, when from this beginning, there
was strife among the Church men about dignity and honor, as for the
maintenance of religion, and their private sustenance. Indeed the obscurer
Churches were wont in former times to go to the learned and skillful Bishops
of more famous cities, and to ask their advise if any doubtful thing had
fallen out, and to crave their aid to whom the excellency of the place
procured more authority: but that which they did before of their own accord,
now must be done necessarily: and those whom lately they saluted as their
brethren and fellows in office, they were now to be acknowledged by higher
titles. From hence came into the Church, exercising of authority and having
dominion: by which in a short time after, all thing were turned up sidowne.
Constantinople thought that she was regarded nothing according to her
worthiness, by this Nicene Decree: where fore a few years after, a Council
being gathered in the same place under Gratian and Theodosius the elder, she
ordained in plain words, that the Bishop of the City of Constantinople, ought
to have the honor of Primacy next after the Roman Bishop, because that it is
new Rome; see the first Council at Constantinople, Canon the fifth. By which
things both she bewrayed her own ambition, and also showed some what more
fully, what those some thing obscure circunstances of words in the Nicene
decree meant.

And the third part of the Sea became blood: The Second effect, is the
corruption of Doctrine, and the death of the things in the Sea. The Doctrine is
turned into blood, that is into a nature wholly growing out of kind. Before
indeed, it began to be foul and thick, defiled with many superstitions, but
after the desire of Lordship and Primacy was mixed with it, it became an
horrible blood. But what this third part is, the History shows clearly. In
the former sounding of the trumpet the East was smitten with the hail: now
the West is punished with the bloody waters, as some time Egypt. Now Rome must
play her part, which not content with the Primacy of Order the which the Ni^^ne
Fathers gave her, strove as much as she was able, to get her self the highest
estate also of power over all the rest. And she had many opportuni^^es
doubtless before others, as to be the head City of old time and no^ y t long
ago, that prejudice of the Nicene Decree, the exceeding peace the which she
enioy^d, when in the mean time the whole East was inflamed with the deadly
fir^brandes of dissentions, finally ordained as it were a sanctuary, the
orthodoxes being driven out of their se^tes: under a color of defending of
whom, she crept in by stealth to that dominion, which in her heart she sought
so greedily. For while both the banished Bishops, of whom she seems to
deserve well, praised her of a grateful good will more then was meet, and
she vaunting her self the more freely in a good cause, she exercised a
certain empire and dominion unwarres over all men. Which coming of hers
appears evidently in Sozomenus in his 3. book chap. 8. Athanasius of
Alexandria, Paulus of Constantinople, Marcellus of Ancyra, and Asclepa
Gazensis, being cast out of their people fled for succor to Rome: the defense
of whom Julius Romain took freely: neither was that to be reprooved, unless
he had made craftily to himself from hence a step, unto tyranny. For so he
writes to the Churches in their behalf, as though the power were his own to
command any thing imperiously. As if it were meet that he because of the
dignity of his seat should be careful for all, he restored to every one his
own Church. But when letters were sent every where touching this matter
through the East, being as I said full of authority and power, which he
arrogated to his seat, the Eastern Bishops, in other things not to be
approved, did this well and according to their duty, that they thought the
arrogance of the man was to be convinced of them, and the Romish ambition to be
reprooved freely.

And from hence is that which they answer, that the Roman Church does strive
and contend with all men about honor, as if she were the schole of the
Apostles, made at the beginning the mother City of Godliness: although the
teachers themselves of the doctrine came from the East, and were men of that
country etc. There was added to his cunning of boasting so insolently of the
Apostolic Chair, a crafty interpretation of all duty, as of due obedience:
the saluting of his brethren and fellows in office, by the name of honorable
Sons, and other notable frauds of that sort, as Damasus in his Epistle to
the Constantinopolitane Council do show, in these words: In that, says he,
your charity most honorable sons, gives due reverence to the Apostolic
Chair, by the same thing you procure very much reverence to your selves. For
although it apperteineth to us chiefly to order the stern and rudder which we
have taken upon us to govern in the holy Church, in which the holy Apostle
sat a teacher, yet we confess our selves to be unworthy of so great an
honnour, Theodor. book 5. chap. 9. Incredible is the charity of the Roman
Pope, who embraces noe otherwise then as Sons, so many Bishops present in
the Council. In the next age his unsatiable desire brake forth more evidently.
Three most Holy Popes, who could not err, Zozimus, Bonifacius and Celestinus
are convinced of falsehood, belying the Nicene Council to stablish their own
Principality. The sixth Council of Carthage (albeit they reprove so great a
naughty act more gently then was meet) writes to Celestinus, that they could
not find any such thing in the truer Councils, which are received for Nicene,
being sent them from holy Cyrill and Atticus of Constantinople, out of the
original, which they long a go sent from thence by Faustinus, as out of a
part of the Nicene Council: and therefore they warn him, that he would not do
that whereby he may seem to bring into the Church of Christ the smokie pride of
the world.

So in short time their impudency increased, neither from hence forth did they
cease before that Rome the conqueresse had taken from all the rest the apple of
contention.

The Nicene Fathers tought to provide for the peace of the Church, by placing
some chief Patriarchs, as it were in a watchtower above the rest, but the
issue convinces them both of an exceeding great error and aberration, and of
their labor to be very ill and unprofitably bestowed: and together also it
teaches how much safer and better it is to continue and keep within the
bounds and simplicity of the divine and most holy word of GOD, then that we
should alter or change any thing in it leaning unto humane wisdom and
inventions of men.

Such is this third part, into which the burning montaine was cast: and that
the doctrine afterward became most foully corrupted, and marred, now it is mor
known thanks be to God, the^ that is needful to spend time in proving it.
We shall find that this is the continual Cokou song of all the Papists, an
immoderate boasting of the Apostolic Seat, whether they do refferre all
things wrestingly, the Sun and Moon, the two swords, and the Church built
upon Peter.

9 And the third part of the creatures dyed: There remain yet two parts of
the second effect: one touching the death of the creatures in this Sea: the
other of the d^stroying of the ships. The creatures in the Sea, are all that
basest company of the Clergy, as they call them: of which sort are the
Doore-keepers, R^^ders, Singers, Exorcists, Acobythes, Subdeacons, Deacons,
Archdeacons, Deanes, Religious Monk^s, Brethren, and the rest of that kind.
The Ships, are those of a higher degree, whose office was to take pains in
preaching the word, and to transporte it hither and thither as merchants, or
any other way to exercise merchandise in this Sea* the third part of all those
should perish, that is, all that execute this corrupt ministry in Europe, the
third part of the world by drinking up this read blood, they should be
destroyed, who puffed up with ambition, despise the simplicity of their office,
and neglect all manner of duty through desire of attaining a better dignity. In
the East the overflowing of the Barbarians quenched this flame: In the West,
the times being some what more quiet, gave leave to it to spread abroad at her
pleasure. The greatness of which burning, by which are burned all the Mariners,
Watermen, Masters of Ships, Pilottes, sailing in the middland Sea between
Europe and Afrique, from the gulf of the Sea Ionium unto the Isles called
Gades, that is, the Ecclesiastical men of this our world, may be comprehended
more easily in mind and thought, then declared by words, of him that
follows brevity. I would to God that the broken piece of this Mountain did
not yet still trouble the Crystal Sea in Christi an Churches. But how agrees
it to this Sea-evill, that in the same tempest, as says Hierome, by an
earthquake of the whole world, which bef^ll after the death of Julian, the Seas
passed their bounds, and as if God did threaten a floode again, or that all
things should return to the old Chaos, the ships being carried to the
unapprocheable places of the Mountains did hang upon them? In the life of
Hilar. Eremit. Annian Marcell book 26. at the end, reported the same,
mentioning that this came to pass the 12. day of the Calendes of August, when
Valentianus was first Consul with his brother.

10 Then the third Angel blew the trumpet: The Primarie effect of the third
sounding of the trumpet is a star falling from heaven into the third part of
the rivers and of the fountains, burning like a torch, called wormwood. The
Secondary effect is bitterness procured thereof, and the death of men drinking
of the w^ters. We ought to remember that, which is clear enough from the
things before said, but it is to be set down again and again, because of
them, who to the end that they may darken the things, do often repeat the
contrary, that the words are not to be taken properly. If one great star
should fall, we should not need to expect any further evil following Neither
would it fall into the third part of rivers only, but cover the whole earth:
whereupon they that urge the property, are constrained to go from the words,
and to feign a certain multitude of exhalations gathered together. But it
shall be manifest from the whole Prophecy, that he speaks not of that which
is to come, but of that which is past in respect of our age. Therefore they who
call us back to the natural signification of the words, do of set purpose
desire to hide the truth so, that it may never show it self. Let us come to
the matter. We have heard that the stars are the Ministers of the word in
the Churches, chap. 1.20. Although the word does not so appertain to the^
alone, but that also it may be applied sometime to others. How, says the
Prophet, speaking of the King of Babylon, art thou fallen from heaven o
Lucifer, the Son of the morning? Isaiah 14.12. Therefore the word fitteth
them who glister aloft, as it were in heaven: especially if they shine with the
light of truth. This is a great star, not dark and cloudy, but of a notable
greatness. It fell from heaven, by falling from the true Church, through Heresy
or some other ungodlines. It burns as a torch, because the fire of it should
be flaming and mounting up, coming forth openly abroad, not burning only with
a secret heat, as even now the Mountain did burn: whose flame yet should
not continue long, but the nourisheme^t failing as of a lamp, it should be
clean put out: It falls into the rivers and fountains, that is upon those
men from whom as from fountains the doctrine should flow unto others, of
which sort are the Bishops disposers of the word: the diverse consideration of
whom does procure unto them diverse names. Even now they were Ships carrying
hither and thither the marchandizes of the word: now because by their
continual flowing they do maintain that universal Sea of doctrine, and
increase that which abides in the multitude, worthyly are they compared unto
rivers and fountains. The star falls into them, peradventure the common
people remaining more sincere, which comprehends not so great subtilityes.
Although how shall the river flow clear, where the fountain is corrupted?
Unless peradventure as the Sea waxes not sweet by the watering of the rivers,
so neither do the multitude gather bitterness from the corruption of these. But
the matter is otherwise here, seeing a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump:
and albeit, the fountains should be most corrupt, yet it should not be without
danger to them, who should drink thereof, but they should perish even as
well. The name of the star is wormood, not because it should be called so
commonly, but because it should show her self to be some such thing by the
effect. And wormwood some time notes the bitterness of affliction, as behold I
will feed my people with wormwood, Ier. 9. that is, most bitter corrections:
some time the deadly poison of heretical wickedness, as take heed that there
be not in you a root bringing forth hemlock or wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29.18. that
is, least your mind be the seedeplot of any Idolatry and wretched life, as the
most learned Tremelius and Iunius do expound it. Both seems to be joined
together here, that the bitterness of the calamity may be mixed with the
vicious and corrupt doctrine. Now for the application. The third Angel did
blow about an eleven years after the former. When Constantius, to whom befell
the Eastern Empire, and by and by after the death of his Father, through the
fraud of a certain Elder, whom he used familiarly, was cast from heaven into
the Arian Heresy. The impiety began before through Arius, and got some
patrons, as before we have said: but Arius forthwith counterfaited a
recantation: by the same cunning Eusebius and Theognis recovered their chaires.
Neither durst any openly make any stir, while Constantine remained alive.
This furour enraged the minds of some, and drove them to work the orthodoxes
what troubles they were able, but they made show of an other thing.
Furthermore these were lesser stars: but Constantius was a great star
flaming as a torch, bringing forth the thing out of lurking corners into the
clear light: and endeavoring with very great desire to amplify it. The same
account is to be made of Valens the Emperor, who follows after Julian and
Iovinian. By their means Wormwood fell into the third part of the rivers, and
into the fountains of waters. Before time the Bishops were sick of this
disease: but now they began to rage, having got such rulers. The whole East,
except Athanasius and Paulinus drunk this deadly poison of the Arians and
Emmonians, see Hierome against the errors of John Bishop of Hier. Not only
Nilus was turned into bitterness, but also the rivers and fountains of Thracia,
Hellespont, Bithinia, and the whole continent region: in all which places the
Arians expelled out of the Churches all that were of a right judgment, and
punished them shamefully, Sozom. book 4. 27. More over the poison was powered
forth on all men from the borders of Illyricum, even unto Thebais, as Basyll
co^playneth in his Epist. 69. And what wormwood was at any time more bitter,
then for Christians to be beaten with stripes to death by Christians, to be
deprived of their goods, and privilege of the cities, to be burned in the fore
head with a hot iron, and to be handled with noe less cruelty, yea rather
more cruelty of brethren, then before time of most fierce and outrageous
enemies? Yet all these things and many mo suffered the orthodoxe at the hands
of Macedonius of Constantinople, and others his fellows in office, not
Bishops, but fiendes of Hell, as Socrates writes in his second book, chapter
27. This mischief vexed and over ruled a long time that third part, both by
it own self, and also by the unhappy birth of the Macedonians and other
wretched offspring of that sort: nevertheless when Valens was dead, this flame
also decayed, the matter of which was consumed, as of a lamp, which has noe
more oil. Those Wormwood waters did wonderfully provoke the calamity of the
hail with which now at lenght they mix themselves, and hindered that the
burning flame of ambition in the West could not be helped. For now the three
Trumpets came on with rage together, which molested at the first asunder and
mor lightly.

11 Therefore the third part of the waters became: The Second effect showing
the fruict of the falling star. The Teachers and Bishops almost all, of that
third part, who should be the springs of learning unto others, forthwith
infected the wholesome waters with the bitterness of that wicked opinion: but
they made this deadly mixture not only to themselves, but also all which
drunk hereof, and sufferred themselves to be infected with the same opinions,
got to themselves destruction, as has been declared by us before.

12 Afterward the fourth Angel blewe the trumpet: Here is mentioned one effect
only of the fourth trumpet: otherwise then in the former. Neither that without
cause, but for this intent, as far as it seems, because the former evils
came from them of the household, and that it was therefore needful, not only
that it should be showed which was done, but also the Authors, whereunto the
first effect perteined especially. But this calamity should come altogether
from the Enemy, and from men that were strangers from the Church, any fall of
whom there was noe need to rehearse. Wherefore he comes to declare this
trumpet noe otherwise then to the relating of the former calamityes, which the
spiteful Heathen Tyrants did bring in before time, as in chap. 6.12.13.

This only effect smites the third part of the Sun, of the Moon, of the
Stars, of the Day and of the Night. The Sun, Moon, and Stars we
interpret as before, to be the chief ornaments of the purer and true Church:
So as that the Sun should be the Scriptures themselves, the fountains of
light. The Moon the doctrine borrowed from thence, which is compared sometime
to the water, and also sometime to the light for a diverse respect.

the stars, the Ministers: the day, ioyfulnes and mirth in the Church from
the enjoying of this Sun: the Night, a sorrowful condition, either in regard
of affliction, or of darkness and obscurity which is cast upon the truth, or
of both: whereupon there shall be noe night in the full happiness of the Church,
chap. 21.29. Neither are the Ministers stars, because they are servants of
the night, but because they put away the darkness that is in others, themselves
in the mean time being enlightened wholly by the light of the Sun; The
meaning therefore is, that a most grievous calamity, common noe less to the
false, then to the true Church, shall invade the third part of the world: as
the History witnesses it to have come to pass. I pass over the tempests of
those wars, which the most obscure nations Goths, Suevians, Hunnes, Heruls,
Vandals, and the other confederates of these, inferred: which scarcely
repressed of Constantine the Great, at length when he was taken from the
earth, overflowed all Europe: I think that this forth sounding of the trumpet,
is to be referred especially, when Gensericus the Vandal, about the year after
Christ is birth 438. passed over from Spain into Afrique, sent of Bonifacius.
For what Decius or Diocletian is to be compared with this man in cruelty? The
divine goodness delivered from their jaws Augustine, a few days before the
city Hippo was taken. What torments endured not the rest of the saints? The
Tyrant commands all holy books to be burned, every one without regard to be
killed, that they should not spare the innocent, but suckling children being
pulled from their mothers breasts, to be partly dashed against the stones and
the ground, partly to be cleaved asunder in the mids from the crown of the
head. And they were better dealt with all, then the rest which remained alive,
many Ministers of the word, and famous men being laden with huge burdens in
stead of Camels and beasts, and compelled with goades of iron to hasten their
going, as often as through wearines they stayed. Proclamations from the King ar
set forth, that all in general should be destroyed, who had holy orders. And
Victor of Vtica who wrote the History of this persecution, makes mention, that
of an hundred and three score Bishops, which lately were in Zengetana and the
provincial jurisdiction, three only were left alive, at what time he wrote
these things: and that one of these three escaped persecution and lived as a
banished man at Edessa in Macedonia. Verily the third part of the Sun, of the
Moon, of the stars, and of the day was smitten; seeing the Africane Church,
the third part of the world, lay wholly quenched, as far as man could judge.
Especially when as Hunorichus Nundrus, and at length Gilimer made a gleaning
with greater cruelty (if any thing can be greater) then Genserichus used in
reaping the first harvest. Neither was the Night untouched, but the third part
of it was likewise smitten, that is, the whole false Church also, which is wont
to be more populous then the true, and to cover it over with her darkness, was
partaker of the same calamity. For the Vandals desired to root out all at once
every one of the Christian name: far otherwise then the other barbarous
nations in Europe, which sought only places to dwell in for themselves, and
bare noe such hateful minds against religion. For which cause we think,
that this fourth sounding of the trumpet, does properly belong to the Africane
Vandals. And so much the more, because by their means it was brought to pass
that the Sun in those countries did go down always to this very day: for
after that horrible darkness, which the Vandals brought in, God by his
fearful judgment gave up those nations to the Mahumeticall madness, whose
hellish darkness at this time sufferreth noe confortable Sun beam to shine
upon them. How is it to be lamented, that that part of the world, which before
time was beset with most famous lights, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, and
others almost infinite, is now altogether become black, and does not shine
with one little sparkle? But so is thy will most holy Father, who have
compassed about us Europeans left alone, and most wickedly abusing thy holy
name, with very sorrowful spectacles of thy wrath, both toward the East and
South. So therefore are the four first trumpets, Contention, Ambition, Heresy,
and War: those four Angels, which Constantine the Great for a time
restrained. But the first and third trumpet belongs to the East: the second
to the West: the fourth to Africa. The Prophecy of this chapter contains
about two hundred and thirty years, to wit, from the beginning of the reign
of Constantine unto the year of Christ five hundred thirty and three, at which
time Belisarius carried away captive Gilimer, and destroyed the name of the
Vandals in Afrique, Evag. book 4.16. Ye may fetch a larger declaration from
Eseb. upon the life of Constantine: from Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomene,
Evagrius, Procopius, of the war of the Vandals: and Victor of Vtica touching
the persecution of the same men: whose Commentaries God would have to be
extant, for the light and credit of this Prophecy.

13 And I saw and heard one Angel: Now he comes to the three last trumpets,
much more troublous then the former, as appears from the common preparation in
this verse. For as though the usual sounding of the trumpet were not of
sufficient force to cause fear, a common Proheme to these three full of
terror is prefixed: every several afterward is declared by their transitions.
As touching the words, some read for an Angel an Eagle, as Aretas, the
Complutent Edition, and the common translation: brought hereunto as it seems,
because the fourth Beast was like a flying Eagle, chap. 4.7. But the word one
being adjoined, makes against it. For it was wont to be the limiting of a
thing uncertain and indefinite. But the Eagle the fourth Beast was only one:
wherefore it had been superfluous to say, I heard one Eagle. Therefore one
Angel agrees better: which word is general, and by right may be limited with
some addition, as Andreas reads, and some other Greek Copies. Furthermore he
is called an Angel which flies through the mids of heaven, after in chap.
14.6. But this one Angel is some one man alone, picked and chosen out from the
rest, to some peculiar office. (...) is not the mids of heaven, as the
Astronomers call it, who call midday in this wise, but the mids between
Earth and heaven, to wit, the mids of height, not of lenght, as the Angel
appeared to David, 1 Chronicles. 21.16. But seeing heaven is the holy Church, and
the earth the false and counterfaite, which carries the name and show only
of the true: this Angel being seen betwixt both, seems not to have attained
the purity of that, and yet to have flowne somewhat aloft beyond the dregs and
filth of this. He cries with a loud voice, that he may be heard of all men,
that there shall come far greater calamityes, from the three trumpets that
are to come, then yet have gone before. But that these shall come upon the
inhabitans of the earth, who do counterfeit holiness, whereas in very deed
they are withered branches and rotten members. The time and congruency of the
matter do make me to think that this Angel is Gregory the Great Bishop of
Rome: he was one, as it were taken out of the rabble of many Bishops, whose
labor God would use to profit his Church. But although he sat unwares in the
chair of wickedness, yet God knows to pluck his out of the jaws of Hell.
And significantly doubtless is he called one, as though it were a miracle for
any one of any goodness to be found among that degenerating route. This Gregory
did fly in the mids of heaven, pressed down with many superstitions and
errors, that he could not be enrolled a citizen of the heavenly city. Whose
nevertheless singular good will, care, diligence, right judgment in many
things lifted him up on high far above the rest of the common sort, and that
company of superstitious ones. He cried with a loud voice, denouncing to the
world a great calamity by ANTICHRIST who should come straight way. The King,
says he; of pride is at hand, and which is unlawful to be spoken, an army of
Priests is prepared: book 4. Epist. 24. Again, the King of pride is at the
doors, in the same book, Epist. 38. In the same place again, where is that
Antichrist, which chalengeth the name of universal Bishop, and for whom is
prepared an army of Priests to attend upon him? He is at hand, says he, and
at the doors: yea he was far nearer then he thought, in whose chair he sat
even himself, but by his account he could not be far of. Neither is it
lawful to diminish the Popes credit, who could not be deceaved, especially
avouching the same thing so often and in earnest. Seeing therefore that this
Gregory next after the fourth trumpet, that is, the Vandalike persecution, so
expressly cries out aloude, that Antichrist is at hand, then whom noe
greater plague and calamity could befall the earth: and that a few years
before, that the Monster borne long ago, broke forth into the open light, it
must needs be that he was this Angel, who is showed almost so plainly by this
type, as if he had been named.

CHAP. 9.
THEN the fifth Angel blewe the trumpet, and I saw a star fall from heaven
into the earth, and to that star was given the key of the bottomless pit.

2 He opened therefore the bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out of the
pit, as the smoke of a great furnace: and the Sun was darkened, and the air,
by the smoke of the pit.

3 And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the earth, and unto them was
given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.

4 But to them it was said, that they should not hurt the hay of the earth,
neither any green thing, neither any tree: but only those men, which had not
the Seal of God in their foreheads.

5 And to them was commanded, that they should not kill them, but that they
should be tormented five months: and that their torment should be, as the
torment of a Scorpion, when he has stung a man.

6 Therefore in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and
shall desire to dye, and death shall fly from them.

7 And the forms of the Locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle:
and on their heads were set as it were crowns, like unto Gold, and their
faces like as the faces of men.

8 And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth
of Lions.

9 And they had habergions, as habergions of iron: and the sound of their wings
was like the sound of charets, when many horses run unto battle.

10 And they had tails like unto Scorpions, and stings: and they have power in
their tails to hurt men five months.

11 And they have a King set over them, which is the ANGEL of the bottomless
pit, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, but in Greek Apollyon, that is,
Destroying.

12 One woe is past: and behold yet two woes come after this.

13 Then the sixth Angel blewe the trumpet, and J heard a voice from the four
horns of the Golden Altar which is before the eyes of God, saying to the sixth
Angel, which had the trumpet.

14 Loose those four Angels, which are bound at the great river Euphrates.

15 Therefore those four Angels were loosed, which were prepared at an hour,
and at a day, and at a month, and at a year, to slay the third part of men.

16 And the number of the army of horsemen was two thousand times an hundred
thousand: for I heard the number of them.

17 And I saw the horses in a vision, and them that sat on them, having fiery
habergions, and of Jacinth, and of bristone: and the heads of the horses were
as the heads of Lions: and out of their mouths went forth fire, and smoke,
and brimstone.

18 By these three was the third part of men killed, that is, of the fire, and
of the smoke, and of the brimestone, which came out of their mouths.

19 For the horses power is in their mouths, and in their tails: for their
tails are like unto serpens having heads, wherewith they hurt.

20 And the remnant of the men, which were not killed by these plagues repented
not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and
Idols of Gold, and of Silver, and of Brass, and of stone, and of wood, which
neither can see, neither hear, nor go.

21 Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, neither of
their fornication, nor of their theft.


Analysis.
SVCH has been the common Proheme, as was said in the last verse of the former
chapter. The special effect of the greater trumpets follows: two of which
are handled in this chapter: The Fifth, unto the verse 13. The Sixth in the rest.
The first effect of that is, the fall of a star from heaven, ver 1. The
second effect is the opening of the bottomless pit, the smoke coming out of
the pit, darkening the Sun, ver. 2. and the ingendring of Locusts: of which
afterward there is a description, first in respect of their power, like unto
scorpions ver. 3. over whom, ver. 4. of how long continuance, ver. 5. how
great, both from the degree of pain, which should not be unto death, but only
for torment, ver. 5. and also from the esteeming of death, as a lesser evil,
ver. 6. Afterward there is used a lively description of them, both of what
sort they are by themselves, and that partly in sum: That they are like to
warrelike horses, ver. 7. partly by every member in regard of their heads and
faces, in the same verse, of their hairs and teeth, ver. 8. of their
habergeons and wings, ver. 9. of their tails and power of hurting to
continue, ver. 10. and also lastly, what they are in respect of their King
Abaddon, ver. 11. So is the fifth trumpet. The two next are set forth by
transitio^s, ver. 12. The former whereof, that is the sixth contains both the
calamity in the rest of this chapter, and also a consolation of the Saints in
the two following. The calamity first is commanded, the author of which
commandment is declared, ver. 13. The Minister to whom it is given, and the
sum of the commandment, ver. 14. Afterward it is performed in very deed,
both by the Captains, to whom a space of tyrannising, and the number of them
that are to be killed, is prescribed, ver. 15. and also by the soldiers, the
number of which is showed, ver. 16. and fierce and terrible disposition, ver.
17. The event of all which is double, the killing of the third part of men,
ver. 18.19. The hardening of the rest, ver. 20.21.

Scholions.
1 Then the first Angel blewe the trumpet, and J saw a star: The first
effect of the fifth trumpet is the fall of a starr, as we have said in the
Analysis, which star is not any good Angel, they are never said to fall from
heaven to the earth, which always in this book is taken in the worse patt:
but to desce^de, as chap. 10.1. and 18.1. and 20.1. Furthermore, this star is
the Angel of the bottomless pit, of which in ver. 11. who is called
Destroying, not only because he shall destroy others, but also because he
himself shall go into destruction, chap. 17.8. Who has come from the same
bottomless pit, from whence he has caused destruction to others, in the same
place: It is well true that a Holy Angel has the key of the bottomless pit,
chap. 20.1. but that is a key to shut only the bottomless pit, after that
the Devil is put in: this on the other side is only to open the same. Neither
is that firm, that the key is never given to others, then our friends: for
what other thing is the Key, then a power over a thing? Which we know is
granted to the fowls spirits; whereupon the Devil is called the Prince of the
world, John 14.30. the Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. 2.2. the Prince
of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6.12. Therefore this star by an usual
manner of speaking in the Scriptures, is some wicked Man, to whom we have heard
before now, that the name of star is given. That Ambrose, which not very
long ago Tonstall published, will have him to be some Arch-heretique, who as a
star in heaven, before he fell, shined brightly in the Church with learning
and wisdom: Ioachimus Abbas, that it is some Clergy man endued with knowledge
of learning: Well and according to the meaning of the Holy Ghost, as we shall
see by and by. He is said to have fallen in the time past, which fell before
now. For this star fell not first at this fifth sounding of the trumpet, but
departed long before from her soundness by certain degrees, and was tumbled
down into this pit of ungodlines. Although this preter tence notes not only
the thing which is now past, but also after the manner of the Hebrews, a
continuing action. Of which sort are those, This is my be loved Son in whom
I have been well pleased, Mat. 3.17. So before, Behold says Christ, I have
stood at the door and do knock, chap. 3.20. Of which sort are many in other
places. It fell from heaven unto the earth, by revolting from the holy Church
to a degenerating company of ungodly men. But this fall now first began to be
marked, after the sounding out of the fifth trumpet. For that which is done
leisurely and privily, is not perceaved to be a doing, before that it be
manifestly come to pass. The key of the bottomless pit given, is a power
granted over infernal darkness, which was shut up in the bottom of the pit
of hell, for that is the bottomless pit. Now first this power was granted to
send forth the smoke, howsoever the fall from heaven was before that the
trumpet sounded. Now that we may find out who this star is, the thing is
not to be measured by one or two circumstances (for so we shall find very
many to have fallen from heaven) but all things are to be taken together: which
surely whomsoever they shall fit, he doubtless is that very man whom this
Prophecy painteth out unto us: it cannot be that the holy descriptions should
be general and common, so as they may be applied to diverse things contrary to
the meaning of the Spirit. But it is to be observed, that this trumpet is not
limited within any certain bounds of the third part, as the former, but to
have free liberty to spread far abroad in what place soever it will, as in
the common proheme the Angel cried out in the end of the former chapter, woe
to the inhabitans of the earth: as though the calamity should be contained
within noe other limits then of the whole earth: from whence it comes to pass
that the latter trumpets exccede the former, not only in the very kind and
continuance of the evils, but also in the space and largenes of the countries
themselves, to which they should bring damage. These things being thus laid,
we shall find that this trumpet sounded immediately within three years after
that Gregory died (whom eve^ now we showed to be the Angel flying from the
mids of heaven) about the year from the birth of Christ, six hundredth and
seven. At which time Boniface the third obtained of Phocas the parricide, that
the Bishop of Rome should be universal: then also Mahumet in the East (whom
Robertus Cetenensis and Bibliander refer unto the same time in the eleven
table: albeit I think that others more truly do reffer him to a few years
after: as touching the sum of the thing there is noe difference) was believed
of his own people to be a great Prophet. Both stars fell from heaven before
this time. The Roman defection is manifest in the Idolatrous worshipping of
relics, and in attributing that to the Saints, which is proper to God alone:
that I may not recite many other wicked superstitions, when as it would ask a
long time even for to number them. Gregory that middle Angel, whom by right
thou may call holy in comparison of many other that were to come: in how
plain words does he bewray the impiety of this seat herein? The holy Martyrs,
says he, our defenders are present, they will be asked, and they require to be
sought. Therefore in your prayers seek ye these helps, find ye out these
defenders of your guiltines: in his Homilies on the Gosp. Again, Which Holy
Peter of late could be your helper in all things, and more over he is able to
forgive your sins, book 4. Epist. 34. Again, let him put his trust in the
grace of the omnipotent God, and in the help of the blessed Apostle Peter, in
the book 4. chap. 39. Moreover, from the cross, in which is the wood of the
Lords cross, and the hairs of John Baptist, we have always confort of our
Savior, through the intercession of his fore runner, book 7. Epist. 126.
Neither was he the first author of this Idolatry: neither did they which
followed endeavor to overthrowe it, but rather increased it with all their
power. And not without cause indeed, the fall of this star became the^ first
known, when the Bishop began to be called universal, then yet the ears of
all men might ring with the late crying out of Gregory, He is Antichrist, who
chalengeth to himself the name of universal Bishop. From which also it is
manifest, how both they deceive and are deceived, who require instantly the
testimonies of Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Augustine, or of any other
Father, by which expressly it may be proved that the Pope of Rome is Antichrist,
seeing his fall could not be so plainly discerned before the blowing of the
fifth trumpet: which doubtless sounded not, before these holy men ceased to be
among the living. The fall also of Mahomet from heaven is evident. The
Saracenes had received the true faith of Christ by the instruction of Moses a
certain Bishop of that people, when Mavia the Queen reigned, as in Socrates
book 4.36. or Mania, as Sozemene calls her, book 6. 38, At which time
Valens governed the Empire of Rome in the East.

From this beginning, or peradventure from Zacomus the Prince, who flourished a
few years before, the truth seemesh to have been spread among them unto the
times of HERACLIVS, corrupt without all doubt with much filth, and corruption,
as is wont to come to pass in process of time, yet not quite abolished, as it
is clear from Mahumet himself: who acknowledged the Scriptures, and took to
himself companions, or rather had for masters Sergius of Constantinople, a
Nestorian Monk, and John of Antiochean Arian, Wherefore it is plain that both
of them had fallen. The key was given to the Bishop of Rome in that manner
which I have said, For an ordinance of the Emperor being established, that the
Bishops of Rome should have full power to assemble general Councills and to
disolve them, to confirm and disanull the things which should be decreed in
the Councills: and that the City of Rome should be the head of all wholesome
life, when before Constantinople was so esteemed because of the seat of the
Emperor (as writes Pomponius on Phocas) what could not this key open? Does
not the Pope worthyly boast of the Keys, and carries them an ensign for his
arms, least perhaps any should be ignorant, that he is the same, whom John
saw should come? And this is that difference between the other superstitious
men, and the Pope of Rome. Many others did give more to the Saints departed,
then was meet, and defiled themselves with the most grievous sin of
Idolatry, yet to noe other was given the key to open the pit, but to this
universal Bishop. Let noe man therefore to hide the Antichrist, call forth the
defense and fellowshippe of others that erred, but let him join together all
the properties, nor judge of him for one alone. But as touching Mahomet, what
could not he obtain of the simple multitude, being counted of all a great
Prophet? Whose sowning from a disease the rude multitude believed to have bin a
conference with the Angel Gabriell. Surely a mighty Key and fit to open the
pit of Hell. Therefore the respect to the time, the greatness of the matter,
theagreablenes of all things, which shall more appear in the explication:
finally the large bounds of this trumpet do cause that as well Mahomet as the
Romish Pope are to be contained under this star. Neither is it an unmeete
thing that many persons should be noted by one type: whom the likeness does
compose and make to be some one thing.

2 Therefore he opened the bottomless pit, and the smoke ascended; Such was
the first effect. The second sort of effects do arise one from another in a
certain order. For first, he opens the pit: from the pit opened smoke
ascends: out of the smoke, beside the darkening of the Sun, come Locusts.
And the Smoke is Heresy in doctrine, and superstition in worship. For what
other thing can breath out of the Hellish pit? Before time indeed by many
cranyes it sent forth a foul vapor, but now through the doors opened by the
help of these men, it began to go out hastily. The Sun and air are
darkened, after that errors growed in use, and the light of the truth was
quite put out. Neither is it a darkness of one place only, such as the high
rope of some mountain does cause, but the whole air is filled with blacknes
differring nothing from the darkness of the night. And certainly after once the
Primacy was obtained of Phocas, Bonifacius the next both in name and order,
consecrated to all Saints, Pantheon a Temple of Heathenish Idolatry,
practizing the same ungodlines, which the Ethniques did before, but under an
other something more glorious name. Whose holy day also he appointed, that the
wickedness of worshipping an new army of Gods, might not be Romes alone.
Theodatus his next successor decreed, that the parents who had received even
through ignorance, their own children from baptism, should not live together
any more in the society of wedlock: but that there should be a separation
made, and the woman should receive her dowry, and be married to an other after
a year. A new kind of incest by spiritual kindred, which God knew not when
he made his laws of incest and unlawful marriages, Lev. 18. Bonifacius the
fifth added, that we by Christ are delivered from original sin only: that
the law requires noe more of us, then that which we are able to perform by
our own strength, or at least by the help of the divine grace. Vitalian, that
all things ought to be done in the Church in the Latin tongue. Finally, that I
may not reckon up an infinite thing: the matter at length came to this point,
that all must necessarily submit their necks to this yoke: That every soul
that will be saved, must confess the form of the Roman tradition: and that all
her decrees are to be received, as if they were stablished by the divine voice
of Peter himself: as Agatho in his Epist. among the Acts of the sixth Council
at Constantinople. This smoke which at the first opening of the pit, was but
thin, became every day thicker, almost by infinite degrees. And the manner of
Worshipping God, began to be noe less corrupted, which did consist wholly in
Masses, Altars, Garments, Images, Chalices, Crosses, Candlesticks, Censers,
Banners, Holy Vessels, Holy Water: in a multitude of Prayers, Pilgrimages,
Fastings, and an exceeding great company of not only idle, but also ungodly
ceremonies, the most pure ordinance of God forsaken in the mean time, and
troade under foot. How long before, and how far this smoke spread it
self in the West, one alone Boniface Venofride an Inglishman may be instead of
many witnesses, who being the Legate and Apostle of Gregory the second,
brought into bondage under the Pope the Franckes, the Noriques, the Boys, the
Thy rigates, The Cattes, part of the Saxes, the Daces, the Sclavonians, the
Frises. How great a multitude of slaves by one man's travel? But this was
nothing to the whole West, covered in a short time after with the same smoke.
For the Princes being made to believe, that, that Church was founded of Peter,
and this Peter left the keys and power given him of Christ to his successors
at Rome, and in no other place in the earth: so as he that should cut of
himself from the Church of Rome, should become a banished man from the
Christian religion (as Adrian in his Epistle to the Spaniards:) it is noe
mervayle if by this darkness the Sun was taken away from all Churches every
where. But this dark night became yet much more thick, when at length the
holy Scriptures being wholly laid aside, and all good learning being banished,
sophistical Theology was only in account, the unpure Decrees and Decretals,
held the governance. Then the Egyptian darkness was not thicker, the^ that
which came upon the whole West. The Eastern smoke sent forth by Mahomet was
grosser at the very first beginning, so as it might be felt with the hands. He
unto three holy Scriptures, as he speaks, that is, the Law of Moses, the
Psalms of David, and the Gospel, joins his Alfurta, an horrible Chaos of
all blasphemies. And as if the Eastern people had not received hurt enough
from the dotages of Mahomet, Heraclius the Emperor spread also among them the
error of the Monothelites. So then about these times, every man may see
abundance of smoke coming out of the opened pit. As touching the words,
instead of a great furnace, Aretas, the Complutent edition and some others
read a burning furnace, peradventure both are to be joined together, but the
sense is clear.

3 And out of the smoke went Locusts: An other effect of the second sort, the
procreation of Locusts: that is of men, who resemble their disposition most
fitly in their multitude and slouthfulnes. The words may not be understood of
some venomous creatures indeed: whose offspring does not require a man falling
from the truth, of which sort we have showed the star to be which fell
from heaven: neither are the true Locusts bred from the smoke of errors: but
the offspring must be of the same kind, of which his cause is. Wherefore from
this ignorance and most gross errors there came forth in the East the
Mahometish Saracens, a company of vile persons by troops running violently to
robberies, living not so much of their own as of others: a nation borne to
eat up and devour the goods of other men, which has wasted the whole East in
a few years: afterward spoiled miserably the west and our Europe. The
Western Locusts are Monks, Nuns, the young brethren the innumerable route of
religious, the Cardinals with the whole Popish Hierarchy. All these beetles
spru^g out of the same smoke, or dunge of ignorance and error. For after that
men did attribute their salvation to their works, what measure could there be
of new religions and newly devised superstition? Al do ferve^tly thirst after
salvation, which when they understa^de to be in their own power, and to
consist in the observatio^ of such things, there was no superstition from
which they could stay themselves. Surely a man is scarce more begotten of a
man, the^ these Locusts from that smoke. Whatsoever pleasant thing was any
where, in any countries, flying thither in troops, and placing themselves
there, they devoured it wholly: neither was their living more dainty then
secure, as though all the rest of mankind had bin created for to be the cooks
of these banketers. How great troops there have bin in time past, any man may
conjecture from hence, that a certain General of the Minorites, which one
sect filled forty Provinces, promised to the Pope toward his expedition
against the Turks, out of the Seraphicall family of the Franciscanes, thirty
thousand wariours, who could perform valiantly warlike offices, without
hindering at all the service of holy things: Sabel. Ennead. 9. book 6. How
huge a multitude must there have bin of all the religious men, considering that
one family of them ministered so copious an army? To which is to be added
Polydore Virgill, affirming, that there was never any ordinance of human
godliness, that grew more in a short time: for this alone family of the
Franciscanes filled the whole earth: so as the common people astonished did
suspect, that godliness was not so much regarded of many, as idleness and
slouthfulnes: of Invent. book 7. chap. 4. Behold the Locusts, even by the
judgment of the common people. There were Monks indeed of old time, but
such as lived by their labor: neither were they at all of any Ecclesiastical
degree: but this new generation sowing nothing of their own, devoured other
men's harveses: and that it might be evident whose offspring they are, The Monks
are enrolled by Boniface the 4. among the tribes of Priests, and power is given
to them to preach the word and minister the Sacraments. Boniface the fifth added
the power of binding and loosing. Now therefore they are made the creatures of
the Pope, of whom alone they receave their dignity and authority, which before
they could obtain no further, then the opinion of their godliness would procure
unto them. And not without cause it is noted of learned men, although minding
nothing as it seems this Prophecy, that in this age three great miracles came
to pass, the Monasteries of Monks were builded, Kings themselves became
shaven Monks, and daily fornication was among the holy canonized state,
Beleus Centurie the first on Vitalianus. Surely the Monkery of this time had
some peculiar thing, which did cause astonishement unto men, although they had
little regard to this Prophecy.

And power was given them, as the Scorpions of the earth have power: Now
follows hereafter a description of the Locusts: and first from the power
given them, which they obtain like to that, of the scorpions of the earth.
This creature is of the infects, it has five arms, toothed with forked
claws: the cruel plague of the poison of serpents, as says Plin. They are of
an angry disposition, whence the proverb, thou provokest the eight-footed
scorpion: and Scorpio among the Greeks, is to exasperate, to stir up, to
make very angry, after the manner of a Scorpion.

And as it becomes their outrageous madness, they carry always a drawn and
ready weapon to inflict a deadly wound. The rest of the insects have their
stinges hidden within: the scorpion alone is armed with a long stinge hanging
out, which is not idle, but always striking, giving himself noe rest at any
time, that he may not be wanting at any occasion: his going is with a winding
step, by which he strikes the more unwarres. Such doubtless is this smoky
breed in the power of hurting, which at the first were Locusts in multitude and
sloughtfulnes. The thing is clear in the Saracenes a furious nation, prompt
and ready always to kill: which by stealth and privily is wont to assail
men, and to come on with rage in those places, in which it was least of all
feared. Also our Religious Locusts in the west, which seemed to breath forth no
other thing then charity, gentleness, courtesy, were as quickly moved, as
the Scorpions. If a man did offend but one even the least of that shaven
heard, he stirred up the whole troop, neither did he carry it away scotfree,
although placed in the higest estate of nobility Don Pluto dares not ta assay,
though he be Prince of Hell,
So much as dares the unruly Monk, and crafty beldame fell.


In which two verses Pope Pius, who before his Popedom was Aeneas Silvius, was
not afraid to pronounce, that the rage of the Devil is milder, then the
monkish. They carried their weapon standing out and known to all men; the
terrible lightening of excommunication: but they gave a blow for the most part
fetching a compass, and secretly, and they pretended always fained causes of
their forie. Although if they pleased not to draw this weapon, at the least
way, they tormented with fear of Purgatory, and Hell, whither they thrust
down all their enemies. Now therefore was the time, when men dwelt among
scorpions, as in time past, Ezech. 2.6.

4 And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth:
These things show over whom power is given them. First, all Hay is excepted
simply; secondly also in part the green and trees: only men unsealed, ar left
to their lust. As touching the hay (fOr so may the Greek word with the old
Interpreter be well translated, specially seeing that the word green follows
next after) it is the dry grass cut of from the earth, which seeing it is the
company of the wicked, as we have often showed, the grass cut of from thence,
shall be men separated of God from the society of other wicked, by certain
plain and known marks. The Locusts should not hurt these, not because there
lacked will and endeavor; but because they should loose all their labor in
attempting their destruction, whom God would defend by his mighty arm against
their violence. As we read that it came to pass in the East, when
Constantine Pogonatus was Emperor, about the year 674. For then the Saracenes
with great armies, by land and sea invaded Thracia, they assaulted
Constantinople the very seat of the King: but after that by the space of
seven years together they could effect nothing by violent assaults, at last
many ships being burnt by a fire newly found out of one Callimcus, and the
rest of the navy being partly drowned through a storm, partly dashed against
the rocks, they were discouraged and weakened, so that having lost all hope,
they desired peace for thirty years: which they redeemed by a yearly tribute
of a thousand pounds of Gold, and 40 men prisoners. But do you ask the
cause why the Saracens fought here so unprosperously? There was a certain Hay
time in those countries, when Constantine abandoned the impiety of Heraclius
and Constans his Father, and rooted out utterly Monothelisme, the sixth Council
of Constantinople being asssembled. Indeed Martin and Agatho Bishops of Rome,
condemned also the same Heresy: who yet cannot be counted among this haie,
being tied to the earth by other veins, to wit a most foul Idolatry: of which
the Church of Constantinople, was more pure, which received not true and
express Images before the (...) Cou^cill a few years after under Iustinianus
second, as shows Antonius Contius, in the third part of the Decrees, in the
third chap. of distinctions, the sixth holy Council: and Polydor. Virgil. in
his 6. book and 13. chap. concerning the Inventours. In the times of Leo
Isaurus, the same Locusts came flying again about the year 719. with a far
greater number of ships, and more hurtful armies. But God sufferred them not
to hurt his haie, which he himself doubtless had moved in stirring up Leo to
prohibit that wicked Idolatry: which haie time became yet more evident, when
Gregory the second excommunicated the Emperor, and deprived him of the Empire
and of his fellowship, that is cut him of from the wicked earth, because he
had ordained that holy images and pillars should be thrown down and
destroyed. Therefore the Locusts are driven away by battle, by famine, by a
sea-fire, by tempest, and hail mingled with fire, that they might acknowledge
God to be the defender of his haie: and the whole navy of ships, ten only
excepted, did perish: of which ten, five also were intercepted of the
Emperors soldiers, the rest at length arriving at Syria, that they might be
tidings bringers of that horrible slaughter. It was Doubtless a manifest
example of the haie saved from the injury of the Locusts. Besides these
Locusts, the whole East was also full of Monks: but as the scorpions in some
lands do not hurt, as in the Jlande Pharo, in the Norike Alps, and elsewhere:
so in very many places they bring death without any remedy; and as the Locusts
destroy very often whole nations with famine, some time also they are for
meat: so the poison of the Monks was more sharp in the West part, in that it
did not enter into the East: neither were they much hurtful in the West, to
the cut grass. Discreet men, to whom the truth did show it self more
clearly, despised the hypocrites without fear, and sufferred not themselves to
be devoured of them, as the other unskilful multitude, which through a show
of Godliness became a pray.

Neither all green thing, neither all trees, but only those men, which have
not, etc. The meaning is, that some green thing, and some trees should be
delivered from this vexation of the Locusts, all the rest being yielded up to
their cruelty, who had not the seal of God in their foreheades. In the former
chapter and seventh verse, the third part of trees was burnt, and all green
grass, to wit, of that third part, because all that part of grass, and of
trees, should be of the company of the cast awayes. But unless some trees
should be counted in the number of the elect, the four Angels should not have
bin forbidden before to stay their rage, even for one moment of time, chapter 7.1.
Here therefore a few are taken out of a great number, as the natural force of
the words does show sufficiently. The words do bear doubtless that
interpretation, which the most learned Theod. Beza brings, thus, neither any
green thing, nor any tree, but only the men etc. For the universal sign,
all, is taken some time for any, as chap. 7. ver. 1. neither upon all tree,
that is, upon any: where the Complutent edition reads upon any tree: and
chap. 21.27. any thing that defiled, or any defiled thing, as has the Common
translation. Also the particles (...), may be understood by way of opposition,
but only the men etc. as, but they only which are written in the book of
life of the Lamb, chap. 21.27. But here I think that it is rather to be
translated according to the proper signification of the words by way of
exception, thus, except only the men, which have not the seal etc. The
difference is, that exception is always of a thing of the same kind:
opposition may be of any diverse thing whatsoever. And this places every green
thing, and every tree in the number of the sealed: that attributes the same
thing to some certain trees, and only to some green thing, counting the rest
of the groan in noe place of those that are to be saved, more agreably to that
which we mentioned before. chap. 8.7. Neither is it needful in the other
places alleged to depart from the natural property of these particles, if
we shall consider the matter diligently. From these things then it is prooved
that there are some within the compass of the false Church, whom God
chalengeth to him self by a privy sealing: and that this green thing and
trees are men, as we have interpreted, chap. 7.1. the exception requiring it,
which notes expressly men sealed, that also the green thing and trees should
be men, out of the number of which men are excepted. And surely there were many
men, yea some Kingdoms England, Denmark, Germany etc. whether the rage of
the Sarracenes came not: and in those places where they raged, did they
exercise tyranny over any other, then those men, who had not the mark of
salvation? What other strife do the History-writers of those times and places
report, then about the sepulcher and the cross of the Lord, and such vain
things wherewith Christians were bewitched? Neither did superstitious Locusts
vex any other men but those which were addicted to their superstition, as even
now we said.

5 And to them was commanded, that they should not kill them: How great is
their power, we may perceive from the degree of torment, from the continuance
of it, and estimation of death, as a lighter thing. As touching the first, it
was not permitted them to kill, but to tormente. How may this agree to the
Saracenes, who shed so much Christian blood? These things seem to be spoken,
not simply, but in comparison. If consideration be had of that slaughter, which
in the next trumpet was to come, the Saracenes may well be thought, not to
kill. At their first beginning the Christian name was not so much hated:
neither was there need of any great murder, when the nations which they set
upon gave out their vanquished hands, yielding almost of their own accord to
have fellowshipe in that ungodlines. In the latter times there was a more
fierce and bloody victory, by how much the battle was more eger. But the
Spirit did purposely chose out that kind of speaking, which might agree very
well to both the troops of Locusts. For those in the West should not be so
fierce and cruel in killing the bodies. But this comparative speech notes
both the cessing of these in this respect, neither takes from the other all
killing, though far less then that which was to come.

But that they should be vexed: To wit, the men that were without the mark.
There is a defect of the relative they. (...) properly signifies to be tried,
here it is used for to be afflicted, tormented, or any way to be vexed, as
every where in the holy Scriptures, and elsewhere. Montanus and Plantines
edition read, that they should vex, which they seem rather to take, that the
sentence might be less harsh: but Aretas and the Common translation have it in
the passive, as also Theod. Beza. Neither is it in vain that there is made so
sudden a passing from the verb active to the passive, but to show that this
sorrowful time is not to be measured by the fury of them that tyrannize, but
by the calamity of the sufferers: which thing brings great light to
understand the continuance of the torment, of which, in the next words which
follow.

Five months: Primasius reads six months: but the Greek copies with one
consent, and the Common translation have five. This place is indeed very
dark, and such as has always much troubled the Interprepreters. For how may
so small a space agree to the Kingdoms either of the Sarracenes, or of the
Papists? Let every day be counted for so many years, that five months should
be at least as much as an hundred and fifty years, after the manner of the
Scriptures in other places, as in Ezechiel forty days, every day for a year
I give thee: and according to the continual custom of this book (as
hereafter we will show God willing) yet nevertheless what is this so small
and short a distance of time, to these so long continuing tyrannies? Wherefore
Bullinger and some others of our countrymen do think that this number is
assigned as it were of the hotter months, in which especially the Locusts are
wont to be in chief strength, for all the granted space of tyrannizing, how
great soever it shall be. The which opinion seems to me like to be true,
unless that the very great care of the accounte, which is used in other
places, required here also some certain and limited thing. The Jesuits, being
like unto the Cuttell, do purposely as I think, power out here their
darkness, to the end that all things being confounded and disordered they may
lurk the more safely: they will have so many common months to be signified,
as though that woe had been in vain, which the Angel flying through the mids
of Heaven had sung before the three last trumpets. Did he not foreshewe by the
same that the plagues to come, should be more grievous then those which were
past? What greater thing shall this trumpet have then the former, if the
Locusts, in who^ lies the whole force of it, neither are endued with power to
kill, and also that the power which they have is of so short time? It was a
great destruction which the former trumpets brought in, and full of terror,
neither passing over in a moment, yea not in a few years, as we have showed:
but if this calamity be so shortened, neither shall it compare with the former
evils in grievousnes of torment, and also in respect of the shortness of the
pain, it would be found much easier. But I will not stand long in refuting the
toies of the Jesuits. It is most just that they who will coin figures at
their pleasure where they are not, should not see the same, where they are in
very deed, having as it were their eyes blinded. The thing peradventure may be
somewhat more apparent, if we observe certain positions: the first of which
is this, whole Kingdoms and their Kings are not spoken of here, but only
the Locusts and their exceeding great power: which we see to rise up by certain
degrees. First, they come forth out of the smoke: the smoke out of the pit
opened: the pit is not opened before the key be given: neither is the key
given, as soon as the star fell, but some long time after. From which it is
necessary that the Angel be far more ancient then the infernal generation.
For who requires the issue of ones body to be equal to the parent? Wherefore
that is not to be cast upon the Kingdom it self and Kings, which is proper to
the Locusts. Whose age is not to be regarded from hence, but only the summer
time and vigor of this overflowing company of vile persons: The summer time, I
say, because neither the first original of the Locusts, nor the last end
seems to be limited in this space. For they must needs have a beginning to
grow, before they have a power to hurt. But after their power should be
diminished, they should hurt noe small time through the stink of their rotten
carkeises. The second, the time is not to be counted from the bringers of the
pain; but from the sufferers. Whereunto have refference that verb passive,
that they should be vexed, of which we spoke even now. For it imports much
from whether of them we make the accounte: if the reckening be from the
Locustes themselves, they should have power to vex in noe place of the world,
but for the space of these five months only: but if respect be had to the
sufferers, the same distance of time shall be given to certain countries, and
shall be esteemed according to the diversity of places, howsoever the continuing
of the Locusts, in some place it may be shall be longer. From which follows a
third position, that the five months are not once only to be numbered, but so
many to be understood figuratively, as there are countries, which were to
undergo the same calamity for so great a space of years. Which foundations
being laid, we shall see noe small consent of the History. The first troop of
Locustes was of the Saracenes, who beginning about the year 630. to fly about,
Mahomet being their captain, in the first five months, that is, the first
hundred and fifty years afflicted most miserably the whole Arabia, Syria,
Mesopotamia, Armenia, Persia, they took likewise Egypt, spoiled Afrique, and
at length entered into Spain. True, will thou say, but they have held all
these places, except peradventure Persia, Armenia, and some part of Arabia,
not only for an hundred and fifty, but more or less four hundred years. I
deny not, but in the mean time it is to be considered how long they were trou
belsome to men of the Christian name in those places. It is certain that there
were congregations of Christians in great number, when first the Saracenes
invaded: and that they were not utterly rooted out by and by, but after a long
continuing misery, at length they were wholly destroyed by death, by slaughter,
by falling away to that impiety waxing strong, which became every day more
confirmed by an access of new strength. By which things it came to pass,
that the countries which before time perteined to the worshippers of Christ, in
the space of those five months, became all to the infidels, either noe
Christians at all, or very few being left there. In the next ages we shall
find the History very silent as touching the making mention of Churches in
those places. But we do limit this first invasion within the space of an
hundred and fifty years: not because at the end of this time, they were
dispoiled straiteway of the countries which they subdued, but because afterward
they fought with ill success against the Romans, often times vanquished,
killed, put to flight, hardly keeping that which had been gotten, much less
getting any more. At the year 780. about the end of Leo Copronimus, that is
after the hundredth and fifty year, since which time they first grew strong,
their insolency was restrained by almost continual received slaughters, and by
domestical discordes: Leo hanodraco brought them under in Asia: Constantine
who reigned with Irene his mother put them to flight. Nicephorus was beaten by
Leo Armenius. The same did Theophilus, Michael the son by Basilius, Petronas
and Andreas Captains: and the other following Emperors found noe less good
sucesse against them: so that now there being a manifest decay of their former
prosperity, not without cause their flourishing summer may be thought to have
ended in the East, they began to branch out in the Mediterrane Islands, in
Italy and Peloponnesus, all which places by the space of an other hundred and
fifty years they cruelly spoiled and destroyed. The inhabitans of Cyprus being
thrust out of their dwelling places, and transported other where about the
year 807. at length by the prosperous conduct of Zimisca, recouvered their
native country after an hundred and three score years. This space is greater
by a few years: but some weakening and infirmity is wont to go before the
last destruction, so as the vigor may agree very well unto the number set
down. They bring in subjection to them all Sicilia assailed often before about
the year 867: neither could they be expelled wholly from thence, before that
Georgius Mamaces destroyed them utterly about the year 1060 more or less.
Zonaras reports that not long after they returned under the power of the
Agarenes, but Ambustus Catacalon, many thousands of them being killed,
repressed them so, that they neither durst nor could bring much hurt to the
Christian inhabitans. This space also is longer the^ the determined months,
unless peradventure the dwelling of the Saracenes was not so troblesome to the
inhabitans, in those years numbered over and beside. But in Italy the thing is
more clear. About the year 830 the Saracenes being called out of Babylon for
aid, she felt destruction by and by from them, whom she sent for to be her
helpers: for they brought a very grievous desolation upon the chief part of
that country: neither was there any pause of the vexation, Otto second being
Emperor, in the year 980, that is by a plain accounte, in the hundredth and
fifty year after the spoiling begun, killed them with so great a slaughter,
that from thence he got a name, and was commonly called the Death of the
Saracenes. Here is so great a consent of the time, as if the Spirit had
respected this country alone, and in it had ordained an example of his wrath,
in delivering her up for to be spoiled of these Locusts, which was the teacher
of impiety to the whole earth, and out of which an other kind of Locusts did
spring noe less noisome then that former. But touching them we shall see by
and by: let us prosecute those things which remain concerning the former.
Therefore this first company, which by a limited space of an hundred and fifty
years did rob and slay in sundry places by a certain interchangeable course,
at length new troops of Turks followed. Who at first were troblesome not so
much by the damage which they brought by themselves, as that in taking by
force the countries of the Saracenes, who abode in heaps together in the East,
they drove them forth more into all the West. But after the poison of the
Agarenes waxed old, least the Christian name should enjoy even a very little
peace, the Turks took upon them their office, which they performed more
cruelly, then they themselves whom they succeeded. For beginning at Romanus
Diogenes in the year 1073, who being taken of the Turks, and again sent
away, having his eyes first put out, was killed of his own people. The Turks
not enduring that their good turn should thus be nothing regarded of the
Romans, vexed and took away the whole East: until a new invasion of the
Scythians made them fear, and constrained them to devise how they might
defend themselves, rather then to molest others: whereby they were brought to
seek peace of Johannes Duca Emperor of Rome, who then lived at Nice,
Byzantium being lately taken of the Latins. Which fell upon the year 1223.
see Niceph. Gregoras in the second book of the Roman History. For so it
pleased God the supreme governor, that the Turks, as Locusts and Scorpions
should vex, before that after the manner of cruel Lions, they should make
horrible slaughters without any difference of sex or of persons. And therefore
worthily their assayling until the year 1300, was called robbing by the
History-writers, rather then war: undertaken rather with a mind to take
booties, then with any hope to possess the places, which they had taken.

This rehearsal has been some thing full of words: but my desire is to bring
light unto the History: which that I may do, I regard nothing my own trouble.

The other kind of Locustes are our Religious ones in the West part of the
world, who as long as the Saracens were in their chief strength, had not yet
attained their perfection. They overflowed indeed before through great
abondance, but the summer was not yet very hot, wherein they should most of
all tyrannize, until in the times of Innocent the third the Dominicans,
Franciscans, the Poor, The Penitent, the Observants, the Trinitaires, the
brethren of the Holy Ghost, and other infinite of scowring of that kind, arose
with full power to vex men at their pleasure. There was noe age so abounding
with religious, as Polydore Virgil and other learned men have observed. Neither
did some writers think, that all the orders were even to be reckoned up, both
because they would have regard to brevity, and also because they were wont
often to spring up after the manner of todstooles, as says Polydore Virgill in
book 7.3. And certainly now was the Power of darkness, the Locusts being
armed with their stinges. Hildegardis the Abbess saw from God and bewailed a
few years before, the misery to come by the begging Friars and hungry
Locusts, and not long after experience taught the world, that her sorrow was
not in vain. This plague dared longue, neither left it any thing uneate^ up
wholly, until about the year 1360, to wit, and hundred and fifty years after
their power received, at length a West wind began to blow by Wickleffe and
other godly men: which shaking them of from the boughs, ceased not to blow,
until they were driven in to the Skarlated Fathers, as it were into the read
Sea. But that none may object that their stinking carkeises do even hitherto
infect the air: noe man can deny but that since that time they have lost their
stinges, which thing only this Prophecy respects.

And their pain should be as the pain of a Scorpion: Not that they should
kill as Scorpions (for this was forbidden them before), but that they should
inflict a wound causing noe less sharp grief, then the stinging of a
Scorpion. It is likely that some great inflammation of blood, striking and
pearsing througly does thereof arise: especially seeing it is a chollerick
creature, as we have declared before, ver. 3. But what torment is to be
compared with that, whereby men are spoiled of their goods, are pulled asunder
from their wives, are berefte of their children, the chief comforts of this
life: neither this by any necessity of death, the grief whereof is forgotten
with the time, but whereby the living and strong are separated away from the
living, that the grief may be renewed daily, and a man only left alive for
misery? That men sufferred all these things at the hands of the Sarracens, is
more known, then that it needs examples: and we shall see that they endured
noe less the same at the hands of the begging friars, if we shall well mark
somewhat more diligently. For these heirs spoiled of their inheritances, in
sitting by their parents ready to die, and wringing from them, partly by
threats of Purgatory, partly by an hope to be delivered from thence through
their singing of masses for their souls, and by their prayers, possessions of
great revenew, farms in the country, lands, Lordshippes, and great sums of
money. For which thing any word of the sick man half dead was sufficient, or
if the breath were gone, yet any sigh uttered at their demaundes. It was a
grievous thing to the heirs for to be dispoiled of their goods by this
fraud: but it was more grievous to be bereaft of their wives and children.
What was it else but under color of a vow to break marriages, to withdraw
children from the government of their parents, that against their wills, they
would keep themselves close in their Monasteries? And here are to be referred
those most famous decrees: If any shall say, that a ratifyed marriage, is not
broken of by a solemn profession of religion of one of the two yokefellowes,
let him be accursed. This decree is of the Council of Trent: but it was in use
in former times, chiefly when these Monks abounded. And many examples do
prove that not only marriages ratifyed were undone, when as it is wont to be
a hotter fire, and greater torment not to obtain the thing desired, but also
those that were accomplished, which examples being sufficiently known, I do
pass over purposely. More over that it is lawful for children to enter into a
religion against the will of their parents. An other torment of miserable men.
They took then away husbands, and wives, and children from those, to whom God
and Nature had conjoined them. Whom when they had in their keeping as pledges,
what could they now be afraid of their most loving mates, and most tender
parents, who durst not to attempt to do any thing against it, least they
should be cruel toward their own bowels? yea rather what should they not
hope for and carry away? This tyranny therefore brought noe less wealth and
security to the spoilers, then vexation to the spoiled. That I may not say,
how greatly it did molest the Priests and Bishops that the sickle should be
thrust into their harvest of the superstitious Locusts, and that they are wiped
both of all estimation and also money with the people, while the Friars bare
the sway in hearing confessions, and doing other things, which by right
perteined to the secular Priests, as the Archbishop of Biturim complains in
an assembly of the French Bishops, Maidenburg Centur. 13. chap. 9. colum. 964.
But peradventure this was a more easy torment, consisting wholly in things of
this life: that was far greater, which did cast a snare upon the consciences,
by enioyning a necessity of confessing all their sins with every
circumstance. Jnnocent the third, to whom the Western Locusts owe their
stinges; powered the first poison and strength of vexing into this superstition.
Whosoever, says he, confesses not alone all his sins faithfully at least
once a year to his own Priest, let him both living be kept from entering into
the Church, and also dying let him want Christian burial, in the Council of
Lateran, canon 21. The Locusts armed with this stinge, afflicted men with most
grievous torments. And certainly what rack could be more painful? Not to
confess was to betray their salvation, as they were made to believe. But to
confess was all one plainly, with this, for a man to offer his throat to the
tormenter: when as those holy hypocrites would absolve most readily the wolves
and Foxes from great sins: and would devour the poor Asses for one bundle
of litter stolen away, as a certain man wrote pretily in the Penitentiarie of
the Ass: The injury which thou have done to a stranger in taking away the
litter from him, is an exceeding great wickedness. Such then is the torment,
so far as may suffice to manifest the truth: the full declaration whereof
would be longer then would fit our purpose.

6 Therefore in those days: Men shall be so weary of their life, that they
shall seek death, even as a thing which they desire very earnestly, that is,
Death shall be esteemed a less evil, then this torment. Hence it came that the
Mardaitae did fortify Libanus, flying from the Saracenes: to whom assembled
many captives, servants, and that were homebred, because they were not able to
endure any longer the tyranny of the Saracenes. Although the safety which they
sought by falling and flying away, did run from them; who were compelled
again by force and arms to their former bondage, as says Zonar, in Constant.
Pogonatus. Our England was so grievously vexed and polled by these Western
Locusts, that it complained in vain, that she was more miserable then Balaams
Ass: clubbes and spurs did prick their sides, and suffered them not to rest
even a very little while: but to go forward, and to obey their most unjust
exactions, which the Holy Pope did urge continually by these Horsleaches, was
nothing else, then to go willingly into certain destruction, set before their
eyes. Certainly during the reign of Henry the third, men by the just judgment
of God being given up to the lust of these Locustes, were sick of a disease
more grievous then death. Neither did this misery belong to one Kingdom alone,
but also the neighbors, Scotland, France, and Germany groned under the same
burden. From whence not without cause Johannes Camotensis, as he is alleged
of Agrippa in the book of the vanity of sciences, said, the Legates of the
Popes of Rome did so play the Devil in the Provinces, as if Satan had gone
forth from the face of the Lord to scourge the Church. But chiefly men sought
death, and found it not being terrifyed of these locusts with the fear of
Purgatory. They would willingly have died the common death of the body, which
all antiquity judged always to be the Haven and end of all miseries; but when
the Locusts thundered out that the flames of Purgatory were not inferior to
hell fire in torment, they quaked for fear being about to die, and felt
themselves to be spoiled of all confort of death. From hence it was that for to
be freed from this their fear, they did give to the Locusts, whatsoever they
would ask, yea often times when they did ask nothing at all. Yet
nevertheless how of necessity did the miserable soul stagger and was vexed,
when even common sense did teach, that sins cannot be purged by any
corruptible price? Thought therefore and anguish of mind did press them down
on every side, considering that a bought confidence did free them from pain
little or nothing at all.

7 And the form of the Locusts: A description of the Locusts, which first in
cruelty are like unto horses prepared unto battle. There is a great alacrity
of this beast unto fight: he diggeth his feet in the valley, and rejoices in
his strength going forth to meet the weapons, he moketh at fear, and is not
made afraid, and turns not back through fear of the sword: Job. 39, 25.
There should be no less promptness in the Locusts.

Famous are the invasions of the Sarracenes in all the Histories: the warlike
prouesse of the Popes band has not peradventure ben so observed of all: which
yet is as clear and famous, if we consider the thing nearly. What soldiers
used Innocent the third to root out the Albingenses? Besides Dominicus the
mourninge trumpetour and Heralde of this war, who a little after, was made
one of the four Princes of the Begging Fryards, he mustered an army of the
Crosse-bearers: by whose aid, as it were of horses running to the battle, he
hoped to repress the heresy, as they call it, and to abolish it utterly. This
order had indeed their original before now, but shortly after being brought
almost to utter decay, Innocent restored it for this war: that the
mischievous persons, as it were half dead, might be brought again from Hell,
by the authority of the same man, by whose means they should have power to
tyrannize and to vex the world a fresh more spitefully, see Polydore Virgill,
of Invent. in the third chapter of the 7. book.

Neither did the POPE, whose manner was to confound all things, and to set
KINGS together by the ears (as PROBVSTVLLENSIS shows in an assembly at
Wirizburg, under Honorius the fourth) afterward use any other incensours to
raise up hatred.

Yea as often as the Popes were to make war (for the Pope is martial, and
not without cause, when as the Locusts his subjects are so warlike) a full
army of Crosse-bearers was at hand to fight for their King. Hildegardis
fore-shewed worthyly that these Hypocrites should be sowers of privy grudges,
who rejoice in nothing so much, as in contention and bickering ofmen.

And on their heads were set as it were crowns: The first property was
general: now he follows on the thing he began by every member. The Crowns
on their heads like unto Gold, are the shaving and rasing of the head, which
in time past was of great estimation among men, even as a crown of Gold: so
called doubtless, because the crown of the head being shaven, seems to
appear in the mids like to a crown. In how great account it has been some
time, Bellarmine shows out of Hierome in an Epistle to Augustine, which is
the 26 among the Epistles of Augustine. I pray thy crown, says he, that thou
would salute in my name, thy brethren, my Lord Alipius, and my Lord Evodius.
And Augustine in an Epistle to Proculian a Bishop, Epist. 147. Yours do adjure
us by our crown: ours do adjure you by your crown. Me think I hear, yea
by this Scepter: Homer. Iliad 1. Both kind of Locusts was notably known by
these crowns. Herodotus in Thalia makes relation to the Arabians, that their
hair is shorn, as Dyonisius himself was wont: And they are shorn beneath
like a globe, shaving their temples. But the shaving of the Monks and
religious men was of all other most famous: Polyd. Virgil speaking of the
Benedictines, They are shaven, says he, with a rasour from the crown of the
head lower then half of the skull: the hair beneath cut of after the form of
a small circle about the ears and the temples compasses the head like crown,
from whence the crown of the head it self being shaven, is called a crown,
book the 7. chap. 2. See how fitly he interprets Herodotus, minding noe
such thing, but only moved with the convenience of the thing it self. For
that which he says, they are shorn below round, he has translated
elegantly, The hair below cut of in the likeness of a little circle, a thing
long a go forbidden to the Jews: you shall not cut round the crown,
because of the Arabians neighbors as it seems, who were shorn after that
manner: that in noe thing they should be like the Jdolaters, Levit. 19.27. But
it is meet, that these Monks, who differ only in name from the ungodly
Gentiles, should agree with them in the likeness of polling their heads. The
gold of this crown, that is, the authority and dignity of this shaving, we
may see from hence, that they were wont to make obtestations by their tonsure,
as even now in the Epistles of Hierome and August. Is the dignity thereof was
so great when yet the superstition was very yo^g, of what gravity and authority
was it, after it came to a perfect ripenes? Frances de Ribera will have (...) to
be an Helmet, after the manner of speaking of the Greeks: but he is deceived,
(...) indeed sometimes is used in that signification in Homer, as (...), but
never (...), as may be understood from Plutarch, Sump. 8. Problem. 6. The
Latins, says he, do call (...) a crown from the head: as Homer by
similitude have called, (...) an helmet. So Hesychius describes (...) to be,
(...). But there is noe such thing concerning (...): To that, says he, Servius
affirms upon that of Virgill, all according to the custom had shorn hair,
hid with an helmet: on which place Servius writes thus: a crown, that is, an
helmet, and he has used the speech of Homer, for he called an helmet (...). I
doubt not but Servius knew that (...) is in Homer, and not (...): but because
of the likeness of the words, the Printers have erred, and given to us the one
for the other. Seeing therefore that the Grecians do distinguish the use of
these two words, the signification of the one is not to be transferred unto
the other.

And their faces, as the faces of men: Of an alluring form and full of
humanity, but wherein there is noe truth nor syncerity. What wonderful
cunning men are the whole rabble of those superstitious in this thing? Who^ did
they not pass in feigned courtesy? But well spoke Hildegardis of them, They
are gentle, says she, but great flatterers, false traitors, holy hypocrites
etc. There need noe witnesses in a clear matter. Also how could the barbarous
Arabians have brought under them so many countries in a short time, unless by
a certain counterfeit humanity, they had allured them to a willing apostasy?
Where fierce cruelty plainly shows it self, men had rather die in fighting,
then in serving miserably.

8 And they had hair, as the hair of women: Hair are given to women for a
covering, says the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.15. Therefore this superaboundant: groing
of hair, shows that the Locusts shall be covered with the names of women, as
it were with long hair, and shall glory very much in this ornament, counting
it a very great honor to themselves. What is more apparent? It is known that
the Arabians were called Agarenes of Agar, Sarahs maid, and this name is often
in Zonaras, Nicetas, Gregoras, and other Grecians, who were necessarily to
report the things that were done of them, this name being given them for a
reproach, as writes Sabellicus, Ennead. 8. book 6. leaf 177. b. but most
ancient, and in their opinion most glorious, 1 Chronicles. 5.10.19. and 27.31. and
long before the book of Chronicles was written, Psalm. 83.7. from whence also
it is evident, that the name is honorable, and by which they would have
themselves to be principally called. For why else are they distinguished from
the Ismaelites, wholly of the same offspring, ulesse that they inhabiting toward
the South of Judea, reioiced more in the name of their father: these toward the
East and Southeast, and being nigher to the Jews themselves, rather in the
name of their mother? Which name also at length passed the other in glory, it
being very famous with foreign writers, at last being made a name
Patronymicall even to the Ishmaelites themselves in stead of that former. B^t
from whence at length were they called Saracenes? From Sarah her self, as
far as it seems. For after their offspring from Agar seemed more vile, then
that it could fit their enriched estate (for when the Jews were destroyed,
both their stomach and wealth grew) the maid being refused, they passed over
into the name of the mistres, and afterward would be called S^racenes. For so
Hierome on the 25. of Ezechiell writes, that by the M^dian^tes, the Scripture
means the Agarenes, who now are called Saracenes, taking to themselves
falsely the name of Sarah, that forsooth they may seem to be descended from
the free woman and the Dame. From whence often times in other places he says,
that this is a wrong name, because, that it was challenged of them selves
wrongfully and uniustly. Which things do cause, that it may not seem to have been derived from Sarak, which signifies in the Arabian tongue thievish or
robbing men. For what any one man, much less a whole nation, would take unto
them a reproachful name? Neither was there any cause that Hierome being near
to the original thereof both in time and place, skillful in the tongues, and
very diligent to learn such things, should envy them that name, or call it
perverse being doubtless most fit and far the meetest for them. If it may be
lawful for me to guess, I think it was made of Sara, and the putting of an
other word Qedar, whose first letter, as the Hebrews manner is, concurreth unto
the composition of the word, as if it had been written Sarahqedar, and by
contraction Sarah, and in Chaldee Saraq. As though they should call them Saream
Arabians, for a distinction from the Jews, which are Sarean Jsraelites: not
that they would feign themselves to be descended from Sarah, but when as the
maids children were their Dames, Genesis 16.2. why should not the children take
to themselves the names as well of the Dame as of the maid? This indeed might
have some color, if they had been boundmen, but being borne out of the family,
and so many ages after they put upon themselves this name impudently. I have
rehearsed these things some what at large, for to search out the truth of a
doubtful matter, if peradventure my labor can do any good. The sum of all
comes to this point, that the Arabians gave themselves this name from a woman
for their reputation. Were not also the Western Locusts proud of the name of
Marie the mother of Christ? The Carmelites were named the Munkes of the holy
virgin: from whom Honorius III taking away their garment of sundry colors,
gave them a white one, and called them the family of the Virgin, that name of
virginity might agree with the white robe, which color is not spotted, see
Polyd. Virgil book 7. chap. 3 of Invent. Afterward sprung up a new family of
Servants of the Virgin Marie, Philippus Florenticus Medicus being the founder
of it, see in the same place chap. 4. But what are these few to the whole
swarm of those Religious? Yea Dommicus and Franciscus, from which fountains
flowed an infinite company of vile persons, gloried in the same Marie their
Patroness: I bring for witness the History of Lombardie, which they call the
golden Legende, which is able enough to convince their ungodlines, and to
approve the truth of the Prophecy: but then which, there is nothing more
vain, as concerning the truth of the things which are reported. Thus
therefore it is written in the life of Saint Dominicus, pardon me, I pray, if
I relate a Fable unto you: When Blessed Dominicus being at Rome, was instant
with the Pope, for the confirmation of this order, he saw in the Spirit Christ
being in the air, and holding three spears in his hand, and shaking them
against the world, whom his mother meeting quickly, asked him what he would
do: and he said, behold the whole world is full of three vices, to wit, pride,
conveteousnesse, and lust, and therefore I will destroy it with these three
spears. Then the Virgin falling down at his knees said, most dear Son have
thou compassion and moderate thy justice with mercy. To whom Christ answered:
do thou not see what great injuries are done to me? Stay thine anger my
Son, and wait a while: for I have a faithful serva^t and stout champion,
who shall vanquish the world wandering every where, and shall subdue it under
thy dominion. J will give also an other servant to him for an help, who shall
fight with him faithfully. To whom her Son said, behold I bin pacified, and
I have accepted thee, but I will see whom thou will appointe to so great an
Office. Then she presented to CHRIST Saint DOMINICVS: To Whom CHRIST said, in
deed he is a good and stout Champion, and will do carefully all the things
of which thou have spoken unto me.

She presented also SAINT FRANCES. And CHRIST commanded him likewise as the
former etc. In the same place after. And blessed DOMINICVS continuing in
prayer, and entreating the Blessed Virgin MARIE, to whom as a special
Patroness he had committed the whole care for his order etc.

From which we see, what hair these friars had. And not these only, but also
the whole nation of the Papists, who hold not Jesus Christ to be favorable to
them any otherwise, but so far as Marie by her intercession procures them
favor. But it shall be superfluous to wring out that thing by witnesses, which
they confess at this day of their own accord. But thou will say, how now do
I attribute long hair to the friars, whom of late I had said to be shorn and
shaven? To be shaven and to glory in the name of a woman, are not contraries:
which to be signified by these allegories, and not any proper covering of
hair, I suppose to be manifest enough. So before, chap. 4. Four and twenty
Elders are said to sit upon thrones crowned: who yet afterward fall on their
faces, and throw down their crowns at the voice of the Beasts, giving glory
to God continually: which seem so repugnant, that they cannot stand, if they
be taken not figuratively but properly. Christ also in the parable, from one
that had not on a wedding garment, and cast into utter darkness, infers,
that many are called, and few are chosen, when as the proper application would
make the contrary, that many are called and few are rejected, Mat. 22.13.14.
But the favorable readers will unloose these things easily of themselves.

And their teeth were as the teeth of Lions: The well known rage of both has
sufficiently proved to the world, their teeth to be as of Lions, seeing the
Saracenes assailed with sword and fire: they devoured widows houses under a
color of prayers and godliness.

9 They had also habergeons: Both the one and other should be fenced nobly, and
should be noe less safe, then if they should have been covered with iron
corselets: labor should be undertaken in vain, either for to subdue them by
war, or restrain them by any force, as long as their time of reigning should
continue. How unprosperously did the Romans war often times with the
Arabians, until their fore appointed time of tyrannizing was passed over, is
relatetd by Zonaras in Constans the nephewe of Heraclius, in Justimanus
Rhino^meta, and others. The same also is evident in the friars: one exemple
shall be instead of many. The University of Paris, accused to the Pope, a certain
blasphemeous book patched by the Dominicanes, which they called the Eternal
Gospel. The Pope disallowed the book, yet he would not have it to be
condemned publicly, that nothing might be diminished of the estimation of the
Monks: neither would he correct any further their wicked impudency: Maidenburg
Cent. 13. chap. 8. col. 776. Therefore he that did strike them with any weapon,
it was as if he had cast it against an iron corselet, or rather against a
brazen wall.

And the sound of their wings: The huge noise of the Locusts, when they
should even move themselves to make an assault against any. I will speak
nothing of the Saracenes, whose hostile in roades, how great terror they
brought to men, who is ignorant? Was it not a thing worthy of fear, unto all
Kingdoms and Dominions whatsoever, that almost an infinite host of most strong
men did remain in the mids of them, who were wholly addicted to the faith of
a foreign Pope, and did altogether depend upon his pleasure alone? By what
cunning could the Pope more terrify the Kings, then by the clapping together
of these wings? It is noe mervaile that the Popes cherished so greatly this
band of men, whose labor was so profitable unto him.

10 And their stinges were in their tails: The Complutent edition and some
other books read otherwise then the translation of Theod. Beza: And they have
tails like unto scorpions, and stinges; and in their tails they have power to
hurt men five months. Aretas agrees with the same. And so indeed the
declaration of the things in order set forth requires. For that which was set
down before undeterminatly, verse 3. and 5. as though the power to hurt had been common to all the Locusts, in this manner is drawn more distinctly and
expressly to one certain kind. Now it is showed that the chief fierceness
shall be in the tails, to which also the five months should properly belong:
but the tail is every worst and filthyest thing in his kind. Does not the
thing it self declare that it came so to pass? Who of the Saracenes did
chiefly bring misery upon our men? Certe^ly the tail of the Saracenes, the
basest route, the rascal sort and company of vile persons, which having noe
resting places of their own, ra^ne hither and th^ther into Cyprus, Creta,
Sicilia, Sardinia, the two Islands Baleares, Spain, France, and Jtaly, to
seek a place to dwell in. The other multitude, whose tyranny was more stable
and which continued longer, kept the countries more quietly, and with more
estimation, which they had once possessed. Also of all the Religious, the
Begging friars are the tails* to whom especially the sting belongs, and the
five months of tyrannizing. For taking their beginning from Innocentius the
third, they grew into almost an infinite number, untiil the year one thousand
three hundred and fiftieth, that is until Gerardus Ridder wrote a book
against them, which he entitled the tears of the Church, in which he proved
that that kind of life was far from a Christian perfection: that it is
against charity, that they do feed of other men's labors, when a man should
be able to get his living with his own hands: that they are hypocrites: that
they live most filthily: that for men's sake and for lucre they mixed fables,
Apocrypha, and most vain dreams with the sincere truth: that they devoured
widows houses under a color of long prayers: that they did troble the whole
Church many ways, by their confessio^s, sermons, and solemniti^s at men's
burials, and therefore that it belongs to the Bishops to restrain and
repress this immoderate liberty and abuses of the Monks. Those are his
words: the sum of which I have mentioned, because it agrees wonderfully
with this description of the Locusts. Neither do I attribute it to him alone,
that this plague was quailed and repressed: but many courageous men desirous of
true godliness were about that time, who with joint forces did put to flight the
same. From hence therefore it is more apparent which we said at the fifte
verse: That the whole Kingdoms, either of the Saracenes, or of the Pastists,
is not to be gathered into that space of five months: but this time belong to
the Locusts only, and chiefly those, which have the consideration of tails,
as we have declared.

11 And they had a King set over them: Here the articles have an express
signification of that which is intended: That Angel of that bottomless pit,
as it is wont to be done in certain and known things. Yet we have had before
noe mention of this Angel of the bottomless pit in express words, unless
the same be he, to whom the key of the pit was given. And so indeed it is
needful. For who rather should be the Angel of the bottomless pit, then he
that had the key given him to open the pit and to send forth the smoke? By
which argument we have showed that the star which fell was an evil Angel.
That King to the Saracens is Mahumet, or the Mahumetish Calipha, whom they
obeyed. But to the Superstitious Locusts the Pope. For as Bonifacius the 5.
chose the Monks into his clergy, whereby it was made manifest, whose
creatures they are, as was said at the 3. ver. so Innocent the third, that it
might become known to all me^, that the tails of the Locusts, that is, the
begging friars, do acknowledge no other King then the very Pope, decreed in
the council of Latr. can. 13. That no man from hence forth should invent any
new religion; but whosoever would be converted unto a religion, should choose
one of those that were approved. Which is not so to be understood, as though he
would prohibit simply any new religions, but that afterward no new order
should be instituted, without the approbation of the Apostolical Chair, as is
found in the end of the chap. concerning the religion of Dom. Which decree,
Gregorius the x. renewed in the Council at Lions in France, in chap. The
diversity of Rel. From which decrees, that was made necessary, which before was
free, as Bellar. himself confesses in his 2. book of Monk. chap. 4. And what
is this else, but to be a King? To whom it appertains to tie men with the
bonds of laws, and upon things which are at our choice to lay a necessity:
wherefore the Papists are holden with their own judgment, and we need no
other arguments. But this King is signified by name, and that two ways, in
Hebrew Abbaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, after a manner of speaking usual with
the Hebrews, the participle being put for the substantive. And certainly that
adversary, is called, the child of perdition, 2 These. 2.3. But it is noted by
the name of both nations, because that King shall be common as well to the
Gentiles as the Hebrews: diverse indeed in the sound of languages, but one
and the same in very truth. Even as Augustine from the words Abba Father,
argues a consent as well of the Gentiles, as of the Jews unto one true God.
The Hebrewe word fitteth the Saracenes, because they are near a kin to the
Hebrews, and bordering on them by their countries. But the Greek word
Apollyon after the manner of the Scriptures, notes the rest of the Gentiles
whatsoever, which fetch their beginning from any other stock then the
Hebrews. With how nigh frienship therefore are the Romish Pope, and the
Mahumetish King joined together in truth, albeit that they pretend war and
an hostile mind? The Spirit gives them rightly one name, which do one thing,
although in a contrary show. So then we have a most clear description of the
Locusts, so as noe man ca^ be in doubt now, either who should be that Angel
of the bottomless pit, or who is his infernal army. Has not therefore
Bellarmine notably deceaved both himself and his hearers, who in a certain
oration which he made in the Schools, draws wrestingly all these things
against the Lutherans? Does he respect the time, when this mischief should
overflow the world? It is that doubtless which followed next after that
desolation, which the Vandals executed upon that third part of the Christian
world. What other Locusts were there at that time besides those which I have
spoken of? Where shall one find the shaving the protiction of a woman's name,
the utterlie undone, and undoing Prince, and every of the other marks any
where else, then in that same heard, whereof languishing now a long time and
giving up the last breath, he himself is one? But that the matter may be yet
more apparent, if it be possible, I think good to add here in stead of a
conclusion the prophecy of Hildegardis the Abbess, both because I have made
often mention of her, and also because I think that a copy of it is not easily
gotten, and it does much set forth the thing it self. The notable man of
blessed memory, our country man John Fox, placed the same in the Acts and
Mon. of the Church turned into English, which he had by him in Latin written
in parchment with old characteres thus:

THE PROPHECY OF HILDEGARDIS.
In those days shall arise a people blockish, proud, covetous, faithless,
and crafty: which shall eat up the sins of the common poeple, holding a
certain manner of foolish superstition, under a fained covering of beggerie, by
a forged religion, preferring it self before all other. Of an arrogant
disposition, and sained devotion, void of all shame and fear of God: a strong
and ready author and inventour of new abominations: but all wise and faith
full Christians shall detest this order: they shall give labor, and shall give
themselves to idleness, esteeming more a living by flattery and beggerie:
endeavoring with all their power every means, whereby they may pervers^te
resist the teachers of the truth, and hinder them, joining to themselves for
that purpose Noble men. Then also who shall deceave the great States of
Realms, and draw them in^o error that they may minister to themselves
necessary sustinance and the pleasures of this world. For the Devil shall
grass into their hearts these four chi^fe vices, Flaterie, Envy, Hypocrisy,
Backbiting: Fl^terie, whereby they may get to themselves many great things:
Envy, when they shall see benefits to be bestowed upon others th^n themselves:
Hypocrisi, that they may please men with a fained pretense: Backb^ting, that
they may extol and set forth themselves with praises, but derogate from
others, to the end that they may be had in estimation of men, and deceave the
simple. They shall preach indeed diligently, but without all sense of
godliness, and not after the manner of the Holy Martyrs before time. They shall
derogate from the Secular Princes, they shall take away the Sacraments from
the true Pastors, and shall receive alms of the needy, sick and miserable,
winding themselves by little and little, and stealing into the favor of the
common people: they shall have familiarity with women, teaching them how with
flattering and fained words they may deceave their friends and husbands, and
rob them of their goods, to give to them. For they will receave whatsoever has been gotten by theft, robbery, or any evil cunning, and they will say give
us, and we will pray for you: So that laboring to hide other men's sins,
they shall wholly forget their own. And, o grievous thing: they will receive
any thing from vagabonds, pilferers, extortioners thieves, and robbers by the
high ways, from church-robbers, usurers, adulterers, Heretics, Shismatiques,
revolters, harlots, bawdes of Noble men, perjured merchants, corrupt judges,
soldiers, tyrants, and such as live in trades contrary to the law of God.
They are perverse and wicked, embracing the persuasion of the Devil, the
sweetness of sin, an easy and delicate life, and a certain abundance of
things even unto eternal damnation. All these things shall appear manifestly
in them all, and every day they shall grow more wicked and more hardened in
their hearts. And when their fraud shall be found out, and their naughti^esse,
then gifts shall cease, and they shall go about to houses hungry like
ravening dogs, their countenances cast down upon the ground, and their
necks made short, as doves, that they may be satisfied with bread. Then the
people shall prosecute them with an outcrie, woe be to you wretches, children
of sorrow, the world has deceived you, the Devil has ruled you hitherto by
his power: you have a frail flesh, and heart utterly without wisdom and
unstable, wavering minds, and eyes delighted with much vanity and folly, your
idle paunches have coveted dainty dishes of meat, and your feet have been
swift to wickedness. Remember the time when you were openly blessed, but
secretly envious, abroad poor, but rich at home, courteous in show, but in
very truth great flaterers, false traitors, perverse back biters, holy
Hypocrites, suppla^ters of the truth, just beiond measure, proud, unchaste,
unconstant teachers, delicate Martyrs, confessors desirous of much lucre:
gentle, but false accus^rs, religious but covetous, humble, but yet proud,
merciful, but shameless liars, pleasant flatterers, peaceable persequutours,
oppressors of the poor, bringing new sects invented of your selves: counted
merciful, but known by experience to be wicked, lovers of the world,
conspiratours, drunkards, ambitious, patrons of wickedness, robbers of the
whole earth, unsatiable preachers, men pleasers, beguiling simple women, sowers
of privy grudges. Of whom Moses that excellent Prophet spoke well in his
Song, a people without council and understanding: Oh that they would know,
that they would understand, and consider their latter end. Ye have built
indeed on high, and when it was not granted you to rise higher, ye have
fallen down together, even as Simon Magus, whom God cast to the ground, and
smote with an huge blow: so at length you have been thrown down from your
false doctrine, naughtiness, lies, slanders, villainies, out of the clouds
unto the very earth. Then the people speaks to them, get ye hence, you
teachers of abominations, destroiers of the truth, brethren Shunamites,
fathers of heresies, false Apostles, who counterfaited the life of the
Apostles, the followers of whom you have been in noe sort. You are the children
of iniquity: we will not follow your manner of courses. For pride and
arrogancy have deceaved you, and unsatiable covetousnes has wrapped in her
snares your erring minds. And after that ye would clime higher then was meet
and reasonable, by the just judgment of God ye have fallen down headlong
into eternal shame and reproach.

These things Hildegardis foretold about the year 1146, three skore years
before the begging friars were bred: whom notwithstanding she painteth out so
cunningly and lively, that she may seem not so much to have foretold a
thing to come, as to have reported a thing past. Who can describe more clearly
the beginning and disposition of these Locusts? Who can speak more plain of
their destruction? even of us, who have seen the thing declared to be true by
the event? Neither only treated she of those which should spring up next
after her age, but also of the I^suites of our time, and the other company of
vile persons of that sort, which does annoy in these days. For all these
Locusts belong to the same pit, are of the same manners, and shall be in the
same destruction.

12 One woe is past; The first of the three more grievous. For the second
follows in chap. 11.14. as it has been observed before, that one with the
Hebrews is as well a nowne of order as of number, in chap. 6.1. This woe is
past, not because noe remnants should remain when the next trumpet should come
after the other, but because the heat of it should be much cooled again, so
as it wanted but a little, but that it might seem to have b^n utterly
quenched. For this Angel of the bottomless pit shall not be abolished
wholly, together with all his servants before the bright coming of the Lord, 2
These. 2.8. There is the same meaning of this word chap. 11.14. For the ve^ation
of the sixth trumpet should not vanish away altogether forthwith at the first
sounding of the seventh, but should tarry after that for some long time. But
the space of this trumpet is of six hundred years and more, to wit from the
year 406. unto the year one thousand three hundredth and fiftieth, or there
about.

13 Then the sixth Ang^ll bl^we the trumpet: Now the sixth trumpet follows,
and the s^co^^ woe: of which first is declared the commandment: secondly the
Execution. In that is to be considered the Author, the Administratour, and the
meani^g of the commandment it self. The Author is, one voice from the four
horn^ of the golden Altar. We have showed at chap. 8.3. what manner of altar
this is. Properly it signifies Christ, in whom, and by whom only our prayers
do please God: as once was shadowed out by the golden Altar of incense set
before the veil, upon which alone, it was lawful to burn the holy incense.
This Altar had four horns, upon which only once a year reconciliation was
to be made of Aaron, and with the blood of the s^c^ifice for sin in the day
of reconciliations: Exodus 30.10. For albeit the daily prayers were sweet and
had also a good savor, the incense of which was daily offerred on the altar,
yet these yearly prayers, which were made upon the horns of the altar were
most fervent, and of chief moment. But it is to be observed that the voice
which is heard, coming from the horns of the altar, is not a praying, but a
commanding voice, saying, loose those four Angels: From whence this voice is
not of the faithful praying, but rather of Christ hearing their prayers. For
therefore it is made from the horns of the altar, both that he may teach that
this voice is an answer given to the supplications of the saints, and also
that we may know that by him alone is obtained that, which we ask, by whom
and in whom only we offer up our prayers to God. Therefore when the godly
desire earnestly, that God would provide for his Church being troubled, this of
loosing the 4 Angels comes from the horns of the altar: that while they
should handle the stiff enemies of sincere religion according to their
deserts, the truth in the mean time might spring again, and enjoy a more
quiet season. We have learned from those things which have been said before,
that the pure religion had been oppressed wholly and overwhelmed, partly by a
deluge of Locusts, partly by other infinite corruptions, chiefly by the tyranny
of Antichrist. But when it seemed good to God about this time to begin some
restoring of the truth, it pleased him to trouble Antichrist and to disquiet
him with the fear of the four loosed A^gels, least he should d^^^^oy his
growing truth in the first blade, and not s^ffer it to come to that rip^^^^sse
which we see now. Wherefore this commandment came in good season to the
Church, for whose sake alone all the alterations come to pass, which we see
in the world.

14 Saying to the sixth Angel: To him, to whom the commandment is given. This
first is appointed the effectour of the work, the former only denounced the
evil: peradventure the contagion of the sin let them from putting their
hand to the work, but here should be a clear separation of the punishment
and the fault, that the minister thereof should not need to fear the
infection of this.

Loose those four Angels: Car. Gal. p^g. 56. and duravit usque ad ann. 1191
etc.
The meaning of the commandment of loosing the four Angels: who stood
prepared in readiness, expecting only when a sign should be given them. But
what manner of Angels were these? were they properly so called, and bound to a
certain place, that they could not stir from thence, until some special
leave was given them? Certainly it is read that Asmodeus was exiled into the
desert of the uppermost Egypt, Tob. 8.3. But this worthily may be counted to be
of small credit, because of the Jewish lies, unto which that people was so
given, that also Josephus a man doubtless learned and eloquent, durst affirm,
Solomon either first to have invented, or at least by his books to have
increased the Divelish art of coniuring a spirit, book 8. chap. 2. of
Antiquities. Thi^, I say, had been vain by right, unless an authority of
greater weight out of this very book of the Revelation agreed unto it, chap.
18.2. Where it is signified, that the unclean Spirits are shut up into certain
places, as into a prison. Which yet nevertheless seems not to be common to
all, but only to some certain. For how can all be tied to limited places, when
it is free for some to compass the whole earth? Job 1.7. Of which also some
walk about as roaring Lions seeking whom they may devour, 1 Pet. 5.6. They
rule also in the air: and the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience. Ephesians. 2.2. And they are the governors of the world, yea the Gods
of this world, blinding the minds of the infidels, Ephesians. 6.12.2 Co 4.4. Can
they perform these things being absent? Therefore some do seem to be cast
into certain places, as into a prison* some to have more free liberty to walk
abroad. Yet nevertheless the impiety of the Magitians is nothing helped from
hence, who think that they are able to constrain the Devils with a certain
necessity of abiding within a circle, in a smooth stone, in iron, steel, in a
looking glass, in the nail of a man, or any like thing. For God has reserved
this power to him self alone, and to his holy Angels, whom often he uses for
his ministers in this thing, he has given noe authority any where to such men.
Neither are these Angels only Devils, but also men, who are ruled by their
power, whom now it is a common thing to be called Angels. For the army is
made of men, as is manifest from chapter 20.7. Where again he entreats of the
same thing. Satan goes out to deceave the nations, and to gather them
together unto battle. But the Captains are of the same kind with their
so^ldiers. Wherefore seeing the order of things has brought us unto the year
one thousand three hundredth, it is not to be do^bted, but that they are the
Turks: of which judgment are a great part of Interpreters: they are said
four, because there were four chief families of them. For after the
slaughter received of the Scythians: Iconium the Princes Palaces being lost,
and after some years spent in robberies, at length they retiring back, they
recovered themselves again, and divided among their Princes that of Asia,
which in short time after they took from the Romans. The first of which was
Carm^nus Atisurius, the second Sarchanes, the third C^l^m^s and Cerasus his
son, the fourth Atman, as he is written in Gregoras, or after others Ottoman:
to which the same Gregoras adds the fifth A^urius, book 7.1. And so many they
seem to have been at the first: but afterward to have been brought to four.
Laonicus Chalcocondy las says, that in the beginning there were seven, book 1
of the Turks affairs But he joins a certain man called Teciem with
Ottoman, and reckeneth the children asunder from the fathers. But it is not a
thing to be mervayled at, that this confusion of barbarous people could not be
represented certainly by the History-writers, albeit Gregoras lived in the same
time, and had the charge of keeping the rolls of the Emperor Andronicus the
elder. This nation came some ages before from Armenia and the countries
bordering on Euphrates. From which places they did repel easily the Romans,
which were wearied long ago, and wasted with many calamityes. But about the
beginning of the reign of Andronicus Paleologus the elder, before the year
1300. it spread her self abroad through Asia, even unto the Sea Aegeum. But
that they should not break forth from some other place, then from their fore
appointed lists, to wit from Euphrates, at that time, when the raines were let
loose unto them, God by the help of the Catelani drove them again unto
Euphrates. These men their Captain being Ronzerius, were soldiers in pay
under Andronicus, the prowess of whom was such, that for fear of them, the
Turks fled not only from Philadelphia, which then they besieged, but also
almost beyond the ancient bounds of the Roman Kingdom, as Gregoras
testifyeth, book 7.3. This fear therefore did drive them into the countries
about the river Euphrates, and did as it were lay fetters upon the^ for a time.
Neither was it a small bound tying them, that they could not rage as they
would, in that their forces being divided unto many Princes, every one a part
were too weak, that they should dare to attempt any great thing. Both these
impediments were taken away at the time of the power granted them. For first of
all the Cat^lani followed not on the victory begun, but shortly after went away
returning home. Secondly about the same time, to wit, about the year 1291,
whatsoever by lawful war the Christian Princes took in Palestina, and in
the countries adjoining in twelve expeditions, and after the possession of 196
years, they had lost now all that, so as those lands being given over, every
one went their way home. Finally all the families of the Turks, whether of
their own accord, or compelled by force, submitted themselves to that one
family of the Ottomans. By which means the Turks being free from all fear of
the enemy behind them about Euphrates, neither having any before them, that
could set against them sufficient forces, renewed their assault against the
Romans, whom in short time they overwhelmed wholly, as it were with a deluge.

Bound at that great river Euphrates: So called properly, that famous river of
Armenia, running to the West part of Mesopotamia, where the Turkish nation
abode many years before it entreprised this warfarre.

15 Were therefore loosed: The execution of the commandment, lighting upon
the year 1300, by one consent of all History-writers; when their domestical
dissentions being appeased, and all consenting to the Empire of the Ottomans,
they might freely bend themselves with all their power to enlarge their
bounds, and some time at length creep out of their narrow straightes. How
long time this power given to the Turks should continue, is declared in the
next words, prepared at an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, which
so exact description pertains to the conforting of the godly, whom the Spirit
would have to know, that this most grievous calamity has her set bounds,
even to the last moment, beyond which it shall not be continued. Which indeed
seems to be the space of three hundred ninety and six years, every
several day being taken for a year, after that manner which we interpreted
the months before. But the year set down here simply is meant to be the
common and usual Julian year, of three hundred three skore and five days,
and some few hours. All which time counted from the year one thousand three
hundredth, shall end at length about the year one thousand six hundredth
ninety and sixth: which is the furthest bound of the Turkish name, as also
other scriptures by a merveilous consent do prove, unto which now to run, is
not permitted unto me, but a fit occasion shallbe given at an other time, if
God will. In the mean time we must know that the power of the Turks shall
not remain whole unto this end, but shall threaten their ruin before or
about forty years, before that last destruction of them shall come: but of
this matter at some other time more at large.

To slay the third part of men: Not without cause does he make mention of the
power granted to kill, because more blood should be shed by these Angels, then
by any enemies before spoken of. A great number were killed of the Saracenes:
and the Romish Antichrist is wholly berayed with the blood of the Saints: as
after chap. 17.4.6. But the slaughters made by them were none in comparison of
these, neither therefore do come into any account. The rage of the fierce
enemy is limited with the bounds of the third part, as we have seen that it
has come to pass in the East, partly in Asia, partly in Europa: from whence
it is not to be feared that it shallbe extended much further. And surely it is
kept back by the force of the same prohibition, whereby the violent waves of
the sea are kept by the limits of a small send. For what bar is there in
the West to stay them, when the Christian Princes endeavor one an others
destruction? Albeit there may be granted an excursion beyond those bounds for
a small time to punish some men, as we have observed in the Sarden Church,
chap. 3.3.

16 And the number of the horsemen was: of the armies of a horseman, for of
horsemen, unless peradventure it be set partitively, as though he should say*
and the number of the armies, of that of horsemen was two thousand hundred
thousand: I heard also the number of the armies of footmen, which things need
not to be stood upon, considering that any may easily gather from so great a
number of them, that these were almost infinite. The Comp. and the K. bible
read, of an horse. A certain old copy has of horses, and ten thousand times
ten thousa^de. The word two being put out, which Aret and the Com transl. has.
The Interpreter of Aret. and the Com. declare this number by the parts, twenty
thousa^de times ten thousands: which Th. Be. in the whole translateth two
thousand tim^s an hundred thousand. In the clause following the Compl. and the
K. bible do omit the copulative, and, read by Ar. and the Com. transl. Beza
has it by a rational coniunctio^ for I heard the number of them, as if the
number expressed perteined to the whole army, which yet is referred expressly to
the army of horse men, but the indefinite number of the rest of the armies,
should have respect unto that of footmen: unless peradventure all the hosts
are of horsemen, because of the swift increase whereby the Turks should wax
strong, as also is signified in the verse following. But these are smaller
things, yet not to be neglected. We understand that their armies shall be
exceeding great. And in many expeditions it has been known for certain, that
the Turk^ alone did bring more soldiers into the battle, then all the
Christian Princes joined together.

17 And more over I saw the horses:: Such is the number of the hosts, their
disposition is declared in this verse. Which, of what sort it is, is showed
from the horses, from the armor of the sitters on them, from Lions heads of
the horses, and from that which comes out of their mouth. They are Horses in
their alacrity and promptness to war, as before ver. 7. The habergeons of
the sitters on them, are fiery, of Iacinth, and of brimstone: altogether of the
same quality, of which that is, which comes out of the mouth of the horses,
which breath out fire, and smoke, whose color is of Iacinth and brimstone:
which three ar the instruments of killing men, as after shall be said. Seeing
then they are armed with these three on their breasts, it is even as if he
should say, that they are armed s^rely with the destruction of me^, as who
suppose that all their safety and defense lies in slaying of other. How lively
do these things pourtray the Turkish Empire, which is sustained with no other
hold the^ tyranny? But further the fiery habergeons ar clear to all men, eve^
as the fire cannot be hid. Which is another mark, by which properly this route
may be challenged to belong to the Turks, not to the Saracens, or Romans. For
the Turks do vex with open war, neither is there any of the Christian
name, but he may behold a far of their hostile mind in their habergeo^s and
breasts. The Saracens also were noisome, but they invaded as it were by skippes
and unexpected flying upon me^ privily, and as craftily as they could. Also the
Romish Locusts so deceived with their vain shows, and do yet deceive, that
they who^ they kill, cannot be persuaded that they are their enemies. For they
hide their habergeo^s and corselets, neither make show of any hostile thing,
but lurk as Scorpio^s under a stone. The lio^s heads of the horses do note
great cruelty, whereby the wicked nation was brought to notable infamy above all
who^ we ever heard of. Moreover in this point they pass the Locusts, who had
lions teeth only, but these have the whole head, that unto the hugeness of
their teeth may be joined the strength of their jaws, and sternnesse of their
co^tenance. That which comes out of their mouth is threefold, fire, smoke, and
brimstone: which three seem to note one thing, to wit, the ordinances of
war, whose original was not long after the beginning of the Turks, which
they use with a more furious affection the^ other men. The greatness of that
gunne was almost incredible, which M^chmetes used in assaulting Constantinople,
to the drawing whereof were used seventy yoke of oxen and two thousand men, as
says Laonic. Chalcocond in his 8. book of the Turks affairs.

And those twelve thousand Ianizarites whom they have to their ordinary guard
for the safegarde of their body, are all gunners. See also if any thing could
be spoken more fit to declare the nature of the ordinance. First here is
mention made of fire: but least a common fire should be understood, there is
adjoined a double difference, of smoke and brimstone. For the fire of the
ordinance is notable for an abu^da^ce of smoke, which arises from a sudde^
kindling and que^ching, as comes to pass in the noise of discharging
ordinance. Where the fire burns continually, and with a shining flame, there
is very little smoke, being swallowed up by the flame. More over this fire is
Brimstone. Is not the gunpouder made of salt peter, coal, and Brimstone? The
Spirit therefore describes this enemy to us by those weapons, which should
take their beginning almost together with his tyranny. But this fire comes out
of their mouth, because they do send forth this fire as easily, as a breath:
If only that chief robber shall command desolatio^ to be brought upon any
country, most quick hands are ready, which forthwith do his command, and
bring all things into a wilderness.

18 Of these three: Thus far of what quality the Captains and Soldiers ar,
now he comes to the event: which first is the staying of the third part of
men. We hear, o lamentable thing, daily massacres: neither is any almost
ignorant, how far and near their cruelty goes on with rage. But whereas he
says, of these three, it is to be understood of these three together. For
smoke and brimstone asunder have no harm in them. He reckeneth three, as
distinct, because the former description of fire required such a reckening.
Although men shall not be consumed by gunnes alone, but one kind of warlike
instruments is put for the whole.

19 For their power: The Complutent edition and the Kings Bible read thus, For
their power is in their mouths and in their tails: Aretas and the Common
translation agrees: and so it seems that necessarily it ought to be read:
otherwise the reason which follows agrees not with those things that go
before: For their tails etc. From hence therefore, an other difference
between these horse men and the Locusts comes to mind: For these did bear
their stings in their tail chiefly, that is the dregs of the Saracenes, who
had noe proper places of their own to dwell in, and did fly about hither and
thither seeking habitations, and turning others out of all their goods, when in
the mean time the chief Calyphi, Scriphes, and Sultans followed their
pleasure at home in Babylon, Persia and in Egypt. So the Begging Friars, the
tails of all the religious sort did sting vehemently. But here the head and
the tail are even like: the same destruction comes from them both. The chief
Turk himself, the Bassae, the Begi, and the other Ministers of their tyranny,
do all breath forth and exercise the same cruelty. More over these very
Princes were the causers of the other to tyrannize, and ministered unto them
weapons for their fury.

Having heads Wherewith they hurt: The tails also have heads and mouths, by
which they send out the same destruction. They are all of them from the
highest Emperor to the lowest slave serpents with heads at both ends, as the
most learned Franc. Iunius has written very well.

20 But the rest of men: An other event is the obstinacy of the other men, who
are nothing moved with those miseries, neither gave themselves to any
amendment of life. But who are those other? Are they not Western me^, the
third part of men being killed long since in the East? Afrique being so gotten
through the invasion of the Saracens, that it would yield unto the dominion of
the Turks without any bloodshedding. But the sins which stick so fast to
them, are against the first table, to wit, Idolatry in this verse. The
exceeding naughtiness whereof is declared, first from the Author, in that it
is an humane invention: secondly, because it is a worship done unto Devils:
thirdly from the wretched and doting affection, which appears from so
manifold sorts of Idols, of gold, of silver, of brass, of stone, and of
wood: last of all from the notable folly of worshipping things void of all
sense. From all which it is more clear the^ the Sun, who among the Western
people, are the cause of this most grievous calamity from the Turks. For where
shall we find this Idolatry? Surely the Protestants, as they call them, and
the reformed Churches have banished away unto hell, from whence it first came,
all worship, reverence, and sacred honor of Images. Wherefore she that
boasts her self to be the Catholic Church, whose head is the Bishop of
Rome, whose Temples glister with images of Gold, Silver and Brass: yea which
has not refused the worshipping even of those that are of stone, and wood:
she, I say, is that other multitude, which wresting the Scriptures, corrupting
the testimonies of the Fathers, faining miracles, and defending to this very
day the Idolatrous worshipping of images, by whatsoever force, falsehood, fraud
and subtle devises she can, will not be awaked with this most sharp scourge.
Does she not impudently and stubbornly affirm, that Images consecrated unto
true names, are by noe means to be counted among Idols? But what other
speaks the Spirit of, then such, which after the third part of men slain of
the Turks, are defended stiffly in the Christian world? What other does he call
divelish? What other worship of Devils? The matter is plain, it can not be
denied. At length therefore o thou Rome, cease to seek out foolish crafty
shifts. Deceive not thy self. Thy adoration before the image of the Virgin, is
as if thou should supplicate unto Venus. The worship which thou performest
before the graven image of the Father, is done to the Devil, not to God
himself. The Spirit causes me to use this boldness: cry thou out as much as
thou will, that these speeches ar blasphemous, and after thy manner accuse the
holy truth of God of ungodlines. But it is not to be expected that words
should teach thee, whom stripes can not teach. Yet nevertheless, though thou
shall receive noe profit here of, all the godly shall detest thee, who by these
abominations, bring a most cruel fiend upon the Christian world. Art thou
not ashamed to exhort the Christian Princes unto wars against the Turk,
whom thou make invincible by thy Idols? To pretend a mind to fight against
a cruel enemy, but to minister privily unto him that aid, whereby all our
forces ar made a pray unto him? If thou desire from thy heart, that this
spoiler of the world should be repressed or rather extinguished: cast away thy
dung hill Gods: forsake thy sacrilegious Primacy: amend the rest of thy
corruption according to the rule of true godliness, then shall thou see this
mortal and cruel mo^ster, covered indeed with all villainies, to fall of his
own accord: which could not stand surely one moment, unless he were holden up
by these thy sins. But neither will thou be admonished, neither can he be
overcome, before thou be overcome, as after shall be manifest.

21 Neither repented they: An other kind of sins: which are four, murders,
sorceries, formcation, thefts: of which he that knows not Rome to be the
shop, he sees but a little in the clear sun shine at noonetide.

CHAP. 10.
THEN I saw an other Angel coming down from heaven, clothed with a cloud,
and the rainebowe upon his head, and his face was as the Sun, and his feet
as pillars of fire.

2 And he had in his hand a little book opened, and he put his right foot
upon the Sea, and his left on the earth.

3 And cried with a loud voice, as a Lion roareth: and when he had cried,
seve^ thunders uttered their voices.

4 And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write:
but I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, seal up those things which
the seve^ thunders have spoken, and write them not.

5 And the Angel which J saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth lift up
his hand to heaven.

6 And swear by him that lives for evermore, which created heaven and things
that are therein, and the earth and the things that are therein, and the sea,
and the things hat are therein, that time shall be noe more.

7 But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin
to blow the trumpet, even the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has
declared to his servants the Prophets.

8 And the voice which J heard from heaven spoke unto me again, and said: go
and take the little book which is open in the hand of the Angel standing
upon the sea, and upon the earth.

9 So J went unto the Angel saying unto him: give me the little book: and he
said unto me, take it, and eat it up, and it shall make thy belly bitter, but
it shall be in thy mouth as sweet as honey.

10 Then J took the little book out of the Angels hand, and ate it up, and
it was in my mouth as sweet as honey: but when I had eaten it, my belly was
bitter.

11 Then he said unto me, thou must prophecy again among the people, and
nations, and tongues, and to many Kings.


Analysis.
SVCH then is the first part of the sixth trumpet, to wit, the evil: the
comfort follows, consisting partly in the authority of the revealer: partly
in the things revealed. His authority appears from the power of a certain
Angel coming down from heaven, notable by his clothing, ornament of his head,
shining of his face, bright burning of his feet, ver. 1. Likewise knowledge,
which the book open in his hand shows, and his presence every where,
declared by so great a pulling asunder of his feet ver. 2. The things
revealed are, either to be Sealed up, or to be communicated: Those have their
principal cause, the voice of the Angel: their isntrumental cause Seven
thunders ver. 3. Likewise their consequent, which contains both the endeavor
of John in writing, and also the prohibition that he should not write, ver. 4.
The things to be commumicated are, either touching the finishing of the mystery
of God in the times of the seventh trumpet, confirmed by an oath ver. 5.6.7. or
of the gift of prophecy, restored again to the Church, the preparation
whereunto is set down in the rest of the chapter. Prophecy it self follows
in the eleventh chapter. The Preparation is occupied either about the Sign or
about the Interpretation: that before the book received, has a commandment
to take it, in the eight verse: and the obedience of John, in the ningth verse.
After the same delivered, both a commandment to eat it up, and also an
instruction touching the diverse taste of it, in the ningth verse, and the
trial made by John, in the tenth verse. Last of all is added the
Interpretation in the eleventh verse

Scholions.
Then I saw an other Angel: We refer these things in the Analysis, (...)
the confort of the sixth trumpet, which is fitly added. For who would not almost
faint through weariness of so long continuing trouble, hearing noe other thing
in the Church for a long row of years then violent storms of hail, burning
mountains, falling stars, the Sun darkened, troops of Locusts, and
serpents with a head at both ends, casting out flames of fire, whereby an
infinite number of men should burn miserably? Now therefore to them, that
have been as it were a long time and much tossed on the maine sea, is the land
pointed at, and the haven showed, in which at length there might be rest from
these troubles: neither this only, but also in the mean time a prosperous
wind is breathed forth, which may cause a readier sailing. For which purpose a
most mighty Angel came down from heaven, diverse from those, who blewe the
trumpets, or of whom mention was made long ago elsewhere. For they were
servants, this is the very Lord Christ: as whose clothing, countenance, voice,
and whole decking, is more imperial, then can befall to any creature. Neither
does so strange a form, and unlike to the true nature of man, hinder:
considering that it has been manifest from the first chapter, that he takes
upon him that outward show especially, which may serve most to the declaring,
and confirming of the things propounded. Therefore as touching the description
of him, he is called strong, because he has strength sufficient to deliver the
Church from those adversities, wherewith it shall be oppressed. He comes down
from Heaven, because now at length after a long distance of time, he would
visit his Church, from which he seemed to have been absent now a long time. And
about the blowing of the sixth Trumpet, when the four Angels were loosed, in
the year 1300, as was said before, Christ began to give a more plentiful
leave to enjoy his presence, then in the times going next before. Yet howsoever
he came down from heaven, he was clothed with a cloud: not known indeed
plainly to the world, but covered yet with so great darkness, that he was to
be seen, as it were through a lattice. He carries the rainebowe on his head,
a notable messenger of the old covenant, and of fair weather, both that we
may understand him to be faithful and constant in his promises, and also that
the former storms shall be driven away daily more and more, by little and
little, until at length a clear sky shall return on every side. His face
shines like the Sun, Christ indeed being most glorious, at least in that
part, in which he is known and perceived of men: but his feet do yet burn
with fire, because his lowest members on the earth must burn yet with a great
heat of affliction. Although there should be noe danger of perishing in this
fire, for the feet are pillars, yea and that also of Brass, chap. 1, 15. For
these things belong to the same time, see chap. 2.18. So therefore Christ
carries in his own person, an image of the present Church under the sixth
Trumpet. Which began to increase again about the year 1300, yet covered with
much darkness, which notwithstanding gave hope of a more perfect restoring in
due time: and in the mean while revealed the most sweet face of Christ, which
the world had not seen a long time: although the faithful in the mean season
were trodden down with many calamityes.

2 And he had in his hand a little book open: To whom fitteth better an open
book, then to him who has opened the seals of it? chap, 5.5. Because
therefore Christ comes forth with an open book, it is taught that now
again after long ignorance, leave shall be given to men to know the truth, as
we know it came to pass about that time. For at once the Turks began to wax
strong in the East, and most learned men to arise in the West, who maintained
the truth boldly. But it is only a little book, which he has in his hand,
to wit a small book, either because the end now approaching, there should not
remain so many alterations, but that they might be contained in a little
book, as after in the sixth verse, delay shall be no more: or rather because the
knowledge of men in this time should be slender and small, whereunto pertains
the clothing with a cloud, as we have showed at the former verse.

And he put his right foot upon the Sea; This gross Sea of the inferior
world, is the doctrine of the corrupt Church, as chap. 8.8. No less also
perteining to them, whose is the administration of this doctrine. The Earth,
contains the rest of the common people, who in name are Christians. But the
feet are the members of Christ, to wit, his faithful servants, by whom as it
were by feet, he walks on earth. Of these the right foot is the stronger,
by which being set upon the Sea, it is declared, that Christ now at length
will choose out some from that vile sort of Ecclesiastical men, for to be his
feet and faithful members. Also the left foot placed on the earth, shows
that he will take out likewise some from the lay people, who although they
could not compare with the Ecclesiastical, those right feet, in excellency of
gifts, yet they should be made his true members, and enjoy the same honor
with them. Such right feet were Johannes de Poliaco, Martinus Patavinus,
Johannes de Ganduno, Michael Cicerius, Michael de Coriaria, Guilielmus Ockam,
Gerardus Ridder, Johannes Rochetalada, Armachanus an Jrish Bishop, Ioannes
Wtcklefus and others. Christ drew them out of the salt sea of the Popish
doctrine: whom he took out from the company of Ecclesiastical men, and
brought them to sweeter and wholsomer waters of the truth. Out of the lay
people, he had for his left feet, Ludovicus Bavarus the Emperaur, Marsilius
Patavinus, Dantem Aligherium, and many others who defended to their power the
truth seen and acknowledged.

3 And he cried with a loud voice as as Lion roareth: Hitherto has been the
description of the Angel, now the chief cause of the things that were to be
sealed up is set forth, to wit, the crying out of an Angel like a bellowing
Lion, for so the Greek word signifies properly that which belongs to Oxen
and the like beasts. Lions are properly said to roar: albeit some times it is
attributed to Asses and Camels, as Hesichius shows: (...) is to make a
ro^ring like unto Asses, Camels, and oxen. But the Angel belloweth, bccause he
must speak softly, and dared not to lift up his voice (for there is joined
together with it, he cried with a loud voice,) but that he might show that
the meekenes and patience of the oxen is now to be mixed with the courage of
the Lion. And so indeed Christ, as it were revived again then in his members,
cried out strongly: which crying out nevertheless carried a show of the
bellowing oxen only, neither yet made any man greatly afraid. Those first
springing up Christian Worthies strove by lamentings and complaining speeches:
yet nevertheless they bare a grievous yoke of bondage, which they could not
shake of, whatsoever struggling they made against it.

The seven thunders uttered their voice: Which as an Echo answered this lowing.
And these seven thunders are I suppose those Angels of which afterward in chap.
14.6. etc. Surely the time agrees fitly, as we will show at the place: then
also their office may worthily be likened to thunder, which sounded again when
this roaring was uttered. For taking their beginning from thence, they made a
noise with so great roaring, that such as despised the lowing of the Angel,
should at length begin to tremble for fear of this thunder. But it is an
excellent thing, that the thunders speak not, but at the crying out of the
Angel, even as also the Echo has noe voice of it self, but only yields
again the voice which it has received; so those restorers of the tru^th,
howsoever the world condemned them of novelties, brought notwithstanding
nothing, but that which themselves had learned of God.

4 And when the seven thunders, etc. Such were the causes, now is showed the
care of John: whom when the seven thunders were heard, being about to write, a
voice from heaven prohibiteth, and bids to seal them up. These mysteries
were to be kept secret, as before, the book could not be read, as long as it
was sealed, chap. 5. For these times knew not what those thunders did speak,
neither did they mark whereunto at length they would come.

And write them not: So Aretas, the Common translation, and other Greek
Copies, as though these words should declare, what that Seal, should be, to
wit, not to put in writing, but to have it secret for himself alone. But is
any thing revealed privately to John, which he might not publish abroad? It is
not surely to be thought, especially seeing Christ to this end received this
Prophecy, that he might show it to his servants, as before in chap. 1.1.
Where, to his servants, says he, not to any one alone, but for the common good
of the whole Church. Wherefore these words seem thus to be understood, as
though he should say, bring not these voices of the thunders into this place,
but reserve them to an other more proper and fit. Which judgment certain
printed copies do favor, which read, and hereafter thou writest, or
peradventure, shall write: but although (...) might easily be changed into
(...) the first vowell being altered, and the last syllable taken away: yet I
scarce think, that readings quite opposite one to another are found at any
time. Wherefore when it is heard to iug what sense to take, that interpretation
pleases me most of all, which alike agrees to both, to wit, according to that
meaning which we brought even now. Unless some would rather have that these
words and shall write hereafter be referred to the next visions which follow:
but that the voices of the thunders should be buried in silence for ever. But
the former interpretation is more sure, that the Revelation was given for a
common solace, and that therefore those things should be disclosed afterward in
their place, which now are commanded to be kept close. Albeit I deny not that
some thing may be communicated to the Saints apart, as to Paul, who heard
things that could not be uttered, 2 Cor. 12.4. But the drift of the Prophecy
is to be regarded. More over to what purpose should it be that those things
should be overwhelmed with an eternal silence, if at length that were to be
brought to pass, which the thunders spoke? Therefore let them be sealed for
this time, in which they were hidden from the world, as it comes to pass for
the most part in their first beginnings: afterward let them be written, in the
place wherein they shall obtain their end, when the things shall become most
plain by the event. That is to say, being perfected they should be understood,
but they should not be known as long as thy were to be finished.

5 And the Angel which I saw standing etc. lifted up his hand: Hitherto of
the thing that was to be sealed: now it follows touching the finishing of the
mystery, which first is of things to be communicated. It is confirmed by an
oath, that it shall be shortly.

For in that he lifted up the hand, it was done from the old solemn manner of
swearers: from whence to lift up the hand, is often times taken for to swear,
Genesis 14.22. Numb. 14 30. Ezech. 20.5.

6 And he swore by him which lives: (...), The Grecians speak by the fourth
case (...), but John after the manner of the Hebeewes- swear unto me in the
Lord, 1 Samuel 24.21. But he describes God by his power, which most of all
appears in creating things: whereby he brings into mind, that he is noe
less able to put an end to things, then to give a beginning. And that
therefore it is not to be doubted, but that he would straightway perform the
future work, who in the beginning made all things of nothing.

That time shall be noe more: So I translate the word (...), which some times
signifies continuance of time, as (...), time, day, delay, shall mollify and
mitigate. Whence (...) to stay, tarry, defer, is the same that (...) is in
Luke 12.45. Heb. 10.37. Aretas and the common sort of Interpreters will have
it to be understood of the abolishing of time after the end of the world, as
if the Sun and the rest of the stars should stay their courses, and noe
longer finish their yearly round courses: but these things are to be referred
rather to the shortness of time, then unto the consummation of the world. For
otherwise there should be noe special comfort, but that which had been noe
less common to all ages. For even from the very beginning of the world, it
might well have been said, that there shall be noe time after the end of the
world. To what purpose also should he sever the parts which are not disioyned
by the conjunction but in the beginning of the next verse? Time shall be noe
more, but the mystery shall be finished. Time after the consummation differs
nothing from the consummation. Therefore this is the meaning of the words,
that there remains a very little time unto the finishing of the mystery.
Which is the sum of the preaching of the first Angel, chap. 14.7. For, says
he, the hour of his judgment is come: in which is performed that, which is
signified here by the Angel swearing. For they belong to the same time, and
the argument of the preaching is one and the same. For though they held their
peace, the very restoring of the truth would cry out, that the end draws
near.

7 But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel: He describes the time
of the finishing: but that which follows, when it shall come to pass that he
shall blow the trumpet; the common translation has it not right, when the
Trumpet shall begin to blow; which thing has deceived some expositours, so
that they though that this finishing of the mystery should be referred unto the
first sound of the trumpet of the seventh Angel. But it shall appear more
clearly then the light after in this book, that this end is not to be
expected at the beginning of the sound of the trumpet, but some long time
after. There shall be noe small distance of time between the Vials: the first
whereof shall not be powered out before that the seventh trumpet shall blow, as
after shall be seen more clearly. What then prom^seth the Angel touching the
taking away of time? Not that the thing shall be done in that moment, but because
the space to come, is nothing to that which is past.

The mystery of God shalb finished: (...) shall be finish^d: So has the Common
translation: the Complutent edition has (...) by repeating (...) that it is
finished, See Theod. Bez. All Expositours which I have seen, do understande
these things of the last coming of Christ to judgment. Which shall be in the
days of this seventh Angel: yet if the drift of this book be considered, and
every point of the last time be diligently examined, it shall easily appear,
unless I be deceaved, that there is an other meaning of these words. The
whole Prophecy tends to that point to show what shall be the race of the
Church, as long as she must be as a stranger on earth. Which having ben
showed clearly concerning the Church of the Gentiles, some mention was to be
made of the restoring of the Jews, the which other scriptures show that it
shall surely come to pass, before that there be an end of the whole frame of
the world. Neither in examining every minute of the seventh trumpet, shall we
find that the Revelation goes any further, then to the restoration of this
people, as with Gods help we shall make it apparent in his fit place. Which
restoring doublesse may well be called a mystery, because it is so far
removed from all humane u^derstanding, of which there is almost noe hope in
them, to whom the very benefit pertains, as in many places the Prophets show.
Why, speaks the Lord by Isaiah, should thou say, o Jacob, and speak O
Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my cause is passed over of my God?
chap. 40.27. And again, If so be that Sion says, the Lord has forsaken me,
and my Lord has forgotten me, chap. 49.14. Therefore I suppose that this
calling of the Jews is this mystery. Doubtless it is sure that in the time of
this trumpet, the last end shall be put to all things, and therefore we
shall find noe such conclusion of the seventh trumpet, the third woe is past,
as of the fifth, one woe is past, chap. 9.12. likewise of the sixth, chap 11.14.
for the Revelation leads not thither, because neither pertains it to us to
know, neither is it to be imperted to any creature, which the son himself
knew not, as far as he was a man, Marc. 13.32.

As he has declared to his servants the Prophets. To whom this mystery was
revealed plenteously: but which is not understood of our expositours: whereby it
comes to pass, that the things which the Prophets foreshewe to come, the
common sort so interpret as if they were past. Moses in his most famous song
about the end, sings this Mystery, Deuteronomy. 32. David every wherein the
Psalms: So Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezechiell and the rest: it would be too long,
even to reckon the places. Learned men will be content with this bare disclosing:
whom it is sufficient to admonish even in one word, that they would seek
another meaning of many places in the Prophets, then hitherto they have
followed in their expositions. If these things are to be understood of the last
coming of Christ to judgment, there are not very many words, or at the least
clear enough in the Prophets touching this thing. But from hence we learn
that the old prophecies are not to be finished, either in the first coming of
Christ, or in the calling of the Gentiles, but that they reach even unto the
perfect accomplishing of the Mystery. Wherefore they that do restrain them
into the narrow straightes of the calling of the Gentiles, stop up to
themselves the way to understand them, and take away much comfort from the
Church.

8 Go thy way and take the little book: An other thing to be communicated is
Prophecy restored again to the Church. For this commandment shows what
should come to pass to the Ministers of the word in the times of this sixth
trumpet. John himself for his part seems before now to have been furnished
sufficiently for the receaving of the Revel^tion, both by those things which
he saw, and heard, and also endued with the inspiration of the Spirit
extraordinarily. And if the passing from one matter to an other had been set
forth only for to teach, he would have used the same in their fit places in
the rest of the treatise. Wherefore I doubt not, but that here a type is set
forth of the Ministers of that time, as in many places elsewhere John
represents the faithful Therefore as here the book being received from the
Angel, and eaten up, he should play the Prophet again: so about these times
should be raised up faithful Ministers, which should declare the truth to the
world. We made mention that some godly men about the time that the Turkish
tyranny began, and the feet of the Angel set upon the Sea, and the Earth,
arose forthwith, who undertook boldly the charge of prophesying. Which was a
notable benefit of God: this office had been banished a long time from the
earth: put to flight by the hellish smoke, which the bottomless pit, opened
by the Romish Star, sent forth: now it came again by the grace of God, and
men were bidden to take the little book open, which the former times had
shut: the force of which commandment raised up those, which I spoke of, and
many others which followed: whom unless an heave^ly desire had inflamed, they
would not have offerred their lives to so many dangers, which necessarily were
to be undergone in so great envy and hatred almost of all men. But from this
commandment, we draw this common sentence, that men are slow and loath to
take the pains to Prophecy: and not otherwise to settle themselves to this
office, except they be stirred forward of God.

9 Therefore I went unto the Angel, saying to him, give me the little book:
This gift is to be obtained by entreaty, even also of them, who have ability
give^ them thereunto. We must desire earnestly of God with John, that he will
give us the little book, albeit we be now entered into this office. And the
little book is given, when greater abondance of knowledge is ministered, which
was most excellent in this age, now first of all the art of printing books
being found out by a great gift of God. But further these things declare, that
the men of that time, being awaked once of God from their drowsines, shall
greatly endeavor to profit more in the kindled truth. And surely their
industry was notable, and their increase in all kind of knowledge, chiefly of
divinity, so swift, that thou may say not without cause, that they had not
so much read, as devoured the books. After Wickliefe the barbarousnes of the
Scholastiques being rejected, the liberal arts were revived through so happy
abundance of most famous witters, that there is none, but he must confess
that to be the time of devouring books.

And it shall make thy belly bitter: The word tasted in the mouth is sweet, but
bitter in the belly, that is, the knowledge of Gods will is very sweet and
pleasant of it self: but the publishing of it, whereby fruit may come to the
rest of the members, even like the digestion of meat, when it is concocted in
the stomach, is full of troubles and anguish. Which thing sometime Jeremy tried
and complained of, chap. 15.16. Likewise Ezechiell chap. 3.3. And all none
excepted, who have run together in this race: but those new champions
especially, I mean of this time. To whom doubtless the word was so much the
sweeter, by how much they came with a more sound hunger, to wit, having ben
stolen away from the world for some ages, and now first again restored by
the favor of God: whore Embassage contrariwise was so much the more bitter, by
how much men were plunged in more thick darkness, whom because of the long
custom of sin, they must needs find more stubborn and spiteful. The
condition of that time could not be showed more briefly and manifestly.

I therefore took the little book: Althoug John hears, how great trouble
this meat will bring him, yet obeys he willingly the Angel, and eats up
the book as he was commanded. There was a better love in him to Gods word,
then any regard of lothsomnesse, or wringing in the belly from bitterness.

Such excellent fortitude was in those learned men of that age before spoken
of: it could not be, but that they knew certainly, how great trouble they
should procure to themselves by avouching the truth: yet nevertheless they
labored valiantly, setting more by the sweetness which they received from the
joy of the Spirit, the^ by all the bitterness of peril. By whose example all
Ministers of the word must go on boldly: neither is the office to be forsaken
because of the troubles. It is noe new thing for that to be found bitter by
experience, which being tasted a little at the tongues end seems sweet.
Therefore let every true Prophet have this lesson well meditated: least
peradventure lighting upon unexpected evils, he be overcome at length through
infirmity.

11 Thou must Prophecy again: Now in few words he shows, to what end the
former sign was used, that it may be understood that Prophecy was to be
restored again to the Church in those times. The preparation whereunto was the
receaving and eating up of the book, to wit, a burning desire of learning,
which gave hope of a more perfect light to appear daily. But their opinion is
foolish, who will from these words have John to be expected about the end of
the world with Enoch and Elias. These things belong not to the last time, but
to the sixth trumpet, which we will declare manifestly hereafter to be past.
And John is set forth only as a type, not described by any office, which in
his own person he should bear in the last times.

CHAP. 11.
AND a reed was given me like unto a rode, and the Angel stood by saying,
rise, and mete the Temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein.

2 But the court which is without the Temple, shut out, mete it not; for it is
given to the Gentiles: and they shall tread under foot the holy city two and
forty months.

3 But I will give to those my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundredth and threescore days clothed in sackecloth.

4 These are two olive trees, and two candlestickes, standing before the God of
the earth.

5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths, which
shall devour their enemies. For if any man will do them wrong, so must they
be killed.

6 These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
prophesying: and have power over waters to turn them into blood, and to smite
the earth with all manner plagues as often as they will.

7 Moreover when they finished their testimony, the Beast that comes out of
the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them,
and kill them.

8 And their corpses shall lie in the streets of the great city, which is
called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

9 And men of Tribes, of peoples, and of tongues, and nations shall see their
corpses three days and an half, and shall not suffer their carkases to be put
in graves.

10 And the inhabitans of the earth shall rejoice over them, and be glad, and
shall send gifts one to an other: because these two Prophets vexed the
inhabitans of the earth.

11 But after three days and an half, the Spirit of life coming from God,
shall enter into them, and they shall stand up upon their feet: and great
fear shall fall upon them, that shall see them.

12 After they shall hear a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, come up
hither: and they shall ascend up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies saw
them.

13 And the same hour was made a great earth quake, and the tenth parth of the
city fell, and in the earthquake were slain seven thousand men, and the
remnant were feared, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

14 The second woe is past, and behold, the third woe comes quickly.

15 And the seventh Angel blewe the trumpet, and there were great voices in
heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of this world are the Lords, and his Christ's,
and he shall reign for evermore.

16 Then those four and twenty Elders, which sat before God on their thrones,
fell upon their faces, and worshipped God.

17 Saying, we give thee thanks, Lord God almighty, which art, and which
wast, and which art to come: for thou have received thy great might, and have
obtained thy Kingdom.

18 And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the
dead that they should be judged, and that thou should give a reward unto thy
servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear thy name
small and great, and should destroy them, that destroy the earth.

19 Then the temple of God was opened in heaven, and the Arc of his covenant
was seen in his temple; and there were lightnings, and voices, and thundrings,
and eaarthquake, and much hail.


Analysis.
SVCH is the preparation unto the new Prophecy, as was observed in the eight
verse of the former chapter: the Prophecy it self follows in the first
fifteen verses of this chapter: which belongs either to the whole body of
the Church, or some chief members of it. As touching that: The Church is
either true, or false: the true should lie hid this whole periode of forty
months small, very secret, narrow, which is showed by the temple measured,
ver. 1. the false in the mean time very ample and spacious, ver. 2. The chief
members are two Prophets: whose diverse condition is showed according to a
threefold difference of time: the first, by a thousand two hundredth and
threescore days: all which space being black they should go in monrning
apparel, ver. 3. Who yet in the mean while should be like Olive trees, and
Candlestickes, ver. 4. neither should be hurt of any, without punishment, ver.
5. and endued with great power, ver. 6. The second time is of three days and
an half, in which being slain, ver. 7. they should lie unburied in the
streets of Sodom and Egypt, ver. 8.9. and should make their enemies merry
with their death, ver. 10. The third time is not determined after the three
days and an half, in which they should rise again, lifted up by the Spirit,
first upon their feet, which should strike a fear into their enemies, ver.
11. Afterward into heaven, at which the tenth part of the city should fall,
many should be slain, the rest should be made afraid, ver. 13. Last of all a
transition is used, declaring the end of the sixth trumpet, and the beginning
of the seventh, whose Analysis shall be after ver. 14.

Scholions.
1 A reed was given me: After the preparation made, as we have heard in the
first times of the truth, springing a fresh, and many excellent men bending
themselves diligently to the study of good letters, whose fervency was such,
that for the space of two hundredth years, after one thousand three hundredth,
they might seem to eat up books. After, I say, this preparation, at length
about the end of the sixth trumpet, the matter came to this conclusion proposed
in these words: That is, the Prophecy did shine more plainly, and a more
plentiful knowledge of the times, both past and present, the learned men saw,
by the book which they had received of the Angel, that the Church now many
years had bin much afflicted, so as it could not be seen of the world, and
then also at that present to be wonderfully vexed of Antichrist. For this
Prophecy is a repeating of a long time past: as Moses wrote Prophetically the
first beginning of the world: which name, how great estimation procures it to
the History? But to com to the matter, this Prophecy, I say calling to mind
the time past, contains all the space of the former trumpets, as it appears
from the specifying of the time, which is added in the next and third verse.
For if will count back the two and forty months, in which the Church should
be in the temple, they contain not only that hour, day, month, and year of
the sixth trumpet, of which we have spoken in chap. 9.15. but also beside the
five months of the fifth Trumpet, in the same place ver. 5. and those four
times repeated: to all which nevertheless there remain yet nine months
reckened over and besides, which to what other thing ca^ they be referred, then
to those four first trumpets of the eight chapter? But peradventure, thou will
say, these forty two months take their beginning at the end^ of that hour,
month, and year of the four Angels, chap. 9.15. and both these spaces
together may perteine to the sixth Trumpet: which thing cannot be by any means.
For the whole sixth trumpet is troubleous to the wicked, in which respect it is
called the second woe, chap. 9.12. and 11.15. But if the times be disposed in
this manner, it has little misery for them, who by the space of two and forty
months triumphed in all mirth, when in the mean while the Godly are
afflicted. What so great hurt should the sixth trumpet bring them, if after that
short trouble of one year, month, day, and hour, they should have a
threefolde longer felicity and more? It is most certain therefore that this
Prophecy reaches back even to the first beginning of the trumpets: but that
it is set in this place, because the whole race of this time could not be
perceived before that it should be brought to an end. And now indeed God
raised up learned men, Philippus Bergomensis, Franciscus Guicciardinus, Martin
Luther, John Carrion, Philip Melanctho^, Gaspar Peucer, Henry Bullinger, John
Sleidan, John Functius and others, who linking together the histories of things
that were done, represented this face of the Church in their writings. Which
Prophecy doubtless was to be added at length necessarily. For not without
cause some might ask, what was done with the true Church, when the Hail,
smoke, the third part of the grass, the burning Mountain turned the Sea into
blood, the Locusts, and the other fiendes tyrannized? In all these Trumpets
has been a wonderful silence concerning it.

Now therefore the Spirit shows by this Prophecy revived, of what sort the
condition of that time was in the mean while, least that alone should be
passed over, for whose sake this writing was undertaken. Therefore this chapter
is to be joined with the seventh, where the Prophecy touching the Saints
ceased.

To the same pertains that sealing, and this, that I may so say, Temple
measuring: and it is the same wholly and all one thing, except that that
belongs to every several cityzen, this, to all jointly, and to some chief
members.

Now as touching the words: the reed given is the power granted of the
truth, whereby the Saints should measure the length and breadth of the true
and lawful worship, least in a wonderful confusion of things, they should
swerve from a due proportion. In so much as it is like a rod, it teaches that
the truth shall be much helped, and borne up by the authority of head rulers.
For (...) is very often taken for an ensign of honor, the Scepter which
Kings bear in their hands: by which name also are called the rods which
are carried before the Magistrates: likewise an instrument of exercising power,
as in the Poet, Circe accomplished her charms with a rod, and Mercure with
his white wande. The Temple therefore was to be measured by the labor of some
chief man, as we heard it came to pass in the seventh chapter, where
Constantine the Great was the Minister of scaling. For while he provided for
the peace of the Church, and maintained the truth carefully, he procured a
safe place of refuge for a few holy men, from the contagion of the times.

And the Angel stood by: which words are wanting in Aretas, and by that
means he makes the reed it self the bidder, arise and mete But the labor of
Angels conjoined elsewhere, where the like business is done, seems also to
require here, that nothing should be done, but in the presence of the Angel:
see Ezech. 40.3. and after Revel. 21.16. Wherefore Theod. Beza has well
restored this place from the Complutent Edition.

Mete the Temple: The true Christian Church is shadowed by the type of the old
temple: every several part of which was described once most exactly and
measured by the commandment of God himself: to the end that men should
know that this house is framed of God, that it is not of humane building: and
therefore they should not take ought upon them in changing things at their
pleasure, as though the celestial wisdom had not sufficiently provided for
the most convenient manner of every thing. The things to be measured are the
Temple, the Altar, and the Ministers of the worship. The Temple was divided
into the most holy, and the holy place, which had the altar of the burnt
offering set at the door. He bids him to mete these only, of the whole
building: small parts of the whole, and only the more secret rooms. For the
tabernacle before time being thirty cubits long, and twelve broad, was sixteen
times and more lesser then the court. Afterward the temple enlarged by Solomon,
and by the Angel in Ezechiell, had far more spacious courts. The temple then
alone being measured, shows that the true Church shall be brought into very
narrow straights, limited with small bounds, and remooved wholly from the
sight of men. For the holy place was not opened to the people, but the Priests
alone ministered in that place, of which sort here all true Christians are
counted, as before chap. 1.6. Therefore when Constantine came to the Kingdom,
the Church began to hide it self in a secret place, by going from the sight of
the world into a certain more inward room. Whereunto pertains that sealing,
chap. 7. Whereby a few of many were severed by some privy mark. Neither ought
it to seem mervailous that this separating of themselves from others, was made
in so great glory of peace, and desire to advance the Christian name. For when
some raised up contentions, others coveted much to get honors, many travailed
with heresies and brought them forth, all did bend themselves with all their
power to heap up superstitions: was it easy in that state of things for any
pure, sincere, and sound thing to abide in his place? But the obscurity of the
Saints indeed, grew more every day, by how much more those four mischiefs
increased. The which thing Rome also her self granted unwares. For do thou
dema^de where our Church was before Luther? Therefore thou know not. But
understand thus, where thou Rome were not, to wit, in the hidden holy place of
our God: whither she had run for succor with all the rest of the Saints
from thine infection. But when thou boastest, that thou art a City set on a
hill, which never was hidden, but has flourished with a continual and
manifest succession, confess also that thou art not the true Church, and that
thou have found noe place in that covert of protection.

And them that worship in it: Mete is a common verb, and of a continual
quantity: but here figuratively it signifies also, number thou, as if he
should say, put into the number of nine those few, who in truth worship me
secretly: for there was a certain number in sealing the elect, chap. 7. which
same thing is declared here in other words, when he bids him to meet the
worshippers. All the Saints are said to worship on the Altar, because they put
all their hope and trust in the death of Christ: which kind of sacrifices,
pertains not to the Tribe of Levi alone to offer, but to every true godly
man likewise. And this only is that thing which discerns the true Christian
from the false and counterfeit. But that the most in those times, worshipped
not so on the altar, we must think not without cause, when it is to be seen
clearly from their writings, that many who ought to have shined before others
in all knowledge, attributed to much to their voluntary works, and to their
own holiness.

2 But the court that is without the Temple: So Aretas and the Complutent
edition do read: but some books have, which is within the Temple, to wit the
court of the Priests, in which was the altar of burnt offerings, which he
mentioned even now, which court some time is called by the name of the temple.
Neither is this reading to be rejected rashly. For John is not bidde^ to mete
this court, but only the Altar of this court. And it may be that it agrees
more fitly with that, which follows, if the inward court be cast out, then if
that be cast out, which was already without before. But both have respect to
the same end, that it is nothing to be esteemed whatsoever is more then those
foresaid Temple, Altar and Worshippers. For the court is given to the Gentiles,
that is, to the Christians as for a name: neither this only, but also the holy
City (which they should tread under foot, not by spoiling it like an enemy,
but in frequenting it daily under a color of worshipping, as in Isaiah 1.12.)
and that for the space of forty two months. These things show clearly, what
should be the condition of the false Church in those times, wherein the truth
should be hidden. First it should noe less exceed in number and multitude,
then the people which once dwelt at Jerusalem, and was wont when the holy
things were done to be in the utmost court, exceeded the number of them, who
executed their office in the Temple. Good God, how great difference was there?
Exceeding great was the company of the inhabitans, and of them that continually
flocked to the temple: how in the mean time few Priests were there within, in
comparison of that great multitude which was exercised without? There should be
the same quantity of fained Christians, in respect of the true and natural
Citizens. Secondly it should have her counterfeit worshippers, dwelling very
near the Temple. For they should possess Jerusalem, and the whole court
should be theirs. How nearly was the court joined to the Temple? How did it
compass the same round about? Ezech 40.5. Good God how nigh was this society?
Who durst have condemned the court of profaneness, unless the Angel
himself had commanded it? And the event surely was altogether answerable. For
in those first times, when the four first trumpets sounded, what was
Athanatius alone unto so great assemblyes of Bishops? What afterward was Basil
the Great, or Gregory Nazianzene unto almost the whole East? If thou
should respect the multitude, who would not have contemned one or two in
comparison of so great a rabble? But if you would respect holiness, were they not
all Bishops? Did not all desire to be esteemed valiant defenders of the truth?
How easy was it therefore here, either by the number or likeness to be deceaved?
In the last times also there is the same boasting of the holy city, and of the
outmost court against the Temple. Is not the Church of Rome spread through the
whole earth? Have the Lutherans heresies, as they clatter, ever passed over the
Sea? Have they seen at any time either Asia, or Afrique, or Egypt or Grecia?
Who can doubt of the Holy Catholic Church, which counts her Bishops even
from Peter himself, by a most certain succession? But Rome now boasts of her
multitude: by how much in time past she has flourished in greater number, by
so much the more is she nigher to the great assembly treading under foot
Jerusalem, and further of from this small number lying hid in the Temple: we
see in this place the whorish Church most furnished both with multitude and
neighborhood. If these things shall be sufficient to get the victory, thou have
overcome, o Rome, so well in populous City, as in proximity. But let them look
to it, that are car^ied away with the name of the Catholic Church, how easily
here they may be deceaved of the whore, which possesses the holy City, and the
very outward court next to the Temple. Let them in the name of God weigh the
matter in earnest, and diligently: and not suffer themselves to be beguiled
with vain boasting. Let them mind, that unto them that look but of a far
off, they seem all to be in the Temple it self, who are but within, yea the
outmost part of the walls: but let them come nigher, and they shall see most
clearly, that those whom even now they thought to be in the most inward rooms,
are kept certainly from the holy place with brazen walls. Albeit the discerning
now is not so heard, as it was in time past, while the Church had no place in
the public. Read but the writings of our men, and by the grace of God thine
eyes shall wax clear to perceive the truth. May thou not worthily suspect
the Popes craft, restraining thee from buying and selling of our books, and of
all familiarity? Yet nevertheless do thou strive so much the more to know
the truth, that thou shall see the same to be hated of thine, through the
conscience of their own deformity.

Two and forty months: The time wherein the true Spouse should lie hid, and
the false should rule. But how great darkness is here? And noe marveile, in
so great blindness of man's understanding. Wherefore be thou present, who have
received these things that thou might disclose them to thy servants, to the
end that by thy guiding I may go safely. For to dispell the obscurity, it is
to be observed first, that there is not signified in these two and forty
months three common years and an half going about. I hope that the accord of
the things has proved already, that the four Euphratean Angels in the 9.
chapter, are the Turks. To whom power being given for one hour, and month,
and year: seeing that the three hundredth year is now slipped away, is there
any so obstinate, who will yet avouch that these two and forty Months are to
be restrained together within the narrow limits and straights of their own
and naturall-signification?

Hereunto is to be added, that seeing these months pertain to the Beast,
chap. 13.5. that the same was not yet borne in the time of the revelation. For
John saw her rising up afterward, chap. 13.1. which thing no where is either
said, or can be said of the Roman Empire, this is certainly that space, in
which Antichrist shall be borne, shall grow, be wounded, and recover health
again: wherein he shall exercise power over every tribe, tongue and nation,
and shall make the dwelling place of his tyranny the queen of the whole earth;
in which finally both he himself, and also all the Ministers of his pleasures
shall be altogether given to exceeding riot, as is clear from chap. 13. and 17.
and 18. But can all these things be performed in three common years and an
half? Peradventure Therapontigonus Plat^gidorus shall recover life, who
conquered the half part of all nations well nigh within twenty days.
Alexander of Macedonia is compared to a Leopard, which had four wings on his
back, notable tokens of his swiftnes, that he should obtain the Empire of
Asia in twelve years, all that time dwelling in tents, neither giving himself
to any other thing, Dan. 7.6. But Antichrist should for just cause ride on the
very Sun, to subdue all countries none excepted in three years and an half,
and in the mean while to give up himself through idleness to all delights and
wretched intemperancie. But it is more plain yet after in the chap. 20.4.
Where the enemies of the Beast refusing to be subject to his government, and
reigning with Christ a thousand years on earth, to with all that space of time
in which the Devil is bound and tied in chains, and the subjects of
Antichrist lie dead before the first resurrection, do prove necessarily that
the Beast also Antichrist was through all that time: otherwise how were they
able to resist him, not only commanding nothing, but also not living? The same
thing also shall be minifest from the person of Antichrist, which in his place
we will show not to belong to one man alone, but to a certain kingdom and
succession, chap. 17. Secondly seeing this account is not common, it is
needful that we reckon these months after the manner of the other
scriptures: for almost all things in the Revelation are expressed after the
manner of the ancient types. But what is that manner? Shall every several
month note seven years, as the weeks in Daniell? It is wholly without all
example and reason, to compare the months to the weeks. Neither will the
words suffer it by any means. For the Angel shows that every each day is
to be counted, from whence he notes commonly this space, sometime by two and
forty months, some time by a thousand two hundred and threescore days, as
in the next verse, and in chap 12.6. But that way whereby the months are
brought unto the weeks, and there is made the number of two hundred ninety
and four years, numbreth not the fourth part of the days. We therefore
think that every one is to be reckened, and that so many years are to be
assigned, as there are days in these months, which agrees wholly unto the
manner of the weeks in Daniell. Thirdly that these are not Julian years. For
these two and forty months make only a thousand two hundred threescore
days. But so many Julian months do effect a thousand two hundred seventie
eight days, and more. Whereupon there want of the Julian, four score days,
and some what more: how many years the thousand two hundred and three score
days do lack (every one by it self being taken for one year) of the
thousand two hundred three score Julian years. What months then does the
Angel use here? Not the Lunarie, nor Julian, but only the Aegyptia^ months,
every of which consist of thirty days. He has showed, that according to the
custom of this nation only, we must reckon the months, because it was it
that should kill the Prophets of the Lord, and in the street of whose great
city they should lie trodden under foot, and unburied for a mocking stock,
after in ver 8. After the manner of these months we have limited by thirty
days, every of those five months, chap. 9. Fourthly, that this account is not
to be begun, either from the passion of the Lord, or any other time, which went
before this writing. For as we have told you diverse times these words, I will
show thee the things that must be done hereafter in chap 4.1. will not bear
it. Neither by and by after the giving of the Revelatio^. For next after
follows the dwelling in heaven, the clothing with the Sun, the crown of
twelve stars, and the Moon trod under the foot, chap, 12.1. For with all
this glory shined that first most holy Church, or else we can not find to
what times we may refer it. But of what sort I pray you, is this space of
two and forty months? Namely of a most waste wilderness, of sackcloth,
uncleenes, corruption, and lamentable deformity. As touching that the words
are express, that this wonder appeared in heaven, where afterward the Dragon
warred: at length thrown headlong from thence, chap. 12.7. etc. But what had
the Dragon to do in heaven, but that he might lie in wait for the woman
travailing with child? From whence also did the woman flee, if she dwelt in
the wilderness before the time of her travel? Whither, from the wilderness into
the wilderness? But all the error is from hence, because the wilderness is not
defined by his proper marks. For this wilderness is not the want of humane and
extern comfort, but of the gifts of the holy Ghost; with which the first
Church abounding most largely, felt not any desert place, although wholly
destitute of all humane succor. She was indeed very greatly afflicted by the
cruelty of the Emperors, but the Dragon casting the third part of the stars
to the earth took not heaven from her, neither spoiled her of the clothing of
the Sun, although he deprived almost an infinite number of Saints of their
bodies. For her dignity is not to be measured by an outward pomp and show,
but by true faith and pureness of the whole worship of God, in both which she
then flourished very greatly in comparison of all other ages. It being now
known for certain to what both time and place, these months belong, to wit,
to flight, wilderness, privy places to hide in, neither to the first
beginning, but after a long and most grievous battle with the Dragon, in
chap. 12.6. it must needs be that seeing these things are attributed to the
Beast chap. 13.5. that it is also a living creature of some wilderness, (and
what other place is fit for wild beasts dens? from whence she is seen
afterward more clearly in the wilderness, chap 17.3.) and that it is not the
first, that is, the Roman Empire, but the second enemy, to wit, Antichrist,
who in as much as he could, would make this place of refuge to the woman,
dangerous. From which things it is apparent, how absurd it is to end these
months in the death of Licinius, to wit, straightway after their beginning.
Which may yet more appear, if we shall mind this term of time being given
them, that the whole sixth trumpet also is concluded almost with the same
bounds: for when these are finished, there remains a very little of this.
How then is not the mystery of God finished, as is foretold in chap. 10.7. if
the seventh trumpet has sounded now so many ages, to wit, these thousand
three hundred years more or less a very little? Not but that we know, that
a thousand years are even as one day to God, 2 Pet. 3.8. But because it
seems strange, that when the seven seals and six trumpets are finished in
one three hundred years, that now one of the same trumpets should not find
an end in four times three hundred years and more. But there is noe such
unequal difference of the sacred Prophecy. This monstrous proportion,
whatsoever it seems to be, is nothing else but humane folly, and not a right
dividing of the times. Neither is that firm, that noe certain time of
domestical calamityes is signified no where in the Scriptures: for Numb.
14.33.34. 2 Samuel 24.13.14. 2 King. 8.1. and other the like, which might be
added, will prove the contrary. Therefore that I may conclude the whole matter,
seeing the seals do lead unto Constantine himself, and these months are of
a longer time, then all the trumpets that are past, of right do we judge that
they take their beginning in the sixth seal, where heaven departed away, chap.
6.14. Why should not the woman consider of new places to abide in, when the
former were gone away, and come to nothing? And when Diocletian, and Maximianus
gave over the Empire of their own accord, the Dragon was thrown down from
heaven, to wit, in the year of the Lord 304. when the desired peace began to
be given to the Church, and the Sovereignty to fall to Constantine, and of an
exceeding great company of Christians in name, a few elect were sealed, chap.
7. Which things being thus laid, from necessary principles, I hope that now a
large entrance is made to the finding out of the truth of those things which
follow.

And I will give to my two witnesses: Theod. Beza has, But I will give it to
my two witnesses, as if the holy city should he given to them, which should
appertain to the Gentiles, not to the witnesses, who should have place with the
rest of the Saints in the Temple. Therefore we must read as it is in the
Greek, But I will give to my two witnesses, etc. In which words he turns
him self now to the chief members of the holy Church, when hitherto he had
declared summarily the things that belong to the whole body both of the true
and false Church. Now these words I will give and they shall prophecy, are
the same with these, J will give power, I will appoint, or I will command
them to prophecy, as Iosuah gave them that same day to be hewers of wood, that
is, from that day appointed them to hew wood, Ios. 9.27. see the 1. chap. ver.
1. But the meaning is not to be stayed in the office of prophesying, as though
they should prophecy in those days only, which is their continual duty, but
that they should do it all that time clothed in sackcloth. The old Fathers
being farther from the eve^t of these things thought that Enoch and Eliah being
these 2 witnesses, should come to fight with Antichr. in the last times. But
we beholding the thing done now long ago, may surely judge, that the Spirit
has another meaning. The Papists with great applause receive this opinion, and
make much of it, obtruding it upon the world as an oracle: to it because it
carries men away from the present consideration of the things, a thing common
to them in all their expositio^s, and for the which they sweat much. But the
peculiar exposition of the things will confute sufficiently their stiffenes in
that opinion. Therefore that I may dispatch it in a word, we gather that these
two Prophets are the holy scriptures, and the assemblies of the faithful We
will render a reason after in the description. Although every one may see at
the first sight how fit both are for this office. The Scriptures bear witness
of the truth, Ioh. 5.39. And the saints do praise the power of God and
declare his goodness, as every where in the Psalms. A person is attributed to
the Scriptures, after that manner, whereby the adioincts are signified from the
subjects, as Moses for the Law etc. Then which kind of speaking, there is
nothing more commonly used.

Before the type of them was the Sun, but seeing there was here mention made
of war, of death, of the resurrection, a person necessary, which should be
capable of those things. From whence there is this new way of signifying an
old thing. The time how long they should prophcy is limited with a thousand
two hundredth and three score days, altogether the same time with the two and
forty months before. To what end then does he now devide it by little parts
into days, and not declare it briefly by months as before? To wit because the
office of prophesying is such, that they must take pains in it continually
without ceasing, not by a stinted labor every three months, four times in
the year, or peradventure somewhat more diligently once every month, but
wherein we must continue always as in a watchtower, least the enemy
continually lying in wait, come unlooked for upon us sleeping or being absent.
Moreover that we should acknowledge the singular providence of God toward his
holy servants, which at all occasions is ready, both to deliver them from
evil, and also to store them with good things. For the same reason he held
the Angels in his hand, chap. 1.20. and the Psalmist sings, The keeper of
Israel slumbereth not, Ps. 121.4. Finally that he may show that the months
are not to be nu^bred in a general manner, but every day by it self a part, as
we have said before. Sacks are the clothing wherein they should prophecy,
because they should execute their office, vilely arrayed, clad in mourning
apparel, spoiled of all luster, in the same garment that is wont to be used in
lamenting. But whence was this sorrofull arraying in that triumph which the
Church made under Constantine? Surely, although great was the glory of peace,
honors, dignityes, riches, wherewith he endowed most nobly, and adorned the
Churches, yet as touching true godliness, all things began to be far worse.
The Heaven departed away under Diocletian by an horrible tempest of
persecution, but now it was corrupted more with tranquillity, then when the
cruel enemy was at hand to take away their lives. For now the simple purity
of the Scriptures began to be troubled more and more, the meaning of them not
be understood, to be wrested by allegories, and absurd expositions, and any
thing almost to be added unto them which men's fantasy would. Did not the
Arian faction, which we heard in chap. 8, 10.11. infect the third part of the
rivers and fountains with her wormwood, strive to draw the Scripture to their
side, and by their authority to proffer their wicked opinions to the world? So
all Heretics for the most part are wont to do, but the government of the
Magistrate was never added before, to the furthering of so wicked opinion. The
Scriptures then for good cause did put on sackecloath, when they were
constrained so against their meaning to defend and stablish those errors
which they hated chiefly and above all things. Nevertheless they were not
covered by and by with this mourning apparel, but they began in that joy
fullness to change the garment, which they afterward did openly wear. That,
and the ages coming after had indeed some learned and holy me^: but these
were both few, and also every one knows, how great a blemish the corruption
of the times did cast upon them. Indeed in their conflict against the
Heretics, they polished the truth most subtly: but their other works
being void of this care, did for the most part much err from the mark.
Although the gown was then also spotless in comparison of those uncleanness
wherewith afterward the truth of God was stained: the honoring and
worshipping of relics defiled the assemblyes also of the faithful, and
religion being put in holy places, and times, and other frivolous and trifling
things of that sort, clothed them as it were with sack For the beautiful
attire of these, is when they shine in the simplicity of Gods ordinance. But
the ages following did more deface them with dust and ashes, wherewith at
length they being wholly covered, they could be known to God only, unknown
altogether to others by their true face. It is a thing certainly to be wondered
at, that the Church should under the persecutions of the Emperors shine with
the clothing of the Sun, but in the clear sky of her foster father,
shoulbe clothed in sackecloath.

4 These are those two olive trees: There is a double property of the Prophets,
one of bountifulness toward their own, that I may so say, in this verse: the
other of power over their enemies, as in destroying them, in the fifth verse, so
in troubling them with other evils in the sixth verse. As touching their
bountifulness, they are two olive trees, and two candlestickes: the type being
taken out of Zach. 4.2.12. and very fit for these things in hand. For ever as
then God did preserve his Church, and adorn it with the gifts of his Spirit,
and bestows them most liberally upon the same, not so much by the ministry
of men, as by his alone supernall grace beyond all men's expectation: which
thing the oil signified, gotten not by men's industry, but naturally flowing
out of the olive berries into the oil cruet of the candlestickes: so now he
would defend the Church being in danger, and reserve to himself some burning
candlesticks, to which how soever oil pressed and wrong out of the wine press
should be wanting, he himself nevertheless would plant them hard by the olive
trees, which of their own accord and continually dropping out of the berries
into the lamps, should minister perpetual nourrishement to the flame which is
to be maintained. Seeing therefore that in this type the gifts of the Spirit
are shadowed out, the inward, by the flame of the Candlestickes, the outward by
the olive trees, among which, the chief is the sacred word, not without cause
these olive trees, from whose berries oil is powered to nourish the flame of
the candlestickes, may signify the Scriptures, whose office is to minister
doctrine to the Prophets, that they may nourish the flame of Godliness in
themselves and their auditors. For like raison, for which they were compared
before to the Sun, both being ministers of light: this of his own, those in
stirring up a flame by a fit nourishment. Now they are two, in respect of the
old and new testament: God spoke in old time by the Prophets, but now by his
Son, Heb. 1.1. There are also two in Zachary, before the Gospel was
written: yet it hinders not the application, seeing it was always in force,
before it was written. For there are two chief points of the whole sacred
doctrine: the Law, and the Gospel, which are those wholesome olive trees,
and always have belonged to all times. The Candlestickes do carry the
candles set in them, by which Christ has taught expressly that the Churches
are noted, chap. 1.20. To wit, because they show the office of a candlestick,
in the top of which the Prophets being set, not in the high top of wordly
dignity, do communicate their wholesome light to the Saints. The Prophets
themselves are the Candles, not the Candlestickes, as Christ distinguishes
them, neither do men light a candle and set it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick, and it gives light to all which are in the house, Mat. 5.15.

And before he said that the stars are ministers, where he compared the
Churches unto candlestickes in the first chapter, and twentieth ver. But why
are they now but two? Doubtless most fitly for the present condition of the
Church, which had sufferred a pitiful loss of the rest. In the first chapter
there were seven, to wit, so many as are the branches of one: after the
similitude of the candlestick in the temple, which representing the Church had
one shafte only, but seven branches coming out of the sides, Exodus 25.31. etc.
For there is one Catholic Church, as one shafte: but the particular
congregations are many: which coming forth out of that one, and abiding in the
same, as the diverse branches of one shafte do stay as it were upon the same
base. Where those first seven Candlestickes showed that there was then a most
flourishing Church, as long as the Apostles and their next true successors did
burn as it were candles in the same.

But at this time, wherein the PROPHETS should go clad in mourning apparel:
the Candlestickes are but two, which lack five to make up their full number:
because the dignity of it was much diminished, and almost brought to an extreme
condition. Nevertheless the elect should have some fatness as it were of the
olive trees, whereby they should cherish the celestial flame in their hearts:
neither should a candlestick be wanting, from whence the Ministers should give
light abundantly, howsoever the companies of the faithful should be most rare
and very small. These things yet hitherto do not peradventure content our
minds, especially seeing in this space of a thousand two hundredth and three
score days (which we have showed to be so many years, and to have their
beginning in the year 304) we have taught that six Antitype candiestickes
did shine, chap. 2.3.

So then I think, that the three last, the Sarden, Philadelphien, Laodicen,
were not kindled, but after a thousand two hundred, and almost twenty years:
and therefore worthily not to come into any accounte, to which so small a
number of those days agrees.

But as touching the other three, the Smyrnen belonged to the Church decaying,
the Thyatiren to the same rising again: but the Pergamen lying in a most deep
pit of all corruption, from it is neither of any reckening but of set purpose
passed over. Not that there should be none at all in that state of things, but
because none should be greatly in sight at that time.

5 And if any will hurt them: Now follows the power to destroy the enemies.
But why are they clothed in sackcloth but for injury received? Do they then
destroy the world with fire, doing wrong daily unto the^? Injury is double,
one more grievous done advisedly either by open force, or fraud: an other
less of ignorance and lack of heed taking. They seem to have worn
sackecloth because of this second kind: in the mean while continually
punishing their more deadly enemies with this devouring fire. It is said to
come out of their mouth, by whose threatening and prayers such a judgment is
exercised. Even as in old time at the signifying before of Moses, a fire
coming from the Lord consumed the two hundred and fifty men, which rose up
against him with Corah, Numb. 16. Or as at the prayers of Eliah fire came from
heaven, and consumed the Captain and his 50 men, which Achasia sent to kill
him, 2 Kings 1. God defends these Prophets after the same manner, that he did
those ancient ones: yea rather he will have these provided for in a more
notable manner, by how much he regards more his own truth, and whole
assemblyes of the Saints, then singular persons. The Holy SCRIPTVRES
therefore, pronouncing most certain punishments against all ungodlines, and
transgression, do send, as it were, fire out of their mouth, whereby they do
utterly consume and devour the unrepentant.

For it cannot be, that one tittle of Gods word should perish, Mat. 24.35. But
chiefly they do vomit fire upon them, who will hurt them, that is, who dare
corrupt their most sincere truth by humane inventions patched unto it,
threatening that, Jf any man shall add unto this Prophecy, that God will lay
upon him the plagues that are written in that book, chap. 22.18.19. Not
because they do estime the sacred authority of the Revelation only ratifyed
by so great a punishment: but because there is the same regard of the whole
truth inspired of God, as Ye shall put nothing to this word which I speak
unto you, neither shall ye take away therefrom, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Put nothing to his
words, least thou be reproved, and found a liar: Pr. 30.6. From hence in time
past came the horrible slaughter of the Baalites, 1 Kings 18.40. 2 King. 10.25.
and so many most grievous calamities, which did come with force upon the world
all these two and forty months, because almost nothing was done according to
the true meaning of the scriptures, but now the whole world was taught by
traditions, despising Gods truth, either altogether, or wresting it, only for
the confirming of their fables and trifles. Therefore these Prophets being so
evil entreated, burnt up the third part of trees, and all green gr^sse with
fire mingled with hail: killed the third part of the creatures which were in
the Sea by a burning mountain cast into it: turned the rivers and fountains
into worm wood, by a star that fell, and did burn like a torch: yea they
gave power to send the Locusts and the Euphratean Angels, as has been
declared already in the tru^pets: from every one of which, either fire, or
hellish smoke did issue forth. All which evils were no other thing then the
flame going out of the mouth of the Prophets, sorely punishing the wicked
contemners of the truth. There is the same reason of the Candlestickes, that
is, of the assemblies of the Saints: For God sufferreth not the Churches to be
oppressed without rewarding the wicked, but moved with the prayers of it,
requires meet punishements of the oppressors. Diocletian giving over the
Empire, determined to spend the rest of his life quietly. But he escaped not
so. For his house being wholly consumed with lightning, and bright burning fire
that fell from heaven, he for fear of the lightening hiding himself, dyed
shortly after. So Constantine the Great himself has written in his book,
commonly called the fifth book of Eusebius, of the life of Constantine, leaf
168. Although Eusebius, Nicephorus, and others, do tell of a far more
horrible death. Maximinian Hercule his conpartner died his wezand being broken
with an halter. Maxentius his son was drowned in the river Tiber. Galerius is
destroyed by horrible torment of diseases. Maximinus also is taken away in the
same manner: Lucinius often overcome, and often put to flight, at length is
killed. What should I recite others? Valens fighting against the Goths in
fortunately, and flying into a base cottage, was burnt together with the house
it self, by a fire thrown upon it by the enemies. But these were but alone
persons: but also the whole multitude were often, and very sorely punished by
famine, pestilence, and war, as might be declared plenteously, but that it
would be long, and not greatly needful. These things may show sufficiently
that howsoever these Prophets might then seem to be wretched, raged, and
vilely apparelled, were yet notwithstanding armed with a power not to be
despised The same is the condition of the rest of the Prophets

6 These have power to shut heaven: He comes to another very great power,
and wonderful, wherein they are equal to the old even the chief Prophets.
Renowned is Eliah, at whose prayers God did shut the heaven, so that for three
years and six months: the earth was not watered with any shower of rain, 1
King. 18.1. Luke 4.25. But we have not read any such thing done of these
Prophets. It is true it may be, if we take the words properly, but if we
transfer them to spiritual things, after the manner of other things, which
have been spoken before, how great a proportion shall we find? That drouth was
for three years and six months at the prayer of Eliah; so the time of this
power granted to these Prophets should be for so many great years and months.
For two and forty months, or a thousand two hundred and three score days do
fulfill this distance of years and months: but great ones as I have said, and
has been already proved sufficiently before, not those common ones such as were
those of Eliah, every one containing three hundred three score common years:
and the half one hundred and four score years. How great drouth, and lack of
spiritual dew was there all this time, through want of which, godliness
withered in every place? But they that bring every thing to the letter, and
will have the three years and an half to be meant of common years, do they
dream also of such a staying of rain, which they must needs do? Surely they
get for Antichrist a Kingdom ill favored, hungerstarven, every way wretched,
and unhappy: altogether contrary to that excess, wherewith the Spirit says
that he should abound. Neither shall Antichrist have any leisure to carry
about armor to subdue the nations, but rather shall leave droves of beasts and
cattle to the water, as we read that Ahab did long since. But it is no
marvel that they fall into many such absurd things, who had rather follow
their own conceived opinions, then the truth it self.

And they have power over waters: As Moses, who turned the waters of Egypt into
blood: and as these Prophets have done in very deed, when the third part of
the Sea became blood, chap. 8.8. For all this power was showed forth in those
plagues, of which we heard in chap. 8.9. It is just with God that all that
will not believe the truth, should believe lies, 2 These. 2.11. Which indeed
is noe other thing, then to have their pure and clear waters turned into
blood. The next words which follow, and 10 smite the earth with all manner of
plagues, as often as they will, in a short sum comprehend the other plagues,
which are not mentioned in this place, to wit, of the Sun smitten, of Locusts
sent, and the four Angels loosed. From which power is manifest that which we
have taught in the beginning, that this whole Prophecy of the temple measured,
of the court cast out, and of the two Prophets, does apperteine to the same
time, of the six former tru^pets: which do recite one after an other the
plagues in that order, wherein they came to pass. But this Prophecy rehearses
the causes, to wit, the purity of the Scriptures violated, and Gods worship in
the assemblies of the faithful defiled.

These things call forth scourges upon the world: and come not either by
chance or by fortune. These have power to afflict the earth with any kind of
plague whatsoever as often as they will. Because God rules and governs the
world according to his will revealed in the scriptures, and all things for the
benefit of the Church. In the beginning he delivered the earth unto Adam
uncorrupted: and now again he will have all things to do service to his
children, which are restored in their integrity through Christ.

7 But when they have finished their testimony: The second limited time, as we
have distinguished them in the Analysis, takes his beginning after that of
profecying went out, to wit, in the year one thousand five hundredth forty
sixth. How far the thousand two hundred and three score days do extend,
every each one being taken for one year, as we have said at the second verse,
and if we count from the year of the Lord three hundred and fourth, in which
CONSTANTINE took unto him the rule of the Empire, as Cassiodorus says,
prooving that the years of CONSTANTINE should be reckened from thence, and as
Onuphrius having made a most exact account, seems to have collected. For a
thousand two hundred threescore years, eighteen being taken out, how many the
counting of years which the Angel follows laketh of the Julian, as before
at the second verse, do make a thousand two hundred two and forty Julian
years: which from the beginning of the reign of Constantine, do end in the
said year 1546.

That Beast which comes out of the bottomless pit: So express a noting by
Articles, shows that this Beast known, and declared long since, which can be
no other, then the Angel of the bottomless pit, of whom we heard in the
ninth Chapter and eleventh verse, to wit the Bishop of Rome. For we read of
noe other coming out from the bottomless pit, when he sent the Locusts out
of the pit being opened, but that he rose up long before, we shall understand
from the things which follow.

Therefore he shall not be a Beast only of three years and an half
continuance. He has gained 5 months mor at the least, wherein he should reign
with the Locusts. From hence there is an other argument also to confirm this
Prophecy to belong to the former trumpets, because the Beast with whom the
Prophets have to do in the last course of their time, pertains to the fifth
trumpet. Furthermore also that of the thirteenth chapter belongs to the same
period of the trumpets. For this and that is the same beast, and both again is
the same Angel of the bottomless pit of the nine chapter.

Shall make war against them: Shall the Beast now first of all call unto
weapons? He shall assay to do violence the whole thousand two hundred
threescore days, chap. 13.5. But this battle which he shall make when that
time is finished, deserves before others the name of war, both for the very
kind of preparation and hostile cruelty, and also for the notorious slaughter
done to the Prophets. And the thing it self proves that at this very time
there was very little war. For as touching the Scriptures the Council at
Trent began in the year 1546, the 7 day of February, to wit, after those
thousand two hundredth and three score days were ended, in their third session
the eight day of April, pierced and murdered them most pitifully. For here
the Hebrewe and Greek fountains were refused, and the Latin corrupt
translation established for Authentic. Here unwritten traditions were placed
in equal dignity with the Holy Scriptures: Here the Interpretation of the
Scriptures was taken away from the Scriptures, and made subject to men's
pleasure but chiefly to the Popes.

Ever since the world began the Holy and Sacred Scriptures were not so much
abused both openly and by public authority. ANTIOCHVS in deed a good while
since inflicted a grievous wound in commanding the Holy Books to be burnt in
the fire: Likewise DIOCLETIAN, and other Tyrants.

But the injury of these TRIDENTINE FATHERS, is far more grievous. For they
were Ethniques, enemies stricken with a certain fury and madness, wholly
repugnant to all the truth. These alone will be counted CATHOLIQVES, very great
and chief friends, the thing a long time, and much consulted of, guided by
mature and ripe judgment, the very PILLARS and upholders of the TRVETH, and
upon whom noe spotte of error can be cast.

How must it needs be, that their act was of no authority, and these men of
very great? neither is there cause why any should object Marcion, the
Eucratites, Cataphrygians, and such monsters, of which some rejected one part
of the sacred Scriptures and some another, at their pleasure. There is very
great difference as touching the greatness of the hurt, between the dotages of
obscure Heretics, and the deliberat acts and Decrees of an gathered
Council, especially which chalengeth to it self to be credited with out
exception. It is therefore a thing especially worthy remembrance and worthy
that the Church should be put in mind of by so notable a Prophecy. The event
and time do consent so wonderfully, that every equal arbitratour will easily
acknowledge, that I have not wilfully sought this interpretation, but that I
have been lead as it were by the hand, to the same by the very order and
disposition of the matters. As touching the assemblyes of the faithful, which
in these last times did first appear in Germany, they were assailed with a
most cruel war the same year. The same Beast made this war likewise by
the help of the Emperor Charles the fifth: otherwise a noble man greatly to be
comanded, but obeying the Pope too much through the common error of the
Princes. From whence not without cause, that is attributed to one, which being
proceeded from two or more, yet notwithstanding is done by one joint endeavor.
The overthrowe in this war was received about the two and twentieth day of
April in the year following, to wit, 1547, when the armies of the Protestans
were put to flight, and John Frederike Duke of Saxony himself, Ernestus of
Brunswick the La^tgraves son, and not very long after the Lantgrave himself
were taken. Which calamity stayed not in these few, but also afflicted many
others, both Governors and Cities, which partly yielded themselves of their
own accord, partly were won by force. In one moment, says Beza, bewayling
the misery of that time, seemed to be overthrown, whatsoever had been builded
up in so many years, and with so great labors: and they only were counted
happy of the most part, whom sudden death had taken away from these hurly
burlies, such are his words. The remembrance of that time is sorrowful to all
the godly: when the holy and wise Princes inflamed with a desire only to
defend the truth, not themselves alone, but the Churches together with them,
which as newly borne, did lament among the weapons, came miserably into the
power of the enemies. But now was the time of darkness, in which these two
Prophets must be killed, and made a mocking stock. Although we must rejoice in
the same adversities, which are a calling to remembrance of the divine
Prophecies, confirming certainly the confidence and faith of our hope, as says
Tertullian in his Apology.

8 And their corpses shall lie: There is this difference between Antiochus and
the Romish Beast. He in burning up the books of the Law, would not have so
much as the karkeises to remain: This sufferred the dead corpses, but only
for a mocking stock, and for a greater ignominy. The cruel Beast is not
satisfied with blood, but desires some more grievous torment. For their
pierced corpses are cast forth into the streets of the great city, that they
might be a spectacle to all men, and an ornament to the triumph of the Romish
Beast. And what other thing of these Scriptures now remained, then a very
karkeise, wholly without all authority, power, and life, when all
interpretation was brought to the Apostolic Chair, neither might they mutter
any thing at all, which the Bishop of Rome should not breath into them? The
Spirit speaks so exactly, that he may leave them noe tergiversatio^. He knew
that the Pope of Rome, whatsoever he should do against the truth, would boast
nevertheless, that to him nothing is better, of more account, and more
inviolable then the Scriptures themselves. But that noe man may be deceived
with a bare name, the Spirit speaks evidently, that after the Tridentine
Council, noe Scriptures should be in the possession of the Romans, but a dead
carkeise of noe strenght and power.

In the streets of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and
Egypt; This great City is that whole dominion of which Rome is the mother City:
in which sense the tenth part of the city falls after in the 13 verse. A
street is some part of the Roman dition, wherein this spectacle is exhibited
to be seen, the joy whereof spreads it self through the whole Empire. But
the great city it self together with her chief city is described in the
rest of the verse, and that by two express names, a notable mark also being
added, least any perhaps should mistake the city. And also for a greater
assurance we are admonished that these names are not to be taken properly, but
spiritually, that is, aenigmatically, figuratively, allegorically. The first
name is Sodom, a city once very famous for her filthiness, now for her
punishment, a most fit exemple of the tower and chief habitation of this
great city. For is not the city Rome become famous for her horrible lusts,
above all the whole world: In the judgment of all the Poet Mantuan has truly
song of her in these words; Shame get thee to the country towns, if they
als' do not use
The same corrupted filthiness: Rome now is all a Stews.


Which is no less declared by an other taking his leave of Rome, thus; Rome
far well now I have thee seen, enough it is to see:
Jle come again when bawd, I mean, knave, brothel, beast, to be.


But that you may the better acknowledge Sodom, hear what a certain man
answered to one asking a question touching Rome: Say, what is Roma? Amor, Love;
if backward you it spell:
Rome loves the male kind. Say no more; J know thy meaning well.


Has not Hieronymus Zeged Mutius declared this plainly in his Cynedicall
books defending this horrible villainy, and approved by the Bulls and lettres
patents of Julius the third him self. With whom Johannes Casa associated
himself, being Archbishop of Beneventum, but a bird of the same foul neast,
greatly extolling that thing, which peradventure Sodom would have been ashamed
of. But it would be an infinite and irksome thing oven briefly to touch those
things, which might be spoken of this matter. Thine opprobrious lusts O Rome,
have taken away the reproach from thy Brothel houses, which the most holy Father
cherishes in his bosom by a wise policy, to wit for the avoiding of a
greater evil: but while he pretends to avoid, by the just judgment of God
he runs headlong into more grievous, being given over into a reprobate
sense: Romans 1.26.27. as it may be manifest to all men, who are not willingly
blind. And noe less is Rome a spiritual Sodom, then a corporal mother and
a shop of all monstrous Idolatry, as of the worship of the breaden Mass God,
of Images, of Relics, and other most wicked impurity of that sort, as is
more known to all men, then that it needs words.

The second name is Egypt, not any city, like Sodom, but a whole country and
Province. From whence this name is not proper to the mother city it self, but
common to that whole dominion, declaring most plainly the disposition of the
whole Kingdom of the Papists, on which side soever her large possessions do
extend. For it shows noe less the notable spiritual fornication committed
always throughout this whole Empire, then Sodom declares the bodily and
spiritual, practiced continually in the city of Rome. It is reported of many,
how great the blindness of Egypt was long a go, both in worshipping a
multitude of Gods, and also in adoring most base and filthy things, to wit,
Carts, Crocodiles, and other things of that kind. Spiritual Egypt with all
her provinces abounds in noe less plenty, nor of more vile Gods; whereto
perteined the rehearsing of so diverse Images, before chap. 9.20. and the clear
testimony of daily practice makes it manifest. For whither can you turn your
eyes, where you may not see windows, walls, lofts, full of a multitude of
their Gods? What temple can you go unto, where you may not find such as
worship every day their breaden God? And as if Idols enough did not stand out
in a public place, to satiate their spiritual lust, they get privately for
them selves Crucifixes, and Agnos Deises, which they hide in their bosom, that
they may never be without some thing, with which they may defile themselves in
whoredom. It was an horrible thing once to have increased their Gods according
to the number of their cities, Ier. 11.13. But in this Kingdom they have
multiplied their Gods, according to the number almost of the persons. And
whither is it less impious and filthy, religiously to worship a certain
foreskinne, a shirt, breeches, a little brain, bones, peticoates, girdles,
shoes, and infinite such other things, then a cow, a catte, Crocodile etc.
The Idolatry is not to be esteemed so much the less, by how much the
excellency of the thing which is worshipped is greater: for when one has been
sacrilegious once against God, in attributing to the creature that which is
proper to him, it is as well Idolatry to worship the highest Angels as the
lowest, vilest, and most abject creeping thing. Neither is it Egypt alone
because of Idolatry, but also for the notable cruelty, whereby the ove^ and
furnace became nothing milder to the true faithful, then Egypt was once to
the Israelites. Such are the names: the Property belongs to the place where
our Lord was crucified: but ubi being put without interrogatio^, sends us
back to some former thing set down in the sentence, that is to say, unto
spiritual Egypt. For the Lord was not crucified in Egypt taken properly, but
in that spiritual one, whose whole land, dominion, and empire is full of
cruelty and Idolatry. Great is the force therefore of this property, which
brings those former common names of Sodom and Egypt to a striecter and sure
way. For there are many cities abominable for monstrous lusts. Many also whose
outward power over the people, far and near, respects nothing so much as
to practice and stablish Idolatry. But that Sodom which is also spiritual
Egypt, and that Egypt within whose bounds and Empire the Lord was crucified,
can be no other, then one definite, most manifest and certainly known. From
this light therefore any man may perceave most clearly, what that city is,
which has killed these two Prophets, and in whose streets they lay unburied.
For that city which by her chief city is spiritually Sodom, in her whole
dominion Egypt, in which dominion the Lord was crucified, is the city that
has committed this vilanie against the two Prophets. But noe man can doubt,
but that very Rome is Sodom, both spiritually and bodily: and in her whole
Kingdom Egypt, and that under the power of this Kingdom the Lord was
crucified. For they shall deliver him to the Gentiles, says our Lord, that
they may mock, and scourge, and crucify him, Mat. 20.19. That noe man may
think that he was hanged on cross by the power of the judges. Which thing
also the very Jews acknowledged saying, it is not lawful for us to put any
man to death, John 18.31. Therefore Pilate the Roman Praetor, exercising the
Roman jurisdiction in Judea, condemning Christ unto the cross and executing
the sentence given by his soldiers, crucified the L. in spiritual Aeg. the
Romans kingdom being the^ heathenish, and defiled with foul Idolatry. From
which things it is to be observed, that these two Prophets were not to be
slain in the same special City, where the Lord was crucified, but in the same
spiritual Egypt, an ample and spacious country, containing not only many
special cities, but also a great number of Provinces. From whence Bellarmine
avoucheth foolishly, that the two prophets were to be killed at Jerusalem, as
if they who are killed in some one most mighty Kingdom, must needs all be
killed in one and the same city of that Kingdom. More over thou may
observe, that the Popish Rome is no less spiritual Egypt in her dominion,
then was before time that Heathenish, howsoever the Jesuits will have them to
be most unlike. But let them now go, and rejoice greatly in that place: and
let Bellarmine brag, that Chytreus and other of our men do pass over these
words with silence, having as it were nothing to answer to these things. I
hope that their Rome shall be found here far more clearly, then that either he
or any other of his company can be able to take out of our sight by any
darkness of theirs.

9 And men of the kinreds shall see etc. The whole Popish nation should
triumph for victory over the Scriptures made feeble, and weak. But where is
this company of Kinreds, people, tongues, and nations more manifest and
clearer, then in the Councels assembled and gathered together, whither they
came in flocks from every country to one place. Certainly unless the Angel
had named in express words the Tridentine Council, he seems not to have been able to speak more plainly: By the same providence of God it come to
pass, that the Emperors forces were gathered from sundry nations, Germans,
Hungarians, Italians, Spaniards, and others, that the corpses of the Prophets
should be set for a thing to be looked on of all me^, as it were in the
scaffold of the whole world: Sleid. in the year 1547.

5 Three days and an half: Some will have this to be the same space, with
that of two and forty months, and a thousand two hundred three score days.
But the words do show plainly that they are diverse spaces. For this
distance of three days and an half takes not his beginning before the
thousand two hundred and threescore days be accomplished. For so before in
ver. 7. And when they have finished: Afterward, these three days and an half
the Prophets lay slain and unburied. But that space of a thousand two hundredth
and three score days, is a time of Prophesying in sackcloth: so as by no
means they can be referred to the same time. Let us therefore give unto them
their own place, and set them next to the months. Which after the likeness of
the former days, do signify three years and an half: in which the Papists
should rejoice in their own behalf, for that the Scriptures were vanquished,
and the Churches subdued, as they thought, to their Angel of the bottomless
pit, as it came to pass partly at Tridentum and Bonnonia: partly in Germany.
There after the deadly sentence was given against the Scriptures in the year
1546, the 8. of April, from thence for three whole years and an half, the
Fathers triumphed in the mixed assembly of all nations, as if the matter had been executed manfully and excellently, and prepared themselves to suppress the
rest of the truth, until at length by the death of Paul the third, the
Conventicle was interrupted. Which thing fell on the year 1549. the 9. of
November, that is, on the third year and an half after the Scriptures were
trod under foot. The very few weeks that remain hinder not the agreement,
seeing the Spirit thought not good to devide the matter into smaller portions,
then into three days and an half. In Germany the Church, which by the
confederate armies of the Emperor and Pope, seemed to have been put down for
ever in men's opinion, lay as it were half dead for the same space, to wit,
from 22. of April in the year 1547, unto the first day of October of the
year 1550. when at Maidenburg it began to lift up the head again, being
nothing afraid neither of the Emperors proscription, or conspiracy of the
Princes, or whatsoever any enemies could do against them, Sleid. book 22. and
23. You may observe further, how vain a thing that is, and in noe place
agreeing with it self, which every where is spread abroad concerning the three
years reign of Antichrist. For these three days begin not before that the
two and forty months shallbe finished: both which spaces yet nevertheless he
shall reign. From whence after their own account, that we may grant unto
them the months to note three ordinary years and an half, he shall rule
seven years at the least. Although this be small also to co^taine so great
tyranny, as we before have declared. But we see how almost every word by it
self does disproove that invention.

And shall not suffer their carkeises to be put in graves: They shall deprive
them of all common honor, which we owe one to another by the right of
humanity. And surely when the Ministers of the Gospel desired earnestly, that
all things might be done according to the rule of Gods word, the Emperor
obtrudeth to the world that ungodly Interim, the Scriptures commanded to be
silent, and not to mutter against it. But in what a chafe was the Bishop of
Artois, when the men of Auspurg, Trevers and Basell alleged for their excuse,
that they had not received the form of doctrine, because it disagreeth from
the sacred scripture? Do you think, says he, that the Emperor may not make
laws, and prescribe a certain rule, as of civil, so also of holy things?
Sleid. book 23. In the very Council of Trent, what in the name of the rest
a^swereth Pictavius to the Ma^cilane Ambassadors? For when they required that
the same order might be taken for them, which before time was for the
Bohemians, according to the form of the decree of Basell: That the Scriptures
in every controversy might be in stead of a judge: Pictavius objected to them
again, that the Scripture was a vain and du^be thing, as also are the other
politic laws:, and that unto it must be added the voice of the Judge, that
it may be well understood, Sleid. book 23. He grants that the Scripture now
is nothing, but a vain and dumb thing, that is, altogether a carkeise. And
why should he not so boast, being privy to himself, that it was lately slain
by his labor, and of the rest of the Tridentine Fathers? But while they deny
to give this honor to the Scriptures, that they would not suffer them to
obtain that authority, which a few and contemned worshippers would have given
them willingly, it was like as if they should forbid their corpses lately
thrust through pitifully, to be buried. Pilate, when Joseph and Nicodemus asked
the body of Christ, gave them leav that they should bestow what cost they
would upon it. But when the Protestants made humble request that they might at
least wise bury the car keises of the Scriptures among themselves, although
not in any solemn grave, but only under the simple turffe of their cottages,
the Scarlated Fathers denied it stiffely. The Church was handled in the like
manner. For after that the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave were taken
prisonners, the cities put to a fine, and very many noble men utterly cast out
of favor, the Emperor proscribeth the people of Maidenburge by writings spread
abroad, the sentence whereof after the usual form is this: let noe man aid
them by any means whatsoever, neither acquaint him self with their case: they
which shall do otherwise, shall put themselves in peril of their goods and
life. What is this else, then that noe man should dare to make the funerals of
the wretched Church cruelly murdered? Maidenburg was left as a remnant of the
poor miserable, where assemblies of the faithful were kept. But might noe man
help this firebrand reserved from the burning, without danger of his life?
Doubtless it is apparent, seeing they suffered not the duties touching burials
to be performed to their slain carkeises.

10 And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them: The citizens of
the false Church, as before chap 7.1. etc. These should rejoice over them and
be glad, and should send gifts one to an other, as in common joy. And surely
not without cause, being now freed from the great trouble, wherewith the
Scriptures and the most pure Churches, as tormenters and executioners vexed
them while they lived. Nothing is so grievous to the world, as that their
unclean lusts should be bridled, their filthiness reprooved, and all their
actions tried by the rule of the same truth. But the Churches being now tied
to the interpretation of the Scriptures, that is, to the Pope of Rome: why
should not the Papists hope, the Pope being of such gentleness to his
servants, that they shall henceforth be no more made sick by the scriptures?
Without doubt the most holy Father would smite out their teeth, least perhaps
they should restrain his little pretty darlings. A just cause of exceeding
joy, and great triumph.

11 But after three days and an half: In the year 1550, the first day of
Octobre, after three years and an half from that destruction inferred upon
the Churches of Germany. For at this time the Prophets revived, and the
estimation of the Scriptures, and congregations of the faithful increased,
maugre Antichrist, head and all enemies. For the people of Maidenburge, who all
this time were proscribed of the Emperor, and utterly destroyed in men's
judgment, a few days before by George Megelburge: at length raising up
themselves, or rather stirred up of God, by a writing spread abroad, testify
openly to the world, their unquailed courage, and invincible constancy. They
detest the Council of Trent, and noe less reject the decree of Basil, made by
the Princes, and the Emperor himself. They exhort all to fortitude, and
show themselves to be ready, if need shall be, for this cause not to refuse
death. This surely was the Spirit of life, who coming from God restored again
heart to the Church, set up on their feet the slain Prophets, and endued them
with such courage, that they were straiteway a terror to the enemies. For
beside that bold profession, the author whereof was the heavenly Spirit given
to them, they stood on their feet in resisting valiantly Mauritius, who being
sent of the Emperor, and ordained Captain in that war by public
authority, first assaulted them very fiercely. They took also that George
Megelberge, and kept him in their power in the City, who had lately given them
a great overthrowe. And at length when they could not vanquish them by any
force, peace being made with Mauritius, they obtained a very famous name among
foreign nations, because almost they alone of all the Germans had taught by
their example what constancy can effect. So therefore the Church now again
stood up on her feet. Which thing doubtless put the enemies in very great
fear. For as Sleidane writes, That which was an end of miseries to the
people of Maidenburg, was an entrance and beginning of war against those
themselves, by whose aid and council they had been afflicted. For Mauritius,
partly to deliver the Lantgrave his father in law, partly to defend the
truth, and to have free leave to walk in it, which he saw to have been holden
under some space of time by the injustice of the enemies: prepared war
against the Emperor him self.

But how great trembling arose from hence? First the Tridentine Fathers, when
even a false rumor was brought them that the city Auspurge was taken, scarce
taking their leave of the rest of their fellows in office slipped out and
ran away. But when Mauritius proceeded, and approached Oenipous, where the
Emperor himself abode, he struck so great terror into him, that he fled
away suddenly with great speed together with his brother Ferdinand. More over
fear drove him against his will to give leave to depart to John Friderike Duke
of Saxony, whom before we said to have been taken prisonner, least the enemy
should refer it to his own glory. Was this a small fear, which made the
Emperor, and the King of the Romans to flee, and dispersed the Tridentine
assembly of Bishops? Now therefore fear came upon the enemies, that they
should fly away as far as they ca^ from her sight, whom of late they scoffed
at without danger.

12 Afterward they heard a great voice from heaven; Aretas and Montanus read,
and I heard a great voice from heaven saying to them, come up hither. To
ascend into heaven, is after labors dispatched, to be adorned with exceeding
honor and glory: after the example of Christ, who after death overcome, was
taken up into heaven. But whereas a voice was heard bidding them to come up,
thereby is signified that the Prophets should not attain to this honor by
their own power, but should be placed in that dignity, by the authority of
other men, that is to say, by some decree of the Princes. As we know it came
to pass at Auspurge the seventh of the Kalendes of October, in the year
1555: when by a public decree the Emperor Ferdinand, the King, and other
Princes bound themselves, that the religion comprehended in the Articles of
the Augustane confession, should be permitted free for all men: Sleid. book
26. This decree was the voice saying to the Prophets, that they should go up
into heaven. And not in vain, but they harkened to the same most willingly,
changing with most desirous minds their former miseries for a new granted
dignity, as is here said, and they went up into heaven in a cloud. The
enemies saw this, and were grieved: especially the Pope, as was meet, took
it grievously, who was thought to solicit the Emperor, that he would make
void again that Edict, Sleid. book 26.

13 And the same hour there was a great earthquake: Aretas. the Complut.
Edition, and other read, and there was in that day. It is a common thing for an
earthquake to signify an alteration of things, as we have observed at chap.
6.12. And doubtless a great change followed after this decree, all Europe
through. The people of Austria require earnestly of Ferdinand their King, that
the same should be granted to them, which was to the confederates of the
confession: the same the people of Bavaria crave importunately of their Prince
Albertus. Which Princes when they saw, that it was scarce safe to be utterly
against so fervent desire of men, both of them yield some what to their people,
though with an ill will. Like things come to pass in many other places: whence
one might see daily new defections from the Papisticall Kingdom,

And the tenth part of the city fell: The City in this place is the whole
popish Kingdom, which was diminished in a great part of it, when the Germans
forsook the same. I doubt not but the Pope himself will confess willingly,
that by this fall he was deprived of a large part of his city: but together
with this ruin and earthquake were slain seven thousand men. But that which
is translated heads of men, is in the Greek, names of men: for the men
themselves, as in chap. 3 4. But the kind of speaking is very significant,
teaching that God does not strike men after the manner of Blind Fighters, but
to appointe certainly and by name, whom he will have to be slain by his
scourges. These seven thousand Papists are slain, their bodies being not
killed, but they deprived of their great revenues, of Monasteries, Collegies,
and such yearly rents without any hope of recoverie. Was it not as death to
those idle bellies to be bereaved of their delights, and that men who lately
gave their minds to feed themselves only, should be constrained now to
feed others by word, life, or some profitable labor, or themselves to be an
hungered? But by the Angustane decree, the right of such possessions was
confirmed to the Princes of the Protestants: and that afterward without danger
the same might be bestowed upon the Ministres of the word, Schools, the poor,
and other godly uses without any fear of extortion. This doubtless was the
thing that slew them, that now they should be brought to poverty in truth,
who before abounding in all riot, only counterfaited the same. But to what
end is the number of the slain less, then according to the certain portion
of the falling city? For seven thousand only were killed, but the tenth parth
of the city falls: surely because the calamity of the ruin should be
greater, then that of the death. For that perteined to the whole multitude of
the Popish name; the killing was peculiar to the Ecclesiastical men, whom this
alteration vexed most of all, bringing with it the loss of their goods. The
common people who suffered the loss only of their former opinion, bare it
more patiently. Therefore whose grief was small, noe death of theirs is
mentioned. How does the Spirit declare unto us these events one after an
other, and conveniently? He does all things alone, who before the things come
to pass, does tell the condition of them so distinctly and exquisitely, The
rest of the Popish religion before, acknowledging the just vengeance of God in
the destruction and calamity of those Church men, gave glory to the God of
Heaven, that is, were converted to the true creator: in whose stead they
worshipped late Images made of some matter, and Idols. And who knows not that
almost an infinite number of men stirred up by these scourges, and opening
their eyes to the shining light did forsake their former superstitions? We see
the^ from the beginning to the end how this whole Prophecy agrees exactly
with the event. The seven last books of Sleidans Commentaries, do afforde a
more full declaration both of the battle and death and resurrection of the
Prophets. The whole Prophecy is of about a thousand two hundred fifty Julian
years from Diocletian unto the year 1555. how far also Sleidane proceeded
both in writing and living.

Analysis.
And thus far is the sixth trumpet, and second Periode: the last follows,
declared by the seventh trumpet, which is declared summarily in the rest of
this chapter, afterward particularly through all the rest of the book The
summarie exposition commends the Kingdom of Christ, partly by word, partly
by a sign: that is, both of the Rulers of the Christian assembly, ver. 15. and
also of the four and twenty Elders, whose gesture is mentioned in ver. 16.
Secondly their speech, ver. 17. which sets forth the glory of this Kingdom
by the rage of the enemies, the manifest wrath of God in subduing them, and
finally by the rewarding of the good and evil, ver. 18. Last of all the sign
is the temple open, the Arc seen, lightnings sent forth, and voices, ver. 19.

Scholions.
The second woe is past: A transition from the second more grievous trumpet to
the last. But whereas he says that the second woe is past, it is not to be
understood, as though nothing of it at all should now remain, but only that
the strength of it was broken, and much weakened, which should decay more also
every day, while at length it should be utterly destroyed. For those four
Angels of the ninth Chapter, whom we have showed to be the Turks, are not
altogether destroyed at the sound of the seventh Trumpet, but are only
hastening to destruction. So they came after the LOCVSTS, not expecting till
not one Locust should remain, but when they waxed old, rushing in furiously:
as we have showed in the ninth chapter at the 12. verse.

And behold the third woe willcome anon: Why is the last Trumpet called a
voice, which shall give a full and right form to the Church? In regard of the
wicked whose end now appears, and the rewarding of all their sins, both
by punishements begun on earth, and also eternal in hell. It is said to come
anon, because of that small delay which should come between that resurrection
of the Prophets which even now he spoke of, and the last sound of the Trumpet:
and also because shortly the last calamity of the wicked is brought to pass,
which shall not stay so long a time, as the former Trumpets, but shall come
quicly with swift wings.

16 Therefore the seventh Angel blewe the Trumpet, and there were great voices
in heaven; Blewe the Trumpet, to wit, in the year 1558. as the events do make
manifest, for then were there great voices in heaven, that is great joy arose
in the reformed Church: for so the word heaven does signify, as often before:
neiter are these voices terrible, such as are joined with the thunder and
lightnings after and else where: but of praise, and thankesgiving, as their
argement is showed in the next following words. Whose voices they are, is
gathered from that which is said by and by, that when they were heard, the
Elders fell down upon their faces, in the next verse: which they are wont to
do at the voices of the four beasts, chap. 4.19.20. Therefore they are the
Rulers of the Churches, who for some notable benefit, which the sound of the
seven Trumpet brought, do provoke their flocks to the praising of God. They
show what manner of benefit this is, when they say, the Kingdoms of the world
are become our Lords, and his Christ etc. What means this? Does Christ now
first reign? Surely he shall reign always, even in the mids of his
enemies. But now chiefly his Kingdom is to be praised, when he makes his
majesty visible after a sort in the very Kings, in so fashioning and forming
their harth, that they cast down their crowns and scepters at his feet, and
wholly do give their mind to the promooting of his glory.

But neither is this any new thing. He reigned so in old times by
Constantine, and other godly Emperors. Also in these last ages, those famous
Princes of Germany, had restored this Kingdom long since. Tho whom may be
joined Gustavus King of Suevia, and Christian King of Dennemarke, who in the
year a thousand five hundred thirty eight, changed away the Antichristian
impiety, for the Gospel. I answer that the Prophecy means not, that the
Kingdoms now first became of the Christian name, but only that they should
be greatly increased, at the sound of this Trumpet: for then especially we do
say that one does reign, when we see the bounds of his Empire enlarged:
albeit it is proper to this time, that the Kingdom of Christ begun from hence,
shall never again be darkened, as in the former reigns it came to pass,
which in process of time fell into utter decay. For so it is said, that he
shall reign for ever more. Therefore the first entrance of this Trumpet should
be famous for the access of new Kingdoms: as it came to pass in our
England, to which Christ at the sound of the seventh trumpet, in the year one
thousand, five hundredth fiftieth eight, gave the most gracious Queen
Elizabeth, who again gave her Kingdom to Christ, in rooting out through all
her dominions, the most part of the Romish superstitions, and in restoring to
her people the sincere and wholesome truth, that we might worship the Lord
our God according to his ordinance. King Edward her brother, as an other
Josias, performed the same thing with an upright heart the whole time of his
reign, but that his reign was short. For the Angel had not yet sounds the
trumpet, when Christ should reign for ever. Therefore the storm of
persecution in Queen Mary's time seemed to cast down from the lowest
foundations, that which began notably to be built. After this at length
appeased, and a fair sky appearing again, when the comfortable and most
beautiful star Elizabeth arose, then the Christian Empire was increased,
with England and Ireland: the next year was Scotland added, that all Britannie
with the Islands might be Christ's. How famous an increase was this to be
augmented with so great nations? But this glory is greater, because it shall be
eternal. For so the voices speak, who shall reign for ever. The former
Kingdoms of Christ after a sort perished, either abolished by the trouble of
wars, or changed into Antichristian bondage: but after this beginning,
Christian Princes shall never be wanting who should maintain the truth whole
and sound in their dominions. For now that time is begun, when Christ shall
rule in all the earth, his enemies subdued on every side; of which Daniell
speaks in chap. 2.44. and the Prophets every wherein so many places so
honorably. We shall see from the things that follow, that this dominion over
the Gentiles shall be continued unto him, till it be infinitely increased among
the Jews, and at length be translated from hence into heaven. And is it not a
clear proof of the eternal Kingdom, that so great entreprises of so many
and so mighty enemies against one country England and our most gracious Queen
do vanish away as the smoke? He whose scepter they fight against, la^gheth at
their foolish and vain endeavors. And I hope that he who has begun his
eternal Kingdom, will make the Queen also a type of his eternal Kingdom.
Every good man does earnestly desire it in all their prayers. Only we must
beware, least whose singular power and truth we have had experience of in
defending us, his truth we suffer to be corrupted, and his majesty to be
offended by Antichristian superstitions brought in again afresh. We have
Christ angry with us, because we are far from a perfect reformation: but if
we return to our vomit, how mightily shall he rage against us? Therefore
they who favor the Papists secretly, and labor to get liberty for them to
pollute the holy Kingdom, by bringing in again their ceremonies hated of God,
they endeavor the overthrow of our Kingdom, and which my heart dreadeth to
think the death of our most sacred Queen, For howsoever Christ has begun his
eternal Kingdom, yet he has not bound himself to certain countries: he
shall not want a Kingdom, though he shall remove his court to another place,
which doubtless he may do at his pleasure. But I hope that this Revelation
shall declare by such certain arguments, that the Bishop of Rome is that
Antichrist, that if any yet be not persuaded thereof, when the thing at length
shall be more plainly perceived, he will run away from him, as a most certain
and infernal pestilence. But that I may return to my purpose, we see now why
those voices rejoiced, to with, that the Kingdom of Christ was increased by
the access of new people. Surely it could not be, but the whole reformed
Church should have rejoiced soundly for our joy. Neither can it be doubtful,
but that the first beginning of this Kingdom was far most pleasant to our
country men coming out of Queen Mary's raging sourges of persecution: let us
g^sse by our selves, who although we have seen noe other Kingdom at any
time, yet desire noe mortal thing more then a very long use of this. And
therefore according to that regard of our duty, which is meet, we solemnize
that yearly day, which was unto us the beginning of this benefit, in which we
come together publicly, and with joint affections, do give as great thanks
as we can to our God by Chr. After that manner which is foreshewed in this
place, where the chief Rulers of the wholly assembly praise God in conceived
words, and the Elders give their consent, who are in the stead of the rest of
the congregation. Although, that I may not hide any thing, it came into my
mind to merveil why contrary to the manner of other places, as chap. 4.9.
and.5.8. and 7.11. and 14.3. and 19.4. in this one only they are not called
Beasts by their own names. Whither is it because the Beasts are a type, as we
have showed, of such Ministers as are approved of God: but our do err so
gleatly from Gods ordinance, that the Spirit of purpose refused to give them
the name of Beasts? Surely the things that we have spoken of the Laodicean
Church confirm this doubt. I wish that this one thing were not wanting to the
rest of our happiness.

16 Then those four and twenty Elders. The faithful congregation by the
conduct of their Ministers worshipped God, as in our wonted Ecclesiastical
assemblies, chiefly in that yearly assembly where of I have spoken.

17 Because thou have obtained thy great might: For all this time, in which
Christ sufferred hitherto his Church to be afflicted, he seemed to the world to
be weak, and of noe strength: now he would put on his might, and would
manifest to all men his supreme majesty over all things.

18 And the Gentiles were angry: This verse sets before us a short
abridgement of the whole last period, which consists in three things; in the
wrath of the Gentiles, in the beginning of Gods vengeance, and in the full
reward at length of both good and evil. The wrath of the Gentiles is that rage
and fury, whereby they grudge and grind the teeth tegither, for seeing the
Kingdom of Christ so marveilously to be increased contrary to their desire. In
how great a fume was the Pope, when liberty to enjoy a purer religion was
granted to the Germane Princes by a public decree? But because at the sound
of the seventh trumpet, the dominion of Christ should especially show it
self, the chief wounding of the whole Popish nation was reserved to this
time. Which after they heard of our England and Queen, overthrowing the Romish
impiety, burst out altogether, devising for us by what means soever they
could, a final destruction. And many words are not needful in this matter.
Known to the whole world are the Popes curses against us, our people being
stirred up often to rebellion, the bloody Jesuits sent privily daily, hired
traitors, privy murderers, sorcerers, the Popes armies set out in Ireland:
the Spanish navy, then which there was never any stronger and better
appointed: Neither yet with weapons and armor more for fight, then with
scourges, and haltars, and things of that sort for torment, the desirous
inquiry of Philip the Father (lately wakened almost from very death) concerning
our England, as though he were to go by and by into that place, where the
teller of our evil should be noe less pleasant to others, then to himself.
Rages certainly meet for wicked minds. For these are only the beginnings of
fury although famous and notable: then chiefly the Papists shall storm, when
Christ shall enter upon his full Kingdom, as after more at large. The Pope and
Turk shall purpose the last desolation of the whole Church: for which cause
they shall gather very great armies. But the rage of men shall turn the
greater glory of God, as the Psalmist sings. For by how much the danger
shall be greater, by so much his honor shall shine the more in delivering his.

As touching the second, Gods punishment begun, which these words signify:
and his wrath is come, that contains the sum of the Vials, which therefore
are called the last plagues, as shall be said in his place. The full reward,
and first of all goods, as great as can be on the earth, is found in these
words, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged. Which things
perteine to the Jews, yet strangers from Christ, and therefore without
salvation, and dead in deed: but at length they shall be judged, and shall
come to the truth. Which Interpretation I have taken out of Daniell, Ezechiel,
and some places of this Prophecy following: of which how great is the weight,
it shall appear after more clearly. The recompensing of the evil in the last
words, and should destroy them that destroy the earth. To wit, The Pope and
Turk, and all their servants, yet mighty robbers of the whole earth. And so is
the short sum of the things to be declared afterward more plenteously.

19 Then the Temple was opened. Therefore it was shut before, when it was
measured in the beginning of this chapter, and because the elect were sealed.
But now it should be opened, noe more to be used to the receaving of a few
faithful, but that is should extend to an huge multitude of Saints. Neither
only should the Temple be opened, but also the most holy place, in which was
set the Arc of the covenant. Into this once it was lawful for the High Priest
only to enter, and that but once in a year. Now it should be gone into of all
Saints in likewise, all the mysteries of salvation being as plain, clear,
and manifest to every one, as before time they were to the learned and skillful
men, all whose study was bestowed in them. And who but a very envious
anthankefull man acknowledges not a most rich increase of truth, which is
come to pass in these last times since the year 1558. in which the seventh
Trumpet sounded? The doctrine was made lightsome in many points, more clearly
known, delivered more distinctly, then has happened in many ages past. Neither
do I speak this to boast, but to praise Gods bounteousnes, and to show forth
the truth of the Prophecy. Surely God has begun to consume in his mountain
the form of that veil which covers all people, and that covering which is
spread upon all nations, Isay 25.7. He began, I say, because it shall be taken
away more fully, when it shall be taken from the Jews also.

And there were lightnings: The third part of the sign, which declares what
should follow after the opening of the Temple, great evils should fall upon the
world from the Church increased and abounding with so great riches of divine
knowledge.

The world waxes lean throug her prosperity, and by how much the Sun
shines more brightly upon it, so much the more are the sick eyes of it
grieved.

Therefore it desires that this were abolished, and endeavors as much as it
can, but prevails nothing by endeavoring, unless to call forth lightnings
upon it self, and those evils which are rehearsed. But this is only a brief
foreshadowing of the things, the pattern shall be mote lively set forth
afterward.

CHAP. 12.
AND there appeared a great wonder in heaven: a woman clothed with the Sun,
under whose feet was the Moon, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars.

2 And being great with child she cried traveiling in birth, and was pained
that she might bring forth.

3 And there appeared an other wonder in heaven: for behold there stood a
great red Dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his heads
seven crowns.

4 Whose tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, which he cast to
the earth. And that Dragon stood before the woman, being ready to bring forth,
that when she had brought forth, he might devour her child.

5 And she brought forth a man child, which should rule all nations with a
rod of iron: and her child was taken up unto God, and his throne.

6 But the woman fled into the wilderness, where she should have a place
prepared of God, that they should feed her a thousand two hundredth and three
score days.

7 And there was a hattell in heaven, Michaell and his Angels fought with the
Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels.

8 But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven.

9 And that great Dragon, that old serpent, which is called the Devil and
Satan, was cast out, which deceaveth all the world: he was cast, I say, into
the earth and his Angels were cast out with him.

10 And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, now is salvation and strength,
and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; because the accuser
of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.

11 But they overcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of their
testimony: and they made no accounte of spending their life even unto death.

12 Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them: woe to the
inhabitans of the earth, and of the sea: for the Devil is come down unto you,
full of great wrath, as who knows that he has but a little opportunity.

13 When therefore the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
persecuted the woman which had brought forth the man child.

14 But to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might
fly into the wilderness from the sight of the Serpent, into her place, where
she should be nourrished for a time, and times, and half a time.

15 And the Serpent cast out of his mouth after the woman, water like a flood,
that he might cause her to be carried away with the flood

16 But the earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed
up the flood, which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth.

17 Then the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made war with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the commandment of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.

18 And he stood upon the Sea sand.


Analysis
It has been spoken summarily concerning the seventh trumpet. The parts of it
are a calling to rememberance of the time past, in three chapters, 12.13.14.
and the Prophecy touching future things, from thence to the end of the book.
The calling to mind of the time passed, relates the things done, either by
the enemies, the Dragon in this chapter, the Beast in the following: or by the
Citizens chap. 14. The history of the Dragon is of things which were done
partly in Heaven unto the 13. verse, partly in Earth in the rest of the
chapter. Those are the persecution and war. The persecution has a
description of the persons, both of the woman against whom it is undertaken,
ver. 1.2. and of the Dragon, who infers it, ver. 3.4. Afterward the Event.
whereby the woman nevertheless brings forth a Son, who without harm and
being endued with excellent power, is taken up to God, ver. 5. then also she
flies without hurt, ver. 6. The war which is made in Heaven is described by
the Captains themselves and Armies, ver. 7. The overthrowe of the Dragon, ver.
8.9. and the Saints song of triumph, verse. 10.11.12. The things done on
earth, first against the woman, is the persecution renewed both against her
being present, where the assault of the Dragon is rehearsed, ver. 13. And the
escaping of the woman, ver. 14. and also against her being absent. Here the
assault is made by a flood powered out, ver. 15. the help against it is give^
by the Earth, which swallowed up the flood, ver. 16. Secondly against the seed
of the woman there is a war, ver. 17. All which things are concluded with a
transitio^ unto the battle of the Beast in the chapters following, ver. 18.

Scholions.
1 And a great wonder appeared in heaven: As touching that we told in a word
in the Analysis, that the three next chapters together perteine unto a
continual History of the time past: peradventure it may seem strange to some
body, why the Spirit should do that which is already done, and rehearse again
the former History, set forth sufficiently as it seems, in those things that
have bin said before: especially in this place after the blowing of the seventh
trumpet, when shortly there should be an end of all things, as we have
learned from the tenth chapter. There are most just causes of both: for no man
beholding separated and dispersed parts here and there of a building, scarce
comprehends in mind any fashion of the whole frame, much less perceives he
the handsomnesse, which would be of them joined together, every one set in his
own place, and couched together in fit order. The former handling was a certain
preparation of divided parts: but this continual narration does properly
join all things together in one, and sets before our eyes the whole frame,
that we may see to what sum at length that singular building comes. But it
is reserved to this time, because before the last Trumpet, there could not be a
full comprehending of these things. The events came forth by peecemeale and
distinctly: the knowledge whereof the world received a part and by little and
little, after the manner of folded tapestry: but all things at length being
ended, now there was time to behold the whole unfolded cloth, and of
appropriating together the universal building. But chiefly by this rehearsal
we are taught, that such an History of all those things under the last
trumpet is to be made, as is instituted typically in these three chapters.
Which thing came to pass about the year one thousand five hundredth and
threescore, certain learned and skillful men framing that excellent work of
the Centuries at Maidenburge. In which thirteen Centuries, whatsoever from the
birth of Christ unto the year one thousand three hundredth is found here and
there among the ancient Churches, or politic writers, is brought into one
body, and as a built house all things fitly joined together, is placed to be
seen at once. From which our country man John Fox, and John Sleidan received
a great light, who continued the History unto the year 1555. that is to say,
unto that time which by two or three years went before the blowing of the
seventh Trumpet. For this cause, to wit by the force of the restored Church,
and of that commandment in chap. 10.10.11. the former times are repeated under
the last trumpet, because now at length all things should be declared most
copiously by the studies of the learned which had come to pass never before.
The like industry of learned men about the end of the sixth trumpet brought
forth that continual narration, whereof we spoke in the former chapter: but
that was more general, and obscure in consideration of that time: but this
most full and abundant, obtained by a greater knowledge of things, the^ ever
before this time. These things are to be observed touching the order of the
Prophecy, to the end that we may see the more easily, not as some suppose,
these things to be set in an other place, but most wisely and fitly to be
reserved unto the last Trumpet, as to their natural and most proper place.

Yet nevertheless there is noe cause why in this repetition we should fear a
twice sodden Colewort. For we shall now behold that face of things joined
together by their ioints, of which before time there could be noe looking upon.
Therefore, as touching this great wonder, it is seen in heaven, a type of the
true and heavenly Church, whose condition he fetched from the beginning, to
wit, from the beginning of the seals, and the time of the Revelation given,
containing in the six first verses, what was her state from thence to
Constantine the Great, in whom the sixth Seal also ended, as we showed at the
sixth chapter. And it is manifest that the same space of time is reckened up, by
the description of the woman and the Dragon, with the event of the persecution,
and of that open war, which is made with Michaell, as shall be showed in their
places. The woman which is seen does rightly bear the image of the Church,
which so often times in the Scriptures is called the Spouse. The clothing of
the Sun, is the excellent brightness and purity of that time, as touching the
doctrine of lustification, and the syncerity of the whole faith: for the
garment, as we have showed in other place, is the imputed righteousness of
Christ. The Sun notes the light of the Scriptures. Therefore the clothing
of the Sun, is such a confidence in the righteousness of Christ alone, as the
scriptures teach. Which is a most comely ornament of the first Church, which
the opinion of our strength had noe whit yet darkened.

In other places of the Scriptures this clothing is of white and pure linen.
But the glory of any later time do not attain unto this most excellent glory
of the Sun.

The MOON under her feet: This is commonly and ordinarily referred unto the
despised and trodden under foot vanity of worldly things, which are as variable
and changeable as the MOON. In which respect the Woman has noe greater regard
of such earthly things, then of that which commonly men do trample and tread
upon with the soles of their feet.

But from the former things we have learned, that the Moon does signify the
light of truth and doctrine borrowed from the Scriptures, which now being put
under her feet, may show that all the steps of this Church are directed and
disposed according to the only rule of the one of these. For it is not enough
to shine round about with the Sun, unless the steps be set in the way of
Godliness. As therefore the clothing of the Sun is the doctrine of faith, so
the Moon under the feet is the doctrine of manners: which are either public
or private. They comprehend the whole manner of worshipping God, and revoking
of those that err, which is called Discipline commonly. These private are seen
in the common life of every one. Great was the glory then of the woman, before
whom the heavenly light of truth went in all things, whether publicly or
privately. I take rather this latter applying, because it is more fit to abide
in the signification once received: albeit I would not have utterly rejected
the former interpretation, as being godly and learned. The crown of twelve
stars on the head signifies the shining administers of the doctrine, the
twelve Apostles, by whose preaching the Church was founded, and also the
Apostolical men, who receiving the word from them that saw the things don
their selves, preserved the Church chaste and undefiled. But it is to be
observed that the woman does carry the stars in an other manner then Christ:
he being Lord of all carried them as it were servants in his hand, chap.
2.16. she bears them as her chief ornament on the crown of her head. Such
then is the particular explication. Which description, how well it agrees to
that church, noe man can be ignorant of, who has been even but meanly
acquainted with the History. She was most glorious by the clothing of the
righteousness of faith, in retayning faithfully the doctrine which she had
received from Christ, the Apostles, Evangelists, and other Apostolic men.
Neither was she yet defiled with the uncleanesse of humane invention, but in
the whole worship, discipline, life, manners, she had the Moon under her
feet, following the sacred truth as her North-starre: in all things there
was one form of governing in all Churches, the very same which is taught in
the Acts of the Apostles, and their other writings. Or if any man will refer
the Moon to the vanity of wordly things, how free was she from ambition, and
desire of honors? How greatly did she abhor the coveting of riches, and
contention for dignity? How sincere is the History of that time in Eusebius?
The Bishops are reckened by name, excellent for their manners and doctrine:
their conflicts, labors, and sufferings are declared; but as yet the proud
names of honors and dignities were unknown to the world: the burning
mountain was not yet cast into the Sea: neither had Satan brought in
arrogancy and pride: but the Pastors used singular modesty, being very
careful for the good estate of their flock, not heaping riches and Lordly
titles for pomp. One Paulus Samosatenus is called Magnifique Lord and (...),
as a forerunner of Antichrist, guarded with a great company of men servants,
whereof some went before, some followed after: see the Synodicall Epistle in
Eusebe, book 7. chap. 30. But when this insolency was hated of all the rest,
then the time now drew near, when this vain glorious Bishop rose up, in
which the woman hid her self. I am not ignorant but that pride had sprung up
in some other sorts; but the Spirit describes the womaa by those marks, which
were yet evident, not by those which grew up about the end of that flourishing
estate, and secretly. Such was this Church, and such ought every one to be, but
of which sort none has been since that time. For we shall find those that
followed, not clothed with the Sun, but with the night: not treading under
foot the Moon, but the earth: neither having the shining stars on her head,
but golden ornaments.

A Crown of stars. This crown of stars is wonderful. Among mortal men
Gold is wont to be appointed for this thing. But to what end should she have
Gold on her head, under whose feet did lie whatsoever is precious in this
world? The glory therefore hereof is the integrity of the Ministers, noe
mortal dignity. The faithfulness of these is the glory of the Church: which
is in a mourning estate when these loose their light.

2 And being great with child she cried travailing in birth: The fourth
property: her traveiling with child, having in the womb, as Mat. 1.18. Aretas
and the common translation have she cries being in labor with child, pained
to bring forth, that is in bringing forth, or that she might bring forth,
by a syntaxe not unlike to that whereby we saz fair to see, valliant to fight.
The Church had exceeding great pain for along time, as it were of a woman
travailing with child. And she desired in all her prayers, to be freed at
length from that most afflicted condition wherein she was under the Heathenish
most cruel Emperors. Which thing she knew that she should obtain, if
sometime at length she could bring forth one who should rule the common
wealth, and have the chief menaging of things. For the woman was not barren
before this time, but happy for issue in very great number: but one son was
yet wanting, who might be able to defend her from the injuries of the enemies:
whom while she is in labor with, and prepares a defender, she sufferred
most sharp pains, before she could obtain that which she desired.

3 And another wonder appears. So is the description of the woman, the rest
of her condition is made apparent from the description of the enemy, to wit the
Dragon: both from the things inherent, in this verse, and also from the effects
in the verse following. Those first are his red color, horns, heads, crowns:
before all which is set the place in which the Dragon appeared, to wit, in
heaven, not so called properly, (for what has the Dragon, that is, the Devil,
to do in the heavenly palace, from whence he is banished for ever?) but in
the heaven which is in earth. But this Dragon is not only the Devil in his
own proper person, but also men being the Ministers of his fury, especially
the Roman Emperors, whom from that time in which John wrote, persecuted most
grievously Christ in his members, as Traiane, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, and
Verus, Commodus, Severus, Decius, and at length Diocletianus, open enemies, who
make a professed war, are called in this book Dragons, of which sort is at
this day the Turk. Others, who in name are Christians, but fight against the
truth secretly, and by indirect subtilities, are called Beasts, which do prey
upon men only for to satisfy their hunger: whereas the Dragons forced by noe
want of meat, are carried to our destruction because of that hatred which is
between man kind and them. This Dragon was once in heaven, as long as the
open enemies held the Empire of the world, exercising dominion over men named
Christians, which were dispersed through all places of their Empire. He is
called Great, being the highest Prince on earth: and red being most furious
against Christians, wholly red with their blood. The seven heads are seven
hills, and seven Kings, after chap. 17.9.10. unto which place we defer
the more full handling of these things. In the mean time, for this matter
which is in hand, it shall be sufficient to understand, that by this circunsta^ce
of words, the city is noted, where he should place the seat of the Empire, to
wit, Rome, famous for the seven hills and Kings. For the Beast received the
Throne from the Dragon, chap 13.2. Therefore if her seat shall be at Rome, so
shall be his. The ten horns are so many Kings, or Provinces governed of
Pretors like to Kings. So Strabo declares it in the last words of his last
book of Geographic: That Augustus Caesar divided the whole Roman Empire into
two parts: the troublous and warlike Provinces of which he took to himself,
the other peaceable and quiet ones he gave to the people. Who divided theirs in
ten Pretories, the exterior Spain and her Islands: The interior containing
Baetica, now called Granata, and the country of Narbon in France even unto
Alencem Sardinia, with Corsica: Sicilia: Illyricum, Epyrus being adjoined.
Macedonia. Achaia even unto Thessalia: Aetolia and Acarninia, and certain
nations of Epirus to the borders of Macedonia, Creta, with Cyrenaica: Cyprus:
Bithynia with Propontide, and certain parts of Pontus. Suetonius also makes
mention of the like disposing of the Provinces, but tells not the number; to
Aug. in chap. 47. Moreover the same Strabo reports that Dicharchies do and
always have belonged to the Emperors portion. For Caesar held the rest
distinguished also in ten Provinces: to wit, Afrike, France, Britannie;
Germany: Dacie, Mysie, Thracie, Cappadocie, Armenie: Syrie, Palestine, Judea,
and Aegypte. And this is the same thing which Cyprian writes to Successus:
that Valerianus wrote an answer to the Senate, that all belonging to the
Emperor, whosoever ever had confessed before, or shall now confess, should be
seized upon, and bound, shoulb be sent enrolled into the Emperors possessions,
that is, into those far countries which we spoke of, belonging to the Roman
Empire. Therefore whither we respect the countries which the Emperor held in
his own possession, or those which he yielded to the people, they were the
ten horns, the power and strength of the Dragon, in which all his might
consisted. Yet the number remained always the same, but was altered according
to the present occasion. But it was sufficient for the Spirit to describe the
enemy by any certain mark, then which there is none more clear, then the
largeness of this dominion, and this so notable a decree of the Provinces
divided. But he bears the crowns on his heads, not on his horns, because
the supreme majesty did abide at Rome, to which all the rest of the Provinces
submitted their dignities.

4 Whose tail drew: Considering that the Dragon is of such a disposition, how
does he carry himself toward the Church? Two effects of him are rehearsed,
one upon the Stars, the other against the woman. As touching them, he shall
cast down many from the heavenly profession by sharp persecutions, who ought
to have showed light to others. For this is to cast the stars of heaven to
the earth, see Eusebius. book 6. chap. 41. See also before in chap. 6.13.

But the Dragon stood before the woman: He watched her diligently that noe
maintainer of the Christian religion should be borne. He rolled every stone for
to cut of this hope. Add certainly as soon as Maximinus the Dragon saw
Alexander of Mammea to be somewhat favorable to Christians, so as he was
thought to have been instructed in their ordinances, he forthwith devoured him.
Decius also the Dragon did swalowe down the Philips, both the Father and the
Son: he himself shortly after being swalowed up in a marsh. But the thing is
made manifest most clearly in Constantine. at whom chiefly the Spirit pointed
the finger. Diocletianus and Galerius with whom he lived being a young man in
the East, perceaving his singular towardnes and virtue, left nothing untried,
that they might kill him privily. So Eusebius writes upon his life, in his
first book. Pomponius Laetus reports that he was sent with an army against
the people of Sarmatia, most fierce nations, and accustomed to murders: from
whom, when contrary to the opinion of Galerius, he brought back not death but
the victory, by the persuasion of the same man, under a color of exercising
his valor, he fought on the Theater with a Lion. For Galerius sought, to
destroy the unwarie yo^g man, as of old Euristheus did Hercules. Neither was
there here an end of the treacheries. Maximian Herculius that red Dragon,
devoured him almost afterward by snares set to intrappe him. But he which laid
a snare for an other, through the just judgment of God, perished himself in
the snare. Constantine escaped many other privy assaults, not by humane
wisdom, but by divine revelation from God, as Eusebius writes upon
Constantines life, in his first book. For the Dragon knew that it concerned
him much, that no such a one should arise: whence it is no marveile if he did
labor so greatly, to devour this child assonne as it should be borne.

5 And she brought forth a male child; The event of the persecution: at
length the Church howsoever the Dragon strove against her with all his might,
brings forth a male and strong defender, by instructing Constantine the Great
in the Christian faith. For he was that male child, who first of all the
Roman Emperors, took upon him the defense of the truth. We have made
mention of the Philippes both Father and Son, which were both Christians.
Although if we must believe Pomponius Laetus, fainedly and not truly, but
only that they might cover their wickednesses with a honest name. But is i^
like, that they were so hated of Decius, for a conterfaited name? But I dispute
not of that. This is certain that they little or nothing helped the state of
Christians. The male child was not borne before Constantine. He was the first
of all that delivered the Church valiantly from the tyranny of the enemies, he
maintained and defended the same strongly, increased and enlarged it
wonderfully, he brought the peace so greatly longed for, established it for
ever. How greatly she labored before that this Emperor her son was borne,
all the History both holy and profane do tell it.

That should rule all nations with a rod of iron: For Christ bestows on his
people this his peculiar power according to that promise, If any shall
overcome, J will give him power over nations, and he shall rule them with a rod
of iron, chap. 2.27. The truth whereof shained forth in Constantine. For he
over came the Sar^ates, the Goths, and all the nation of the Scytes in sundry
battles. Yea God rewarding his godliness, as Eusebius speaks, he subdued all
sorts of Barbarians under his feet: every where he did set up his enseignes
of victory, caused most famous victories among all men, and made him to be
feared of all adversaries: In the first orat. upon the life of Constantine.
Whereupon the Ambassadors almost of all nations ran together to his Court
continually, neither did the distance of place let either the Indians or
Aethiopians, which two ways are divided the fardest of all men: as the same
Eus^bius writes out of Homer, that they should not bring their gifts to get
his favor. For he ruled with a rod of iron, who so repressed all enemies with
force and arms, that no man durst even to lift up his finger against the
Church.

And her son was taken up unto God: How taken up? whether by death whereby
Constantine being taken from the earth, was received up into heaven? Or rather
by a great earthly dignity, which God bestowed on him, being delivered from the
lying in wait of adversaries, and conspiracy of enemies. The thing it self
seems rather to approve this latter: especially seeing the Magistrates are
called Gods; by which proportion the Throne of supreme dignity, is called
rightly the Throne of God himself. Also in the former chapter the two Prophets
reviving, and recovering their former honor, are said to go up into heaven,
ver. 12. Neither is it like to be true, that he whose power should be so great
over the nations, should have his birth and death joined together, not any
notable great act being mentionned, that he might give some show of his
received power. Therefore to be taken up unto God in this place, is to be
placed in the highest top of dignity among men, That is to say, be made an
Emperor. But he is said to be taken up, because the Empire was not so much
sought of him, as given to him thinking no such thing. He had escaped the
conspiracies by flying to his Father, whom he found dying as soon as he came.
Who at length being dead, he took all that power by inheritance, under the
shadow whereof he desired to be covered whiles his father lived. Shortly after
he is desired with earnest requests of the people of Rome, whom the great
tyranny of Maxe^tius oppressed, they exhort and beseech him that he would not
lurk in a certain corner of the earth, but would take upon him the
government of the whole world being offered unto him. There was added a
heavenly token, and a voice commanding him to doubt nothing of the victory. How
great was this force from God, taking up a man to so great dignity? Undoubtedly
he could gladly have been at rest in his fathers bounds of France and
Britanny, in which he kept himself quiet the five first years, unless he had been taken up perforce of God in heaven, to a greater Empire then that which he
had purposed in his mind.

6 But the woman fled: The other event is in respect of the woman, who by and
by after the birth of her male child fled away. Which flight is declared from
the place whither she went, from the condition wherein she was in that place,
and the space of time which she remained there. All which things are declared
somewhat more largely afterward, from verse 13. where a continual Prophecy of
her is made: here they are mentioned in few words, as in their proper place,
to the end that we may the more easily understand to what time this flight
properly pertain. The place is the wilderness, that is, the Temple measured
of God, chap. 11.1. where a few elect lying hid, was a mere wilderness, in
comparison of that great assembly which possessed the holy city and the
uttermost court. Yet this wilderness is a place prepared for her of God, as
we have seen from so exact a measuring of the Temple. For God had a care of
her and provided for her a cover to hide in, howsoever he suffered her to want
a public assembly. The condition of her lying hid is such, that she should
be nourished by the means of certain men: (...) so he says, that they should
nourish her there. But who are these? Two Pro^^^^ whereof we have heard in the
former chapter, ver. 3. power given them to prophecy, was the ministry of
nourrishing the woman. For as God raining Manna from heaven, fed the Israelites
once in the wilderness, so he prepared meat in the wilderness for the woman.
Furthermore he would rather have committed the office of feedind to the ravens,
as we see that he did to Elaja, then that he would have sufferred her to perish
through famine. This is therefore that time, when they that overcame did eat
of the hidden Manna, as we have said in the Church of Pergamus, chap. 2.17. The
space wherein she should be darkely known in the public is a thousand two
hundredth and threescore days, the same that those two witnesses prophesied
clothed in sakecloth, chap. 11.23. The concurring of all which things teaches,
that this wilderness is that temple, and that this seiourning in banishement
in the wilderness, is that dwelling in the sanctuary. Whence it is, that the
same beginning is to be attributed to both, to wit, the sixth Seal, as we have
showed more at large in chap. 11.2. Upon which time did fall that sealing in
chap. 7. All which do most strongly confirm, that our interpretation, which
we have hitherto given. But why fled the woman being increased with so mighty
a son, who before being succor less, and laboring with great pain to
bring forth, did withstand so ma^fully the rage of the Dragon? Certainly the
fear of the enemy did not put her to flight, but the lothing of some
domestical evil.

And so indeed it came to pass, that the security that such a son was
borne, took away all regard of true godliness. For now the tyrants being driven
from their necks, they were at good leisure to follow after conte^tions and
ambition. Now there was leisure to search diligently the relics of the
saints, to consecrate Temples to Martyrs, and to pray in all Temples. No
outward griefs did hinder, but that men might freely give themselves to the
corrupting of all religion. Therefore that simple integrity, which Christ
appointed, the Apostles practiced, and which was also faithfully kept, by their
next successors, whiles the cross suffered not their minds to be wanton;
began wholly to be defiled and violated with idle and impure ceremonies mixed
with it. The clothing of the Sune, which was wholly wove^, as in the warpe so
also in the wourfe, of the threedes of the sacred verity, began to be altered
by the holiness of our works. The Moon which governed their paths, was driven
out of her place by the invocation of Saints in the public worshipe, and by
the violating of the whole sacred discipline. The shining stars in the crown
of her head, were changed into honorable Lords. Which the woman seeing, endured
not the grief, but by and by getting her self away, fled thither, where at
least she might be freed from the torment of seeing, that is to say, no public
assemblies were found, wherein Gods ordinances did flourish entire and whole.
For the faithful one by one are not the woman, but the whole congregations of
the faithful. So the Son brought more hurt then the enemy: not of a will to
hurt, but by the wickedness of men, which abused shamefully so happy a peace
to all impiety.

7 And there was a battle in heaven: Hitherto of the persequution, whiles no
man through all this space of the Seals, did withstand the rage of the Dragon:
now at length war is made Michaell being risen, who should take up arms for
the defense of the Church, and delivered her from the power of the enemies. But
as touching Michaell, this name it may be belongs properly to Christ alone:
which yet is communicated to the faithful, in as much as they are able by the
strength of his spirit to carry some image of this name, even as he gives to
them that overcome his power to rule the nations with a rod of iron. For the
chief Captains do not make this battle with their armies on both sides, in
heaven it self properly so called (for how can the Devil appear in heaven,
which was thrown down from thence at the beginning, never to return thither
afterward.) But this battle is made in the Church upon the earth, in which
sense the Dragon was seen in heaven, above in ver. 3. In this wrasseling both
the Princes do exercise their strength by ministers, who are noted by their
names. Therefore Michaell by communication of name is Constantine, the
faithful soldier of Christ, who even now was called the man child. But the
Dragon is Maxentius, Maximinus, Licinius, by whose tyranny the Devil powered
forth his hatred against the Church. The Angels are the armies warring under
the banners of both the Captains. We have showed before in the 6. chap. ver.
15. that Christ began the war against the Dragon, when he did cast down from
the high Empire Diocletian and Maximin Hercule, by a show of a voluntary giving
over, and drove Galerius to a recantation by an horrible torment of diseases.
But then Christ fought by his own strength alone, bringing a wonderful help
from heaven: but in this war wherein a lawful victory was to be gotten, and
the Dragon to be thrown altogether from heaven, it seemed good to him to use
the labor of his Servant. This therefore is that war, which first
Constantine took upon him against Maxentius the Son of Maximinus Herculeus.
Afterward which he made against Maximinus in the East by Licinius: and lastly
which he made against Licinius himself, endeavoring the same things, which the
other tyrants did. For that we may understand under whose conduct these
warred, Constantine miraculously is appointed the Emperor of the holy war.
For behold the heavenly sign of a most bright cross, which he saw in heaven
about midday: by this do thou overcome; the meaning of which, a vision in the
night when he was at rest, opened more fully. Whereby it was plainly testified
that he was not made Governor over this expedition, so much by the election of
the people, as by the voice of God himself. For I like not to take away the
credit of the miracle: Constantine himself confirmed the thing by an oath to
Eusebius. Although there is no matter of weight from hence to establish the
Romish Idolatry: for the impiety of worshipping the Cross was not yet known:
neither was this sign given to that end, that it should be worshipped
religiously, or that it should be any religious thing: but only as a token of
the faith, and a certain pledge of ^he victory, whereby Constantine yet a young
Christian, might go forward more cheerfully, and fight with greater hope
against the enemies of the death of Christ. But the craftines of the Devil,
and the corruption of man's mind, turned this sign given, not long after, into
destruction, as of old also the Brazen Serpent commanded by God. Maxentius
contrariwise made war under the conduct and power of the Devil only, he
being a most wretched worshipper and consulter of Devils, ripping women great
with child, that he might look into the bowels of the children not yet
brought forth Maximinus and Licinius were Princes of the same impiety, so as
there is no man, but beholding these Captains set in the place of them that
were dead, may easily see Michaell to stand on the one side, and the Devil on
the other.

8 But they prevailed not: The event of the war; the happiness of the former
time, did now forsake the enemies. Before they trod under foot the Church at
their pleasure: now fighting with her man child they are slain with a final
destruction. Maxentius the Dragon was drowned in the river of Tiber. Maximinus
prevented a banishement by Licinius through a sudde^ death: Licinius himself
more then once or twice being put to flight in often battles, was at length
beheaded. So the Dragon was now utterly overcome and driven out of heaven,
where lately he held a place by tyranny. For their place was found no more in
heaven, the open enemies being subdued and destroyed, much more removed from
the government of the common wealth, without any hope to recover it afterward.
For from this time the Devil was bound for a thousand years, as in chap.
20.2. Neither then being loosed shall he have rule over the Christians, but the
hurts which he shall do, shall be only the bitings of the heel: in the mean
while that it should be manifest to all men, that now the Dragon was wholly
conquered and thrown down from heaven, God governing every thing by his
eternal providence, would that a token should be set up openly in the eyes of
men of this most excellent victory: from whence Constantine before the gates
of his Court, provided that a table should be set up on high, wherein a Dragon
was painted, thrust thorough with a dart, and laid under his and his peoples
feet: see Eusebius. upon the life of Constantine, in the third oration, leaf
137. a.

9 And that Dragon was cast into the earth: That is beiond the bounds of the
true and holy Church, not only among the profane nations, but also all other
people altogether without true godliness, howsoever peradve^ture they pretended
a show of it, and are marked with the names of Christians. That which is here
called the heaven and the earth, was in the former chapter called the Temple
and the Court. In that, the Church lay hid, in this the Gentiles ruled, a
people who because of their vicinitie, did take to themselves the name of the
Church. Therefore the Devil being cast unto the earth, he is thrust out
together with his Angels into this court, having received power to vex the
whore, who lately exercised all his strength against the true spouse.

10 And J heard a great voice: The Song of triumph of the Saints, celebrating
God for his great benefit: which first of all is declared by those things
wherein the benefit it self consisted, in this verse: afterward it is set
forth by his causes, ver. 11. and by his effects, ver. 12. The benefit it self
in respect of men, is safety, the tyrants being destroyed, who did labor to
satisfy their hatred with the destruction of the Christians: in respect of God
it is the glory of his might, of the Kingdom and power of Christ. For then his
power does appear when he utterly destroys and abolisheth his enemies. Also
his visible Kingdom is seen after a sort, when he places godly Princes in the
government of the common wealth: from hence likewise the power of Christ was
much declared, which before seemed weak, being so trodden under soote by the
enemies, neither punishing them according to their deserts. But Christ now by
taking unto him the Kingdom, declared sufficiently that the former want of
punishment and sufferance came not from imbecility, but only from patience.
In respect of the Devil, this benefit was a just reward of his ungodlines, who
continually accuses the godly before God. But we must observe that the
servants are noted with the same names, where with the P^^^c^ himself is named,
because there is an equal good will to hurt in both, although hi^ power be
greater. But this accusation, are those taunts, reproaches, and railings, with
which the spiteful enemies overwhelmed the Saints continually, obiecting unto
them the suppers of Oedipus, incests, adultery, mutual lusts, murders,
conspiracies against Princes, pestilences, famine, burnings, and whatsoever
public calamity there was: of which and the like things the ancient History
is full. Surely the children learned of their father the Devil, that ancient
false accuser, so as it is not to be wondered at, if wicked men do excel in
the same arts.

11 But they overcame: Who? The Angels of Michaell: for now the strength of the
soldiers is commended, the praise of the Emperor being celebrated in the
former verse. But as touching the causes of the victory, the principal is the
blood of the Lamb: the isntrumental is, the synceritie of the faith, and a
very great constancy, even unto death. The blood of the Lamb is the fountain
of all the benefits, which the elect enjoy, either in this life or in the life
to come. For his sake alone God both delivers his people from all the
miseries of this life: and at length will make them joyful with eternal
felicity. The integrity of faith is showed in the next words, by the word of
his testimony, that is, by the truth of the Gospel, which they professed
freely and boldly. Before it was always called the testimony of God, or of
Jesus, as in chapter 1.2.9. ver. etc. here it is called the testimony of
themselves, which kind of speaking nevertheless comes to the same end. For
it does not respect the subject of which, but in which. In the last place is
their constancy, because they esteemed more of the truth and faith in Jesus,
then of their own life. It seems to be a comparative speech, as if he should
say, they loved not their souls even unto death, more then God. But this last
member of the comparison is wanting, u^lesse perhaps they loved not, be put for
they despised. But even so the force of the comparison remains, to with, they
despised, in comparison of the truth. This is a notable consta^cy of the
Saints, that by no torments they could be remooved from faith in Christ. For
which cause at length God gave unto them the reward of victory. But observe,
how this so^g of t^iumphe adds those things which were wanting to declare the
condition of the first Church: we have seen by the description of the woman,
that she was famous for sou^dnes of faith, purity of actions, sincerity of the
teachers: also we have understood that she was destitute of a p^tron, for
because that in great sorrow and grief she brought forth a son. Add to al
these from this triumphant song, that the enemies of the truth, heaped all
reproaches upon the Saints: they used a great violence to their power: yet the
faithful could not be remooved eve^ with the loss of their life, from their
holy profession; whereby it came to pass that those times were made famous by
almost an infinite number of most courageous Martyrs.

12 Therefore rejoice ye heaven etc. The fruict of this benefit is the joy of
the Saints, and the sorrow of the wicked. For why should not they triu^phe
having attained safety, and seeing the glory of God so notably amplified? But
many calamities do remain true, but these shall not touch the Saints, whom
God hiddeth in his tabernacle. And therefore he seems to say, ye which dwell
in them, because, this, is heaven, that, the temple or tabernacle, wherein the
Church lies hid, from whence at length it shall go into the holy mountain to
an everlasting habitatio^, before in chap. 11.7. etc. 2 Cor. 5.1.2. etc

Woe to the inhabitans etc. The effect in respect of the wicked is a very great
sorrow, for these are the inhabitans of the earth and the sea. And from hence
may be confirmed this metaphorical signification of these words. For if the
earth be properly taken, the Devil should be in like sort trobelsome to all
the Saints, who dwell together with the wicked and unseparated. Moreover who
are the inhabitans of the sea besides men? The Devil does not spit out his
poison upon the whales. Neither do good and bad men dwell together less in
Islands, then in the continent land. Thus therefore we do distinguish, that the
inhabitans of the earth are every wicked multitude, either of Heathen or
Christians, who have only a counterfeit show of religion: But the inhabitans
of the sea are the Church men, as they call them who profer to their false
Christians gross, foul, saltish and bitter doctrine, which does rather bring
to the hearers, sterility of godliness, and a gnawing of their bowels, then a
quenching of their thirst, or yielding of any other fruict. The Devil being
berest of power to hurt the Saints, did now vex these with all manner of
storms, as we have read that it came to pass in the East under Constantine,
Constantius, Valens, Iulianus and the rest. In part we have already showed
before what sturres the Devil made among the BISHOPS. But it belongs not to
my purpose to prosecute the thing more at large. Let him which pleases look
into the History, and he shall behold wonderful Tragedies.

Surely noe Godly man can without great grief run over those contentions,
discords, reproaches, false accusations, wherewith they raged one against
another. Neither do I doubt, but whosoever shall read their actions, will
freely confess, these men to have been moved by the furies of hell: they
troubled and confounded all things with so mad affection. But these were but
flea bitings in comparison of the calamities of the West. I let pass the
civil wars of Constantine and Constans brethren, of the new risen tyra^ts
Magnetius, and Vetranior, and others such light evils; how great desolation I
pray you came from the Barbarians, Goths, Vandals, and the rest of the unclean
persons, and at length from the Lo^gobards? All countries were spoiled in a
miserable manner, and Italy once the Lady of countries, above the rest. With
how lamentable songs did Gregory the great and other writers bewail the
calamities of those times? The plague of the Saracens succeeded this, which
troubled the world with most grievous afflictions for many ages. To which if
any shall join the monsters of superstitions and errors, which followed
afterward, swarms of religious men,, apparitions of Spirits, and familiar
communing with Devils, lying signs, monstrous miracles, and many other things
of that kind, it shall not peradventure be hard to define who are those
inhabitans of the earth and sea, against whom the Devil in this his
banishement, raged so furiously. Especially if any shall cast his eyes upon
Rome, and shall see that the most high Popes, who do boast themselves to be
Christ's Vicars, all from Sylvester the second to Gregory the seventh about
sixteen in number, were most wicked Magitians. But we have spoken sufficiently
of this perturbatio^ of things, which the Devil brought in being expelled from
heaven in chap. 8. and 9. This short denuntiation of calamities, is that
Prophecy of the trumpets. Moreover also that is to be declared more at large in
those things which follow in this chapter, which is here touched but in a word.

As who knows that he has but a little time: The Greek word signifies
often, fitnes of time, which peradventure may better serve to the purpose in
this place: for there was yet much time, which at length after a thousand
years should be small, chap. 20.3. a short time. Where the Spirit seems
purposely to have used a word for difference sake, which notes more properly a
distance of time. But the Devil had now but a small opportunity, being thrust
down into that prison, which before time belonged to his dominion. Envy rather
delights to pour out her poison upon the Saints, then for noe necessity to
torment men, who are already enough addicted and made subject to him: he would
spare this labor gladly, and would make trial of it rather in them, who^ he
is grieved to have be^ pulled out of his jaws. Furthermore the word knowing,
may be an argument to prove this thing, the future moments of times, are
without doubt hidden from the Devil. Especially the last day of all, which
also the Son knew not. But he could not but know his present opportunity.
This therefore seems to be the cause of his fury, that being cast out of
heaven, now he must needs bring forth his rage against his own citizens: when
he desired rather to hurt the elect: whom he could not touch, being driven out
from their company: which large field of his fury being taken from him, he
thought that which remained to be but small.

13 When therefore the Dragon saw that he was thrown: Hitherto the things done
in heaven, where the sixth seal ends. Now follow the subtle workings of the
Dragon cast forth into the earth, belonging to the same time of the trumpet.
And first he begins a persecution against the woman which brought forth the
male child. Which persecution takes place, when the one part sufferreth
violence and wrong, and is not able to defend it self against the injustice of
the enemy But what like thing was to be feared of the woman, seeing the Devil
was now thrown from heaven? Can there come any evil from the earth below
unto heaven? But this heaven is not separated from the earth by the distance of
places, but by the holiness of faith and ma^ners. Yet nevertheless from whence
sufferreth she persecution, as it were destitute of a defender, who lately
brought forth a man child, and had Michaell for her most puissant maintainer?
Surely from hence, because the Emperors chief care was to expel the open
enemies, which thing at length having attained, they cared not much for other
things: neither considered they, at least so diligently as was meet, that the
Dragon had many other ways to hurt; which they unawares made more easy by
their means, so far of was it that they set themselves valiantly against his
enterprises. From hence therefore the Dragon first sowed privy bitterness of
minds among the Bishops, which having sprung up together with Constantine,
before the trumpets began to sound, caused a sorrowful perceiving of the
future trouble, as we have noted at the eight chapter, ver. 2. For this sparcle
grew in short time to a flame, but most of all after they began to contend
about the essence of the Son. In all which debates the truth was always in
worse case. But the rage of persecution waxed most fierce, when Constance,
Julian, and Valens exercised tyranny against the Orthodoxe in an hostile
manner. Certes Constance and Valens differreth nothing from the most cruel
tyra^ts, except in name only. They were counted Christian Princes, but under
that name they carried the cruelty af the Ethnicks. Therefore the Dragon
granted noe truce, but being expelled from heaven, vexed the woman forthwith
by other means. This persecution is that which we spoke of in the exposition
of the first, second, and third trumpet, in chap. 8. But see how profitable
this repetition is, which gives knowledge of an other co^ioyned cause of those
tru^pets. There we learned that they in the just judgment of God, were
inflicted upon the world, because it embraced not the truth with that faith,
holiness, and love that was meet: and therefore the coals of the altar thrown
into the earth raised up that burning flame: from hence we are taught what was
the instrument, to wit, the Dragon himself, who did cast men headlong into
that madness, that by their means he might scourge the woman.

14 But to the woman were given two wings: The avoiding of the assault which
the Dragon made, besides which none other was left, namely, to provide for her
safety by flight, as soon as possible can be, to withdraw her self from
these sturres. Whiles therefore the assemblyes of the faithful are filled with
superstitions, the Bishops hate and contend one with another. Constantius and
Valens show rigor by fire and sword. The ancient verity flies wholly away
(for long since she had prepared her flight in some part,) neither is the true
face of a Church seen any where. For swiftnes of flight are given two wings,
yea that more is, of that great Eagle God once de parting from the temple, went
away leysurely and by little and little, Ezech. 9.3. But the woman a little
before delaying, goes not away slowly and at leisure at this time: but
vanished away as it were at one moment. Yet she fled not because she feared
the cruelty either of Constantius or Valens, or any other man's, (for she had
learned long since to contemn both sword, and fire, and also rack, or any
other most exquisite torments): but when she had seen Christ to be propugned
under the pretense of the name of Christian, and not only the bodies to be
killed, but souls also to be carried into destruction, she thought that this
was to be sufferred by noe means. She flies away therefore for hatred of
this indignity, whom noe other dangers made afraid. For she is wont to dread
heresy more then torment: and to tremble more at wicked and obstinate errors,
then at bloody dismembrings in pieces. She knows that the blood of the
Martyrs is the seed of her field, and that every drop of blood so shed, does
beget many other Christians: but that absurd opinions do, as the sowing of
salt, make her land barren; partly by killing that which flourished, partly in
letting that nothing may grow. Wherefore it is not enough for religious Princes
to procure peace by the name of Christian: but chiefly they must regard, that
the syncerity of doctrine, and purity of worship may be preserved: least as it
befell these Emperors, the Church fly away, which they desire to retain, and
they become miserable through the absence of her, whom being present they
neglected. But when fled the Church away? Were ^here no faith full now left in
the whole East? We ought to remember that the woman does both generally
repres^nte the state of the whole Church, and also the particular assemblies,
in which is found the same adorning, which made the woman her self to be
esteemed in the beginning of this chapter. Her flight therefore is either the
dissipation or depravatio^ of particular assemblies: in such wise that God is
worshipped purely in none of them after his own will: which when it has come
to pass, the Church fled, perceived now in no public congregation: not but
that there be many apart among the multitude, whom God does acknowledge for his
own: see in the sixth ver. of this chapter. The place whither she fl^d is the
wilderness, and her own place, that is, prepared for her of God, as before in
ver. 6. and we have showed that this wilderness is the temple. But where this
Desert or Temple was placed, should peradventure be unknown to us, unless the
Dragon, being a most skillful searcher out, did bewraie it: for that way and
thither do^btlesse she fled, whither the Dragon converted his fury. But into
what region he turned his rage, we shall see from those things which follow
in this next verse.

For a time, and times, and half a time: These words set by themselves cannot
be understood, seeing it is a number of time: and there be infinite numbers,
which may be divided into three or more whole ones and an half. But they are
clear from the former things. For it is the same time, which before the
thousand two hundred and threescore days did make in the sixth verse. Or the
two and forty months of the eleventh chapter ver. 2. From which it is
manifest what is the time, what the times, and what half a time. For the time
of days, are three hundred and threescore days; times, are twice so many, to
wit, seven hundred and twenty: half a time, an hundred and fourscore. So ^he
time of months, is of twelve months: the times, four and twenty: the half,
six: he alludeth to that of Daniell in the seventh chapter ver. 25. But it is
not the same space: for there it is spoken of the people of the Jews: here of
the Church of the Gentiles, as the whole intent of this Prophecy declares. But
by the allusion peradventure John shows that a limited number is set down
somewhere, from whence that of Dan. might be expounded But now I may not
digress thither. Only let us remember that this flight of the woman is the
same thing, with the sealing of the 7. chapter and the privy places of the temple
in the 11. chap. Furthermore let us obs^rve, that the same time is noted
diversely according to the diverse persons. In regard of the Ge^tils and Beast
always by months, in the 11. chap. and 5.13. and 15. ver. In consideration of
the Prophets, by days, in chap. 11.3. In respect of the woman, both by days,
in chap. 12.6. and also by times, in this place, to wit, because in the woman
all those days should not pass away in one continual tenor, but a threefold
mutation should come to pass: of a nearer departing a way under the time:
farther of under the times: drawing near again, and returning under the
half. The event makes this manifest, as may be understood both from those
things which have been said before, and which shall be said hereafter.

15 And the Serpent cast out; The second persecution is against the woman now
put to flight: for the Dragon thought it not sufficient, to make her flee, but
desired also to put out her name clean. For which purpose he powered out the
barbarous nations after the manner of a flood spreading over all, that in what
corner soever she should lie hid, she might be overwhelmed by this deluge.
For as Herod, to the end that the child Jesus might not escape, commanded
all the children of Bethleem from two year old and under to be killed; so the
Dragon, that the woman alone might not remain safe, caused every place to be
covered with a most violent flood, where he could suspect that she might be
hid. These peoples most unknown unto her, Francons, Alemans, Burgundes,
Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, Trebals, Heruls, Longobards and such like Northern
nations, about the year 400, the dammes, as it were, being taken away, did
run furiously over all Europe, and overflowed, as it were, with waves a great
part of Afrike. And surely it is a thing to be wondered at, that the Church was
not utterly devoured of those most deep gulfes, unless this ship had
learned already long before in the universal flood, to swim in the Sea,
without being drowned. But seeing it is now evident, that the Dragon cast out
of his mouth after the woman, so great abondance of waters into Europe and
Afrike; it is also apparent enough that the woman fled from the East into these
countries. And certainly during those troubles concerning Christ to be of the
same substance with the Father, the state of the Church was here more quiet.
But that we may not think that it was any happy condition, the Spirit calls
our Europe expressly a desert place and wilderness. For the woman going into
the west, fled into the wilderness. For superstitions did so grow in use in
those times, that assemblies of the faithful rightly established, were no more
ordinary in this part of the world, then there are frequent habitations of men
in a wilderness: here and there some more apparent mark was left, but very
rare, as is the meeting of men in a desert.

16 But the earth help the woman: Not ^his earth which we tread on, but a
counterfeit and earthly religion and the lovers thereof, as always before.
This, such as it was then every where in the world called the Church (while the
true was not in the sight of men, but was hidden in privy places) brought much
help to the woman. For those Barbarous nations, the which at home practiced
the impiety of the Gentiles, bred and brought up in the same, after that they
had come into these more learned countries, yielded to that religion, which thy
saw to be there received of the greatest number. The Vandals and Goths
abiding first about Thracia, where the Arria^ plague had disteined all things,
were converted in name unto Christ, but in very truth to that fained and
counterfeit one whom Arius had fashioned. The other route of Barbarians in
Germany, Italy, France, and Spain, followed the Romans in all things. Which
did much tame and softe^ their cruel minds. For while they gave their names
even to this religion, and suffer themselves to be enrolled citizens of the
same, they were not so spite full against the Christian nation, that they would
purpose to root it out. Whereby it came to pass, that when they ceased their
anger for a new professions sake, and were at quiet in those countries which
they had possessed, this flood at length was swalowed up; and the expectation
of the Serpent notably deluded. This good the earthly Church brought once to
the heavenly, being afterward about to heap upon the same infinite evils.

17 Then the Dragon was wroth etc. Thus far the persecution, which when the
Dragon sees to have been in vain, yet he will not desist, but attempteth an
other way to hurt. He purposes to assail the remnant of her seed with war.
But why moved he war against them, and persecution against the woman? Because
persecution is, as we have said, when the one party sufferreth wrong, and
repelleth it not, of which sort was the womans condition, as from her first
beginnings: so after Constantine for some space: for whose safety no man did
fight, nor maintain her purity against superstitions springing up. But war
is when violence is repelled by violence, which at length the seed of the woman
should undertake, that it may defend the self against manifest tyranny. But
if the woman be the Church, what is this her seed? Even now we said that the
woman was the holy assemblies of the faithful, which publicly do worship
God himself by his word, sacraments, prayer, discipline, as he alone has
appointed. Therefore her seed are the faithful being of a right judgment, who
by reason of the daungerousnesse of the times cannot meet together openly to
worship God: but apart do bend themselves to those studies, by which every one
privately may cherish godliness. Against them the Dragon prepares war: when
as there should be congregations in open place, which did profess pure and
sincere godliness, as long as the woman was absent in the wilderness. And so at
length it came to pass. For after that overflowing of the Northern barbarous
people, and that the flood was swalowed up by the help of the earth: the
Devil raised up about the year 630, the nation of the Saracens, which should
make a most grievous war upon the remnants of the Church lying hid here and
there in the confused multitude. Malice suffe^red him not to grant them any
breathing time, but as soon as he had p^rceiued that this former entreprises
were of noe effect, he turns himself to an other purpose, coveting rather
that he should be always miserable through continual labors, then that the
few elect that were remaining should be without miseries even for a small
time. Therefore first, he moved the Saracens to fall away from the Romans;
Secondly he ordained Mahumet their Captain: then he sent him into the whole
world to destroy all. Who can declare the Iliad of miseries, which flowed from
thence? From that time there was continual war, for a whole seven hundred
years, until the Turks a viperous breed, a generation worse then their
parent, destroyed utterly the Saracens their mother. This war was far and
large: such a there was never the like in any other time. It exte^ded from
Persia even to the furthermost Isles of Gades, and almost from Lybia into
France. And how grievous was it, that in few years was subdued Arabia,
Syria, Mesopotamia, Persia, Egypt, the Isles of the Sea, Afrike, and Spain?
Surely the Christian world was very greatly afflicted her by. For the Devil
spared not his own, so that he might destroy that lurking seed in the common
calamity. This war was showed before, partly by the Locusts, as we have
expounded in chapter 9: partly by the Euphratean Angels, that is, the Turks, who
in these days accomplished that which the Saracens had begun. Neither ought
it to seem a strange thing, that so cruel a name is now given to the thing
which long ago was an army of small vermin: other is the outward face of a
thing already accomplished, such as is mentioned in this place: and other of a
thing in hand yet to be finished, of which sort it is there. Now therefore
we may see from the persecution in the East, the overflowing of the barbarous
people in the West, and the war of the Saracens common to both, by which
miseries the Dragon troubled the world, after that he had lost heaven, and how
just cause there was to denounce a woe to the inhabitans of the earth, as we
have heard at the seventeenth verse.

And this whole Chapter may be in stead of a Commentary, showing how that the
Prince that rules in the air, is the Spirit that works in the children of
disobedience, as we have it in the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, chapter
second and second verse. Such then is the History of the Dragon, so far as he
assaileth with open force; for this office he takes to himself. The other of
fraud and craftines he gives to his Vicar the Beast, of the which enemy we
shall speak in the Chapter nex following. The whole Prophecy is more or less,
of a thousand two hundred years from John the Apostle, unto the year 1300.
Where also the Centuries do end, being set forth under this last trumpet, of
which we said that this repetition is a type.

And he stood on the Sea sand: A passing over to the Beast: Aretas, the
Complutent edition, and all the Greek copies do so read as our translation,
and I stood: the common translation has, and he stood, but falsely. For he
attributes it to the Devil, who even now went his way to make war with the
rest of the Saints, and for madness was not able to stand still in any place.

Neither is there any other intent of standing on the sand, then that the
rising up of the Beast might be seen, which concerns nothing the Dragon.
Therefore the words are to be referred unto John, in which there is a
transition unto the enemy, set in the place of him that is dead: to the
contemplating of whose original John says that he was set in a most
convenient place. In which he declares that it does appertain to them only
to behold the Beast rising up, who after they have escaped the Sea of false
doctrine, are set at least on the shore or bank of the truth, howsoever it may
be, that the mooving of the waves, and the ebbing of the Sea casts upon them
also many brinish errors because of nighnesse: as after they that do get
victory of the BEAST, are said to stand at the GLASSIE SEA as we may see in
the fifteenth Chapter and second verse.

For that these things do pertain and are to be refferred to the event, may
be gathered from the like place in the seventeenth Chapter and at the third
verse: where JOHN is carried into the Wilderness for to behold the damnation
of the WHORE. For what need were there to change the place, unless the
remooving had a Mystery? Here therefore some godly men are to be viewed, to
whom, being set as it were on the shore of the Truth, the original of the SEA
BEAST should be certainly known: and that also at that time, in which the
Devil went for to make war against the seed of the woman. For neither is
this place attributed rashly to this transition.

Which we see to have been performed in them of Maidenburg, who having attained
at length to settle the soles of their feet on the dry ground, after they had
swomme out of the Papisticall Sea, manifested to the whole world in their
Centuries such a beginning, growing, and ripenes of this Beast, as is here
described of John. Which doubtless many learned men also before painted out in
lively colors, but all their labor was bestowed about one or two parts, none
made a perfect image before the seventh trumpet, which procured us these
Centuries. To this end tends the transition: how correspondent the event is,
the application of every several thing will make plain.

CHAPTER 13.
THEN I saw a Beast rising out of the Sea, which had seven heads and ten
horns, and upon his horns ten crowns set, and upon his heads was set a name
of blasphemy.

2 And the Beast which I saw, was like a Leopard, and his feet as the feet of
a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: and the Dragon gave him his
power, and his throne, and great authority.

3 And I saw one of his heads as it were wonded to death, but his deadly wound
was healed: and all the earth wondered and followed the Beast.

4 And they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power to the Beast, and they
worshipped the Beast s^ying, Who is like unto the Beast? who shall be able to
war with him?

5 And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things, and
blasphemies: and power was given unto him to do two and forty months.

6 Therefore he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dewell in heaven.

7 And it was given to him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them, and power was given unto him over every kindred, and tongue and nation.

8 Therefore all that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life of that Lamb, which wa^ slain from the
beginning of the world.

9 If any man have an ear, let him hear.

10 If any lead into captivity, he shall go into captivity: if any kill with
a sword, he must be killed by a sword: here is the patience and faith of the
Saints.

11 Afterward I beheld an other Beast coming up out of the earth, having two
horns like the Lamb, but he spoke like the Dragon.

12 And he exercises all the power of the former Beast before him, and he
causes the earth and them that dwell therein to worship the Beast, whose
deadly wound was healed.

13 And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire to come down from
heaven on the earth, in the sight of men.

14 And he deceaveth them that dwell on the earth, for the signs which were
permitted to him to do in the sight of the Beast, saying to them that dwell on
the Earth, that they should make the image of the Beast, which was wonded by
the word, but did live again.

15 And it was permitted to him to give a Spirit to the Image of the Beast, so
that the image of the Beast should speak, and should cause that as many as
would not worship the image of the Beast should be killed.

16 And he makes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bound, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads.

17 And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name
of the Beast, or the number of his name.

18 Here is wisdom: Let him that has understanding, count the number of the
Beast. For it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundredth
threescore and six.


Analysis.
THVS far has been the battle with the Dragon; the combat with the Beast
follows; which is double: the first, and the second. The description of the
first is from the beginning of the chapter to the 11. verse. And first from the
causes, that he arose out of the Sea: then also from his integrall parts, his
horns, heads, and their decking, ver. 1. his whole form, feet and mouth, ver.
2. Furthermore from his authority, whereby he does excel, which is threefolde,
at the first received from the Dragon; a while after diminished; afterward
recovered again his wonde being healed: which is more amplifyed then that
first, as declare, both the honor which the worshippers give to him, ver. 4.
and the power both to blaspheme and also to make war, ver. 5.6.7. Last of
all, the largeness of his Empire, ver. 7.8. All which things ar concluded with
a pleasant shutting up of the matter, for a greater heed taking and
consolation, ver. 9.10. Such is the first Beast: The second declares his
stock by his rising out of the earth, and also by his likeness to the Lamb,
and Dragon, ver. 11. The power also of this is great, as appears in subduing
men to worship the first Beast, ver 12. and that partly in deceaving by great
wonders, ver. 13. and lying ver. 14. partly in compelling both by punishment of
death to worship the living Image, ver. 15. and also by the loss of their
goods, to receive the mark that should be printed upon them; which is
declared, both to whom it belongs, either men, or members, ver. 16. and how
manifold, to wit, the mark, the name of the Beast, the number of his name,
ver. 17. Which number is set forth, both by an exhortation to count it; and by
a noting partly to whom it is proper, to wit of a man; partly how many it is,
to wit, six hundredth three score and six.

Scholions.
Then I saw a Beast: That the whole next treatise may be more clear, two
things briefly are to be considered, before we come to the unfolding of every
several thing. The first is the kind of this Beast, the other of the time
wherein he arises. As touching that first, this Beast is not the civil Roman
Empire: either Heathenish, or Christian, corrupt with heresy. For if we regard
the Heathen Emperors, they reigned when John wrote: but this Beast was not yet
come, whose first beginning he saw in a type. For nothing whose original he
had represented unto him, was past but to come, according to that saying, J
will show thee the things which must be done hereafter, chap. 4.1. But the
Angel afterward affirms plainly, that he was not yet come, saying five are
fallen, one is, and an other is not yet come, chap. 17.10. It is manifest that
he that was not yet come, is this Beast, ver. 12. Are ten Kings who have not
yet received the Kingdom: but shall receive power as Kings at one hour with
the Beast. Furthermore this Beast received his throne and power from the
Dragon, ver. 2. who now before time had persecuted the woman, that is, the
Christian Church. But the Heathen Emperors received their throne and power
from none, especially which was before this time a chief enemy to the
Christian name, seeing the Emperors themselves are more ancient then the
birth of Christ himself. Finally the Beast is of the same time that the flight
is, and solitarines of the woman. But the Heathen Emperors under the name of
the Dragon were together with him in heaven, as we have showed in chap 12.3.
But there is nothing in the work of nature, which has his being before and
after himself, and is both the original to it self, and the image thereof,
(which must needs be) if we refer this and the second Beast to Antichrist
alone. It is true indeed that nothing is before and after himself, and both
the original to himself and image thereof, in the same, in respect of the
same thing, and at the same time; yet in one and the same man infancy goes
before old age, and the latter age may be compared to the likeness of the
former. Therefore we conclude that by no means this Beast is the Roman
Heathenish Empire, much less the Christian. Which in the Throne did not
succeed the Dragon, but always had his palace either in Constantinople, or in
France, or in Germany. Neither did the whole earth follow with admiration the
Empire restored, as in ver. 3. nor received his mark, as in ver. 16. but after
the renewing, it was limited with small bounds, first of France, Jtaly, and
some part of Germany: secondly, in short time after of Germany alone, having no
jurisdiction over Spain, Britannie, Hu^garie, Sclavonie, and the other
countries, which yet belonged to the Roman Empire under another name. Neither
to acknowledge the Christian Emperor to be such, as he chalengeth to himself,
that is to say, the highest Magistrate in the countries subject unto him, is an
argument of one appointed to destruction, as in the 8. verse. For Paul
professed himself to be a Roman, and appealed to Caesar, Act. 25.10. Yea
Christ acknowledged the Heathen Emperor, and commanded that he should be
obeyed by giving to Caesar the things which are Cesars, Mat. 22.21. Seeing
therefore it agrees not at all to the Emperor, it must needs be that
Antichrist is signified: whose one and the same person is described under a
double figure of two Beasts, as may be manifest from the 17. chap. where there
is taught a declaration of this Chapter, and no mention made of the second, but
of the first only. But why so I pray? Was it not needful that we should be
instructed touching the second, whom all men think to be either the very
Antichrist, or at least his Minister no better then himself? Not at all: but
because he that knows one, knows both: neither does the second make an
other person, but does pour ray the same image: somewhat more plainly setting
the colors upon the lineaments. And why should not the Beast be double, when
one Antichrist is a double head, the seventh and eight? of which that answers
to this first Beast, this to the second. The reason why a double type is used,
is the notable variety, which could not be represented fitly enough by one.
This Beast has a double rising: from the Sea and from the Earth. He has also
a double power: Civil and Spiritual. In respect of the Civil, he is the
first, in regard of the spiritual, the second. Which double tyranny is most
plain in the one Pope of Rome, so as we can not doubt but that he is both the
Beasts. It is known how Boniface the eight in his first Iubile, vanted
himself openly in the Temple of Peter and Paul, one day coming forth girded
with a sword, and clothed with an Emperors corselet: in the second day with a
Prelates apparel,, and with a key crying with a loud voice, Behold here are
two swords, that is, Behold here is a double Beast. Which double power
Mantuan does express by an elegant carme in these words: He is mighty and
very strong, with the two swords girded,
Magnificent Keisers and Kings, have his feet worshipped


Let then this be the first thing, that the Pope of Rome is this double Beast,
be cause of a double beginning and power: neither is the same so much
celebrated by the words and means of those of our side, as by the Popes
themselves, as it does more clearly appear from the exposition following. A
second thing is demanded touching the time of his beginning: which I think is
to be set in the very giving over of Diocletian and Maximin Hercule, when these
two seemed of their own accord to give over the Empire about the year three
hundredth and sixth, as before has been declared. But because none peradventure
fetches Antichrist from that head spring: and because Bellarmine affirms
that all our men do place the coming of Antichrist after the six hundredth
year: and after the death of Gregory the first (although this is to be
understood of his birth: for our men do make his conception to be more
ancient) that I may not seem alone to have enterprised to do a thing unheard
of, I will yield reasons of this my judgment, which seem to me to be most
strong. First this Beast rules all that time, wherein the woman lies hid in
the wilderness, and the two witnesses prophecy clothed in sackecloth, as is
manifest after, from the fifth verse, where power is give^ to him to do two and
forty months, which is the same space of the woman and Prophets. Now we
evince by necessary arguments, that the woman went into the wilderness, and the
witnesses took mourning apparel at that time which we have said, when
Constantine began his reign: and therefore also the Beast began in the same
time to arise out of the Sea. Furthermore what other thing means that of
Socrates, who lived when Theodosius Junior ruled, in the times of Celestine
Bishop of Rome, about the year 424. four score years after Constantine; The
Roman Bishopric, likewise that of Alexandria, being advanced long since
beyond the Priesthood, unto a Princedome: book 7. chap. 11. Had he promoted
himself beiond the bounds of the Priesthood? Whither else I pray, then unto
an Antichristian tyranny? Had it done this long since and of a certain long
time? Certainly So crates comes to my accounte, or rather I to his, or, as it
is more agreeable to the truth, both of us to the reckening of the Holy Ghost
himself. But he speaks no more of the Roman, either here, or before, in book
7. 7. then of the Alexandrine. That is true indeed; he in common touches
sharply the ambition of both; but the Roman Bishop had many more peculiar
properties of the true Antichrist, which in no sort did belong to the
Alexandrine: and therefore although at the first they ran together it may be
with equal steps, yet in short time the Roman got before, and left the
Alexandrine many miles behind him. Hereunto more over is added the third
Carthaginean Council, about the times of Syricius, to wit in the year three
hundredth ninety, which decreed, that the Bishop of the first seat, should not
be called the Prince of Priests, or Chief Priest: or any such thing: but only
the Bishop of the first Seat: but universal, let neither the Bishop of Rome
be called, Can. 26. as it is cited in the ninetieth distinction. We learn
from this Decree, what those times had brought forth; otherwise it had been
foolish and superfluous to make an ordinance touching this matter. Neither is
the confession of the Papists in this thing to be passed over. Do thou the^
ask the cause why the Roman Bishops were never present at the general
Councills in the East part? Bellarmine declares that it came not to pass by
chance in his first book of the Council, and of the Church chap. 19. but for
a certain consideration. Which howsoever it was not known peradventure to many
others, yet it ought to be thoroughly understood of him, a man that is a
secretary of the Popes Kingdom. He renders two reasons of this absence: the
first, It seemed not to be convenient that the head should follow the members
etc. The second, because the Emperor was always present at the Councils in
the East part, or some Ambassador of his: who challenges to himself the
first at least material place, otherwise then was meet. That either this
therefore might not be tolerated, or a tumult moved, he went not to those
Councils, but sent only his letters. Such are his words: he has hit the nail
on the head. For the Pope disdaineth to be present at those Cou^cils, in which
the Emp. should sit before him. How fair were words give^ both to the Emp.
Constantine and also all the Nicene Fathers? The good men thought, as Eusebius
speaks, that old age was a let, that the President of the Lady City of Rome
could not be present: and therefore were content with the Elders, which
supplied his place. But the true cause was, that he could not abide, to give
place to the Emperor. For I believe Bellarmine rather then Eusebius, touching
the mind of the Bishop of Rome. Wherefore in the times of the first Nicene
Council there was a man at Rome (...), that lifted up one; who albeit not yet
openly, nevertheless within and secretly with himself was exalted, above all
that is called God, 2 These. 2.4. Not that he vaunted himself to be superior
to God in Heaven (for that is not the meaning of the Apostle) but to all the
Gods in earth, to wit the highest Magistrate, who is called (...), Imperial,
from whence (...), that is worshipped, seems to be added in stead of an
exposition. But why do I be stowe much time in these things? The matter is out
of controversy from chap. 17. afterward. The seventh head of the Beast
succeeds next after the Heathen Emperors; for these make the sixth, as shall be
said in his place. But Antichrist is that seventh head, and therefore has his
beginning by and by after the Heathen Emperors. Shall I then think that all
from Miltiades are utterly cast away, as who do make this Beast, that is, the
very Antichrist? Farte be from me so great rashness of judging. This Beast is
the state of a Kingdom, as I hope shall be most clear after. And therefore God
could deliver from the common destruction some peculiar men, who^ he thought
good though furtherers and ministers of this Kingdom. The impiety was not so
wicked at the first: and the young Antichrists did not know for what mischief
they prepared a way. Therefore we leave these to the infinite and
unsearcheable mercy of God, yet we doubt not, but we have found out the
original of the rising Beast, which now we see to have fallen on that time,
in which the Dragon was cast unto the earth, chapter 12.9. For being about to leave
heaven, he provided himself of a Vicar, who in his absence should govern his
affairs: whose business he looked unto, nor carelessly, as we shall find
afterward. These things being thus set in order, we see how from this
fountain, every each thing will flow most easily; every part of this Prophecy
agreeing most fitly one with another. The true original doubtless not being
perceived of the Interpreters, disordered all consideration of the times, made
a harsh, constrained, and absurd exposition, and took wholly away the right
searching out of the event. Now as touching the words, the cruelty of
Antichrist is signified most fitly by a Beast, as often in the Scriptures
Tyrants are compared unto Wolves and Lions, equal to them in fiercenes, but
for hurt worser, by how much iniquity in men is more armed, because of the
force of reason. He did rise out of the Sea: because he has his original from
corrupt doctrine, to wit the authority of Peter's Chair, falsely bragged of,
wherein the Bishop of Rome glories almost in every word, and which the
ancient holy men Tertullian, Cyprian, and the rest, knowing not for what
impiety they prepared a way, extolled with excessive praises. But then chiefly
the Sea was visible, and the rising out of water might appear to men's eyes,
when the Nicene Fathers cast the burning mountain into the Sea; as has been
said, in the 8. chap. ver. 8. that is when they confirmed by their Decree, that
whatsoever preeminence there was, should be given to Rome, over the neighbor
Bishops. For the Sea notes together with the Doctrine, the Clergy, whose
office is to take pain in ministering the Doctrine. Those holy men were far
from bringing in the Tyranny, which was after stablished: yet they unwares gave
a notable increase to it, by this their constitution. Before the Nicene
Council every one lived to himself, and little regard was had to the Church
of Rome: as Aeneas Silvius confesses. This then especially was the rising of
the Beast: not that he began not to rise up before, but because now first he
could be seen and marked of men.

Which had seven heads: Such was his rising. His integrall parts are, first
his Heads, which are as many, and the same which the Dragon had in chapter 12.3.
For there is the same seat and dignity of them both. For these heads are
Hills and Kings, as in chap. 17.9.

17 He has also ten horns, as the Dragon, and ten crowns set on his horns.
Which ten crowns, are ten Kings, chap. 17.11. Yet nevertheless differing in
two sorts from the horns of the Dragon. First, in the crowns with which these
are adorned, as which do note out Kings, not to be subject to the Empire of an
other man, but who should have a free and supreme menaging of things. The
Horns of the Dragon had no such adorning, but this honor did belong only to
the heads, as in chap. 12.3. Whence comes the difference? Because the Heathen
Emperors placed the seat of the Empire at Rome, whereof they are the seven
heads: establishing her the Empress and Queen of all. And therefore the
crowns being taken away from all other Kings and Provinces, they have imposed
them upon the seven heads or hills of this. But now there should be an other
face of things, Antichrist at length showing himself. For the majesty of the
Empire should not remain at Rome, but should have her seat in some other
country: for which cause the crowns, which before did belong to the heads, now
for a new respect are tranferred to the horns. Secondly, they differ in time.
For the horns of the Beast were not yet bred, when John wrote, chap. 17.12.
The horns of the Dragon, even before John was borne, were lifted up on high,
spread with many branches, as we have seen in chap. 12.3. Therefore although
they agree in number, yet they are not the same in all things, neither should
one do well, if he should apply to the head of that, things that belong to
this. But finally, what are these horns? All things being diligently
considered, I think that they were the ten first Christian Emperors. Of
counting whom there may be a double way: one, of every several by himself,
and of them only in whose power was either the universal Empire, or that of
the West. Into which Catalogue do come Constantine the Great, Constantine,
Co^stans, Constantine his sons, IVLIANVS, Iovianus, Valentinianus, Gratianus,
Valentinianus the second, Theodosius. And so there is a great consent of the
things done and of the Prophecy. For while these ten did reign, the Beast was
defended excellently, and his dignity much increased. Which at length being
taken away, the horns being as it were broken for a time, the succeeding
Emperors were not able to maintain the same authority of the Romish Beast,
which those predecessors had gotten. Honorius the son of that Theodosius
sufferred Rome to be taken and spoiled of the Goths. And although for the
space of two years it was beseeged by Alaricus, he abiding at Rave^na, either
was not able, or durst not succor it, the strength of the Horns was so much
abated. Where was his Fathers valiantness, which killed and put to flight
enemies in so great numbers, even in the furthest bounds of Rome? But neither
from the East was there now any aid, but the horns being as it were broken,
whereby the former Emperors removed so far of the Barbarous people: the Beast
with his Rome was a pray to the most contemptible nations. But there seems to
be a more full accord, and in every part more agreeable from a conjoined
reckening of the Emperors, both of the west, and of the East, after the usual
manner of all the Chronicle writers. Thus they are numbered: 1, Constantine the
Great: 2, Constantine, Constans, Constantius his sons: 3, Iulianus: 4,
Iovinianus: 5, Valentianus and Valens: 6, Gratianus, Valentinianus the second,
and Theodosius the first: 7, Theodosius the first with Arcadius and Honorius
his sons: 8, Archadius and Honorius alone: 9, Honorius and Theodosius the
second: 10, Theodosius the second and Valentinian the third. Concerning whom
there shall be a more large declaration in the 17. chap. 12. ver. In the mean
time let no man trouble us with words out of season, and cry out that it is a
thing heinous, wicked, and unheard, that I make those first Christian
Worthies, the Horns of Antichrist. Shall he now at length become a member and
maintainer of Antichrist, who of late came forth with the Seal of the living
God, who stood at the Altar with the Golden censer, who was the man child of
the Church, and that Michaell who drove the Dragon out of Heaven? But that the
malicious detractour may hold his peace: it is one thing advisedly and of set
purpose to do a thing, an other unwittingly and through ignorance. Constantine
advanced the state of Christians to his power: neither was it in his mind to
further Antichrist even the least that might be; but rather wholly to stop up
all the passage against him: yet nevertheless by adorning, advauncing, and
defending the Bishop of Rome, he made a more ready way for him ignorantly and
contrary to his meaning. Is this any strange thing, that a man not knowing what
he cherished in his bosom, should lend him his help? Were not his first
beginnings hidden even from the most sharpsighted? Certainly seeing most holy
men have offended some time most grievously, and that deliberately, it shall
not, I think, be strange, that both he and other men have u^warres bestowed
their labor ill. I desire not to detract the least that may be from any most
excellent men, and that deserved well. But I am not mine own, but the Spirits
Interpreter, who bends the whole description of the horns to this point, as
it shall appear in his places: I will follow him gladly, who can find out, to
whom they may agree more fitly. I seek the truth, and not slaundering: But I
doubt not, but whosoever shall view every thing with indifferent eyes, he will
conf^^se that the Spirit has set these ten first Emperors as images, by which
both the beginning and proceeding of Antichrist might be the more apparent.

And had set on his heads a name of blasphemy: That an ornament might not be
wanting to the heads, for the crowns were belonging to the horns, to wit the
Emperors: in their stead is put a name of blasphemy. Which name is the
arrogant bragging of the Romish particular Church, That Peter's Chair cannot be
sundred from Rome: That the Romish Church is the foundation, and form of the
Churches, from which, all Churches took their beginning, none of them that
believe truly, is ignorant, as speaks the Pope Vigilius in an Epistle to
Entherus. Likewise. that they cannot but err, and be counted Heretics, who
think otherwise of the Sacraments and articles of the faith, then the Church
of Rome thinks, as Martine the v. published in a Bulle given at Constance:
and Sixtus the fifth against the Articles of Peter of Oxford. Many such names,
which were too long to rehearse, Rome bears on her heads, has them for her
own, and glories in the same, as her chief ornaments. See Cause. 24. q. 1.
and Bellarm. in his 4. book of the Roman Pope, chap. 4

2 And this Beast which I saw was like a Libard: The whole form is of the
Libard, which is the female of the Panthers: an untamed beast, most adverse to
man, leaping up to his eyes, and in great rage, and tearing his Image in paper:
see Basil in his Sermon. of the accept. of pers. Like unto the Devil, hating
with an unfeigned hatred the image of God in man, as the same Basil writes.
This and the Tygre only of all Beasts almost, are discerned by the variety of
spots: the rest have each one their proper color, according to their kind.
These spots seem to touch those vices, and foulness of all villainies,
which cleave fast to those Bishops. Can the Blackamore chang his color, or
the Libard his blewe spots? then might ye also do well, oh ye that are
taught to do evil, Jeremy chap. 12.23. Are not the Romish Bishops the
greatest enemies to true Christians? whose image they cannot bear, themselves
being most foul worshippers of other images? Are they not deformed above all
other men, with all kind of vices? Who by and by after their first beginning
were found forgers, belying falfly the Nicene Council, for to stablish their
tyranny. Furthermore afterward Simoniacks, Homicides, Atheists, most wicked
Magitians, most foul Adulterers, and teachers of all unclean lusts: finally
covered with all those abhominatio^s, which a modest man would be more ashamed
to relate, then they to commit. Neither are these the reproaches of adversaries,
but true crimes, touching every of which, and far more, there are extant most
clear testimonies of their own men. Therefore this is a spotted Beast,
showing no greater hope of forsaking his turpitude, then the Leopard to chang
her spots. But besides the diversity of spots, the Libards, otherwise
called Pa^thers, are very skillful to get their pray. For as Pliny writes;
They report that by their sweet smell, all beasts are enticed, but are
terrifyed by the crabbed looking of his face. Wherefore that being hidden, he
takes them suddenly, being allured by his other sweetness. Does not Rome
likewise by a certain reverend majesty, as it were by a sweet favor, allure
them that behold a far off, hidding the diformity of her countenance, that
is, the monstrous filthinesses, which she fostereth, until she has brought
the Proselites in her snares? The Bears feet are smoothe, long, broad,
tearing the earth with his nails, or going; they attribute to him a certain
stabilitie joined with cruelty. Neither has any Monarchy, no not that of the
Assyrians, thou of long continuance, equalled the years of this. Yet she
stands by her Bears feet, continuing so long a time by cruelty. His Lions
mouth, notes his terrible fiercenes, devouring up all things, which the
lamenting of the whole earth can declare more plainly then my words. Therefore
the cruelty of many Beasts is found in this one, neither was the Panther
sufficient to express his outragiousnes. Therefore is he compact of all joined
together, which once did compete to all the Monarchies severally. Dan. 7.4.5.6.

And the Dragon gave him his power, and throne: Thus far the natural form
of the Beast: the power follows; and that in the first place, which he
received first. The Dragon gave him his power, his throne, and great authority;
Power is an inset strength. Authority is that which is exercised toward
others: the Dragon gave him both, and his throne besides. And this is Rome, the
city with seven hills, as we have seen before in the 12. chapter ver. 3.
Which the Dragon Diocletian and Maximian being to be thrust out of heaven,
gave to the Beast the Pope,, that he might perform his business at least by
his Procurour, when he could do it no longer by himself: and betimes indeed
the Dragon, as soon as he perceived that he must depart, took order for a
Successor, putting the Beast in possession, before his expulsion. For
Diocletian lived at Nicomedia, Maximian at Mediolanum, in the which places both
of them gave over the Empire: leaving in the mean time Rome empty for the
Beast. Maxentius held it after for a few years, but only as one that has
the custody of a thing upon co^ditio^ to restore it, as the event has
declares; who should not have the Throne for himself, but should keep it for
the Pope. Constantine coming to visit Rome afterward, and finding the Throne
possessed of an other, went to Byzantium called since Constantinople, and there
appointed a place for himself to dwell in. The other that followed, Emperors
of the West part, when as the inrodes of the Barbarous people did molest
continually, that they might be nearer to bring aid, and more ready for every
opportunity, abode at Mediolanum, or at Ravenna, as the most commodious places.
So they by little and little left the Throne to the Beast. Whereby at length
that which let was wholly taken away, and the man of sin was revealed to
all men, as in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians chapter 2. verse 6. From
which now it is perceived that this Beast is not the Roman Heathenish Empire,
which received Rome by the gift of none; neither does account his power and
dignity as received of any, unless peradventure the Dragon did pursue the
woman of whom we spoke like an enemy, before the Heathen Emperors were
begotten. Furthermore, the Pope of Rome is the Beneficiarie of the Dragon, and
not of Constantine: neither holds Rome by his Donation, as he boasts falsely
and impudently: but only by the assignement of the Dragon. Thus therefore the
Throne being gotten, Rome began from that day to be famous, rather for the
Popes Palace, then for the Emperors Court. And indeed it grew very quickly,
and her power waxed great in a short time; as Prosper witnesses in his book
de Ingratis, in these words, Rome is the Seat of Peter, which is become the
Head of Pastoral power to the world: whatsoever she holds not by force of
arms, she holds it by religion. And again in his second book of the
calling of the Gentiles, chap. 6. Rome by the soveraigntie of Priesthood is more
increased, by the tower of religion, then by the Throne of power. Unto which is
added Ammian Marcellin, in his 27. book, as he is cited by Bellarmine, that he
marvaileth not, though men contend with so great desire for the Roman
Popedom, seeing the riches and majesty of it are so great.

But that the Dragon gave him this power appears from hence, that the name of
Rome was honorable to all men, because of the ancient Empire, of which once
it was the Seat; and therefore that they easily yielded to any promotion of
hers; but of this more largely at the 6. verse.

3 And I saw one of his heads, as it were deadly wounded: Montanus and
Plantines Edition does omit I saw, as though the Dragon, together with the
throne and power, had given also, one of the heads wounded: which is contrary
both to the faithfulness of the other Copies (for Aretas and the Common
translation read I saw, and all other) and also to the truth of the history.
For the Beast had not a wounded head at his first beginning. For first he was,
afterward he is not, in chap. 17.8. as at that place we shall show more
fully. In these words he comes to the second condition of the BEAST. The
damage consists in the wounding of one of his heads, which now once or twice
we have advertised to be seve^ hills and Kings, from chap. 17.9.10. Whether
then of these kinds should suffer this calamity? Surely if the wound
inflicted, be to come into the power of the enemy, scarce can one of the hills
receive a wound, but all will be wounded together. Wherefore more properly it
belongs to the Kings, any one of which being afflicted with this wound, the
rest abide whole from the same. Although this hurt cannot be so proper to a
King, that it should not also be common to the Hills. And these Kings are seven
Governements, or Principalities, by which the City of Rome has been governed,
to wit, those celebrated by all, Kings, Consuls, Decemviri, Dictatours,
Tribunes, Emperors, Popes, as we will make plain at the 17. chap. If now it
be demanded to which of all these this calamity should happen, the place which
even now we spoke of declares it evidently: to the seven head, namely, the
Popes. For so speaks the Angel, and another, that is, the seventh is not yet
come: and when he shall come, he must continue a short space: being hurt with a
wound, as it were quite killed with the same: for John says, as it were
wounded to death, as Aretas well puts us in mind, for he should not be
altogether destroyed by this blow. But now after that it is manifest touching
the Heads, this wound was inflicted, when Rome forsaken now a good while of the
Emperors, abiding partly in the East at Byzantium, partly in the West at
Ravenna: and beginning again to flourish under a new Governeme^t of Popes,
was smitten with an exceeding great storm by the Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, and
the rest of the Northern people. Which vexed most miserably the whole West
part. In this common calamity, that late Empress of the nations, and Queen of
the whole world, escaped not scotfree, but sufferred a greater destruction,
then almost any City besides, oftener taken by assault, sacked, wasted, and for
an hundred two and thirty years, at the lust of the Barbarians. First,
Alaricus about the year 415 besieged and took it: Of which thing Hierome
speaking: but after he says, the most famous light of all countries is clean
put out, yea the head of the Roman Empire cut off, and to speak more truly,
the whole world is destroyed in one City etc. In his Proheme of Ezech. But in
more words and eloquently in an Epistle to Principia a Virgin: The City is
taken, which took the whole world etc. In what lamentable manner would he have
bewailed, if it had befell him to hear of the often conquerings and spoiling
thereof, which followed? For Rome now was consumed not once, but was taken a
second time by Adaulphus, who gave her such a deadly wound, that she was minded
to change her name, and to be called afterward Gothia. The third time
Gensericus the Vandal took it. The fourth time, Odoacer Rugianus reigning
there fourteen years. Theodoricus the King of the Goths slew him whom at
length Totilas follows by a cer^en order of succession. He the fifth time
overthrew and rased it, bringing it to that wilderness, that neither any man,
nor woman could be found in it by the space of forty days, according to that
of the Sibyll: Rome shall be a perpetual ruin, and she that has been seen,
shall not be discerned. Albeit I think not that she has yet endured that
calamity, which Sibyll speaks of, although that now past, may be a notable
proof of that which is to come. Who in those times, would not have thought,
that the seven hilled City had utterly perished? Who would not have supposed
that the dignity of the Popes, to wit, the seventh head, had bin past remedy?
Therefore the Constantinopolitane Bishop, and he of Ravennas, the authority of
Rome being as it were utterly gone, labored greatly, as the next heirs, to
draw the same to their Churches. But they were both much deceaved. The head
was not wounded unto death, but as it were, unto death. Therefore the wound
waxing more fierce, Zozimus, Bonifacius, Celestinus, about the year 420.
having supposed a Nicene Council, challenged the Primacy: and they did moove so
much as was sufficient to show, that some life was left: but they had a
shameful repulse; because this was the time of the wound on every side.
Pelagius also not long after, before the skarre had closed altogether, wrested
the scriptures to the same end, but his endeavor coming to no proof,
declared that both the head remained alive, and also that it was of no power.
For the reign of the Goths, darkened the light of the Popes dignity: neither
could now any acknowledge her the chief, who at home being the basest, and
servant of the Barbarous people, scarce had a place where to abide. For at once
the Emperors dwelling at Rome, at what time the Apostles were in authority,
restreined Antichrist, that he could not come forth, to be seen abroad: so the
new erected Kingdom of the Goths in Italy, was an other thing with holding,
which did repel his put out horns for a time, and compelled him again, to
hide him self in his shell. Rightly therefore now, the head did seem to be
wounded, which was not able to shake off the yoke, neither by any strength of
his own, neither by any hope that he had from the East; seeing the Emperor had
granted of his own accord, Italy to the Goths, which he had no hope to be
able to retain. What could he expect from the West, every country wanting
help; so far off were they, from being able to succor others? Therefore O
Pope, thy wou^d was deadly, whereof no remedy appeared from any place.

But this deadly wound was healed: The third condition of the Beast, consisting
in his dignity recovered, by the healing of the head. Which began at the year
555, when Justinian being Emperor the Goths were destroyed in Italy b^ the
valiantness of (...) and N^r^^^^^. The Emperor played the Physician
mani^estly; for first he took away the noxious humors, by ^^pressing, yea
rather utterly abolishing the Barbarians; afterward he powered in, wine and
oil. That Decree of Justinians new constitution 131, was a most pleasant
ointeme^t: We ordain that according to the Decrees of the holy Coun^^lls, the
most holy Bishop of ancient Rome, shallbe the chief of all Priests. H^^ much
was the wound amended hereby? But Phocas the Parricide, afte^ (...) years more
or less, that is in the year six hundredth and six, fini^h^^ the cure, bound
up the wound, healed it up into a skarre: He did g^aunt unto Bonif^ce the
third, that the Roman Bishop should be counted Vnivers^ll: not only that he
should go before the rest in order and honor, as Iust^nian decreed, limitting
the Primacy with the bounds of holy Concills, b^t who should have the whole
world for his Diocese: the Bishop of Constantinople strove afterward in vain,
from whom the Primacy was given, by the sentence of the Emperor. Now he
perceived that the wound was healed, and that therefore it was superfluous to
plead any more for this matter. And certainly not very long after, the Pope Leo
second, showed that he had recovered health, when about the year 680. by the
wars of the Emperor, he compelled Felix the Bishop of Ravenna, to
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for his Lord: and that the Bishop of Ravenna
should not rise up any more, it is ordained by the authority of the Pope, That
afterward the election of the Clergy of Ra^enna, should not be of force,
unless the consent of the Roman Pope were added to it: Sabellic. Ennead. 8.
book 7. Thus was the wounded head cured, which being healed did more hurt the
Christian world, then before he received the wound.

And all the world wondered and followed the Beast: Now he declares how great
the recovered dignity should be: and first by the honor which the worshippers
of the Beast should give to him: this honor is in admiring, in this verse, and
also in worshipping both the Dragon and the Beast, in the following. And he
speaks significa^tly after the Hebrews manner, to wonder after the Beast,
which is as much as in wondering, to follow the Beast: that is to give up
themselves wholly to be ruled by his Empire, as the Israelites going a whoring
after their Idols, forsook the true God, and consecrated themselves to the
worship of them. They who so admired the Beast are the earth, that is men
savouring the earth, altogether strangers from the heave^ly city. But how many
is the number of them? All without exception. For he says, the whole earth.
Therefore it should come to pass that the Beast after the head was healed,
should rule with far larger bounds, then before. Prosper said that Rome was
more ample, at the first receiving of this dignity by the tower of religion
then by the throne of power. Which seems to be understood rather of the
consent of the truth, then of the dominion of the City of Rome, although then
it was doubtless large. The truth was propagated further then the Roman
Empire: But Britanny had not yet acknowledged the authority of Rome in the
matter of religion, till under the Pontificate of Gregory the fifth, that is,
after some hope that the wound should be cured: Augustine the Romish Munke
forced our countriemen, to take upon them the yoke: neither did France,
Friseland, Denmark, Germany, Sclavonia, depend much of Rome, before
Bonifacius, or Venefride an Inglishman about the year 720. brought these
countries or the chief parts thereof unto the obedience of the Pope of Rome.
Now therefore was the time, when the whole earth should admire the Beast: when
besides these and other Princes of Europe, countries also most remote, Ireland,
Scotland, Norway, Gothia, Sueveland, Luten, and other nations of Sarmatia,
honored the same as some God. Let therefore the Pope glory in his
universality: by how much he has the greater multitude, by so much a surer
argument is he that Beast. But as touching the admiration, it was indeed great
some ages before, and that of the most famous lights of the Church: who carried
away with the too much honor of the Beast, and not regarding sufficiently to
what mischief at length the matter would grow; did exalte too proudly the
pre-eminence of the Apostolic Chair. Yet did they not wonder after the Beast,
so as they thought they must embrace all whatsoever he should ordain, but they
had one rule of godliness and duty, to it, the sacred truth. Neither were the
commendations of those times, any thing to that admiration which followed the
healing of the wound. Hear Bernard: Thou, says he, speaking to the Pope, art
the great Priest, the chief Pope, thou art the Prince of Bishops, thou art the
heir or the Apostles, thou art in Primacy Abel, in governing Noe, in
Patriarchat Abraham, in order Melchisedec, in dignity Aaron, in authority
Moses, in judgment Samuel, Peter in power, Christ in an-annointing, etc. in
the 2. book of Considerat. Verily o Bernard, thou have played the fool
through admiration. Yet nevertheless I dare not put thee among those, who
wonder after the Beast, considering that I hear thee else where reprooving
boldly and sharply the wickedness of the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and other
Clergy men. The times deceaved thee: but there was in thee, I think somewhat
borne of God, which at length did overcome the world. But of what sort was the
wou^dring of other men, who were more blinded and less fearing God? Hear what
the Ambass. of the Emp. of Sicilia being prostrated on the ground, cry; which
take away the sins of the world have mercy on us: which take away the
sins of the world, give us peace: P. Ae. b. 7. What also Simo Begnius Bishop
of Modrusium speaking to the Pope Leon in the Council of Lateran, sess. 6.
Behold, here comes the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, thee, o
most blessed Leo, we have expected for Savior. Add unto these Cornelius the
Bishop of Biponte, who showed his astonishme^t in the Cou^cill of Tre^t in
these words; The Pope being the light is come into the world, and men have
loved darkness more then the light: for every one that does evil hates the
light, and comes not to the light: O Blasphemous Fools, is it not enough for
you to adorn the Man of Sin, with the praises of the Saints, unless ye
load him also with the spoils of Christ himself? But learn from these, that
did speak by public authority in their General Councills, what was the voice
of the whole world? In the same route of wonderers are the Jesuits at this
day, and all the Papists. Neither can it be otherwise, but that they must
think, that he is to be followed in all things, and worship him as God, whom
they judge for a surety to be free from error: has not the Englis man written
justly in his Poetry, that the Pope is the astonishment of the world?
Especially if one set before his eyes the Emperor leading his horse by the
bridle, and holding the stirrup, while the Beast mounteth on horseback.

4 And they worshipped the Dragon: That is, men acknowledged the power of the
Beast to be by right the chief, because of the ancient majesty of Rome, which
the Heathen Emperors, who are those Dragons, procured unto it. For was not
this to adore and worship the Dragon, for his sake to give the supreme dignity
to his successor? But this was the first foundation of the Roman Primacy,
because this City was a fore time the head city of the Empire. From hence
every where in Eusebius and other Ecclesiastical writers, it is called the
reigning City. But most clearly does the Council of Chalcedon show this, in
the 16. Act. For the Fathers in order gave privilegies to the Seat of old
Rome, because of the Empire of that City. An hundred and fifty Bishops, most
loving to God, and of equal Seat, moved with the same intention, gave
privilegies to the new Rome; judging according to reason, that the City
adorned with the Empire, and Senate, should enjoy the like privilegies of the
ancient Rome: and in Ecclefiasticall affairs to have authority as she, and
to be the next after her etc. Therefore the Empire and Senate did bring forth
the Primacy to the elder Rome: which being granted unto her by those first
Fathers, because of the Heathen Emperors, who reigned there before time: the
Successors afterward, did for the same cause, amplify the dignity granted,
and prostrate themselves all shamefully before the Dragon, worshipping him as
the author of this honor. By the same argument the Bishop of Constantinople
would have obtained the like dignity. But the Dragon sufferred it not, who had
made the Bishop of Rome his heir of the whole. Wherefore the Legates of the
Roman Bishop withstood that Decree. Neither would Pope Gelasius, who in other
things approved the Concill of Chalcedon, confirm this one Canon, concerning
the privilege of the Church of Constantinople. Therefore that Decree was of noe
force, especially when the same Gelasius, to whom the Dragon had committed his
power, had ordained wisely before, and warily; that no Act of any Council
whatsoever, should be of any force, unless it were confirmed the Bishop of
Rome.

And they worshipped the Beast saying, who is like to the Beast? who can war
with him: Such was the worshipping of the Dragon: now followed of the Beast:
which consists in the extolling of his power above all; that we may not
think, that adoration is in the gesture only. And was there not just cause of
boasting so highly of the Beasts power? Leo Isaurus the Emperor of
Constantinople fought unfortunately with Gregory the second, excommunicated by
the same, and put from all the Empire of the West. Childericke the King of
France, was too weak for to encounter with the Pope Zachary: wherefore forced
by his authority, he gave over his Kingdom to Pipine. The Longobards not using
the Beast well, when he was sick of his wound; at length when he began to be
recovered, and to wax well, were cast into the jaws of this Leopard, by the
help of Pipine and Charles the Great. Neither lost Charles his cost, being
made Emperor for his labor. Great indeed was thy power o Beast, who were
able at thy pleasure to take away, and to give again, that which is the
highest in men's affairs. Lamentable is the History of Henry the fourth, who in
the heart of a terrible winter, bare foot, and fasting from morning to night,
for the space of three days, waited for sentence, craving pardon before the
gates of the Canusine Castle of the Roman Bishop: who yet prevayled nothing,
either by his own or others tears, or by the intercession of any Sanct, save
only of a certain whore, whom the Holy Pope had made his darling The Emperor
was deceived, who thought that the Pope could be pacifyed by prayers and
fasting: this God required an other kind of sacrifices. But that is horrible
that the Pope drove the Son of Henry to that wickedness, that he should
assault his Father with war, spoiled him of all dignity, and at length
constrained him to end his life in extreme miseries. Frederike Barbarossa, a
man of an heroical disposition, has set forth greatly the triumph of the
Beast, being trodden upon with his feet, while he in the mean time did sing
this verse of triumph: Thou shall walk upon the Aspe and Bisiliske, and tread
upon the Lion and Dragon. What should I rehearse Frederike the second, Lodovike
of Bavaria, contemning indeed at the first the Popes, but at length having
tried their strength, prooving all means to win their favor again? Our
England has affoarded us a sorrowful exemple of King John. From all which may
be perceived how unequal a conflict any Prince on earth had with this Beast.
Therefore Rudulph^s Halsbergensis the Emperor, when the Princes desired
earnestly that he would go visit Italy, not dissembling that he did wholly
abhor this voyage, answers wisely that he was made afraid, by all men
footstepp^s t^nding toward it, and none backward from it. What was this else
but, Who shall be able to war with him?

5 And there was a mouth given unto him, speaking great things: Hitherto the
honor of the Beast, now followed his power of blaspheming, and doing. Of which
both, the power given is first recited, afterward the execution of bl^sph^ming,
in the sixth verse, of doing in the seventh verse. It is profitable for u^ to
understand that those horrible impietyes do enter into the world, not by any
blin^e force of fortune, but by the most just judgeme^t of God. Who does so
puni^h naughty acts, and especially men's despising of his truth. The power of
blaspheming, is the freedom from error, which the Roman Pope chalengeth to
himself, and his Seat, and that men of a blind and perverse mind, do
willingly grant unto him. What blasphemies may not he proffer to the world,
every one of whose Decrees are held for Oracles? The power of doing is that
exempt, and most free ability to do all what one will, without rendering a
reason to any man. Wherein notable is the power of the Roman Pope above all
other. For such Decrees do they ordain: No man shall judge the first Seat,
desiring to moderate justice; for the Judge shall be judged neither of the
Emperor, neither of all the Clergy, neither of Kings, nor of the people.
Again, God would have the causes of other men to be ended by men. Likewise:
The whole Church through the world knows, that the holy Roman Church has
right to judge concerning all men: neither may any judge of her judgment. This
is called a power of doing for excellency sake, such as indeed belongs to no
Emperors, who refuse not to he refrained with the bounds of laws, and all
their actions to betried by the rule of equity and justice.

As touching the words Aretas reads: And power was given him to make war
months etc. In like manner also Montanus, and Plantines Edition: The Common
translation absolutely, as also Theodorus Beza, and the rest of the Greek
Copies. The like use of this word in a like matter in Daniell, favors this
reading, He shall cast down, says he, the truth to the ground, and shall
do, and he shall prosper, in the eight Chapter, the twelve and four and
twentiest verse: and he shall prosper wonderfully, and shall do. So in the
eleventh chapter verse twenty eight, He shall do, and shall return to his
own land. In which places is signified a certain free and chief power of
doing, which should not fear the judgment of any.

The time of doing are two and forty mon^ths: the same space wherein the
temple remains measured, the two Prophets mourn, and the woman lies hid in
the wilderness, as in the 11 chapter second verse, and 12. chapter six verse*
from whence the beginning of all these is to be judged the same. At one time
the Church is banished, the Prophets wear sackecloth, and the Beast or
Antichrist is borne: to wit, in that first refreshing after the public
persecutions about the year 300, as before has been said. But shall there be
also the same ending? Shall the Beast be deprived of all power to do, and the
woman return our of the wilderness together? This peradventure is against it,
that after the two and forty months ended, he makes war with the two
Prophets, and overcomes them: which is a thing of no small power, as we have
showed in the 11. chapter verse 7. Furthermore there remains yet a war
far a way the most grievous, to come long after those months, as we shall
see after in the 16. chapter. Last of all if there be the same end of the
months in regard of the Beast, which there is of the woman, how shall he have
power to do two and forty months, seeing some great part of them did lay
sick, yea as it were dead by means of his wounded head? This space then
seems to contain the whole tyranny of Antichrist, so as that time when the
wound was green be taken away from it. But we have already showed that this
sickly time was ended with the reign of the Goths, in the 3. ver. which
continued an hundred and forty years. Therefore if we take away these years
from the months of the woman lying hid, we shall find that at the end of
this lurking, to with at the year 1546. that 37. months and ten days only of
the flourishing Kingdom of Antichrist were past. There are wanting therefore to
this, 5. months and 20. days, which if we shall count from the year 1546.
the last end of Antichrist shall come out at the year 1686. or there about.
For so we shall learn from other scriptures that he shall utterly perish
about that time. It may be that his destruction shall prevent this term: for
neither do I now recke^ curiously, neither peradventure do the
History-writers number the years so faithfully as is meet. But it shall not
be granted him to proceed further, the furthest space being set down by me.
But peradventure these months are not the space of time from the first
beginning unto the last end of the Beast, but only the former years of his
reign: as many as may suffice to manifest him abundantly to all men.

In which respect as they begin together with the months and days of the
woman and Prophets, so also they have an end together. The mention of the
war with the Sancts beneath in the 17. verse, confirms this sense: which
war we have declared to have befallen at the end of these months, in chap.
11.7. From which exposition the Beast is said to have power to do two and
forty months, of the most part of these months: because that small distance
of time, in which he should hide himself by reason of his wounded head, should
have a very little reckening made of it, in respect of the whole number:
neither is the power which shall be afterward, like to that of former time; as
the experience of this time proves sufficiently, wherein we see the Popes
forces, since that war was made, that is, since the Council of Trent, are
become a great deal feebler and weaker: so that his power is almost nothing to
that, which it was in former ages. This latter is more plain, wherefore it
pleases me the more.

Yet notwithstanding I would not hide any thing, as much as in me lay, where I
should see the least doubt, that either my self might find out the truth, or
at least wise might stir up others to search it out.

6 Therefore he opened his mouth to blasphemy: Hitherto has been the given
power: now the thing it self is performed: these two are distinguished,
because the heigh of impiety should not be looked for the first day, but he
should come to it by certene degrees and in process of time. But first he
prepares himself to blaspheme God and his name: afterward his Temple: last of
all those that dwell in Heaven. He blasphemeth God, by vaunting himself to be
God, not as other Princes, but sacrilegiously beyond the condition of mortal
men, as to whom power is given in Heaven and in Earth, who shall rule from Sea
to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the world, as may be seen in the
first book and 7. chap. of the Ceremonial. pontifical. And as the Pope Sixtus
confirmed openly in these words, Whosoever accus^th the Pope, shall never be
forgiven, because he that sins against the Holy Ghost, shall never
beforgiven, neither in this, nor in the life to come, See the first Tome of
Councills. in Purgat. of Sixtus. Thence follows that, which Boniface the
eight sings so loud, thus, We declare, define, and pronounce to every
creature, that it is upon necessity of salvation, that they be subject to the
Pope of Rome: Extrav. of Maiorit. and obed, one holy.

Secondly he opened his mouth against the Tabernacle: That is the true Church
of God, lying hid, and being as a stranger on the earth. For this Tabernacle is
the same that the Temple was in chap. 11.1. the dwelling place of God,
conversing with his people in the desert: which shows evidently at what time
chiefly he should cast out these blasphemies, to wit, when the Church should
dwell in the wilderness, and should be known only to a few obscure
citizens. And that I may not rehearse these many blasphemies: Could not
Antichrist in his chief pride having a desperate mouth, rail against the
humble and despised Church, when he being now without Spirit, and almost half
dead, stays himself from no reproaches against the same, she being by the
grace of God restored and flourishing? Thirdly, he blasphemeth them that dwell
in Heaven. These are Citizens and members of the true Church on earth. His
opened mouth barked at the Tabernacle, against the whole congregation of the
faithful. But the blasphemy is intended chiefly at those which dwell in
Heaven, against particular holy men His foul mouth revileth them with all
manner of reproaches. Are not all that set themselves against the Romish
impiety, defamed as if they were Schismatiques, Heretics, Rebels, most
wicked men, unworthy to enjoy the light in common with other? Read that one
Bulla of Leo the x. aga^n t Luther, and thou shall have a most oboundant proof
of these blasphemies. But all Papisticall books are full of them: yea their
tongues do scarce talk of any other thing.

7 And it was given him to make war with etc. This is that war which was
made in the 11. chap. ver. 7.8. To wit, the Tridentine Council, and that
lam^ntable battle of the Pope and Emperor against the Protestants in Germany.
This is also that victory, whereby he triumphed over the two Prophets that were
slain. For the Beast warreth his whole forty and two months, as before in
the 5. ver. but at the end of that time, this war should be the most
memorable of all, whereof he makes here mention. Therefore this Beast, is the
Angel of the bottomless pit, in chap. 9. ver. 11. and 11.7. There remains
yet another war, but in that the Beast shall not overcome, but be overcomed.

And power was given unto him over every Tribe, and tongue, and nation: The
third part of his power, as we have distinguished in the Analysis, which
consists in the largeness of his dominion. This should spread it self far
and near, as before time, the Empire of the Dragon. For there is the same
Throne of both, the same Kingdom also, and Empire: see before in verse 3. upon
those words the whole world.

8 Therefore all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, whose names etc. A
setting forth of the large jurisdiction, from a description of the subjects. Of
which sort are all, whom God has not accounted in the number of those that
shall be saved. Which words have prevented that doubt, whereby one peradventure
might think that it were past remedy, as concerning the salvation of all,
seeing all almost did seem to be servants of the Beast. Fear not, says the
Spirit, none of the elect shall perish: I have all these written with me by
name: only they shall be permitted to worship the Beast, who are not written
in this Catalogue. But thou will say, it is as hurtful a thing to worship the
Heathen Emperors. But hat is not the matter how dangerous it is to worship
either him, or those, but only the Beast is described by the multitude of the
reprobate, whom he has for his worshippers, as though he should say, this
Beast is he, whom all the reprobate of the earth shall worship: that is, to
whom they shall give Divine honors. To which proposition if thou shall add;
But the Pope of Rome is he, who^ all the reprobate of the earth have
worshipped, giving unto him divine honors, it will follow that he is this
Beast. Some Heathen Emperors arrogated to themselves a Godhead, but eve^ the
Heathen men derided this madness, so far off were they from approoving thereof
by worshipping. Suetonius reports how great a mocking stock the Dodecatheos,
that is, the secret supper of Augustus was, in which twelve ghests sat down in
the habit of Gods and Goddesses: but Augustus himself in the apparel of
Apollo. The hoasen, the golden beard and lightening, the ensign of the Gods,
which he bare, were despised. But as soon as the Pope had taken to himself the
name of God, his worshippers by and by consented unto it. We heard in the
thirteenth verse of the Adoration, which the Ambassadors and Bishops performed
in their general Councills. With whom the Canonists accord, as in a certain
Gloss printed at Lions in the year a thousand five hundredth fifty five, in
Extravag. Ioann. 22. VVh^n it was counted an Heretical thing, to believe, that
our Lord God the Pope had not ben able to ordain, as he has ordained. In
Sixtus of Election, and the found^tions of Elect. In the Gloss, The Pope is
not a man. Clement in the Proheme in the Gloss, Neither art thou God, nor man,
thou art, as it were, neither b^tween both. Finally when they preach, that the
Pope is all, and above all: that his power exte^deth it self to things in
Heaven, in Earth, and Hell: That he can command the Angels, that he has such
power in Purgatory, and ^lso in Hell, that he can deliver by his Indulgences,
as great a number as he will, of souls which are tormented in those places,
and set them by and by in Heaven, and in the seats of the blessed. When, I
say, they attribute these and many such blasphemous things unto him, who sees
not, whom the reprobate of the earth do worship, and adore with divine
honors? Not that all who some time have adored the Beast are reprobates (for
it may be that they did repent, and were converted to God) but because all the
reprobate do worshipe him. Neither let any prate foolishly, that there are
many countries in the world, in which even the name of the Roman Pope has not
ben heard. I do not otherwise take the whole world and all the reprobate, then
the Holy Spirit himself; if the Papists have any thing, whereby they may cut
the throat of this Universality, let them strike at it.

Seeing therefore that these thing^s are so* now let the Pope cry out, that it
is altogether of necessity to salvation, to be subject to the Roman Pope. The
Spirit contrariwise says, that to be under the Roman Bishop, is to be joined
wholly with the loss of salvation; if any do so di^ without repentance
Whether of these two must thou believe? He will have it that he cannot err,
but how foolish is it, to bring the trial of the same thing thither, where if
thou shall err in believing, there shall be given thee no^ leave to correct the
error. This Beast is worshipped of all the reprobate, whom as long as thou
conspire^t with in worship, who will seclu^e thee from the condition of the
reprobate? He therefore breaks not ^nitie, who departs from the Romish
Synagogue, but he procured un^voidable destruction to himself, whosoever is
joined to her and repented not. O ye most wretched reco^cilers, who seek to
bring back again the people to Rome. Is it not enough for your s^lves to
perish, u^lesse you increase your condemnation, by drawing others with you into
the same destruction? But let no godly man be offended, if he see the
reprobate to return to their Beast: the Spirit has foreshewed that this load
stone shall draw unto it this refuse, that hereafter they may not marvel Why
all of ung^dly and dissolute life, are more prone to the Pope, th^n to the
truth.

Of that Lamb which was sl^ine from the beginning of the world: Without cause
Aretas will have a transposition of the words to be here, so that this should
be the sense: Whose names are not written from the beginning of the world, in
the book of life of the Lamb, which was slain. He will have the names to be
written from the beginning of the world, but not the Lamb to have been killed
from thence. But the things are not well divided, which the Spirit joins
together. For if the Lamb be from the beginning of the world, it must needs
be also that he was slain from the beginning of the world.

But CHRIST is not a Lamb, but for sacrifice, neither can he be a sacrifice
otherwise then by death. As therefore by the eternal Decree of God, he was the
Lamb appointed for to save the Elect: so by the same Decree he was slain,
from before the foundations of the world. VVose force was noe less available
to deliver the Elect, before his death was accomplished in the flesh, then
after he had endured and sufferred the same in the cross, and in the grave.

9 Let him that has an ear hear An acclamation, the sense whereof is: That
this Beast is to be known with all diligence; howsoever there shallbe many,
who will not hearken, and will deny a thing, so perverse are they, more clear
then the Sun at noonetide. But all ye elect, give ear, and with as great
diligence as you can, fly from this plague. Which by these marks is so
proposed before your eyes, as that you may see her, not as by the nails, but
by the whole frame of her body.

10 If any lead into captivity: These things pertain to the consolation of
the godly, who were to fight with this monster: the first confirmation is taken
from a certain punishment which shall come in his time: that is to say, although
they shall see the Beast mighty for a long time, and carrying many by companies
into bondage, yet they should be of good courage. For at length they should see
him also led into captivity. He shall perish with the sword, although now he
kill with the sword whom he will. The confort is like to that in Esaias: Woe to
thee that spoilest, who thy self is not spoiled: and to thee traitorous man,
against whom they dealt not traitorously, when thou shall cease to be a
spoiler, thou shall be spoiled etc. chap. 33.1.

Here is the patience and faith of the Saints: A second consolation. All those
things serve for the Saints, for the exercise of their faith and constancy.
And surely a great courage is required in so great dangers: but by how much
the dangers shall be greater, so much the more shall the praise of the godly be
brighter: therefore let no man quake for fear of the danger, but let him mind
that this Beast is the occasion for him to get glory by.

11 Afterward I saw an other Beast: Thus far of the first Beast, the second
follows. an other indeed in beginning and original, but in nature and
disposition altogether the same. Whereupon the seventeenth chapter makes
mention of one only; under one comprehending both, as was observed at the fifth
verse of this chap. For which cause also the Spirit does not make a particular
description of every member: but rehearses those things only, which are
proper to the new rising; other things, as far as it seems, being common to
this with the former. First, he ascends out of the earth, both augmented by
the authority of earthly men, and those of the laity, as they call them, whom
chiefly the earth signifies, and also exceeding in honors those very men by
whom he was advanced. For that which comes up from the earth, is lifted up
above the earth, having it put under his feet, by whose weight he was lately
oppressed. So the former Beast rose out of the Sea, having sea men put under
him, out of whose company he came, and plunged up. This ascending fell out upon
the times of Gregory second, about the year 726, when the Pope trusting in the
aid of the Longobardes, smote with the ligh^ning of excommunication Leo
Isaurus the Emperor, and withdrewe Rome it self and Italy, and all Hesperia,
from hi^ obedience. For now indeed, the Beast began upon the earth, who not
only exercised a power over the Ecclesiastical route, but also bridled the
lay men by his authority, and their chief head the Emperor: who although
before time he had given a great power to the Pope over the Clergy, yet he
pressed down the same even till now by his majesty, as it were by a certain
weight, more heavy the^ the Hill Aetna; that he should not lift up his crests
above the Emperor. But now the earthly dignity yields to the Beast, to be
trodden under foot of him at length, who grew up so far only by the favor
of the Emperors. Therefore Zacharias the next, that it might be manifest to
all men that the Popes were now loosed from the prison of eartly dignity,
deposed Childericke the King of France, and commanded Pipine the Father of
Charles the Great, to be created King in his stead. But yet it was more clear
in Leo the third, who translated the Empire from the Grecians to the Germans,
and anointed Charles the Great for Emperor. What a more great proof can
there be of the supreme power on earth, then to take away the Empire from whom
he will, and to bestow the same again upon whom he shall think good? The
Popes following persisted in the same steps, esteeming the Emperors as it
were balls, in rejecting the same from their office, and appointing other in
their room at their pleasure. Whereby Bellarmine being moved, wrote indeed
truly, and agreeable to this Prophecy. All the Emperors who have been since
Charles the Great, are bound to the Pope for their Empire: in his 5. book of
the Pope of Rome, chap. 8. For ever since that time the Beast rose up from the
earth, being higher then all earthly power: to which are added earthly
dominions and possessions of lands joined with this original: which the Pope
before time either wanted altogether, or at least enjoyed but small and few,
as great as were sufficient to maintain a Bishop, not which should make any
show of a Kingdom. For in former ages, Italy was tributary to the Emperors,
which at length the Goths possessing, made it to pay tribute to them: when
they were slain under Justinian, it returned again to the Empire, administered
by Captains. The Roman Pope had yet noe Provinces, until this earthly rising
up, had given him lands sufficiently. For is it likely that the Pope by whose
persuasion other men fell from the Emperor, and were made richer, became not
more enriched by the spoils of the same? Would not he provide himself, and
Saint Peter of some little gobbet? But it is a sufficient argument, what he
got thereby, that a while after, that the Longobardes converting their forces
against the Romans, sought to take away from them those cities, of which they
had spoiled the Emperor. Which being taken away, Zachary the Pope recovered
them again by fair flattering words with great increase, if we must believe
the Papists. For he obtained of Luitprandus by gift for blessed Peter and the
Popes besides, a few cities taken away, the inheritance of the S^bins, and the
City Narnia, and Ancona, and Humana, and the great valley of the town
Sutrium: Moreover all those things, which Luitprandus had taken to hims^^f^
from Amilia and the people of R^venna, within the space of two years: Blond.
Decad. 1. book 10. But without controversy the munificence of Pipine, and
Ch^rles the Great, and Ludovike far surpassed. For Romanie was now called a
Princedome, that even by the very name it might acknowledge her Lord. Therefore
the Beast began now to glory in the Kingdoms of the world, which boasted
before of the title of dignity and honor, rather th^n in any possessions, of
cities and towns.

Having two horns like the Lamb: These two horns are Pipine, and his Son
Charl^s the Great, by whose weapons as it were by horns, the new Beast chased
far away all enemies. Pipine aided the Pope Stephan 2. flying into France,
against Aristulphus the King of the Longobardes; whom, he passing twice over
the Alps with an army, compelled first to yield the things taken from the
Pope: Secondly to deliver to the chair of Peter Ravenna, the Princedoome, and
whatsoever almost he had taken in Italy: see Volat book 3. Charles the Great
for Pope Adrians sake, repressed Desiderius King of the Longobardes: yea took
away wholly the Kingdom from that nation, that they might not afterward cause
any trouble to Rome. Moreover again when Aragisus a Captain of Beneventum put
Adrian in some fear, he fled into Italy, brought him by constraint to his
duties, and set Adrian free from all fear. Leo the third also, being expelled
by the Romans, hasting into Italy the third time, those seditious being
punished severely, he restored him unto his Chair. The Popes of Rome never
had so great deffence, since their ten first horns, in any as in these two.
Therefore these two notable horns made famous the original of this second
Beast. Which are said to be like the Lambs, because the Popes who^ they aided
did seem helpless, afflicted, innocent like Lambs. How lamentable Epistles
do Stephanus the second, Constantinus, Stephanus the third, and Adrian Popes
send to Pipine, and Charles the Great? How full are all things of complaints,
of lamentations, of tears, and of most vehement callings upon them for
succor? See before your eyes, what cruelty those letters do attribute to the
enemies, but what innocence to the Bishops. Surely thou will call those wolves,
these Lambs, and that he has an heart of iron, who would not deliver them,
being in danger, from their most cruel ^awes, if he be able Yet nevertheless
in this miserable estate the Beast retained his former mind, and loftily and
terribly as the Dragon. I let pass Gregory the second, striking with
lightening, and terrifying Leo Isaurus. Whose voice I pray, was it, when
Zacharias took away the Kingdom from the lawful King, and bestowed it upon
Pipine his servaunt? What manner of voice was that of Leo the third, which
proclaimed openly, and consecrated Charles, Emperor of the West? Was it not
that of the old Dragon, who according to that very great power whereby he
prevailed, made and deposed Kings whom he would? Desiderius the Longobard felt
the force of this voice, who being allured by the Lambelike show of the Popes,
he entered quickly into their possessions, for to recover whatsoever things
they had wrested away by fraud from his Ancetours. But this voice brought to
pass, that while he strove for some one city or town, he lost his whole
Kingdom, and that not from himself, but also the whole name of the
Longobardes. These are wonderful great acts of the Earthly Beast, taking away
and bestowing Kingdoms at his pleasure. And that which is more, not so much by
armed force, as by his voice, by which he exercised the power of the Dragon:
although he bare yet the show of a tender Lamb, who was not able of himself
to drive away the wolf from his own neck.

And he exercises all the power of the former Beast: Such is the rising and
form of the Beast. His power is equal with the former, a great proof whereof
is given in this verse. As touching the equal power, whatsoever that first
could do, this second does exercise all the same in his sight. But whence had
he this so great power, but from the Dragon who gave it to the first above in
the second verse? Wherefore both are the same, both for amplenesse of power,
and also for the same author himself from whom they received it. But as
touching that some will have this second to be as it were the Chalbard man and
esquire for the body of the former, is it to be thought that any is to be
compared with Antichrist, either for power, or will to do wickedness? Surely
he shall have noe fellow, but he shall surmounte all men in naughtines, and
wickedness by many degrees. Therefore this Beast, is not any servant of
Antichrist, but he himself, endued with no less power to do mischievous
deeds. But thou will say, they seem to be distinguished, one of them working
in the sight of the other. But this kind of speaking shows not a diversity
of person, but only that the first remained alive after that the wound was
healed.

Albeit they are worthily set as two divided, because of the notable variety
which the same person should obtain in his growing. In which respect he is
called both the seventh and also the eight King, chap. 17. Not because there
are eight Kings, for there be only seven heads, but because the seventh has
so great diversity, that for good cause he may seem a new one, and the eight.
And if the second Beast be diverse, why would he procure honor rather to the
former, then to himself, who has equal power, and like notable lewdenes? It
is necessary therefore, that the honor of the second consists in the honor
of the first, which he thrusts upon the inhabitans of the earth with so great
endeavor, not so much through a desire to increase an others, as his own
glory.

And he causes the earth, and the inhabit^ns etc. The effect of his power
tends to that end, that he may compel all false Christians to worship the
first Beast, which the Spirit describes diligently by his deadly wound
healed, declaring that this adoration agreed not to him, before that he
recovered health from his wound which he had. He was of great authority before
he received the wound, as we have showed; but of far greater after the hurt
was amended. Which order the Spirit observed before in the 3. and 4. ver.
adding after his head was cut and healed, both admiration, and also adoration.
And that adoration is this same which is now gotten by the labor of this. But
why seeing the second is no other then then first revived, urges he not
worship in his own name, but only in the name of that? This is a singular
cunning of the most crafty hypocrites, to wit, a fained name of antiquity,
whereby he might get estimation to himself in the world. For in this only he
should wholly labor, that the first might be worshipped, as though he
challenged no new thing to himself, but that only which his Ancetours had left
unto him by succession. From hence the Epistles of most ancient Popes were
corrupted most impudently, co^terfait put in the place of true, and true wholly
changed with strange additions and detractions for their own profit. From the
same shop came the feigned donation of Constantine. Likewise the Decrees, which
in their title have a show of greater antiquity then truth; and six hundred
of that sort. Neither is any other thing at this day so greatly labored for,
as that the ancient honor may be given to the Pope, that is, that the first
Beast may be worshipped: it would be an unpleasant ambition openly to endeavor
to get honor to himself (though the Pope is not ashamed of this) wherefore he
obiecteth the first Beast, under whose name he may serve himself more secretly.

13 And he does great wonders: Now is showed by what way he deceives men, and
obtains that worship for which he fights, as for heaven and earth: to wit,
by working Miracles, in the which Antichrist should be wonderful, whose
coming is by the effectual working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, as Paul has forwarned, 2 These. 2.9. Which thing if Ireneus had
observed in his 5. book, chap. 28. he would not have called this Beast so much
the Armor bearer of Antichrist, as Antichrist himself. No miracles of the
former are rehearsed, but only power, and great authority; of which there may
be a distinct force from signs. It is manifest to all men how this Beast is
commended for a notable fine worker of miracles, by and by after he waxed whole
of his wound. Behold one or two (for it were an infinite thing to recite every
one.) The Christians have been protected wonderfully from the Devil in the
Temple Pantheon, after that Boniface the 4. had consecrated it to all Saints.
Theodorus the next healed with a kiss one diseased with the leprosy. No man in
the whole army of Eudo, to whom but even a very small pi^ce of the blessed
Spongie had come from the POPE Gregory 2. was either killed or wounded in the
battle against the Saracenes. The body of Formosus brought from the river
Tiber into the Church of S. Peter, is saluted and worshipped with great
reverence of the Images of the Saints, in the entrance of the temple. A white
dove like snow, whose neck was shining as Gold sat upon the right shoulder of
Gregory the 6. whiles he celebrated Mass When the same was to be buried in the
Palace of Peter, the doors of the Temple tarried not the coming of the door
keeper, but of their own accord leaped back at the bringing of his dead body.
A certain lame woman by drinking the water wherewith Vrbain 2. had washed his
hands after the Mass, was healed. Infinite are the things of this sort, in
which the Roman Pope glories, both old and new. For both are of like force
to confirm his authority. Which Zacharias knew well, who translated into the
Greek tongue the four books of Gregory the Great, concerning the miracles of
the Fathers, that the miraculous power of the Popes might be come known as
well to the Grecians, as to the Latins. But, will thou say the miracles of
other men are not few. That is true in deed: but who ar all the slaves of the
same Pope: of whom whatsoever wonders are done, they are referred to the
defending, preserving, and increasing of his dignity, as to the center. From
whence all these done of his servants, are worthily said to be his, for whose
honor alone they make.

So that he makes fire to come down from heaven: His power to do miracles
being showed summarily, now he descends to some certain kinds, which the
Papists will have to be three, the first, whereby Antichrist shall seem to
rise from the dead; the second whereby he shall make fire to descend from
heaven; the third is, the power of speaking given to the Image: which things
seeing they are not found in the Pope of Rome, as Bellarmine will have it in
his third book of the Roman Pope, chap. 15. it follows, says he, that he
is not Antichrist. His rising from the dead, is gathered from his head deadly
wounded, and healed again, ver 3, of this chapter, and from that which is said
after in the 17. chap. ver. 18. he was, and is not, and ascends out of the
bottomless pit. Which rising again we have showed to be found most plainly
in the Pope of Rome, when he was eased, and delivered from those miseries,
wherewith by the invasion of the Barbarians, he lay overwhelmed and buried, in
men's opinion. For, that it cannot agree to the death of one man, fained for
some few days, it shall be manifest from the person of Antichrist, which the
seventeenth chapter after will prove evidently, to be a long succession of
many, not any certain and singular man. Especially also seeing that this wound
was very sorrowful, not inflicted on himself willingly, and in jest, but made
by his enemies, where could be no place for counterfaiting. Which faining of
death was brought in by a false conjecture of men, and besides the truth of
the matter, and the very words of the scripture. Therefore the Romans Pope is
famous for the first miracle, which if they please, they may call a
resurrection, to which it is not unlike. Now what manner of one is he in regard
of the second? Certe^ly those miracles seem to be very great, which are done
from heaven, or in the very heavens, when as men have very little power over
these bodies: as when a fire of the Lord falling from Heaven, consumed the
burnt offering of Eliah: 1 King. 18.38. Likewise also when the Captain over
fifty men with his whole band was destroyed by fire from Heaven, at the
prayers of the same Eliah, 2 King. 1. Therefore Antichrist that he might not
seem inferior to the famous Prophets, would set forth himself by this sort
of miracles. Gladly do the Jesuits hear this, from whence they judge for a
surety, that the Pope is not Antichrist, of whom, say they, not such miracle is
read But Hildebrand grants otherwise, who in his Epistle to the Germans,
said, that Henry the fourth being smitten with his excommunication, was blasted
with lightening. And not at all adventures, the Spirit doubtless ruling his
tongue as before time of Caiphas; whereby the world might understand, how the
Beast should make fire to descend from heaven. But there is no need that we
should seek a metaphorical sense, when the History ministers most plain
demonstrations. Of which sort was that thing that Pope Zacharias in the month
of June journeying twards Ravenna, in the day time was covered with a cloud
against the heat of the Sun, and in the night time armies of fire went
before him in clouds, Centur. 8. from Polych. book 5. 25. In the same place
is rehearsed that a Song of Felix Archbishop of Ravenna, placed by the Pope
Constantine in the most sacred confession of blessed Peter the Apostl, after a
few days was sound black, and burnt with fire, see it in the book of
Pontifical. they would make men believe, that it was blasted from heaven. But
that is more clear that a certain Bi^hop shaking up with many taunts
Hildebrand, for his privy grudge against Henry, was destroyed with lightening,
and dying cried Alas I miserable wretch b^und with a chain of fire am drawn
to Hell: go ye and sh^we the Emperor that he may repent, and make amends by
duties* for his h^inous offense committed ag^i^st ^od, against S. Peter, and
against his Vicar, unless he had leiffer follow after me going before to
everlasting punishments. The same day also the Bishop of Spira bearing some
evil will to Hildebrant, gave up the Ghost. Ce^t. 11. from Avent. book 5. of
Chronicles. Did not the Ambassadors of Armenia see upon the head of Pope
Eugenius, while he celebrated the Mass at Viterbium, a beam of the Sun
shining with most clear brightness, and in it two doves ascending and
descending? Centur. 12. In the City Barra when Innocentius was saying the
Mass, and Lotharius the Emperor being present, there appeared a golden
crown, whereon sat a white Dove: under the crown hanged a smoking C^ns^r,
and beside it two burning firebrands: In the same place from the Chron of Saxe.
What can be more clear then these things? Wherefore now I think that the
Jesuits will not deny, how that nothing does here hinder, but that the Pope of
Rome may well be the Antichrist. Concerning the third miracle we shall see in
his place, in the 15. verse afterward.

14 And he seduceth the inhabitans of the earth: Therefore these wonders are not
true, but false, and lying, such as are Antichrists according to that of Paul,
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Although they are
not called lying therefore, because they are mere delusions, in which there is
nothing beside a bare show only, but partly because they differ very much
from true, howsoever they shall be wonderful, as which exceed not the powers of
Nature, done by the power of the Devil, by a way unknown to us, whereupon
they affect the beholders with great admiration: partly for that they pertain
to the establishing of error and lying For whatsoever belongs to the
commendation of any thing what soever, which is contrary to the sacred truth
of the Scriptures, it is that lying sign: howsoever it is permitted of God to
be very marveilous, both for to try the elect, and also to delude the wicked:
whom God by his just judgment gives over, that they should believe lies,
which would not receive the love of the truth, as in the second Epistle to the
These. second chap, 10.11. To which rule that cannot deceave, if we examine
those apparitio^s which are said to have been done at Spandavia, Birthinum, and
other places in Germany in the year 1549. those glorious Angels shall be Devils
tra^sformed into Angels of light, as 2 Cor. 11.14. Let it therefore be true,
which the Papists boast of their miracles, and admit that it were done in very
deed, which is put in writing by their men. Yet nevertheless while all those
things do carry away men from the truth to errors and superstitions, they
are wicked, they are lying, wholly of the same kind, of which is this fire
that the Beast brings from heaven.

Saying to the inh^bitans of the earth, that they should make the image of the
Beast: These words as they are in the Greek, may be referred to the Beast
himself, as thou he should say, speaking to the inhabitants of the earth, that
he had made an image of the Beast and c: as though he would render a wonderful
reason of his works, declaring that he had done all things for this intent,
that the former image of the Beast might be revived. Or they may be referred to
the people, as all Interpreters do translate, saying to the inhabitants of the
earth, that they should make etc. as though it were written, saying that they
should make etc. Which is the end of all these miracles, that the first Beast
might be placed in honor with men, and it is in the power of the people to
make this Image. For unless they give honor, there should be no glory for
this Beast. But to make an Image to the Beast, is with the Greeks spoken in
the third case (...) not (...), there is this difference, that a man makes an
image of some body, as a Painter, or Carver of Images, who fashioneth an Image
for gain, or for his mind sake: but he makes an Image to some body, who
makes it for the sake, or honor of some body. But this Image is not any
colored picture, or image made of any matter. For all must be slain, that
will not worship this, in the next verse; but an Image made cannot come unto
all men, unless either it be carried through all countries, or if it shall
have a fixed place, all leave their dwelling places, for to go thither into a
strange country. Furthermore this Image shall effect by his own strength, that
whosoever shall refuse this worship, he may be killed, as in the next verse.
But this power is greater, then can agree either to a picture, or Image,
howsoever we have read that some have spoken at some time by the cunning of
the Devil. Neither are the Images of living men wont to be thrust upon the
people to be worshipped: Images indeed may be set up for living men, but only
for civil honor, not religious worship. Therefore this Image is not any
picture of the body, but a lively and express figure of honor, Kingdom,
power, which the second Beast should carry of the former. For this is that
which the second striveth for, that in his person the first may be revived.
Which his wicked ambition is declared most significantly in this kind of
speaking. For first, when he desires earnestly an image to be put to the first
Beast, by the same he shows, that he does require no new thing, but only
the shadow of that old thing, the truth whereof had bin in former times.
Which cunning we called before, the fained name of Antiquity, above in the
12. verse. From whence also it may be manifest, that the first Beast was not
the Emperors, but only the Pope. For it had been an unjust and impudent
request, if the Pope had challenged openly to himself, the honor of the
Emperors; but he requires nothing but that which was proper to the former
Popes; who would not think that he ought to condescende to so reasonable a
demand? Furthermore this image declares what manner of honor he desires to
obtain among his worshippers, to wit, such as the Idolaters do give to their
Images, for he will sit in the hearts and consciences of men, as an Jdoll, as
it appears manifestly from the adoration, and admiration whereof we spoke
before. He desires him self to be esteemed God; but the Spirit calls him by
a true name, a false God and an Image. The Spirit acknowledges not that
foolish difference between Image and Jdoll, which of late the Idolaters have
forged. But is it not more clear then the light, that superstitious men have
exalted these latter Popes to be certain divine majesty's, and not simply unto
the former glory of the ancient Popes, which seemed to have bin utterly
abolished by the wars of the Goths, and their dominion in Italy? Do not the
same men worship this new framed Image, as an Idol? See those things which
we have spoken at the 6. and 9. verses. Whereunto many other might be added,
unless it were needless in a matter apparent enough to the whole world.

15 And it was given unto him, to give a spirit to the Image: After that men
began to worship the revived Beast, an image of the former, as it were an
Idol, to the end that this who is his crafts master might the more bewitch
the people, he should endue the Image with a vital faculty. He alludeth to the
Devilish arts of the Idolaters, whereby they effected that the Idols should
utter oracles with distinct voices, that they might wrap the minds of men in
greater superstition. So the Pope having once gotten with men the honor of a
divine power, played no longer the part of a dumb person, but forthwith began
to speak, bid, forbid, set up, pluck down, to bless, to curse, to brag
openly, by me Kings do reign: as Hadrian in his Epistle to the Archbishop of
Trevir: Mogent. Coloniens. Whence has the Emperor his Empire but from us?
therefore he reigns by us. Again, that That which the Emperor has, he has
wholly from us. And also, Behold in our power is the Empire to give it to whom
we will: being therefore appointed of God over nations and Kingdoms, that we
should destroy, and pluck up, build and plant. A terrible voice of the
Image, and surely far more terrible, then of the old Beast, whose Image he
is, which never durst mutter any such thing. No marvel though the Canonists
quaking at this voice, do freely profess: that in these things which the
Pope will, his will is to him for a reason, and that yet it may not be said;
why do thou so. At chap. quanto, of the translat. of the Bi^hop. And this is
the third miracle, far more wonderful indeed, the^ if some image or picture
should utter a loud voice: for this is noe new thing, both renowned from
those heathen oracles much spoken of, and also being the accustomed play of the
Magitians: but that this image of the Papists should thunder with so terrible a
voice, it was a thing which the world for good cause should be astonished at. In
this wise therefore we see this Pope a miracle worker, famous for these three
sorts of miracles, by the which even the Papists themselves grant, that
Antichrist should be notably known.

And should cause that as many as will not worship the image: Now unto his
fraud he joyneth violence: for, whom he cannot bring by miracles to worship
him, he compels by punishements. But who is he that should cause, that as
many as will not worship the image of the Beast, should be killed? Doubtless
the Image. For there is the same nominative case of both the verbes, should
speak and should cause. If the Greek be translated word for word, they are
more plain, then as they are expressed commonly in latin; and it was granted
to him to give a Spirit to the image of the Beast, that both the Image of the
Beast should speak, and should cause that as many as would not worship etc.
From which it is manifestly apparent the image is the supposite of the verb
should cause. By which argument we have proved before, that these things are
not to be understood of any image made with hand, which to be of so great
power is a thing uncredible, but of a lively image, which before we said spoke
terribly, who would put to death any, which should refuse to acknowledge his
Godhead. Neither is any ignorant, how great butcheries were made through the
whole world of Christians, because men were not obedient to this Image. The
Emperors themselves being squamish in this matter, sufferred punishment for
refusing this adoration, by the loss of their dignity, yea of their life. What
shall we think came to the other multitude? It would be an infinite thing to
reckon up, and the matter is known well enough: Montanus and Plantine read,
and does cause; against the truth of all other books.

16 And he makes all small etc. The other punishment is of goods, in which
they are punished, who will not receive the mark. And this mark briefly
comprehends all that way, whereby any is kept in subjection to the Beast in
any sort. And it is to be observed, how the Beast requires, that his vassals
should be tied to him by a stronger band, the^ God those of his household to
him A Seal was sufficient for him to touch the top of the skin, with some
light sign. But the Beast will have his mark to sink in more deeply;
whereupon he uses a Character to be engrave^ on the very flesh according to
that affection whereby he is wont more earnestly to urge obedience to man, then
to God. In this verse therefore he declares to whom it does belong to take
upon them the mark, and also in what part. They are all sorts of men, as
shows both the note of generality, and also the distribution of the same.
For he pass^th over none, how contemptible soever and abject, whom he has not
bound to him in some manner. Wisely indeed, seeing small sparkles do kindle a
great fire: Cities are taken in that part very often, which was in least fear,
and eve^ the underminings being neglected, do overthrow the strongest and
highest walls. Are not the Princes constrained to follow the multitude?
Therefore very warily he thought that regard was to be had of small men, poor,
and bond. Which so vigilant and exquisite carefulnes does the more set forth
the glory of Christ in destroying this Kingdom. As touching the words: And
makes all that he may give them a mark etc. It is a short kind of speaking,
but very significant: all one as if he should say; he brings all into that
case, that they willingly receive the mark from his hand. Wherefore in the
translation I thought that I was not to depart from the very words.

That he may give them a mark in their hand etc. Montanus, that they may give
them marks: so Aretas. As though the Beast should compel men to imprint the
marks in themselves: but to make this sense good it should be written, that
they may give themselves. Yet Aretas makes no other sealer then the Beast. But
after he has showed who are to be marked, now he declares in what part, to
wit, either in the right hand, or in the foreheads: In the right hand, to the
end that they should fight valiantly for the Beast to their power. For the
mark is not to be received in the left hand, but in the right hand, being
the stronger, and more ready member. In which manner are marked Emperors,
Kings, and all Magistrates; furthermore the whole Clergy, also the universal
troop of religious men, Professors in Schools, Canonists, Lawyers etc. All
these are soldiers set in the rereward of the band garding the Captain, and
the principal champions of the Beast. The mark is set in the foreheads, that
all may see plainly, to whom obedience is due. In which part all the rest of
the common sort bears the mark. For although they be not of so great
strength as the former, to defend the Beast, yet it is needful, that they
confess him openly, to whose tuition they belong. Wherefore the mark in the
right hand, is a bond of nigher familiarity, both because defense is some
greater thing, then a bare profession, and also because it goes before it in
order and honor. Although the order is changed in the chapter following in the
9. verse, but as it seems to aggravate the thing, as we shall see there.

17 And that no man might buy etc. The force of this mark is, that it may be a
passeport for intercourse of merchandise among me^. How great loss then must
they needs suffer, who because they shall want this privy token, may have to
do or make any bargain with no man? Which thing is ratified expressly in the
Decrees: That no man ought even to speak to these me^ to whom the Pope is an
enemy, Cause. 11. q. 3. If an enemy. And again Distin. q. 3. Gratian; That
obedience is due from all men, to the chief Pope, that none may have any
fellowship with him, to whom he shall be an enemy for his acts: neither shall
he be able to remain in the Church, who fors^keth his chair. To confirm
which things, a forged Epistle of Clemens is alleged; Neither must we here
tarry till one be excommunicated: but if that Clemens be an enemy to any for
his naughty acts, do not you expect that he should say unto you etc. That is,
his beckes are to be observed, that without warning we turn away our selves
from them, with whom we are able to conjecture that the Holy Father is angry.
What more plain prohibitio^ can there be to bargain with them which want
the mark? The practice of this time confirms the same, but more evidently
the former times, when the whole earth wondered at the Beast: for then he that
wanted the mark, had no leave to exercise merchandise with any man.

Save he that had the mark, or the name and c: A distribution of the mark
into three kinds, the mark being put for all, as it comes to pass in
divisions, the name of the Beast, and the number of his name. The mark is the
first and principal token proper to his defenders, and such as are familiar
with him, as it seems, consisting partly in ordaining the Clergy men, in
whom is imprinted an indelebile mark of their perpetual Romish bondage, the
divine providence so governing their tongues, that they should note the
strength of their forged sacrament in those words, by which the mark of the
Beast might be plainly seen of all me^. Partly in the oath, whereby the chief
Emperors, Kings, the other Magistrates, and every condition of men of
something a superior degree is bound to the humble service of the Romish Pope.
So Otto the first in the year 942. swear to Pope John the XII. That he would
exalte to his power the holy Church of Rome, and John the R^^tour thereof,
Distinct. 63. chap. To thee Lord. More fully in the book of Pontifical.
wherein express words the Emperor promises, freely und^rt^k^th, and
warranteth, and swears before God and blessed Peter, that he from henceforth
would be the Protector, Proctour and defendour of the chief Pope, and the holy
Church of Rome etc. Clement. book 2. Title Of the Oath. The Name is the proper
naming of the Beast, given to the rest of the people, as a name derived from
the Fathers or Ancestors, to whom the oath and ceremonies of ordaining did
less co^pete. For the mark either of the oath, or ordination and such rites,
is not printed in all the people (for these belong to the Clergy, Great
States, and others who execute a public office) but there is an other easier,
and readier way, whereby the multitude may profess themselves to be among the
proper goods of the same Lord, to wit, so taking upon them his name, as in old
time servants did: that even as the Prince himself is called Catholic,
Prelate, Pope: so they Catholics, Bishopists, Papists. Of old some of these
names were common, but at length the Pope challenged them to himself; neither
will he have any other to be Catholics now, save those that are of his heard.
And although these names do flow to all his subjects withot difference, yet
the common sort are known by this badge only, the other being marked with a
peculiar mark beside. But what need is there now of a third note? The two
former contain the whole company of vile persons of this Kingdom. There is an
other kind of men somewhat further removed from the Empire of the Beast, then
that which even now I spoke of. Which unless it will be marked at least with
the number of his name, must know, that they are restrained from the use of
any kind of merchandise with the subjects of this Beast. But these seem to be
the Grecians, who unless they would take upon them the number of this name,
should be esteemed banished men from this Empire, and all the emoluments, which
might be gotten in the same. The Number of his name is the very same that a
name expressed by a number, or, that I may so say, a name of number. Which
seeing it shall be made manifest to be Latinus, from those things which shall be
spoken on the next verse, the truth of this Prophecy is wonderfully well
known, even from this part also: for the Beast before time did pursue the
Grecia^s with so great hatred, that although he saw them miserably spoiled of
all their neighbors, would suffer no aid to be carried to them from the
West, until Michaell Paleologus about the year 1273. at Lions in France,
agreed with Gregory the X. to make himself and all his people subject to the
number of the name of the Beast, that is, promised that all his people
hereafter should give all soveraigntie to the Latin Pope. Therefore of the
three marks the Character pertains to great States and the Clergy, as
Sons. The name to the people and common sort, as boundmen. But the number of
his name to the Grecians being strangers.

18 Here is wisdom: he that has understanding etc. Now he exhorts us to
number this name. From which exhortation, if we shall consider it diligently,
some things may be learned, by which we shallbe lead into the true knowledge
of the name. For first, why should he require diligence rather in the number of
the name, then either in the mark, or in the name of the Beast? It is manifest
that this exhortation belongs to the third member. But the Character, or name
of the Beast had served for a more certain knowledge, and made more plain.
Wherefore their affection was to be stirred up rather to the searching out of
these things, from which they might have hope of a greater fruit. The reason why
these are omitted, and that alone is set before us to be considered, seems to
be this, because the number of the name might begin at what time John wrote.
The Character and the name had not yet taken beginning, even as neither the
Beast himself, as we have showed: from whence they came under no accounte, or
understanding. The names indeed of Bishops were common, even in those first
ages: but the state of them then was of an other sort, then after that they
were turned into a name proper to a certain man. The exhortation has respect to
the same end: Here is wisdom: let him that is endued with understanding count
the number: How great a torment had it ben to learned me^ of that age, to assay
a thing altogether impossible? Would they not for just cause have abstained
from the labor of seeking of that thing, to find out which they could have no
hope? The e^devour of diverse of them shows, that this opinion prevailed not
in time past, as though this wisdom should belong to the time to come, in no
wise to their time.

Let this then be the first property; That the number of the name might be
known, even to that age in which John lived, not only to himself by
revelation, but also to another by searching out and study. Secondly it is
expressly delivered that it is the number of a man, that is, such a name of a
man, from whose letters of number, arises this number. Which yet is not the
proper name of the Beast. For it was the number of a man, before the Beast was.
Neither could it remain in one person of a man flourishing at that time, when
John was. For then the counting had been uncertain, doubtful, and impossible.
But it is the name of a nation, passing from one man unto some whole people.

Thirdly, the number showed obscurely and darkely, declares that it was
dangerous at that time to publish this name before all the world. For to what
purpose is this dark showing of the matter but to avoid an unnecessary
offense? Whereunto Paul agrees: but now ye know what withholdeth, 2 These.
2.6. From which it appears that the Apostles taught secretly the Churches
concerning Antichrist, the which was not expedient for to be carried forth
into the wicked world. Not because through fear of danger they thought it were
to be concealed cowardly, but because before the Beast rose up, when his name
yet was not necessary, they would have the Church to be without needless
troubles. A fourth common property ought to be added from the former verse to
these three, which are taken out of this verse; to wit, that this number does
loose them from the bond of prohibited intercourse of merchandise, who do
suffer themselves to be marked with the same. All which now being joined
together have this sum: That the number of name is a numeral name of some
m^n, making the number of six hundred three score six, that might be numbered,
at that time, when this Prophecy was first set out in writing, yet
nevertheless showed but darkely for to avoid unnecessary peril; by which at
length they are delivered from the prohibition of buying and selling, who do
receive the mark thereof. Which description will not suffer any more this name
to be wandering, and uncertain, but shall distinguish some one certain, and
true from all the rest. For as soon as the names shall be examined by this rule
of certain truth, which are brought of Interpreters, we shall find how all
beside one are absurd. Some by a certain property do resemble this number: of
which sort I have known two. The first which Franc. Iunius a most famous man,
and a great light of the Church brings, who will have this number to be the
Popish learning, and the Canon law, as he calls it, especially in the sixth
book of Decretales, added to the five former by Boniface the eight. For this
number is perfect, and diverse times rebounding perfectly from his parts:
neither is there any part of the Popish law, which is not referred to his
head, or contained therein. The Beast teaches this name also, and makes it,
as it were a mark of his people. Yet notwithstanding seeing this name
belongs to the Beast far spent and very old, and not that ancient one,
which was before his beginning, neither the name of any man, it seems less
to agree: especially seeing here is no danger, why a covert speaking of it
should be necessary: neither lastly does this name appertain to the^, who
least do cleave to the Beast, of which sort is the number of the name above
ver. 17; but to the Beasts darlings, the Canonists, who^ the Pope sets much
by. The other is of our most learned country man H. Broughton, Adonikam God is
rise^ up, the name of a man in Ez. 2.13. whose posterity ar counted there 666.
as though John did say, there is the same name of the Beast, which is of that
man, whose posterity are read to be 666. that is, Adonicam.

A name surely very fit, seeing Antichrist vaunteth himself above every name
on earth. But seeing this name signifies no more then that which Paul had
taught before evidently, saying, exalting himself above all that is called
God, 2 These. 2.4. It is not likely that that now should be concealed by a dark
speech, which before was noised through all the Church. What troubles also
were to be feared, if this name had been published? that in the mean time I may
say nothing of this, that the posterity of the same Adonikam, afterward in
Nehemiah are numbered six hundred three score and seven in the 7. chap. ver.
10. The rest of the names (...), in Aretas: in the later writers (...), and the
like, partly are not the names of any man, or at the least not of a people,
partly nothing was to be feared from them, to whose knowledge soever they
should come: Romi^th or Romagnus Roman come nighest of all: but the fourth
property rejects this also, which could not be of force enough to recover the
favor of the Beast. The Grecians willingly acknowledged themselves to be
Romans, and of a long time boasted of this name. Constantinople was commonly
called, New Rome: yet in the mean time they were greatly hated of the Beast,
until at length they did show their consent with the Latins, and yielded the
Primacie to the Latin Pope, Therefore all accounts being cast* I think that
Lateinos is the name which the Spirit here bids us to number. Which is a
name, whose letters after the account of the Grecians, do accomplish this
number, and unto which all the other properties do agree: and so much the
more, because from the Apostles times it has been extended to us, and the event
has so confirmed it, that it is now more clear then the light at noonetyde,
which was dark before. For so Ireneus in his 5. book chap 29. against
heresies, But, says he, the name Lateinos contains the number six hundred
threescore and six: and it is very like to be true, because the most
substantial Kingdom has this name, for they are Latins who now do reign.
But we will not boast of this. Such are his words. As though this were not
the opinion of him alone, but he had received it from another: but from what
other man is it likely, then from Polycarp, whose scholar he was, and he John's
scholar? Such therefore are these Beasts, whose lively image we see in the
Roman Pope, who according to the plain interpretation of the words, the
events of the times, and agreablenes of all things, so fitly without any
violence casts himself into every part of this first pattern, and that even
to the least appearances, and likenesses, that I think the very Papists
themselves cannot doubt any more, who is Antichrist. And thus far concerning
the Dragon and the Beast, according to the consideration of knowledge increased,
which should come under the blowing of the seventh trumpet, for Hitherto do
the thirteen Centuries extend, ending in the year 1300. to wit, in the number
of the name of the Beast, that is, a little after that the matter was brought
to a point with the Grecians, who submitted themselves to the Latin Pope: with
which number of his name the Spirit also concludes this Prophecy of the Beast,
showing a very great consent of the issue in every part.

CHAP. 14.
THEN I beheld, and lo a Lamb stood on mount Sion, and with him an hundredth
forty and four thousand, having his fathers name written on their fore heads.

2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of many waters, and as the
sound of a great thunder: and J heard the voice of Harpers harping with their
harpes.

3 And who did sing as it were a new song before the throne, and before those
four Beasts, and those Elders: and no man could learn that song, but those
hundredth forty and four thousand, to wit, those which were bought from the
earth.

4 These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are virgins:
these follow the Lamb whither soever he goes: these are bought from men,
being the first fruits to God, and to the Lamb.

5 And in whose mouth was found no guile; for they are without spot before the
Throne of God.

6 Then I saw an other Angel flying in the mids of heaven, having an
everlasting Gospel, to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to every
nation, and tribe, and tongue, and people.

7 Saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him: for the hour
of his judgment is come, and worship him which made heaven and earth, and the
sea, and the fountains of waters.

8 And there followed an other Angel, saying, it is fallen, it is fallen,
Babylon that great City, because she gave the wine of the wrath of her
fornication to drink to all nations.

9 And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, if any man
shallworship the Beast and his image, and receave his mark in his forehead, or
in his hand

10 The same shall drink also of the win of the wrath of God, of the pure
wine, I say, which is powered into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be
tormented in fire and brymstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb.

11 And the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore: neither shall they
have any rest day and night, which worship the Beast and his image, and
whosoever receives the printe of his name.

12 Here is the patience of the Saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.

13 Then I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, write, blessed are the
dead which dye for the Lords sake, from henceforth: even so says the Spirit:
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

14 And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sitting
like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his
hand a sharp sickle.

15 And an other Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud voice to
him that sat on the cloud, thrust in thy sickle and reap: for thy time is
come to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

16 Then he that sat on the cloud did thrust his sickle on the earth, and the
earth was reaped.

17 Then an other Angel came out of the Temple, which is in heaven, having
also a sharp sickle.

18 And an other Angel came out from the Altar having power over the fire, and
cried with a loud voice to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, thrust in
thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vineyard of the earth: for
her grapes are ripe.

19 Then the Angel did thrust in his sharp sickle on the earth, and cut down
the grapes of the vineyard of the earth, and cast them into that great wine
press of the wrath of God.

20 And the wine press was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the
wine press, unto the horses bridles, by the space of a thousand six hundred
furlongs.


Analysis.
WE have spoken of the things done by the enemies, it follows in this
chapter concerning the virtue of the citezens, declaring what was the condition
of the true Church, since the time that the battle was ended in heaven, the
Dragon cast forth into the earth, chap. 12.9. and the Beast began to come out
of the Sea, chap. 13.1. Which condition is double, the first is of an host:
where the happy lot of the Saints is declared, from the Captain, the Lamb
standing upon mount Sion. Likewise from the soldiers both defined, and also
selected, ver. 1: furthermore from the joy of the Spirit, expressed by a new
song, ver. 2.3. and the holiness wherewith they are endued, ver. 5. And this
multitude of the Saints is that seed of the woman, scatered here and there in
the world, whith whom the Dragon made war, after that the woman in flying
into the wilderness disappeared, chap. 12.13. The second condition is of
fighting, whereby they go forth into the army: where some ar Emissaries, who the
breaking in being made, do skirmish with Antichrist, and first by the word:
which is done three manner of ways by three Angels following one an other in
order. The first of which does cast upon the earth a general light of the
Gospel, ver. 6.7. The second foresheweth the ruin of Babylon, ver. 8. The
third dispoiled the Beast of his coverings, and sets him in the open light,
by threatening a terrible judgment against them, who setting light by the
judgment, do nevertheless cleave unto him, ver. 9.10.11. But when as the
weak are apaled at the afflictions and torments which they are constrained to
undergo, while they return to the truth, a double consolation is added, one
of John, ver. 12. The other of a voice sent from heaven, whereby the former is
confirmed, ver. 13. And so the first coping is performed by the word. The
second skirmishing is by deed, which is also double: The Harvest, and Vintage:
unto the harvest the servant is furnished with an instrument, ver. 14. with a
commandment ver. 15. and goes about the work, ver. 16. Unto the grape
gathering, the Angel comes forth prepared and in a readiness, ver. 17.
received the commandment from an other Angel, ver. 18. and dispatched the
business, ver. 19.20.

Scholions.
Then I looked, and behold there was a Lamb standing: This Prophecy begins
at that time, wherein the Dragon being cast into the earth, drove away the
woman into the wilderness, chap. 12.13. etc. where more fully the condition of
the Church lying hid is declared, in regard of the clearer knowledge of the
seventh trumpet, as has been observed at the beginning of the 12. chap. The
eleventh chapter touches the state of former things, as it were in one word,
spending all the rest of the Prophecy in the sufferings of two witnesses, as
the chief members: but here more largely is unfolded in what state the
affairs of the whole body were in the mean time, both as touching the safety,
and also in respect of the fortitude of some, by whose conduct a joyful
victory is begun. John therefore repeating the matter from thence, says, that
he saw a Lamb standing on Mount Sion. Which Lamb is Christ, the Son of
God, as is manifest from his correlative in this verse his Fathers name. He
plays the Lamb all this time, patiently sufferring the Dragon and the Beast,
neither punishing them with that severity, that both he was able, and also they
had deserved. And yet notwithstanding he lies not down careless, neglecting
the safety of his people, but stands in readiness to defend them, covering
under his wings the woman, and her scattered seed, that they should receive no
hurt from the enemies. Mount Sion on which the Lamb stands as on a tower or
high hill, is the Church it self, which stands firmly like Mount Sion
against all the force of adversaries. Before it was the Temple, and the holy
Altar, but a small covert to hide in, chap. 11.1. Afterward a wilderness, and
desert, because it had noe clear outward face on earth, chap. 12.6.14. Now it
is called Mount Sion, because it persisteth invincible in the mids of these
te^pestuous storms. A notable confort against either the paucitie, or
deformity.

And with him an hundred forty and four thousand: This band of men is the
same, which was before of the sealed, chap. 7.4. Aretas thinks it to be an
other, because the article having relation thereto is wanting. But it is wont
to be omitted in things very well known, as the woman in John J know that the
Messiah shall come, which is called Christ, chap. 4.25. and many the like.
Verily these, beside the concurrence of the number, have also a name written in
their foreheads* but what is this else then to be sealed? further more, they
sing also a song, which no man could learn but they, ver. 3. Therefore they
are chosen out of the whole company of them that perish: upon whom alone, while
those troubles of the Church continued, Christ bestowed the wholesome knowledge
of himself. Wherefore in all things they are those sealed ones together with
the measured temple, and the woman slying into the wilderness, to be referred
unto that time of the seventh chapter. From hence then see with how great a
train the woman was in the wilderness: and how great a company of Saints were
in the temple with the two Prophets, chap. 11.1.2. Although it be very small,
if it be compared with that, which possessed the holy city, and the court. But
as before time there were unknowen to the world seven thousand men* which
never bowed their knee to Baal, so of late in these last ruins of the Church,
there were an hundred and four and forty thousand Saints in Mount Sion, who
when the rest of the whole world ran after the Dragon and the Beast, were
conversant always together with the Lamb, never departing from his side.

Having his Fathers name: Aretas, the Complut. edition, and another to the same
end read thus, having his name, and his fathers name: so also the old Latin
translation. Which reading, as being more express, seeing we are by Christ
adopted to be sons, and so many copies agreeing, I thought is rather to be
followed. As touching the chief point of the matter, there is no difference;
yet one is more significant then the other. But from hence there is light to
illustrate that in the 7. chap. ver. 3. where mention is made of sealing, but
no showing what manner of ma^ke was imprinted; from this place we learn, that
there was written in their foreheads, that God by Christ was their Father. For
just cause is this made the badge of the Saints, whereby most of all they are
discerned from the wicked of the world, whose manner is, as we see in the
Papists blaspheming the sacred truth, to condemn of arrogance, the filial
confidence. But thou must observe, that there was not any sensible marking, or
if that were granted, that yet it was not the sign of the Cross, but his
Fathers name written in their foreheads.

2 And J heard a voice from Heaven: from Mount Sion, where the Lamb stood with
this multitude, from the Temple, to wit, from the Church. The same thing is
signified by diverse names. In this Mountain only they did bend themselves
with all their power to praise God, the rest of the world following their
wicked, and vain studies. The voice which was heard, is set forth by a triple
similitude, of waters, thunders, and Harpers. Which three fold similitude
notes the progress of the Church. The first voice belongs to the Church
declining, being confused, and not distinct, such as is the noise of waters:
which signifies nothing, teaches nothing, but beats the ears with a certain
unprofitable roaring. For when the woman went first into the wilderness,
although far most learned men flourished in the Church, as Athanasius,
Basilius, Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hieronymus, Augustine and others,
whose very learned works made a great noise through the whole world; how
notwithstanding was all this doctrine in every place not understood, not
perceived of many men, every one nevertheless earnestly inclining to their
superstitions? Yea the teachers themselves did not speak distinctly, and
plainly, sometime preaching righteousness by Christ only, sometime attributing
the same to their own works: sometime taking away free will, sometime leaving
the same whole: in word condemning Idolatry, in very deed stablishing it by
the invocation of Saints, worshipping of relics, and such wicked
superstitions. Certainly there was scarce any point of doctrine, which they did
maintain constantly always in the same manner. Therefore that was a
disordered noise, which rather oppressed the sense, then informed the mind
with profitable knowledge. For as the words of a man giving up the ghost, die
in his jaws, and make no distinct sound for the understanding of the hearers,
so the truth being now ready to die, sounded so confusedly in the conflict of
contrary opinions: that scarce any word of it could be understood. Yet
notwithstanding in this disordered noise, the Saints learned some thing, which
avayled to the furthering of their salvation. If we follow this
interpretation, which the event makes good, you may observe, what is the
judgment of the Spirit concerning the writers of that age, that pure doctrine
can no more be drawn from their writings, then any profitable knowledge be
gathered from the noise of the dashing together of waves. I would have nothing
taken away from their praises: for that which they wanted was long of the time,
not of their learning and wit, wherein they excelled. But I cannot but wonder
at the daintiness of our age, that the good corn being found out, it would
feed again with akers. The second voice is of thunder, roaring, terrible,
making a cracking by certain respites. This voice is proper to the Church
reviving, uttered by the Waldenses, the Albingenses, VVickliefe, and Husse.
These did thunder vehemently, and the world was abashed with the great noise,
but all fear vanished away together with the roaring, while a new violent
sound came suddenly upon them, as it is in thunder, at which men quake no
longer, then their ears are filled with the noise. The voice of Harpers
belongs evidently to the truth restored, immediately before the woman went
out of the wilderness, Confessions being made of the Churches every where,
the Augustane, that of Strasburge, of Basile, of the Swisers, of Saxony, most
sweetly consenting all to one truth. Therefore this threefold voice generally
sets before our eyes the whole course of the doctrine, from the first
lurking of the Church, through all that long reign of Antichrist. From which
we see, how every latter Prophecy is more clear the^ the former. First the
assembly of the faithful was showed by the sealing, chapter 7. Afterward by the
covering place in the Temple, chap. 11. Thirdly, by the flight into the
wilderness, chap. 12. Now more fully in this manner that we have heard, and
shall be more evident in the particular exposition.

3 And which did singe as it were a new song: and do sing, by the defect of
the article, and which did sing, for and singing. A new song, is the praising
of God by Jesus Christ, through whom the elect are made children. It is called
new, not because men now first began, to be, and to be counted the sons of
God, but because in the true Christian Church this grace is communicated to
far more, then in any place else before the communicating of the Redeemer, and
confirmed by more plentiful arguments. In which manner we are said to have
received the Spirit of adoption, Romans 8.14. not because we first have received
it, but because more plentifully then before this time. Or there is a double
song, ever since the first beginning of things, an old, and an dew. The first
praised God, because we were made sons by creation as Adam before his fall:
the second extolleth God with praises, for that we are made children by
redemption. This is a new song, because it is latter, although all the elect
have used the same from the beginning. It is sunge before the Throne, the
Beasts, and the Elders; because chiefly this praising is done in the public
assembly of the faithful: although this assembly was in the wilderness, and
not perceived of the world. Or it is sunge before the Throne, because whosoever
professes this faith in truth, he belongs to the assembly of the elect,
although the difficulty of the times, sufferred not public congregations to
be gathered, in which they might acknowledge the same thing freely.

And no man could learn that Song: Through all the space that the Church lay
hid chap. 12.6. For now the multitude of the faithful was certain, definite,
and that might easily be numbered, they being picked out from every Tribe, which
should sing this new song, above in chap. 7 For as once God separated the
twelve tribes of Israelites to be his people, from the rest of the whole world,
neither could any stranger join himself unto that company, until the
partition wall was broken down: so now has God disjoined the false
worshippers from his, by the strong walls of the courts: of which these are
thrust up into the inward temple, as into a certain straight and narrow prison;
they in the mean time rejoicing in their outward and larger court, chap. 11.2.
VVo could not, or at least would not conceive, what the Saints did sing
within: but with a certain bastard melody, made a great noise, praising God
for their adoption, but made partly by Christ, partly by their own strength:
showing by this thick Sibol^th of what kind they are, Judges. 12.6. There
should be the^ a very small number in respect of the other multitude of them
that did sing this song for a certain time. Yet after Antichrist should
begin to decrease by little and little, the number of the faithful should
increase daily, in so much that at length it could not be numbered, chap. 7.9.
In this wise is the joy of the Spirit; their holiness is described in the other
words, and first, that they are bought from the earth, that is delivered of God
from the false and counterfeit Church, as it were out of the mids of a
burning fire, to wit, by the woonted signification of the word earth.

4 These are they which are not defiled with women: Well has Aretas observed,
that these things are not spoken against marriage. For what defiling can be
there, where the bed is undefiled? Heb, 13.14. Was this company unmaried, and
only of Priests? Nay marriage in time past was not forbi^dden even unto the
Levites, neither is this number made of the Tribe of Levi alone, chap. 7.4.
etc. Certainly neither were the Christian Elders without wives until
Hildebrand, who to the end that his Clergy might not be defiled with chaste
marriages, opened a way to Sodomitry. But peradventure there was none in this
multitude, defiled either by the spots of unlawful company, or by the
infirmity of the flesh. Shall we think that repentance is waxen so frail
since Christ came, which before he took upon him flesh, had such power to
cleanse? Wherefore it cannot be that women should be taken properly in this
place: but to be defiled with women, is as much as to worship Idols: whereunto
we know that, to commit fornication, is referred every where in the
scriptures, as, they go a whoring after their Gods, Exodus 34.14. And in
Ezechiell, thou have played the whore with the Sons of Aegypte; that is, thou
have worshipped the Gods of the Egyptians; and so in many other places.
According to which rule, not to be defiled with women, is the same, as not to
worship the Gods of women. Who then are these women? the Locusts, the people of
the Angel of the bottomless pit, the army of the Rom^ne Pope, which had
hair, as the hair of women, chap 9.8. These bought from the earth, consented
not to the same Idolatry with the Locusts women, neither worshipped their King,
adoring either the Beast, or his Image, or in receiving his mark in their
forehead, or hand; or if peradventure for a time they were carried away with
the common error, yet at length they renounced the same by repentance, which
does so wipe away all sins, as if they had never been defiled with them.

They follows the Lamb, whither soever he shall go: Obeying their Captain
Christ in all things, and hearkening to his commandments only. Montanus
inserteth for, thus, for whither soever he shall go etc.

These are bought from men: By the merit of Christ's blood, saved from the
general contagion, and chosen out of the multitude of those that perished;
least any should attribute salvation to them from that integrity, which was
mentioned even now. That purity was not sufficient to salvation, so far as it
is inherent in themselves, but the price paid by Christ.

The first fruits to God: In respect of the exceeding great multitude, which
at length should embrace the truth, darkness being put away, chap. 20.5.6.
etc.

5 For they are without blasme: God sees noe uncleanness in them, upon whom
he puts the most pure robe of his Son; in him does he behold the elect, in
the imputatio^ of whose righteousness consists this most pure integrity of
theirs, not in the perfection of their own virtue. Aretas omitted before the
throne of God, and puts in the place of it, that which is taken from the
former words, these are they that follow the lamb.

6 Afterward I saw an other Angel: Hitherto the general constitution of the
whole Church, in as much as it pitched the tents with the Lamb: now follows
the battle begun by a few citizens: and first by those who do set upon the
Beast by the word. For about the end of a thousand years, after the first
flight of the woman into the wilderness, as shall be clearly manifest from the
twentieth chapter, the Lamb sent forth some light harnessed soldiers, who
riding about the camp of Antichtist, should provoke him to battle; and should
endure his first assault. These three ar Angels, the first of which were those
famous men, who rose about the year 1300, Ockanus, Marsilius Patavinus,
Johannes de Ganduno, Arnold^s de Villa Nova, Dantes, Petrarcha, and especially
John Wicklefe an Englishman, whose doctrine was more fruitful, then of the
rest, did sink in more deeply, and took such roots, that it could never be
rooted out since that time: one Angel only is here rehearsed, the type of whom
I do apply to many learned men, because in such signs of future things, the
agreement rather of the things is regarded, then the unity of the persons: he
flies through the mids of heaven, because the truth now at length after a
long time being revived, drew with it yet much filth of the earth, by which
burden being pressed down, it could not straightway fly up into heaven, that
is, it could not attain at the first to the celestial purity, but shaking the
wings it abode in the mids between both: see chap 8.13. Hence it was, that,
that holy man, although he knew assuredly the truth in many things, by whose
swift wings he flying up aloft, left the common sort of men far beneath on
the earth, yet he was blind in some things, and much deceived, so as he sat
in the lowest seats of the Saints hitherto. Therefore the first beginnings of
the Church rising again seteth this Angel in the same place, where Gregory the
Great was set, about the time almost of her greatest ruin, as we have showed
at the 8. chap. ver. 13.

Having an everlasting Gospel: That is, the doctrine of salvation by faith in
Christ only, as God has ordained by his eternal decree. It is called
eternal, as though purposely the Spirit would meet with the offe^se of those
times, that the truth restored should in every place be condemned of novelty:
but he declares that it is eternal, whatsoever men prate; which should now
shine upon the world by their labor: together also he signifies by the same,
that the eternal truth had been banished from the earth before, thrust out by
humane inventio^s. Let men therefore see how much they are deceived, who do
traduce, as new sprunge up, that which was before all ages: but do often
vaunt that their own dreams, which the Kingdom of darkness brought forth but
yesterday, are as it were of very great a^tiquity. This Angel has the Gospel
to the end that he should preach it to the inhabitans of the earth, that is,
to the earthly citizens, and before this light was brought of that whorish
Church. To whom now power should be given to open their eyes, and to harken to
the Heavenly truth.

Saying with a loud voice: Now he comes unto the sermon of the Angel, so
much the more to be observed, because it is the first of the voices, which the
seven thunders uttered in chap. 10.4. for it belongs to the same time. Those
Tunders followed the Turkish tyranny, to which they are added in the tenth
chapter, or rather began with it, and are contained within the compass of the
second woe, as appears from the eleventh chap. ver. 14. This combat of the
Angels began at the same time, as we shall make more plain at the 20. chap.
ver. 4.5. But in this very chapter, of that threefold voice, whereby is noted
the proceeding forward of the Church, the second is like a thunder, ver. 2.
Which second voice is begun by this battle undertaken of the Angels, as has been observed before: and so rejoices in the name of thunder, whereof mention
was made in the 10. chap. ver. 4. The Spirit would not have these words to be
related before, thereby showing the deafenes of those ages (to which these
voices belongs) which in hearing heard not: which yet at the sound of the
seventh trumper, when they were past, should be known most plainly: for which
cause they are reserved to this time.

7 Fear God, etc. The argument of the sermon was most fit, when all reverence
toward God lay wholly quenched, in comparison of that which the commaundem^nts
of m^n did teach: according to that of Isaiah, This people draws near to me
with their mouth, and honors me with their lips: but they have remooved
their h^rt f^rre from me, and their fear toward me is that which they have been taugh^ by the commandment of men, chap. 29.13. So when VVicklefe came
forth into the midst, they trembled in every place at the commandments of
men, but the commandments of God were despised with out fear. If any had not
ben present at the sacrilegious Mass, had not numbered certain prayers upon
beads, nor abstained from meats forbidden on set days, and had not performed
other such foolish and ungodly ceremonies, he thought he had committed some
heinous wickedness: but if the same man knew not God and his sacred truth, had
no trust in his mercy through Christ, went to Saints for refuge, and after as
he was in any distress, defiled the holy name of God almost at every word,
and violated other duties of true godliness, he fell no sting of conscience.
From hence therefore for just cause the holy Angel began his preaching, that he
might revoke me^ from a false fear, to the knowledge of the true God. Consider
the doctrine of John VVickliefe condemned in the Council of Constance, thou
shall see how greatly he labored to overthrow humane toys, and to teach
necessary godliness.

For the hour of his judgment is come: So the Angel in chap. 10.7. avoucheth
that the finishing of the mystery was at hand, from which we see how this
Angel sou^deth again as an Echo to the very great crying out of him, as in the
same place ver. 3. And it could not be, but that he should vehemently admonish
men of the most grievous judgment of God hanging over their heads, when he saw
horrible impiety to bear sway every where. Which judgment began to be showed
in that same hour in that first resurrection, of which in chap. 20.5. At which
the Papists for just cause might have trembled, unless they had hardened their
hearts, seeing they might have acknowledged from that slipping away of men to
the truth, which they saw to be every day more and more, both their old
impiety, and also that most just punishments were prepared for the^, u^lesse
they repent betime.

And worship him that made heaven. An other chief point of the sermon, that
men forsaking Idolatry would convert unto the true God. Whom he describes by
the works of creation, who at that time should find the world, the Creator
being despised, giving divine honor to Gods made with hands, to wood, stone,
painted Images, as chap. 9.20. And many harkened to the Angel. For from that
monstrous Idolatry me^ perceived the foulenes of that whole corrupt religion.
But when the rest would not be amended, God sent the Turks into the world, as
we have showed at that place even now spoken of. Yet see his exceeding great
mercy, who before he would let loose the raines unto them, sent this Angel, who
by words should turn men if it might be from their ungodlines, to the end
that by their repentance he also might turn away his scourge. Should he yet
after so long patience deal by admonishing, rather then by striking? But such
is the incomprehensible goodness of our God, that he punishes not before
extreme necessity does plainly compel him. He bridled therefore the Turks,
which then began to be dreadful, that they should bring no great damage to
our Europe, until the Angel had executed his office. Which when it was in
vain with the most part, what should stay the rod any longer?

And an other Angel followed: The Complut. edition and the Kings bible have,
and another second Angel followed. The second Angel prophecieth of the fall of
Babylon, that is, of the city of Rome, and Romish power, as is manifest from
chapter 17.5.9.18. He speaks of futur things, as of those that were past, after
the manner of the Prophets, because it is no less certain, which is foreshewed
to be hereafter, the^ if it had bin already effected. Though he does not only
give knowledge of a future thing, but also shows a thing begu^ at this
sermon. This Angel are those Ministers of the following age. The chief among
which were John Husse, and Hierome of Prage, who fought valiantly against the
Primacy of the Pope, as we may see in the Articles condemned in the Council of
Constance. Him they desired to thrust out of his Antichristian throne, together
with whom Babylon Rome must needs fall down. Neither could it be that the Pope
should long escape, whose beginning was wicked, his increase worse, and his
ripeness no longer to be borne with, as these two holy men made apparent. They
preached about the year 1414, and did shake the Romish tyranny somewhat more
forcibly then Wickliefe: which also the Spirit did signify should be, making
every Angel following, a more fierce enemy then the former. Worthily did they
cry out that Babylon was fallen, when Bohemia being enlightened by their
sermons, forsook straightway the Pope of Rome, and destroyed every where the
Monasteries, the habitations of the Romish superstitions. Which beginning was a
famous proof of the whole ruin at length, which they saw would be shortly,
whereof they should receive a most sure pledge in this first beginning.

Because of the wine of the wrath: That is, the wine of fornication, whereby
she has provoked God to wrath. This wine is Idol^try, which superstitious men
drink up no less sweetly, then most pleasant liquor. Rome gave this wine to
all nations. Who knows not that Rome vaunteth that she is the mother of all
Churches? Which thing is most true, if we regard superstitions, error,
Idolatry, and all the other corruption, all which in general the whole West
part sucked from Rome, as it were from the mothers breasts. But she shall be
punished shortly for her wickedness, which thought it not enough to corrupt her
self, u^lesse she poisoned all the rest of the nations with the contagion of
her impiety. The Complutent edit. and the Kings Bible do omit the conjunction
causall for, eve^ as also the word city in those that go next before, with
which agrees the common translation, but that it has the relative in stead of
the conjunction. Aretas reads as our copies: but this diversity changes not
the meaning.

9 And the third Angel: and an other third Angel, as some copies have it. The
third should be the strongest of all. He should not only nippe Antichrist with
most grievous words, but also most severely threaten destruction to all, who
will not depart from the humble service of him. This Angel was Martin Luther,
that began openly to traduce Antichrist, about the year 1517, who detested
this infection more bitterly, by how much through the revelation of the Spirit
of God he had more sure knowledge of the filthiness of the Romish Beast. The
Spirit here attributes to him a troublous sermon, and full of tumult. And
indeed there is no man, who has tasted the works of that holy man, to whom
they seem not to cast a savor of the heavenly truth: they are in every place
so hot and earnest, and do flame with a certain fiery heat: yea he came some
time to that fervency, that he could not stay himself from foul and unchaste
similitudes. Many desired a greater moderation and modesty: but from hence we
may see, with what inward motion he was carried. The world was sick of a great
drowsy disease; which could not be shaken of unless he had spoken vehemently,
dealt roughly, and stung them. Of which labor he received happy fruit. Men
were wakened out of sleep by his warnings, and seeing in what great danger
they were by worshipping the Beast, they delivered themselves from his snares,
as soon as they could. Therefore they forsook the author of their evil, and
fled unto the salutary truth. A matter of a great troble and stir. But a
wheel is not turned about without noise, and the Spirit in some part does
manifest the trouble that followed by this very great earnestnes of the sermon.

If any shall worship the Beast: He deals in earnest, and cutteth to the
quick. The sum of the sermon is contained in this conditional proposition,
if any shall worship the Beast, he procures to himself eternal destruction:
The antecedent part is found in this verse, the consequent is declared by the
two sequents. As touching the worship, it is set forth first by a double
subject, the Beast and his Image. The Beast, simple and unskilful men do
worship, who are carried with the present glory of things: His Jmage, the more
learned and skillful, who see further, and worship the present Beast, for the
reverend antiquity of succession, and that ancient image renewed in this that
is present. Both are in the same state, unless they repent. Before, the
worshipping of the Image was common to all, chap. 13.15. but where in some
respect it is distinguished from the adoration of the Beast, it seems to
consist in this diffe^e^ce of learned and unlearned. Afterward the manner of
worshipping is declared: which is done two ways, by receiving the mark,
either in the forehead, or in the hand. In the forehead are marked the common
sort of men, who by a naked profession do acknowledge their humble service.
In the hand, the Princes, Peers, the whole route of Ecclesiastical men, and
the rest of that sort, whose duty is to maintain the Beast to their power.
Why then is the order changed, and the first place given to the mark in the
forehead, to which the second was before, as which place belongs to men of
less reckenning? chap. 13.16. Surely that the greater condemnation of those
defenders may be showed, as though he should say, Every one shall be tormented
with fire and brymstone, who has but received the mark in the forehead, much
more they which have received it in their hand. But why is noe mention made of
the number of his name? Because this token is proper to the Grecians, who
should worship the Beast by their consenting with the Latin Church, chap.
13.17. But this Angel was appointed for the people of the West part:
especially Greece also being destroyed by the desolation of the Turks. But
thou must observe, that this worshipping is performed not by falling down on
the ground, but by ac^nowledging a soveraigntie, in which manner they may
worship, who never saw the Beast.

10 He shall drink also of the wine of the wrath of God: The consequent part
of the conditional proposition describes the destruction of them who worship,
both by the kind of punishment in this verse, and also by the eternity
thereof, in the verse following. That first is set forth allegorically in the
beginning of the verse; after it is declared by proper words in the other
part. To drink of the wine of the wrath, seems to be a metaphore made by
antanaclasis or reciprocation unto the wine of fornication: whereby idolatry is
signified, wherewith men are delighted no less, then with the pleasantnes of
wine. As therefore men rejoice in their sins, so God shall rejoice no less
in punishing them: for he shall mix for them the wine of his wrath, according
to that in Deuteronomy. 28.63. Or the reason may be taken from them that do kill
wicked men by poisonned drinks, as once the Athenians, and other people, and
at this day the Turks. But what is this pure wine mixed? These things seem to
be contrary: a thing is said to be mixed, which is powered in for him that shall
drink, although it be not allayed with water: but that exposition seems to
me to be more probable, which will have diverse pure wines to be mixed
together; which mixture does much sooner cause drunkenesse, and makes a
greater disturbance of the body. Water being mingled alayeth the strength of
pure wine; which tempering is not fit to signify the very great severity of
punishment. Let therefore the mixed pure wine be judgment without mercy to the
unrepentant.

He shall be tormented in fire and brymstone: These things more properly do
note, that the punishment shall be like that, which of old was of Sodom. A
sorrowful spectacle whereof is yet at this day to be seen in the world in the
ashy earth, and in the stinking lake. A visible mark doubtless of an eternal
punishment. This punishment shall be taken before the Angels and the Lamb,
that the torment may be the more grievous, by how much it is more known to
their enem^^s.

And the smoke of their torment: These things do declare the eternity of the
punishment: for the smoke of the torment shall be eternal. But the smoke is
taken for fire, of which it is a token. Here it is used, for to teach that the
worshippers of the Beast shall not only be tormented for ever, but also that
their torment shall never be hid from the Saints, who at least shall see
always the smoke thereof. As touching that he says they shall have no rest day
nor night, by the same he shows that their torment shall be continual also,
beside that it shall be eternal. The repeating again of the antecedent of the
conditional proposition, belongs to the earnestness of this sermon: where
he makes mention only of the mark^ of his name, it is because this badge is
common not only to them who are marked in the forehead, but also to them who
receive the mark in their hand. Wherefore o ye Papists consider diligently,
how horrible punishment abides you, unless you forsake the Pope of Rome.
These stinging words of Martin Luther were not of a man, and of an angry
adversary, but which the Holy Ghost ministered unto him. Ye see that the man was
sent from the ca^pe of Christ himself. And think not that these threats are
dead with him, but let your ears ring with the same continually. For they live
at this day, and shall no less have their force for ever, threatening eternal
destruction to every one who do yet worship that Romish Idol. Yea a more
grievous punishment is prepared for men, by how much the ungodlines of the
Popes chair is more apparent: let every one hear, who regards his eternal
salvation.

12 Here is the patience of the Saints: These things perteine to consolation,
which the Angel uses with the same as a conclusion shutting up his sermon.
Albeit they may be the words of John, adding these things after his manner like
an acclamation. But it skilleth little whose of these two they were. The speech
is defective, for, here is the trial of the patience of the Saints: here is
the trial of them that keep the commandments of God. For now it should
appear, who were endued with true patience, and who performed the duties of
unfeigned godliness. Antichrist should be driven into such rage by the
preaching of Luther, that it was neddfull for men to be godly indeed, that
would endure stoutly his assault, and yet not forsake their profession. Of
which fury Germany is witness, which from hence did wholly abound with
murders, and the blood of the godly, chap. 11.7. And no less our England for
her part, which the^ every where did burn with the fires of the faithful.
What were the horrible sloughters of France? the ashes of Merindoll and
Cabrieres are a sign of most outrageous cruelty. Now was there need of virtue,
without which none could stand. And that we may know in how great da^^er
things were, we read that the very Captains and sta^derd-bearers quaked for
fear. How timorous was H. Melanctho^, until Luther raised him up, and
comforted him? The like fear without doubt apaled many men.

13 Then I heard a voice from heaven: The other consolation is of a voice sent
from heaven. For to the end that the Saints should be more pro^pt to undergo
danger, it is avouched from heaven, that the utmost trouble which the wicked
can bring upon the faithful, is present happiness to them: and that it shall
not be in vain, although it seems otherwise to the world, that they do
throw themselves into so great perils for the trueths sake: for their works
should follow them, of which they should receive straightway a most sweet
fruit, and obtain at length a most blessed and ample reward. Neither is it
without cause, that there is so express mention of the time, from this time,
from now, that I may so say: the common translation has, from now. Theod. Beza
thinks that this member is to be joined necessarily with blessed, to which he
adds next, blessed from hence forth etc. But it seems that it is not to be
put out of the place, which the Spirit advisedly gives to it, joining it with
which die, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth. Not but
that the dead in former ages also were blessed, but because these times
required necessarily this special comfort. As long as they had to do with the
Heathen persecuting Christ in his members professedly, no man could doubt, but
that he ought to spend his life in that cause. But in the combat with them who
boasted that they alone were true Christians, justly the more simple might
doubt, whether they should resist unto blood. Therefore to the end that the
Spirit might take away this scruple, and that the faithful should not doubt to
die in this conflict, he pronounces them happy who die from henceforth, as
though he should say, a crown of celestial glory does remain no less for
all those who die in the fight against the Beast, then for those who for
Christ's sake were slain before time by the Heathens; words full of confort.
And so indeed it came to pass in the Church restored after the year 1543,
after the Parliament of Aquen, against them of Merindoll and Cabriers, and many
others having sufferred calamities in France: when a rumor also was spread
abroad, of the entreprises of the Emperor, and of the Pope against religion:
for then many weak brethren being amazed at the dangers present and expected,
began to think by dissembling their religion, to provide for their goods and
life. Which thing fear persuaded them to be lawful by the example of
Nicodemus. Against this great fear, a voice sounded from heaven, when certain
writings full of holiness were published by John Calvin, of avoiding
superstitions, and an excuse to the Nicodemites: in which by most strong
arguments he disprooveth that weakness, and proves a necessity of testifying
our religion openly, whatsoever dangers shall be near at hand: that the glory
of God ought to be more precious to us, then this frail life, which to speak
properly, is no other thing then a shadow. Which judgment other holy men also
confirmed by their writings, Philip Melancthon, Martin Bucer, Peter Martyr, and
the whole Church of Zuriche, as we may see in the Opuscules of Calvin. This is
that voice from Heaven.

14 And J looked and behold a white cloud: Thus far the three Angels
fighting by the word; now a fact is added, and engines are brought forth to
begin the ruin of Babylon. Which preparation is double, the Ha^vest and
Vintage: The harvest is the gathering of the good, according to that saying of
Christ, the harvest is great, but the laborers are few: pray therefore the
Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his harvest: Mat.
9.37. And it is set forth in three verses: the preparation whereof is in two
Angels, one the Prince ver. 14 and the other an Administer ver. 15. Whose
labor is joined together as a double thu^der apaling with a double crack, one
by and by following an other; afterward follows the execution ver. 16. As
touching the words, a cloud hanging aloft signifies a certain highness,
such as are honors, dignities, Magistrates, Principalities, and such like: to
which an high place is granted among men, though not the highest, seeing the
clouds do stay beneath the sky. Which signification is confirmed by that
which was spoken before of the two Prophets, who rising from the dead, went up
into the Heaven by a cloud, that is, were earryed unto the due height of
dignity, by the help of certain inferior Princes, chap. 11.12. A white,
clear, and cheerful cloud betokens gentle, merciful, and comfortable
principalities. One setting like to the Son of man, is a certain chief man
placed in this high degree of dignity. The ambiguity of which phrase has
carried away some Interpreters into a contrary opinion. Commonly it is wont to
be taken of Christ, but by prefixing the articles, of which here are none.
Furthermore seeing this like to the Son of man does nothing, but at the
commandment of an other, it cannot agree unto Christ: he is therefore a man of
our state and condition: whose form being represented to John, resembling the
Image of a future man, worthyly is said to be like to the Son of man. The
golden crown notes his Kingly dignity, which is of a larger dition then a
Magistrates of a city. The sharp sickle in his hand shows a faculty and
readiness to cut down. We shall see the application straight way, after the
unfolding of the general matter and sense of the type.

15 And an other Angel: An other beside the three former; and the fifth in
number from him sitting in a cloud: this comes out of the temple, a citizen,
and as is likely, a Minister, and Pastor of a purer Church, whose office is
not so much to reap with his own hands, as to stir up him that sits on
the cloud to the labor, both by the faculty given him of God, and also by the
opportune ripeness of the corn. Hereupon he bids him to put in his sickle,
and reap. For now the time to reap is come. The thing being attempted before,
obtained no joyful issue, because yet the time was not fit; but now God
would prosper their godly endeavors. It is to be observed, seeing that this
Angel comes out of the inner temple, not the exterior court (which
partition was made in the eleventh chapter) that the Spirit is yet employed in
a more full declaration of the same time, to wit, of the Church lying hid, and
shut up in a narrow place, as we have showed at the first verse of this
chapter.

16 Then he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth: The
thing is put in execution, and wants not success, the corn falling of his
own accord before the sickle through the great ripeness of it. The word earth
was taken before commonly in the worse part. In which signification it may note
that those, who before were inhabitans of the earth, that is, members of the
earthly Church, which is very far off from the true and heavenly, shall be
gathered now at length into the bundels of the more pure corn in this harvest;
or if the harvest be only of the reprobate, so as that these alone are cut
down with the sickle: the meaning of the vision comes to the same end, but
that former sense is more natural. For it declares that at length there
should arise confortable Princes and Magistrates, who by the persuasion and
exhortation of godly Ministers, should gather from Antichristian superstition,
their subjects into the true Church, and the sincere profession of wholesome
doctrine, but should drive away the contrary impiety and the practisers thereof
out of their coasts. Such white clouds were Saxony, Misnia, Hassia, Prussia,
the free cities, Strasburge, Zurich, Berne, Geneve, Basil etc. They that sat
on these clouds were Frederike of Saxony, Mauritius, Philip the Lantgrave,
Ioachimus of Brunswike, Albert of Brandeburg Princes. The Senate of Zuriche, of
Auspurge, of Berna, of Geneva, and the rest. The Angel coming out of the
Temple, is Iustus Jonas, Philip Melancthon, Nicolas Amstorfius, John Dulcius,
which were persuaders of Frederik Duke of Saxony for to abrogate the private
Mass, and to begin reformation. Likewise Zuinglius, Bucer. Capito, Blaverus,
and the other holy men in their places. The sickle put on the earth, are the
hands of Princes and Senators of cities, put forth for the amending of
corruptions: to wit, when the Mass was abrogated at Wittenberg, in the year
1521. the Idols, Images, and Altars being taken away out of the whole dominion
of the Tigurines, in the year 1523: and more over a few years after when there
came a more perfect reformation, the day and year of superstition abolished,
were written on pillars with letters of Gold. When in all the places above
rehearsed the reapers did bend to the work stoutly, striving who might do
best in cutting down wicked superstition, and in pulling up darnell by the
roots, for which before, they were not able to see the corn, they did so
bear sway in the whole field. This harvest was begun about the year 1521,
and was hotely applied by the space of ten whole years next after and more:
it followed Luther by and by, who a little before the reformation was begu^,
thought it needful for fear of the Emperors proscription, to hide himself
in a more secret place. While he then lay hid, an other Angel took this office
upon him to exhort him that sat upon the cloud, to thrust in his sickle on
the earth, by taking away Idolatry, and gathering together the godly as
handfuls into holy assemblies, as has been declared. Neither is this an
allusion like to be true, but such an application as the regard of the time
requires necessarily. The Church lay hid yet in the temple, as is manifest by
the Angels, which come out from thence. But about the end of the limited time
of a thousand two hondreth and threescore years should be the harvest and
vintage following; to which moreover the last place is given in this Prophecy,
because after all the former things were finished, these also should be
performed in their time. And all these things most fitly agree to that
application, which I have brought: neither shall any by searching out find
either any other Angel, or harvest also, that every think may agree
necessarily with themselves.

17 And an other Angel. So was the harvest, the vintage follows as it is
wont. But this is proper to the wicked, as that was to the godly. For the
Saints are well compared to wheat and corn, the profitablest things, and
most necessary things: which by the solidnesse of their fruit, resemble fitly
the soundness of good men, who are more profitable for their use, then goodly
in outward show. But the full, and swelling dainties of grapes do most aptly
declare the present felicity of the wicked. The Harvest belonged to Germany,
and brought us to the year 1520: this vintage is proper to our England, so
wonderfully agreeing to the things here done, both in the course of time, and
co^grue^cy of all the matter, that it is not to be doubted, but that the Spirit
pointed with the finger to these grapes. Which that we may perceive more
easily, every thing is to be considered apart. There is both a preparation and
also an execution of this vintage. That belongs to 2 Angels ver. 17.18.
joined together in labor, as those in the harvest, which in like sort do
thu^der with a double crash. The execution is done first by pruning the vine,
and casting the clusters of grapes into the wine press, v. 19. after by
treading the wine press, v. 20.

The shredders are two Angels companions, conversant in the same Temple, that
is, both free citizens of the true Church yet lying hid. For it was not yet
freed from her narrow straights, although the Gentiles in the mean time
reigned in a great assembly in the court, and holy city. Which is diligently to
be observed, seeing the place of the Angels manifests also the time when the
thing was done, and as it were bears a candle before us, to put away
darkness. Touching the first Angel mention is made particularly in this
verse, that he had a sharp sickle, that is, power to cut off the clusters of
grapes, and to prune the vine, in which thing he should carry himself
courageously, as the sharp sickle declares. But he neither sits on a
cloud, neither has a crown on his head, as the Angel of the harvest, ver.
14. Whether are these things set down once in common, to be tra^sferred
hither? Or whether rather this Angel does not attain that degree of dignity in
which the former was: but that it is of a somewhat lower class and degree?, So
it seems, seeing it is not a safe thing to add any thing to the words
inspired of God, but upon most certain reason. Therefore this Angel is Thomas
Cromwell, in the days of K. Henry the eight most mighty Prince, a man with us
most famous, Earl of Essex, keeper of the Great Seal: who came out of the
Temple, which is in heaven, a sincere favourer of pure religion. He had a
sickle, being appointed the K. deputy in matters Ecclesiastical, did apply the
same sharply and lustily to the work: yet not endued with any either crown or
diadem, being rather a minister of another power, then an author of his own.

18 And an other Angel came out of the Altar: The second Angel is described by
a threefold property, that he comes out of the Altar, that he has power over
fire, and that he exhorts his fellow Angel to cut the vine. Touching the
first, it is said significantly to come out of the Altar. For so the Greek
has out of the Altar. Theod. Beza translateth from the Altar, which expresses
not the force of the speech sufficiently. A man comes from a thing, nigh to
which he was: but out of a thing, within the compass whereof he was
contained. But how can he come out of the Altar? This may be understood from
chap. 6.9. I saw, says he, under the Altar the souls of them, which had bin
killed. This kind then of speaking declares that this Angel is an holy
Martyr, such as they are who have a place under the Altar. But they that lie
under the Altar, must needs come out of the same, when they go any whither.
But whereas there are many kinds of Martyrdom (for some are consumed by
sword, some by an halter, some by wild beasts, other some by fire) that it may
be understood of what sort this Martyr is; it is added, that he has power over
fire, that is to say, that he sufferring and overcoming the torment of fire
(for this is to have power over fire) he gave testimony to the truth. But that
in the third place he cries to him that has a sickle, it is taught that this
Martyr is described to be such an one, rather because of the future combat,
then passed victory. For a Martyr that is dead cannot exhort to any excellent
great act. The example of his constancy, may stir up the mind to the like
courage: but it is not granted him to instruct by word unto any peculiar
actions, as this of pruning the vine is, unless he were living together with
us. This exhortation therefore puts us in mind, that Martyrdom was at length
to be endured of him, not that he had sufferred it before, when he exhorted to
these things. All which circunstances joined together, lead us unto Thomas
Cranmer Archbishop (as they call him) once of Canterbury. This was a notable
Martyr, having power over fire, to which he gave his body to be burned for the
truth. Whose power over fire was so much the more famous, because first having
fallen by humane infirmity, in subscribing to a wicked opinion, repenting by
and by, and revoking his subscription, when he was brought to the fire, he
would have his right hand first to endure the burning flame, because it had been so ready an instrument of wickedness, which being consumed at length, he
gave his body to be devoured in the same flames. He cries with a loud cry to
him that had the sickle, because in the time of King Henry the eight he stirred
up Thomas Cromwell by his words to make this grapes gathering. For being
excellently learned, and burning with an ardent zeal, he could not but hasten
forward the work to his power, and inflame him, whom he saw to be endued with
the power to do it.

19 Then the Angel thrust in his sickle. Thus far the preparation, now the
execution is accomplished in cutting down the grapes of the vineyard. Which
Vine is the shining and Princely glory of the Popish Church: the felicity
whereof was great among us in time past, even as in every other: it swelled
with full and read grapes, it hung on railes aloft and made fast together,
overshadowing the whole earth on every side with large branches, and thick
clusters of grapes. For it is known (the rubbish do yet testify) how all
fruitful hills were planted with these wild vines all our Island through, how
deep roots they took, and with how far spread branches, they did so stop
up the Sun, that it could no where shine on the corn. But when it pleased
God at length to punish this wicked people, he raised up Henry the VIII, who
for just causes being angry with the Pope both shook of from himself the
Antichristian yoke, and also took it from the necks of his people. Neither
content with this ministry of the Angels, partly of Cromwell with his sharp
sickle, partly of Cranmer having power over fire: In the year 1539. he
labored that this whole vine should be not so much cut, as plucked up by the
roots and utterly destroyed. For hence the Abbeys and Fryeries were pulled
down, the Nunries laid eve^ with the ground, and the lands and revenues of
old appointed to wicked superstitions, were brought again to the common
treasure, and at length being set forth to a public sale, they were sold to
diverse persons. And this is the cutting of the clusters of grapes, and the
casting of them into the wine press, a thing indeed memorable, if we shall
consider it diligently, according to the nobleness thereof.

20 And the wine press was trodden without the city: This city is the holy
Church of God, which the Scriptures do note often times by the name of a city,
beyond the territories of which, this press was trodden; how wonderfully does
this agree? For howsoever England spoiled the Papists of their goods and
riches, and according to their demerits put them from al their dignity; yet
nevertheless she had not as yet attained for that time such reformation, for
which rightly it could be called a wholly city. The Pope was banished, but the
Papisme was retained, as is manifest from those six articles made the next
year after that the Monasteries were broken down. Wherein it was thus
ordained: That under the form of bread and wine there is the true and natural
body and blood of Christ, and that after the consecration, the substance of
bread and wine remains no longer. That the receiving of the whole supper of
the Lord, is not necessary to salvation, and that under whether of the forms
you will, whole Christ is contained. That it is not lawful for Priests to
marry. That the vows of chastety are to be kept. That private Masses are to be
retained. That auricular and secret confession of sins is profitable and
necessary. These uncleanness defiled England, that it could not be the
dwelling place of God at that time.

And blood came out of the wine press: Blood by an elegant metaphore is the
juice of grapes; but it comes nearer to the juice of these who are now spoken
of by a certain property of speech. For it is that calamity which came of the
overthrowe of the Pope, which was so great, that not only the whole country
was moist therewith, but also it overflowed to the horses bridles. We have
heard that they, to whom this business was committed of destroying the dens
and to confiscate the goods, riding with a great train, visited almost all the
houses through the whole country: which office while they execute, so great
havoc was made of the Papists riches, that horses might seem to swime in
their spoils, as it were in a deep river of pressed grapes. But beside this,
I suppose an other greater thing to be signified, to wit, that not only the
common sort of men, who were no less cheerful to execute this business, then
horses are to the battle, became greatly enriched and increased by these
means; but also the Noble men themselves and Peers of the Realm, who are as
it were the raines to govern the common people, made also very great gain
thereof. It is known well enough that the beginning of many men's Nobility came
from hence, and other men's far greater abundance. For the^ was there scarce
any, at least of any value and reckening, who went not to purvey wood when this
oak did fall.

By the space of a thousand and six hundredth furlongs: That is, through the
whole country of England A thousand six hundredth furlonges, make two hundredth
English miles. But the length of the country from the furthest part of the
South to the farthest end of the North part is more by an hundredth miles: but
if we shall take away the Northen wast ground, where the country nigh the
bounds is desert and unhusbanded (which these grapes, that is, religious
nation dreaded greatly, as too cold an air, delighting in the Sunnie and most
pleasant places) we see also a mervailous consent even in this part. In this
wise therefore is the vintage of England, so manifestly declared by the
agreement of all things, that it is not to be doubted, but that this alone is
the natural application of this type. And now we perceive, with what
singular skilfulnes the Spirit has described all memorable things, which
should come to pass in the Church, even till the year 1556. In this chapter
he stays at the year 1540. but the eleventh chapter has supplied that which
is wanting here since that time. The thirteen Centuries describe most clearly
even to the year thirteen hundred, the acts of the Dragon and of the Beast.
From thence our country man John Fox beginning at Weckliefe, with whom you
may join John Sleidane and Gaspar Peucer, follows on the things remaining,
even to the seventh trumpet.

Because of this their more abundant and greater knowledge of things past,
which the diligence of these should bring to men under the blowing of the
seventh trumpet, the Spirit has made this repetition now agreeing with their
narrations.

The whole Prophecy of these three chapters is from the time of John unto the
year one thousand five hundredth and forty, that is, of a thousand four
hundredth fifty years.

CHAP. 15.
AND I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvelous: seven Angels having the
seven last plagues; for by them is fulfilled the wrath of God.

2 And I saw as it were a glassy sea mingled with fire: and them that had
gotten victory of the Beast, and of his Jmage, and of his mark, and of the
Number of his name; standing at the glassy sea, having Harpes of God.

3 And they sung the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the
Lamb; saying, Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God almighty; just and
true are thy ways, King of saints.

4 Who shall not fear thee, o Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou only art
holy; for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are
made-manifest.

5 And after these J looked, and lo, the Temple of the tabernacle of testimony
was opened.

6 And there came forth the seven Angels which had the seven plagues, out of the
temple, clothed with pure and bright linen, and girded about the breasts with
golden girdles.

7 And one of the fowr Beasts gave to the seven Angels, seven golden vials, full
of the wrath of God, which lives for evermore.

8 And the Temple was filled with the smoke that proceeded from the majesty of
God, and from his power: and no man was able to enter into the Temple, til the
seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled.


The Analysis.
HITHERTO have been the things past of the seventh trompet, so far forth as
under it they were more fully known, then at any time heretofore: now follow the
things to come; of which, the common type is in this chapter, and then the
special execution, in the rest of the book. The type first summarily shows,
how seven Ministers are prepared, which should take vengeance on the enemies;
verse 1. Also what should be the state of the Church conversing among the
Gentiles, until the Angels executed their office. The pourtraiture whereof, is
set forth by the glassy sea, mingled with fire: and in the victours, and the
Harpers: ver. 2. Then by the Song; the authors whereof are Moses and the Lamb:
the argument of it, is, the praise of Gods omnipotency and justice; ver. 3. and
the gathering to him of all the elect, ver. 4. After this, it shows in
special, a more full description, partly of the Angels prepared to their work;
as of the place whence they come, verse. 5.6. of their clothing, ver. 6. and the
instruments, namely the vials wherewith they are furnished, ver. 7. Partly of
the whole Church; both in respect of the chosen Gentiles, by whose means it
shines with glory, and the presence of God: and in respect of the rest, unto
whom it continues shutt, until the appointed time.

Scholions.
1 And I saw an other sign: These words are used in sted of a passage to an
other matter; whereby, this prophecy following, is distinguished from that
which was erst explayned in the three former chapters. And now remains the
third and last period, divided from the former, by the kind of events, which
therefore have a new instrument, of vials: but yet agreing with them, in as much
as it is a part of the seventh trumpet, as may easily appear by the things
spoken before. For the Tabernacle in heaven, is not opened before the seventh
trumpet; chap. 11.15.19. But the Ministers of this work, which have charge
given them to power out the vials, do come out of the Temple opened in heaven;
as after in the 5. and 6. verses of this chapter. Moreover, the Angel foretold
that the end should come, when the seventh trumpet sounded; chap. 10.7. Now
these seven vials, do bring the end with them; their Ministers being said, in
this verse, to have the seven last plagues; and therefore they necessarily
belong to that trompet. For if the first vial, answered to the first trompet,
and then the rest in order, so as every one should be of the same time that the
tro^pet is, wherewith it is joined: there were no reason why they should be
called the last plagues. But the thing is not so: especially seeing the first
vial, brings evil on the men, which were branded with the Beasts mark; chap.
16.1. which mark we have seen to be the invention not of the first Beast, but
of the second, chap. 13.16. whose birth days fell out under the fifth trompet.
Whereas by this reason, the mark should necessarily go before all the trompets;
the first whereof, should not so much imprint the mark it self, as afflict the
men on whom it was already printed. Moreover, the Saints triumph is sung in
this chapter, for the victory gotten of the Beast, before the vials are powered
out, or the Angels take their work in hand; ver. 2. etc. But the Beast dies
not under the first trompet, but is then born, and from thence forth,
flourishes until the harvest and vintage; chap. 14. and the two Prophets rise
up from the dead; chap. 11.11. which things fell out about the end of the sixth
trompet, as we have showed. Yea but there is a great similitude, between the
trompets and the vials; there is in deed; but to this end only, that we may
know how men ar punished, in the same degrees and steps that they have sinned.
Yet they differ, both in time, and in manner of punishment: for the vials are
only punishments, whereas the trompets be offenses. It is therefore manifest,
that the whole distance of time, from John, to the coming of our Lord, is
divided into three periods; and every of them again, into seven more particular
seasons, or articles; so, as under the last of that which went before,
begins the first of that which follows; that is to say, as from the last
seal, do arise the seven tronpets; so from the last trompet, do arise the
seven vials. Which distribution of the time, makes this prophecy easy unto
us; which else would be very intricate.

In heaven: That is, in the purer Church. For as of old, the Lord was wont to
rore out of Sion, and give his voice out of Jerusalem, Amos, 1.2. so the evil
by which al his enemies now shall utterly perish, shall come out of his holy
Church, wherein he will show himself an avenger, in punishing all the reprobats.
And great and marvelous is this sign, because of the wonderful change of the
course of things, the Beast and Dragon being overcome and abolished, and
the eternal happiness of the Church procured; as we shall see in the things
particularly to be handled.

Seven Angels: According to the manner of the former periods. These be men,
citizens of the purer Church; as appears by the place from whence they come;
and their attire: of which hereafter. Theod. Beza expresses it thus, the seven
Angels: but there is no article in the Greek; neither were these either seen or
mentioned before the temple was opened. They are said to have, the seven last
plagues; because when these are done, there shall be happy times only, until the
end of al things be come: as the next words show. For they are not caled the
last, as if they should come a little before the end: but because by them Gods
wrath shall be fulfilled, in abolishing the enemies and tempests of the Church.
They have their beginning together with the seventh trompet, about the year
1560. in respect of which, we say they are to come, and not in respect of this
time only, wherein we now live. And he says the wrath is fulfilled, in sted of
shall be fulfilled: ((...) for (...):) for the certainty of the Prophecy, makes
him to speak in the time past, of things that are to come.

2 And I saw as it were a glassy sea, mingled with fire: Hitherto generally of
things to be done, and the Ministers of them: now follows the estate of the
holy Church in the mean while. The Church is described by the things or
substance of it, and the persons. The first is a sea, that is, doctrine; as
before: the diverse manner whereof, makes also a diverse sea. The one heavenly,
like that in chap. 4.6. which also was glassy and like to Crystal: the other
earthly, turned into blood, and void of al purity; chap. 8. Here we have a
third, heavenly also, as the former verse shows; for this sign was seen in
heaven: and glassy, as the first was; with which it wholly agrees in nature,
however there be some little difference in quality. For, in sted of that Crystal,
here fire is mingled: a glassy sea, says he, mixed with fire. That therefore,
was clear as glass; and most simple, without al color, as Crystal is: this
also is clear as glass; but colored with fyrie rednes; not shining with the
simplicity of Crystal. And what other thing does fire signify, than fervent
strifes and co^tentions, burning with hatred? I am come to send fire on the
earth, says Christ, and what is my desire, if it be already kindled? Luk
12.49. This inseparable companion, must the heavenly truth of the last period,
have joined with it: the doctrine should be glassy and clear, through which we
may behold the gracious countenance of the Father in Christ Jesus; yet not in all respects pure as Crystal, but colored with the fire of contention. Which
thing verily, all godly men to their great grief, do find at this day too
true. That unhappy strife about sacramental signs, how great sturres wrought
it in the Church? which yet had not enough it self alone to trouble all
things: but it must bring forth also (as an evil bird an evil egg) that unheard
monster of Vbiquitie. The sparks hereof were cast into the sea, by Luther
himself; but quenched again, both by his own modesty and godliness, and by
Melanchtons and others that have well deserved of the Church. Til afterward
John Brentius, and James Andrews, about the year 1561. did again with much
payns as with bellows, styrr up the flame. Neither was the contention about
these chief points only; but about Gods grace, Predestination, Baptism, and
other things also: as error for the most part never goes alone, without some
company. The Churches which are further off from the brenn of this fire, do
burn with an other no less fervent flame of ambition: whereupon have arisen
very sharp contention for dignities and honors, as for necessary ornaments of
the Church; though purer times do sufficiently teach, that nothing ever
brought more certain destruction thereunto. Neither does ambition suffer, so
free a preaching of the word, as should be: nor manners to be restreyned with
that bridle, which being taken away, a liberty follows to al manner wickedness,
or such at least, as abolisheth Christian piety. This kind of fire, raungeth
throughout the whole renewed Church; and either consumes many, or molesteth
the rest; whiles they labor to quench it. Neither is there sound quietness in
any place; this wild-fyre living even in midds of the waters. Which thing the
Spirit diligently here does intimate; least any man for the contentions,
should reject the truth. For thanks be to our God, who, although fire be
mingled with our sea, does yet vouchsafe it to be glassy still, that is,
transparent and clear; through which we may behold the most sweet grace of
salvation, obtained for us by Christ. We are far from the Christian purity that
should be: yet let us be glad for this good we do enjoy, and earnestly beg of
God, that he would give us that which is wanting. But it is to be feared, he
will take away that which we have; such be our sins: as we have showed in the
particular Churches, chap. 3.

And them that had gotten victory of the Beast: Hitherto of the things: the
Persons are the victours, in the latter part of this verse; and the Harpers,
ver. 3. The Greek phrase (...) is from the Hebrew, Goberim mechajah: for (...)
answers to the Hebrew min, which is often joined with gaber, and notes out a
comparison; as mearajoth gaberu, they were stronger then Lions, 2 Samuel 1.23. so
wicked deeds got victory of me, that is, prevayled against me, Psalm. 65.4. In
like manner they that get victory of the Beast, are such as prevayl against
him, his image, mark, and number of his name. These al are set down severally,
for that the victory should be full and absolute: though the Beast remayn yet a
little while. For they should not only reject Antichrist himself, but abhor
also al his mark, yea and not suffer themselves to be called by the number of
his name. We have showed, that the number of his name, which is, to be called
a Latin, is the least bond of society, wherewith men are tied to Antichrist:
which was proper to the Greeks, who by admitting this symbol, obtained mutual
trafique. But the inhabitans of the West, which long ago easily sufferred
themselves to be made his marked soldjers, and to be called Papists, and of the
Popes religion; do now detest the very name Latin, which the Greeks so hardly
and lately received. This victory therefore is full, as is signified by this
particular rehearsal of Image, mark, and number of name. But, thou will say,
when fell out this victory? At the sound of the seventh trompet, when the
Protestant Princes in Germany, which had wrong out from Charles to have their
proffession of religion free; did soon after his death, get it to be confirmed
and stablished by The Emperor Ferdinandus, in the year 1558. at which time, our
gracious Queen Elizabeth, being also crowned, did manifest to the world, that
the Beast was overcome in England; who a few years before had begun to reign a
fresh; and was never before fully vanquished, but reserved of God unto this
time, for to honor the charrot and triumph of our good Queen. The year next
after, they trod down the Beast in Scotland. Before these times the truth did
fight, but in doubtful battle: now it did plainly beat down and overthrow the
enemies. Unto these, many other are to be added, as in France, Sweveland,
Denmark, Suecia, Prussia; al which being joined together, do make up this
company, that stand at the glassy sea.

Standing at the glassy sea: Holding the true and sincere doctrine; to the
voice whereof, they stand and hearken continually. He alludeth to the
Israelites which stood on the sea shore, beholding the marvelous salvation
which God had given them, their enemies being destroyed. Seeing therefore we all
whom God has freed from Antichrists tyranny, do yet stand on the brink, newly
escaped out of danger: what evil fury vexes us, that we should rave, brethren
against brethren, with all kind of reproaches, raylings and contumelies? How
shameful, yea how wicked a thing would it have bin, if the Israelites for
whose sake the waters were cleft asunder; and whiles they escaped by a passage
unheard off, through the midds of the sea, so soon as they came safe to the
shore, their enemies were drowned: if they, I say, should have stuck and killed
one an other? Yet this ungodly prank do we play at this day. Which seeing it
is most unworthy them that are adorned with so notable and singular a good: I
entreat by God our avenger and savior, that we may seriously weigh the thing;
and letting pass our brawles and contentions, may get us harps with one
consent to sing praises unto God, rather then to strike up terrible drumms, for
to move intestine war. We stand on the shore, but the enemy is not yet
altogether drowned: and if he were overwhelmed, yet should they be no place for
this bitterness. But unawares I have strayed from my purpose; how be it, I
trust, not without reason.

Having harpes of God: That is, divine, sweet and excellent harps: according to
the manner of the Hebrews, who call all that of God, which is in it kind most
chief and excellent; as a Prince of God, Genesis 23.6. Mounteyns of God, Psalm.
36.7. trees of God etc. for most excellent men, high mou^tayns, noble trees.
See the observations of the learned Ian Drusius. Or, be they not caled harpes
of God, because God gives the joy of his Spirit into their hearts, whereby they
give God meet thanks for this his notable mercy? Perhaps this is the righter.
But both of them do signify alike, the great pleasure that is felt by this
victory; such as we have showed was in the Tigurines, who wrote upon a pillar
with letters of Gold, the year and day when reformation began among them. With
what precious stone should this day be graven, of much fuller victory and
triumph? But we are in special to respect the Confessions set forth in this
time: for these are most sweet harps, and that of God; whose strings he has
tuned, and with whose melody he is much delited. Whiles the Temple was shutt,
the voice of the Harpers sounded with sweet harmony, when the Churches
testified their consent of doctrine, by the writings published and offered to
Caesar; as we have showed on chap. 14.2. But now after the year 1558. a much
sweeter symphonie is made, by the accession of the French, English, later
Helvetian, Belgian, Bohemian, and Scottish Confessions. Al these agreeably
singing one tune together, do make a most grateful song to godly ears; but
drive the enemies out of their wits.

3 And they sung the song of Moses: Such a triumphal song, as Moses and the
Israelites sung of old, when they were delivered from the Aegiptians, Exodus 15.
For this deliverance out of the jaws of Antichrist, is of no less power and
good will of God toward his, then was that from Pharaoh. No marvel if the same
benefit, be celebrated with the same song. It did not plainly appear before
these times, what issue things should have: the people was indeed gone out of
Aegipt, but camped as yet before the jaws of Chiroth, and was perplexed in the
country, closed round about with the wilderness. The Pope and Emperor made
ready their charrets, and thought to bring them back again to their ancient
bondage: but after that the sea had given way to the Protestants in Germany;
(the Emperor being by death drowned with his charrets;) and that their
strength was more confirmed by the coming of England, Scotland, Netherland unto
them; now was the time of singing to Jehovah, that he has excelled gloriously,
the harse and him that rode upon him, he has overthrown in the sea.

And the song of the Lamb: The same, as I think, which was mentioned before,
chap. 4.3. wherein they celebrated God the Father, for the grace of adoption in
Christ. This joy of heart, which figuratively is called a song, arises from the
belief of Christ's justice imputed unto us; and the feeling of that fatherly
love, wherewith God loves us for this cause. Which always has been the song
of all the elect in every time and place; and namely of them that lay hidd for
1260. years, chap. 14. but now at length is communicated with many more, about
the beginning of the last period: and shall no more be muttered in corners, but
be sung without fear in all streets and open places. No song, does the Pope of
Rome more hate: he curses it with all direful execrations: but the wretch never
tasted the sweetness of it; neither can any of his servants, whiles so he
persisteth, learn the same.

Great and marv. etc. In deed great, and beyond al exspectatio^ Luther when he
began, thought nothing less the^ such an innovatio^: and not without cause.
For who durst ever hope, that the least part of his dignity could be thrown
down; unto whose feet, so many Emperors of old subjected their necks? A
wonderful work verily, and far exceeding the straigfhts of the mind of man.

Lord God almighty: God, for (...) O God: or by want of a word to be supplied.
which art God, which art almighty.

Just and true etc. Just they are; for he has done vengeance on the wicked:
True; because that is now performed which was promised. For in his holy word he
has taught that it shall be well with the good, and evil with the wicked.
According to which general promises and threats, he governs the world;
manifesting unto all his truth, in performing the same.

4 For all nations shall come: By this deliverance there should arise to the
faithful, a more ample hope of the universal caling of the whole world, A thing
not now first signified; but whereas a more plentiful knowledge should increase
daily in the later times; in the ages before, because of the long delay and
great difficulty of the thing, at the expectation thereof, lay quite dead. But
the thing is here but generally touched: and is after more largely to be
handled in due place.

For thy judgments etc. By these which thou have begun, it may be manifest
enough to every one, what thou will do at last. O Rome, why look thou not
to thy self in time? Will thou not yet be wise, before thy last destruction
come; when it will be too late? Do not these documents of the wrath of God, make
manifest unto thee, what he judges of thee? Remember Pharaoh, to who^ Gods
judgments were manifested, but he would not be instructed. Take heed least
thou, walking in the same stepps, fall not at last into the same pit. The word
(...), besides that signification of ceremonies which the Greek Interpreters
give unto it, denotes also an argument or example of justice: see Th. Beza on
Luk 1.6. Which signification agrees fitly to this place: as if he should say;
Arguments of thy justice, are manifested: thou have openly declared to all the
world, that thou art a most just judge

5 And after these etc. He now begins in special a more large declaration of
the Angels: and first of the place from whence they come, namely the Temple
opened. Which was opened chapter 11.19. and whereof mention is here made again, as
often times comes to pass, because of the long commemoration of things past,
which came between in 3 whole chapters. The temple, before was shutt, as long
as the woman was in the wilderness. Sometimes there came Angels out from thence;
but but the veil being hanged at the door, suffered none to look in; whereupon it
remained still hidd, to them that were without. But now being open; they which
are in the court, may look in if they will.

The Temple of and c: Hereby is meant the most holy place. The two tables of
stone, are caled the Testimony; because of the law written in them, which
testified the will of God. Hereupon the Ark has the same name; because unto it,
these tables were put. And then the name more largely was ascribed to the whole
tabernacle, in the inner place whereof, the Ark did reside. Number. 17.23.
Moreover, that which is here said, the temple of the tabernacle of testimony
was opened: is the same in effect with this, and the Ark of his covenant was
seen in his temple, chap. 11.29.

The Tabernacle seems to be joined with the Temple, not because the law was
always kept in the Tabernacle, which continued not to the end in the Temple,
as neither did the Ark, after the overthrow of Jerusalem by Nabuchodonosor; as
the Jesuit supposes: for did not the Tabernacle also loose the law, when it
lost the Ark, wherein the law was kept? especially when the Ark was never
after, placed in that Tabernacle? 1 Samuel 4.21. This therefore is no sufficient
cause. But there two seem to be joined together, for to show that this Temple
was yet a pilgrim, and the Angels that came out from thence, were burgesses of
the militant Church. But some man may say, if they come forth out of the
Temple, it may seem the Church is yet in secret: by which argument, we have
serched out the time of the former Prophecy, chap. 14.15. They in the former
chapter, came out of the Temple being shutt: these, out of it being opened. The
Church always dwells in the Temple: for what other fit hospitage can she
have? But this Temple is not always after one manner. Some while it is shutt,
in the time of mourning and solitarines; which was the condition thereof, when
those reapers and grape-gatherers came out of it. Some while it is open and
manifest, when the day shines more cheerful and pleasant: and in this estate
it was, when after the victory over the Beast, the seven Angels came out of the
same.

6 Clothetd with pure and bright linen: These Angels have a more joyful
attire, then had the two witnesses, which were clad with sackcloth, chap. 11.3.
for this time carries an other hiew Yet these garments are common to all the
elect, though they be fitter for some times then for othersome. For they are
the garments of Aarons sons, Exodus 28.42. And all the elect are made Priests.
All the faithful now do dwell in the Temple, wherinto of old none might come
but the Levites. By this attire therefore is signified, the cleannes of the
Angels; through the imputation of Christ's righteousness alone. And least any
should despise this imputation as a base thing, and not fit for any to stand in
Gods sight arrayed with it, as the blasphemous Papists at this day persuade
their people: therefore he says, these garments are both pure and bright;
wherein the majesty of God neither sees any spott, nor any thing that may
hinder the highest perfection of glory.

And girded about the breasts with golden girdles: These garments are to be tied
about every one in particular, by faith, as with a golden girdle: and the
girding is about the breasts, because this apprehension and application is
nothing at all, unless it have place in the heart. So Christ himself was
girded before, chap. 1.13. not for that he needed so to be, but only for to
teach us* and to represent the Church of that time, which was in that part very
comely.

7 And one of the 4. Beasts: It does not appear, which of them by name it was:
especially seeing one of the Beasts may be either of order, or of distribution:
of order, as when it signifies the first, at chap. 6.1. J heard one of the
four Beasts, that is, the first, to weet, the Lion. Of distribution, when in
usual manner of speech, it may perteyn alike to any of the fowr. But it
skilleth not which of the^ it be. That agrees unto all, which belo^gs to every
one; al whose virtues being joined together, do give us a pattern, what manner
of man every faithful minister ought to be, as is observed on chap. 4.7. Here
the intendement is, that we may know how these seven Angels do draw out of the
precepts and institutions of some holy Minister of the Ghospel; that which they
after do turn and apply, unto the bane of the enemies of the Church. Not that
this some Minister, is to be understood of any singular man; but of many that
agree in one faith and doctrine: as Philip Melanchton, Martin Bucer, Peter
Martyr, Henry Bullinger, John Calvin, and the other servants of God, which
flourished about that time. Out of whose godly and learned writings, so many
have drawn very excellent and golden understanding of holy things, that they
have been made fit thereby, to combat with Antichrist; and to finish the
remaynders of that war, which the others had so happily begun.

Gave to the seven Angels, seven golden vials: (...) (a vial, says Atheneus)
is so caled by changing of a letter, as it were Pialee, that is, containing in
it (to piem h^lis) enough to drink: for it is bigger then a cup. book
Dipnosophist 11 Yea he makes it a wide and ample vessel like a cauldron, which
imports very great wrath to be appointed for the last times. These vessels
perhaps are used here in such respect, as God of old, opening the f^oud-gates
of heaven, destroyed all the earth with the flood: or as when he consumed Sodom
and Gomorrhe with a shore of brimston from heaven. For then he seems to power
out on the heads of men, destruction as out of vials. Most fit weapons for the
power of God, which needs no forces for to overthrow the enemies, but can
take them al away, even with a small aspersio^. And now behold, how fit
instruments are attributed, to every sort of events.

In the first place were Seals, because the first events were confirmations and
pledges of those that were to come. Then came Trumpets, signifying evils
^ssayling men with great noise, and denouncing also some heavier thing to be
expected, if they did not repent. Now last are made ready the vials, large
vessels to conteyn Gods judgment, and m^st fit to accomplish the perdition of
reprobates. Neither is there any noise in the pouring out, as was in the
sounding of the trompets. For Gods judgments to come, do make afraid, (for
they are threatened that they may be avoided:) but when they are present, they
fall on men privily, and are not perceived. What are these vials then, and of
what sort? First, they are the holy minds of the seven Angels, intelligent and
capable of the will of God: out of which this baleful liquour is powered upon
the reprobates. Secondly the Beast gives them; by instructing and informing
the same minds with holy institutio^s. Thirdly they are full of the wrath of
God, not wherewith God is angry against them, but by which he executes judgment
upon the wicked. Finally, they are golden; that thou the judgments be most
severe; yet are they most just, pure, and precious. But mark, how dreadful is
this wrath, which is of God that lives for evermore: which words are added
that we may know, the wrath shall be eternal. For the wrath is such as is his
power whose wrath is kindled.

8 And the Temple was filled with smoke: Hitherto has been the preparation of
the Angels; that which follows upon it in respect of this renewed Church, is a
manifest sign of Gods presence; such as was of old in the Tabernacle, Exodus
40.34.35. But, thou will say, the time of the Gospel, requires some more
evident token. In deed so God deal more openly with us by many degrees, then he
did under the law: but whatsoever ca^ be bestowed on us, whiles we are on
earth, though illustrated with the light of the Gospel; is but smoke and
obscurity, in respect of that revelatio^, which at last we shall have in heaven.
But here he teaches, that Gods presence is clear in the Church though the
enemies count it but as smoke, and can see no more into it, then m^n when
duskish smoke does take away their sight. And who but the blind, perceives
not God present in our Churches, which he so marvelously defends against so
many enterprises of the adversaries. But the Papists eyes cannot pierce this
smoke; wherefore the^ weary themselves in vayn, fighting against God. But
because smoke signifies also wrath, the Temple filled with smoke, teaches
that God testifies his presence, with manifest arguments of his indignation
against the enemies, whom now he will vex with continual torments, which out of
the Temple and Church of God, shall daily fall upon their heads.

And no man was able to enter into the Temple: This shows the condition of
the rest, what it should be in the mean time, while these plagues crushed down
the enemies. To weet, they should remayn without the Temple, not able to enter
in for smoke, as Moses could not enter into the Tabernacle of the congregation,
whiles the cloud was upon it, Evod. 40.35. Alike therefore, in some sort,
shall be the condition of the Church when it is restored, as it was when it lay
hidd. As long as the Temple was shutt, and the saints pitched their camp in
mount Sion, the Lamb being their Captayn: no man could learn the song which
they sang: chap. 14.3. It belonged to a few elect; into whose number, none of
the rest of the world, could join himself. Even so, when the Temple is
opened, although the Church be much more noble and conspicuous, yet shall not al
betake them selves unto the bosom thereof, until the seven plagues be
fulfilled. Which is first to be understood of the Jews; whose full caling shall
not be, until the vials be poured out. Full, I say; because during the plagues,
there shall be some beginning, but not an absolute perfection, before they be
altogether past. For, Rome drives the^ from entering in; which when it shall be
taken away, then the Jews, and other nations many, al impediments being
removed, shall flow even with strift unto the Church, and shall thenceforth
continue the faithful nourissons of the same. For we see that al are not by this
smoke quite shut out of the Temple. Seven Angels come out from thence; which
should not come forth, but to execute their office: whereupon the rest of the
Saints, abide therein. This smoke therefore, hindered not all the elect of the
Gentiles from entering in: but the Jews, and full number of the Gentiles only.

CHAP. 16.
AND I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven Angels: Goeye
and power out the seven vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.

2 And the first Angel went, and powered out his vial upon the earth: and there
came a noysom and greevous soar, upon the men which had the mark of the Beast,
and which worshipped his Image.

3 And the second Angel powered out his vial upon the sea; and it became as the
blood of a dead-man: and every living sowl died in the sea.

4 And the third Angel powered out his vial upon the rivers and upon the
fountayns of waters: and they became blood.

5 And I heard the Angel of the waters saying; Just art thou, O Lord, which
art, and which wast, and which shall be; because thou have judged these things.

6 For they shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets; and thou have given
them blood to drink: for they are worthy.

7 And I heard an other Angel from the altar saying, even-so Lord God almighty,
true and just ar thy judgments.

8 And the fourth Angel powered out his vial on the Sun; and it was given unto
him to torment men with heat by fire.

9 And men boyled-hott with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God which
has power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory.

10 And the fifth Angel powered out his vial upon the throne of the Beast; and
his kingdom became dark: and they gnawed their tongues for pain.

11 And blasphemed the God of heaven, for their pains and for their soars, and
repented not of their works.

12 And the sixth Angel powered out his vial upon the great river, to weet
Euphrates: and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings that
come from the East, might be prepared.

13 And I saw three unclean Spirits like froggs, coming out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet.

14 For they are the spirits of Divils working signs, and which go unto the
Kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that
great day of God almighty.

15 Behold J come as a thief: Blessed is he that watched and keeps his
garments, least he walk naked, and men see his shame.

16 And he gathered them together into a place called in Hebrew Armagedon.

17 And the seventh Angel powered out his vial upon the air: and there came a
great voice out of the Temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done.

18 And there were noises and lightnings and thonders: and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, even so great an
earthquake.

19 And the great city was rent into three parts, and the city of the Gentiles
fell; and that great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her
the cup of the wine of the feircenes of his wrath.

20 And every I Will fled away, and the mountayns were not found.

21 And a great hayl, as of talent weight, fell out of heaven upon men: and men
blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hayl; for the plague thereof was
exceeding great.


The Analysis.
HITHERTO has been the common type: now follows the special execution,
distinct with the parts thereof, in this chapter: and then more at large and
continued, in the rest following. The execution is commanded ver. 1. then the
parts ar set down; both the common, the effect of the work, and the event; and
the particular, seven distinct vials, (according to the manner of the former
periods,) for those seven notable plagues, wherewith the enemies are to be
smitten. The first of them is powered out upon the earth, ver. 2. The second
upon the Sea, ver. 3. The third upon the rivers, ver. 4. whose secondary event
is a twofold testimony: first of the Angel of the waters, ver. 5. and 6.
secondly of the Angel from the altar, ver. 7. The fourth is powered upon the
Sun, ver. 8.9. The sixth, upon Euphrates; of which there is also a twofold event;
first the drying up of the waters, ver. 12. secondly, a preparation to war,
whereof there be three princes, authors; and as many Ministers, froggs, ver.
13.14. Then a warning given to the elect. ver. 15. and the gathering of the
enemies into the place Armagedon, ver. 16, The seventh is powered out upon the
air: whose first event is a full end, ver. 17. the second, noyses, l^ghtnings,
eartquake. Also the destruction of the enemies, ver. 19.20. of cities, of
nations, and of men; in the beginning of the 21. ver. and a hayl of talent
weight, causing men to blaspheme, ver. 21.

Scholions.
1 And J heard a great voice out of the Temple: In the commandment, we are to
consider, whence the voice comes, to whom, and to what end. It comes out of
the Temple, as it did in chap. 9.13. from the four horns of the altar:
sometime from the Throne, as after in chap. 19.5. The difference is, that the
voice from the Throne, comes as it were immediately from God: from the Temple,
when any thing is obtained by the prayers of the saints: who here are said to
command; that we may know how great force faithful prayers have; which as if
they were authors of the thing to be done, do so boldly bid the matter to be
taken in hand. And in deed, it could not be, that men enlightened with so great
light of the truth, should not earnestly strive with God in prayer, to destroy
Antichrist very speedily. Aretas has not these words, out of the Temple: but
al our books agree, as does also the vulgar Latin: and in other places it is
usually told, whence any voice comes. They to whom it came, are the seven
Angels. But what need was there of it, (may some say;) seeing they were
appointed before unto this business, and furnished with things needful, in the
former chapter? Verily, they stood ready at the barrieres, and waiting for a
sign: but unto a common commandment, there must also come a special, if any
would have full power to do a thing. For this therefore do they wayt: showing
that not so much as a finger may be moved, without Gods will and providence,
whereby al things are governed. The commandment is, that they go and power out
their vials upon the earth. But some of them are poured upon the sea, rivers,
sun, aier: It is true, yet al their force redoundeth upon the earth. The other
elements have not a change for their own sake, but to affect the earth
thereby, as that which is the common basen for the liquour powered out. But how
then is this proper ^o the first, (as the verse following shows,) which is
common to all? We shall see in the particular explication that the first
belongs indifferently to the common multitude of the inhabitans of this
earth: the other, unto some certain sorts, of chief note.

2 And the first went, and powered out his vial upon the earth: We have seen the
commandment: now beginns the particular execution. Where the effecting of the
work, is the pouring out of the vial upon the earth. Which words, must not be
taken properly. For the vial is not any material vessel; nor full of very
liquour, but of Gods wrath, as in the former chapter, ver. 7. Neither is the
earth, this ground which we tread upon; but first it signifies, men; and then
not al^, but Antichrists marked servants only, as the event straightway
teaches, for there came a soar on the men that had the Beasts mark. In which
sense, it has been often used before: which we do therefore constantly reteyn
in all out explication, that thereby we may the better see, how the whole
prophecy agrees with it self. The event gives a noisome and grievous soar,
that is malignant and incurable, as Physicians use to call it, where there is so
much ranckling and venomous matter in it, as it will never suffer it to heal up.
But neither is this a soar truly and properly so caled: whose procreant
causes, we see, are figuratively borrowed. And like events must we mind to be
in the other vials also: for to expound them according to strict property of
speech, as does the Jesuit; is not to explayn, but rather to confound al
things, so as the light of the truth shall never appear. They which have this
ulcer on them, ar men. There came an ulcer against the men, (as Th, Beza
translateth it,) or in the men, as the vulgar Latin says, in homines:
according to that phrase of sitting in the Temple, (...), 2 These- 2.4. But the
preposition with the fourth case signifies, as if the boyles tormented them,
not so much by cleaving in the body, as by afflicting it outwardly: which does
more agree to figured soars; as if he should say, those things shall be done
against Antichrists bondmen, which shall prick and vex them no less then
noisome soars. Of what condition these me^ are, is declared by the mark of the
Beast, and worshipping of his Image. We have showed before, chap. 13.17. from
the threefold note wherewith the Beasts worshipers are signed; that the first,
has the name of the whole, and is called a Character or Mark, the place whereof
is in the right hand. Which was the propre note of his chief worshipers, the
Noble men, Clerks, Scholars, etc on whom, as upon propps, the Beast does
chiefly lean. Wherefore these should specially be plagued with this soar. But
not they only that have his mark: but also they that worship his Image. And
this is chiefly of the learned men, and such as are wiser then the common sort,
as is showed on chap. 14.9. although the worshipping of the Image, is in some
sort, common to al; chap. 13.15. and therefore should this soar, molest the
whole crewe of them; yet specially those which think they are furnished with the
consent of al antiquity, for to give that honor to the Beast. But hence we may
observe, how it can not be, that the first vial, should be alone with the first
trompet; seeing the vial is powered only on this kind of men, whereas there were
not any such, before the second Beast, whose beginning is not ancie^ter then
the fifth trompet: which point we noted, on the first verse of the former
chapter. These things thus explayned, do al lead unto this, that this ulcer is
nothing else but spite and envy, then which no greater torment could Sicul^an
tyrants feel; as says the Poet. And herewith were the Papists marvelously
tormented, when the vial was powered out. Which sickness is rightly caled an
ulcer, the nature whereof it resembles by a twofold accident. For it forces
them that are troubled therewith, to keep in and not come abroad; so that they
flee the sight of them, for whose prosperity they are stricken sick; as of old
the Aegiptians, who together with their Sorcerers had by the sprinkling of the
ashes so many blisters al over the^, that they could not stand before Moses,
Exodus 9.10.11. Then also in private they are so afraid to be touched, that they
use all the means they may, to keep the soar, least it be squised. Which kind
of evil, came upon the men that bare the Beasts badge, straight after the
opening of the Temple, chap. 11.19. (to which, these vials, as I have showed,
are to be joined; which the repetition of things past, has severed with so
long a space between:) namely about the year 1560, where the former Prophecy
ceased. For then our gracious Q. Elizabeth, being bidden by the voice out of
the Temple to power out her vial upon the earth; that is, being admonished by
the counsels of godly men, about the end of the first year of her reign, she
removed many most worthily out of their Prelacies, and other ecclesiastical
dignities and benefices, who glorying only in the mark of the Beast, denied
due obedience to their lawful Prince. Among them was the Archbushop of York;
the B b, of London, Elie, and 14. others, besides men of meaner note, De^ns,
Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars and the like. How needs must men be vehemently
burned, when they saw their dignities, lands, fearms, faculties, honors to b^
b^^towed on their adversaries; and themselves in the mean time to (...)
des^ised and contemned? Many could not bear the sorrow; but fl^d ^ver sea
because thereof to s^ek so much ease as not to behold it: other^ at home,
payning away with grief in secret places; al of them sleeing the light and
s^ght of men, whom to behold so merry and joyful, was as ill ^s a bitter death.
And though they changed the aier, yet was not their pain assuaged; when the
Pope himself, and that whole nation, by but hearing it only, were very sorely
tormented. Which he abundantly testified by his Bulls against our most noble
Queen, severely commanding all subjects to forsake their allegiance unto their
Prince: neither could they be stayed by any religious regard of oath, whereof
that violatour of al Law both of God and man, did discharge them. But, thanks
be to God, he yet labored in vayn, whereby his torment is much the more
increast. For thus said he with himself, as Saul did of old; Have ye al
conspired against me? Js there none of you that is sorry for my sake? Will no man
ease my boil, with the blood of that Queen, which has wrought me so much woe?
Have patience, good Pope; this is the time of thine ulcer, not of thine ease.
But his sickness suffers him not to rest. Therefore he rages felly, with
venomous libells; he incenseth the Kings with all earnestnes, to wage war; he
privily sends Jesuits, the bellows of al seditions, to betray their country;
he secretly suborneth ungracious cutthroats, to kill their sacred Prince:
finally he applies himself by whatsoever means he can, to styrr up troubles,
whereby he may work the utter destruction of the realm, and of us all. But
having tried all ways in vayn, through the mercy and goodness of our God, these
two and forty years; both he the Prince and head of mischeefs, and his
desperate children, do scarce refrayn from tears, because they naught worth
tears do see. In France about the same time, (that we may see this soar was
universally spread among the Papists;) when Charles the 9. began his reign, and
daily the Papists authority did more and more decay: a great part of Nobility,
joined themselves to the purer doctrine, of the Peers of the realm very many;
the Queen mother (for fear, I suppose, of her English neighbor,) was much
busied about religion, and not obscurely favored the professors thereof, or at
least feigned it; some of the Papists went more seldom to their wo^ted temples;
many which stuck more fast to their old opinions, kept themselves so within
their private wall, that they durst scarce be seen in publik meetings For what
other disease, I pray; then for the pain of this ulcer? Germany had angered the
Thracian stock, long before. But at the same time, the wounds erst inflicted,
now growing more full of atter, were changed into ulcers. The decree of
Charles, as we said before, was heavy, wherein peace and liberty was granted to
religion; but the less hope they had to repele the same, the sharper did it
prick the^ daily. For Emperor Ferdinandus succeeding his brother, thought it
best to rest in the former decrees, whereto he had consented at Augusta, before
he was Emperor. Maximilian his son, did always mislike that manner of
propagating Christian religion, with arms, or compelling any to receive it,
that were unwilling. How untollerable was this moderation to the ulcerous
Papists, that burned with desire of revenge? But now let us see in a word, how
this ulcer will not be touched. Which the Council of Trent verily showed, in the
second session under Pius 4. in the year 1562. where this business was committed
to some chosen men, for to consider of diverse censures and books, either
suspected or pernicious: that is, that by all means they should have care there
went out nothing among the people, that nipped the Popes authority, and Romish
superstition in any one word. Doubtless the ulcer is very egre and virulent,
that can endure nothing that is rough or hard. Therefore whatsoever is laid to
it, let it be tender and soft. For this cause did Pius the 4. set forth an
Index of the forbidden books; which Sixtus the 5. afterward augmented, and
Clemens the 8. lately recognized. VVherin it is appointed, which books men must
quite absteyn from; and which one may use, so they be corrected. (Certainly the
Pope prescribes a diet, for his botchie patients.) Among other rules of
correcting, this is one, that al things be well looked to, and attentively noted,
not only the things that offer themselves manifestly in the course of the
work: but if there be any that secretly do lurk in the Scholies, in the
summaries, in the margins, in the tables of the books, in the prefaces or
epistles dedicatorie. Instruct. de correct. book D. 2. How suspicious is
sickness? Verily this fear of running upon any thing that may offend, has shred
off in many late writers whatsoever was in them of soundest judgment, and more
free truth. But the books are in all men's hands, whereby they may perceive, what
it is that payneth these brand-marked persons, and where. Although one purging
Index set forth by Philip the 2. King of Spain, in the year 1571. may be in
sted of many And least thou might think perhaps, that they are troubled
concerning late writers only, or the marginal notes of others: they do
violence to the very words of the ancient Fathers. For example, in a certain
edition of Augustine, which John Gibbon an English Jesuit, Doctor of Div. and
Professor at Trevers, perused in the disputation about Saints, These. 207.
there these words are no more read, yet do not we constitute temples,
preisthoods, holy things and sacrifices to the Martyrs etc. as the ancient true
copies have, in the 8. book of the City of God, chap 17. but contrary thus; we
do constitute temples, preisthoods, holy things and sacrifices to the Martyrs,
because not they but their God is our God etc. O impudent falsers, which make
Augustine to affirm, that, which he openly denies: that I speak not how unapt
you feyghn his words to be, that sacrifices are to be constituted to the
Martyrs, because they are not God. The Ratts do perish by their own bewraying.
Francis Iunius in the year 1559, saw at Lions with Trellonius some pages of
the true Ambrose cancelled and rased by two Franciscan Friars, and other new
ones substituted in place of the former, after their own will, against all
faithful evidence of other books. An unhonest prank, and an impious: but not
new with the Romists; who showed themselves such artizens long since, in the
Council of Nice. But what do they mean, by adulterating the writings of the
ancients? Would they stop the mouth of this age? They cannot: there are left,
thanks be to God, true copies, by which their sacrilegious impudency is
co^vinced. Or, as is more likely, do they provide for time to come? Foolish
Popelings, which now get ancient writers to succor you: when shortly there shall
not a Papist be left for them to yield succor unto. Your cause, within these
few years, shall be tried, not by the Fathers, but by fire and sword: as this
Revelation will manifest. In the mean while we may observe, both how dangerous
it is, to depend now on the Fathers imprinted by others: and how full of botches
the Popish crew is, which is so afraid of nails, as it pareth them to the
quick; and not herewith content, wrappeth woll also about the Fathers fingers,
that they may the softlyer handle their scabby bodies.

3 And the second Angel powered out his vial upon the Sea: The second vial puts
forth his force against the sea; to weet, figurative, as was the earth: for
there is the same respect doubtless of every one. And seeing the overthrow of
Antichrist is here in hand, what great damage should he suffer, more then al
other men, by the sea properly so caled, turned into rotten blood? For this is
the first effect of this vial: neither would the second hurt him any whit more,
whereby al living things dye in this sea. The earth affords him infinite
daynties, so that he may easily bear the want of fishes, though they should dye
every one. Wherefore we must not stick in the native signification, but take
that which we have seen often used before. It means therefore Doctrine, the
notable change whereof, should fall out under this vial; of corrupt, being made
most corrupt. In former ages verily it was turned into blood: but now it
changes into much more gross and royled filthiness, then ever before: until
at length it becomes like the blood of a dead man, that is, rotten, clammy,
gross, black blood; not liquid and fresh, such as flows from a living body.
The first Council of Trent therefore, is this sea; being no less conpounded of
a hotchpotch of al Popish errors, then the natural sea is of the gathering
together of many waters. Which Council was begun some years before, (as we
have showed, chap. 11.7.) but at length was made an end of, and confirmed by
the definite sentence of P. Paul the 4. at the request of the Cardinals Moronus
and Simoneca, in the name of the rest of the Council, in the year 1564. Into
this sea of errors, the year after, and the eight next following, the second
Angel Martin Chemnitius powered out his vial: who began and composed a Trial of
this Tridentine Council, and found it to be nothing but an horrible confused
Chaos of many monstrous opinions. But this occasion, forthwith upstarted many
doughty Papists to mainteyn the same: who behaved themselves so fortunatly in
this service, that by defending the blood, they turned it into rotten blood;
that is heaped up many more pestilent errors, to the^ that were before. Among
the rest, there rose up handlers of controversies at Rhenes, Doway, Loven, as
frontier Captains; by whose industry it came to pass, that all the dirt which
lay stinking about here and there in many ditches, was scraped together into
one channel, that thereof at length might exist this rotten sea. But above al,
the heaping together of waters most fowl with carrayn blood, was plain to be
seen, when P. Gregory the 13. in the year 1571. procured two ample Colleges to
be built at Rome, for to corrupt youth beyond the Alps; and made Robert
Bellarmine master of this work; that he should u^fold the controversies of
faith, unto the students of those Colleges. For he, that he might the more
provide for his auditors, that is, the sooner destroy them; thought it not best
to labor about any one point, two or three; as many others had done before;
but to bring al controversies into one body as it were, which he saw was yet
wanting, as himself confesses in his Epistle to the Pope. Whereby, through
Gods good providence, it came to pass, that an intyre and perfect body of
Popish doctrine, absolute in all points, which never was before, being largely
disputed in these books of controversies, did now come forth in publik: that
they which willingly shut not their eyes, might see the Sea plainly turned into
filthy blood.

And every living soul dyed in the Sea: But how can this be, (may some say,)
seeing every sowl lives not in the sea? This, it may be, caused Theod. Beza to
transplace the words thus, and whatsoever thing lived in the sea, dyed: But the
natural order of the words has a meaning agreeable with all other of this book,
and of this kind. For we are to know, that the whole crew of the malignant
Church is divided either into the Clergy, or into the rest of the Laity.
Those clergy men are the proper living things of this sea: these lay folk are
chiefly earthly, and denoted by the earth. Now if he had said, every sowl
living in the sea, dyed; some would perhaps have gathered, that this death was
proper to the Clergy and Doctors: but when he says, every living sowl dyed
in the sea, he teaches, that the popish l^itie and people, perish in this
blood, together with the Clergy. But, thou will say, the words perteyn alike
unto al, which any way live: therefore this death seems to be common unto al.
I answer; al verily, which before seemed to live, so soon as they came down
into this sea, straight way were choked and dyed. But all the elect, have their
dwelling in the Temple, and the Temple is placed in heaven, chap. 15.6. so that
they need not to be afraid at al of this earthly sea, whose rotten blood shall
kill only the men of the same kind. And here all unless they leave their
earth, that is, unless they forsake the Popes religion; shall find destruction
in this sea: for no other waters shall they have to drink, but these thus
filthy; nor be informed with any other doctrine, then that is drawn out of the
Council of Trent, and controversal books of the Jesuits. How can they then but
dye presently, if they drink of those waters, wherein all the foundations of
salvation, are turned into deadly poison? Most miserable therefore is your
estate, o ye Papists, which drink in filthy blood, as most sweet heavenly
liquour: and settle your salvation, in most certain destruction. But it is Gods
just judgment, that they which despise the pure waters of life, should
miserably perish in this blood: draw out, o highest God, those whom thou have
destinate to the praise of thy mercy. But besides let us know, that it is not
safe to swimm in this Sodomitish lake, as many do, which make no conscience to
asse^t unto any religion. This then is the estate of this filthy sea: which well
becomes the ulcerous flock, to be fed with the rotten blood thereof, as it were
with rivers.

4 And the third Angel powered out his vial upon the rivers: The Effect of the
third vial, belongs to the fountayns and rivers. The event turns the same
into blood. Fountayns and rivers, are as the breasts wherewith the sea is
nourrished, and which borow their nourishment from it again. And the sea,
being the Doctrine: the Fountayns are the Masters which have charge of the
doctrine; and these, no mean fellows, and footstools, so to speak; but
principal Doctors, on whose mouth the rest of the troup do depend. These now,
by all men's judgment, are the Jesuits: from whose distributio^, the rest of the
multitude gathers, like babes taking the meat into their mouths, which they
chewed for them. Dominicus of old appeared unto Pope Innocent in his sleep, to
hold up with his shoulders the Lateran Church, that was in danger of ruin: but
at this day, the Jesuits be the chiefest propps of the Popes throne: which
nevertheless they shall not hold up long; who long since have begun to faulter
and fayl as overcharged with the weight. For under this third vial, the rivers
shall be turned into blood; that is, those Masters of Popish doctrine, the
Jesuits, shall be put to death; that the Church of Rome, which in time past was
wont to kill with the sword, may at length be killed her self, as the Spirit
has foretold, chap 13.10. Which power this vial began to exercise about the
year 1581. when in our realm of England, by the common decree of the States in
Parliament, it was enacted, that whosoever should go about any manner of way
to draw the minds of the subjects from obedience toward their lawful and
natural Prince, unto the Bishop of Rome, or unto the Romish religion for the
same end: they should be put to death as guilty of high treason. What is this,
may some say, to the Jesuits? Very much when they al mind nothing else,
endeavor nothing else; being traitors to their country, killers of Princes,
seducers of subjects, the plagues and bane of al Kingdoms and common weals.
Therefore the powered out vial wanted not effect, but in the same year Everard
Ducket, Edmund Campion, Ralfe Sherwin, and Alexander Brian, Jesuits and
nourissons of the Seminaries, being convincted of the breach of the law, were
worthily punished. And after them followed John Pains, Thomas Ford, John
Sherret, Robert Johnson, and many other of that leven. Thus by Gods grace, the
wickedness of wretched men was somewhat restreyned: that though it were not
quite taken away, (for who can require of the Leopard to change his skin?) yet
did it not so freely range abroad, but was forced to lurk in darkness, to
disguise it self, to counterfeit and dissemble al things; that so both the
venim might be dispersed more secretly, and the mischeevous heads thereof, be
provided for.

5 And I heard the Angel of the waters: We have seen the first event: the
second is a twofold testimony whereby the fact is approved: of which the first
is by the Angel of the waters; who is not one of these rivers and fountayns, as
the Angel of the bottomless pit, before, chap. 9.11. but one that is over the
rivers and fountayns to execute this judgment of God. In which respect the
rest may be called the Angel of the earth, the Angel of the sea, the Angel of
the sun, etc. to whom power is given over these things. For in that he says in
the next verse, and thou have given them blood to drink, he plainly exe^pteth
him from the number of them. This Angel therefore is some civil Magistrate,
which had power, or rather which was author and Counselor for turning these
waters into blood, namely for killing and putting to death the Jesuits. Whom
if I should note by name to have been that noble man of blessed memory, S.
William Cicil, late high Tresurer of England: the words following will show, I
do it not without ground.

Just art thou o Lord: This testimony adorneth God with the praises of his
Justice and Truth: and annexeth a reason from the present thing, in putting the
murderers to a deserved death. And a like celebration of Gods justice, was
verily made by him whom even now I named, S. William Cicil. For he in the year
1584. to stop the mouth of gaynsaying raylers, rendered a reason in a book set
forth, of putting the Jesuits to death among us. Which book is entitled the
Justice of Britany; whereby is clearly manifested, that some lewd fellows in
England were for shameful treaso^s put to death. He published the book almost
in all languages, that all might hear the Angel celebrating Gods justice; and
others that would procure the safety of their realms and peoples, might be
stirred up by this most worthy president, to do the like. The book has the
very same argument that these two verses have; neither can the sum of it be
comprised in any words more fit.

Which art, and which wast, and which shall be: Thus does Theod. Beza set it
down, out of an ancient hand-written copy. Aretas, the vulgar Latin, and
Montanus, in sted of (...) shall be, do read (...), holy. The former
celebrated God for constancy in his promises, that he is always like
himself, avenging wicked deeds in like sort now, as he punished the^ in ages
past. This latter together with co^sta^cie joins holiness; as if he should
say, which for thy constancy and holiness can let this wickedness go no longer
unpunished: but where a title is used, from the distribution of time, the two
first articles are not wont to be put without the third; therefore the first
reading seems to be the more true.

Because thou have judged th^se things; That thou have showed such a judgment,
that is, have inflicted such a punishment on the rivers and fountayns:
According to the Hebrew metonymie; for with them, to judge, signifies to
punish and avenge: as the nation whom they shall serve, I judge; that is, I will
punish, Genesis 15.14. So Deuteronomy. 32.36. 1 Samuel 25.39.

6 For they shed the blood of the Saints: These words show reason, of the
former celebration. But where have the Jesuits shed blood? As though this were
hard to know? Are not these the spyals for the holy fathers of the Inquisition,
as they that for the most part carry Christians to their boucherie: from whence,
no not the guiltless, as they say is let go, but either it costeth him his
life, or at least al his goods? But besides this, all the world now knows that
these men are the plotters of al treasons against Princes, and the troublers of
public tranquillity: which absteyn not their hands, no not from sacred
Princes, for whom they devise death sundry ways, as we with great danger have
often tried; and other Princes also, by their own proper peril, have by this
time learned. But though these things were not, seeing they are bound by oath to
the Bishop of Rome, who^e most feirce defenders they undertake to be: they are
worthily guilty of the blood of all the Saints, which the Pope has shed in so
great abundance. So Christ condemns the Jews then present, of the death of
Zachary, whom their ancestors killed many years before; because they allowed
the same things that their Fathers, which had wrought that mischief, Mat. 23.35.

And thou have give^ etc. As Tomyris did to Cyrus. To giv on^ blood is to give
one to death; as I will give thee the blood of gealousie and wrath, that is, I
will cause thee to be cruelly killed, as they that are slain in the heath of
wrath and gelousie, Ezech. 16.36. By which it appears, that the fountayns and
rivers, are men, as we interpreted at the first: unto whom the murder of the
saints is attributed, whom they again must make amends with their own blood.

7 And I heard another from the altar: The second testimony is of an Angel from
the Altar. (...) properly is an altar of slain Sacrifices; and sometime the
altar of incense, as chap. 8.3. because it is likewise a sign of Christ's
death. Theod. Beza translateth it, out of the Sanctuary; which does not
sufficiently express the force of the sentence. Perhaps he so turned it,
because of the preposition (...), which for the most part is of place, and of
that which conteyneth any thing; which might seem not to agree unto an altar;
but a like place before, where an Angel came, (...) from the altar, chap. 14.18.
may open the meaning of this. We showed that this manner of speech belongs unto
them which are killed for Christ, which have a place given them under the altar,
chap. 6.9. Therefore this Angel is one of that flock, which sufferring calamity
for Christ's name, does by his sentence approve the fact of killing the
Jesuits, and for that cause celebrateth in like sort the justice of God. Even
as it is manifest to have fallen out in the year 1586. April 4. when the States
of Holland and of the other Provinces confederate with them, did decree, that
none of the bloody sect of the Jesuits, or that then was a student with the
professors of it, whither he were born within the confederate Provinces, or a
forreyner, should creep into those provinces, either by sea or by La^d, under
pain of hostility and loss of his life. By which decree they give their
verdict against those ungracious men, and subscribe to the sentence erst give^
by the Angel of the waters in England. And who sees not them lying under the
altar, who so many years suffered so many and horrible things of the cruel
Spaniard, for the profession of Christ? Although they now by use have learned,
that there is more confort in these calamities, then in all Spanish deynties,
which in time past they enjoyed, when they wanted the holy truth the while.
VVerfore, you noble Hollanders, cleave still with perfect hearts to him, by whose
defense you have hitherto been kept safe. Beware of the Romish wiles; do not
so deal, as that now by harkening to Popish Sinons, your constancy past avayl
you nothing, save to let you have trial of your new feigned friends to be
noisome foes. Think ye that the Catholic King could be more addicted to the
Antichristian religion, the^ the Prelate and late Cardinal of the same? Would
he more desire to take Christ from you, then this man? Take heed; be not
dismayed with fear of any peril, though al men should forsake you. The time is
short: stand still, and behold the salvation of Jehovah, which he will work for
you within these few years. But what do I? I could not choose but by the way to
warn in a word my brethren that are in danger. I come again to the matter.
Two years before that decree was made by the Hollanders, when the French King
Henry the 4 was wounded, by John Castle a Jesuit, who had decreed to kill
him: this worthy sentence was uttered in the Session of the great Chamber, both
against this Castle, and the whole hierd of Jesuits; namely, that all the
Priests of the College of Clermont, and all others that were addicted to the
foresaid society, should, as corrupters of youth, troublers of the publik
tranquillity, enemies of the King and Queen; depart within three days after
the proclamation of this Edict from Paris and other cities and places where
they held their Colleges, and within fifteen days following, get them out of
the whole Realm. And if they did not, but were found any where, after the time
prescribed: they should be punished as guilty of high treason etc. A holy and
wholesome decree: but o Father of mercies, rear up, I beseech thee, thine altar
among them, that the Roman Antichrist being quite abandoned, they may enjoy
with the rest of thine elect, the sincere worship of thy name.

8 And the fourth Angel powered out his vial upon the Sun: Hitherto have bin
these times wherein now we live; for unto this vial have our ages come: the
other four ar by us to be looked for, so that the serching of them out is the
more difficult. Notwithstanding we trusting in his guidance alone, by whose
conduct we are come hitherto; and being helped by the light of those that are
passed, which we have drawn from the former explication: do hope that we shall
bring somewhat, which may be profitable for the illustration of them that are to
come. The proper force of this vial, is turned upon the Sun: whereof there is a
tow fold event; first, a power given to the Sun, to scorch men by fire; in this
verse: secondly, a very great heat of men, blasphemy and obduration; in the 9.
verse. As touching the Sun, the borrowed speech is like the former. For the same
men complayn of the greatness of this heat, which felt the former calamities; as
in the next verse, and they blasphemed the name of God which has power over
these plagues. But if it be understood of any Sun-burning properly; how does
it afflict the bad, more then the good, seeing both of them dwell together on
earth, and the one sort ar no more covered from the force of the heavenly
bodies, then the other? But there is no other Sun to be thought of, then the
vial which is powered out upon it: which we have showed to be caled so, rather
for similitude, than for any respect of proper nature. Let the usual
signification therefore of this word remayn, whereby it denotes the holy
Scriptures: with whose light the dark minds of men are no less illustrated,
then the eyes of the body are with the beams of the Sun. Upon these is this
vial to be powered, not for to hurt them, as the former vials did the earth,
sea, and rivers: but for to give them a kind of force and edge, whereby they may
prick the sharper, and pierce the deeper. How notable the goodness of God is in
this respect toward these last times: there is no man, unless he be shamefully
unthankful and envious, but does acknowledge. For by the pains of some very
excellent, (for why may I not so call those learned men, which have so greatly
helped Christian religion with their studies?) many things are made unto us
most easy and plain, in which the ages past, have been much deceived. Neither
is this a vayn boasting of our times; but a true preaching of the bounty of
God. Notwithstanding there shall be a time at length when the light of the Moon
shall be as the light of the Sun; and the light of the Sun shall be seven fold like
the light of seven days; in the day that the Lord shall bind up the breach of
their wound, Isa 30.26. as partly by the things that follow, will appear more
manifest. Many things there are in the Scriptures, not yet sufficiently
explayned: but the nearer we come unto that day, the more copiously will the
light increase daily, by the near beams of the rising Sun. That I may tell the
very thing; Antichrist is in deed laid open, now long ago through the grace of
God, in marvelous manner: but seeing in these years wherein now we live, and
whereunto the order of time has brought us, the waiting men of the seat of
Rome, have felt nothing heavier, then that their Jesuits should be put to
death, which was the sentence of the vial next before; this burning heat of the
Sun is to be expected ere long, even some greater perspicuity of the
Scriptures, whereby the man of sin may be more vehemently scorched. His
filthiness shall be discovered yet more, whereupon men will the more hate him;
which will drive him and his unto such intemperance, that he will gnash and rage
against the Sun which has manifested to the world his so horrible hiew, that
himself shall not endure to behold the same. Wherefore I am to exhort you, ye
learned men, whom God has adorned above others with a singular faculty of
perceiving and illustrating the truth: that ye would diligently employ your
selves in this noble work for the Church. You hear what a garlond God has
reserved for these last times. Great is the praise of our Ancestors, which
first plucked off Antichrists vizar: no less will theirs be, which shall
utterly hysse him and drive off the stage. Yea they are wont in special, to
make the triumph, which do make an end of the battle. This only conflict
seems to be left for learned men: the more are they to be styrred up to apply
their studies. That which further does remayn, fire and soword shall perform;
and shall not be accomplished by ynk and pen.

And it was given unto him to torment men by fire: The first event, it shall
torment men with heat. But what men? why is nothing here added, as the mark of
the Beast, or some such like, whereby we may know unto what flock it perteyneth?
Shall others also be burned with this Sun, besides the household of Antichrist?
verily so it seems. Hypocrites and all others that are not endued with true
godliness, whatsoever religion they profess, cannot endure that their wickedness
should be manifested, and reproved by the light of the heavenly truth. Whereupon
it is no marvel if many other earthly men also, which are not of the Popes
profession, be molested by this heat of the Sun. But the words of the next
verse, which has power over these plagues, seem to be of those men, as I said,
which have felt the former scourges also. But to what end is this added, by
fire; seeing the word (...) burn, does sufficiedtly express the burning of the
Sun? It is that we may know, that the heat wherewith they shall boil, shall
not be heavenly but earthly; such as is fire, to weet, envy, contention,
strife, and al bitterness of mind. For fire is here metaphorical, which plainly
shows that this is not the proper Sun, seeing it works not by it own but by
an others virtue. Such then shall be the first event, that men shall boil in
heat, not only by a secret exacerbation of their minds, but even by open
brawles and reproaches. But shall the Angel of the Sun, receave such a reward? It
had bin better for him to have stopped his vial, that it might not distill such
trouble unto him. But let him not be discouraged: God will prepare him a secret
place with himself; to keep him from the virulence of tongues. The same has
been the condition of all the Prophets always: so it is with the holy book, that
being tasted, it is sweet in the mouth as honey; but being eaten, it makes the
belly bitter: chap. 10.9. Wherefore let ungratious men reproach freely; so as the
manifestation of their wickedness do move their choler.

9 And men boiled with great heat: The second effect shall be marvelous and
unusual vexations; when there shall be no shelter no not in the thickest forest,
that men can use to alay their heat. Therefore they blaspheme the name of God
that has power over these plagues: like the men of Atlas, which curse the Sun
with all execrations, because it parcheth them with too much heat; as Herodotus
relates. These last words seem to make this plague peculiar unto them, that
were vexed also with soates, and whose fountains were turned into blood.
Notwithstanding we are not to think that it shall be open blasphemy against God,
so as his holy name shall be manifestly violated after the manner of the Hethens,
and them that know not God: but that then men do also commit this wickedness,
when they difame his truth, and use cursed speaking against it; such manner of
indirect blasphemy, it seems it shall be.

And they repented not to give him glory: A defective speech; which is more
full, in chap. 9.20. as if he should say, And they repented not of their
works, to give him glory; and so after in ver. 11. Now therefore see what this
greater light and heat shall effect: it shall drive men to blasphemy; but they
shall persist in their wickedness, no less then before. Least perhaps thou
should look, that they being convicted in conscience, should submitt
themselves to so manifest truth. This therefore take thou knowledge of before;
that thou be not offended at the obstinacy of men.

10 And the fifth Angel powered out his vial upon the throne: This vial upon the
Beasts throne, has for the first event, the darkning of his kingdom: for the
second; rage, blasphemy, darkning, of the Beasts brood, ver. 11. Who this
Angel is, we shall see in the next chapter, upon ver. 17. where the declaration
of this thing is purposed. What the Throne is, the things that we have heard
before, do sufficiently teach us: for it is the City, which the Dragon gave to
the Beast, chap. 13.2. which we have showed to be Rome, and will be playner yet,
by the things that follow. Therefore after the evide^ce of the Scriptures, whereby
the Beast swelted in heat in such marvelous manner: that which now next is to
be looked for, is calamity that shall come upon this very city. Not any light
adversity whereby her former dignity shall be a little lessened: but her last
overthrow, whereby she shall utterly be ruinate, as after shall be manifest: when
that saying of Sibylla shall come to pass: Then (Rome) shall thou be wasted
quight, as thou had never been. This therefore touches Antichrist, nearer
then the former. The farr-darting Sun did scortch, but it was from far: now,
the tops of his sacred Palace shall fall down; whereby the brightness of the
Popes Kingdom shall be turned into darkness. For how should it not be covered
with mournful blacknes, when the Princely Court is cut down, and Chair
overthrown, which they were wont to vaunt should be eternal, and that Hell gates
should not prevayl against it? To prove which point, Bellarmine brings many
reasons: but the speedy event will teach, how he was deceived. Although some
Jesuits, being forced hereunto by the truth, do now beginn to speak of the
destruction of it. Which yet they will have to be, not because of Antichrist;
but before his birth, or at least before he shall begin his reign. But this
fiction, we will take away in his place. We may hence observe, how
lo^g-suffering God is, and slow unto wrath. A thousand times has he now
already convinced this whore of her filthynes: yet will he not quight destroy
her until he has set out her wickedness in a clearer light. Which when it also
shall be done in vayn; what remains but the last punishment, when there is no
hope at al of any amendment? But after the ruin of the City, the Beast shall
remayn a while; not to recover his former dignity, but to perish soon after,
with a greater destruction. And therefore he says, his kingdom was made dark,
not altogether extinct, but bereft of the former brightness.

And they gnawed their tongues for pain: The second event; they shall gnaw their
tongues for rage and madness. Huge and intolerable shall be the pain; such as is
noted elsewhere, by weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 22.13. Unless perhaps
by a proverbial manner of speaking, so great anguish be signified, as will they,
nil they, they are compelled to refreyn their malapert tongues, to renounce
their own writings, and speak thenceforth more modestly; which is commonly
caled the biting of the tongue, and eating of ones own words. But because in
the next verse it is said; they repented not of their works, the former
exposition is more simple. Although they may faighnedly and for fear, temper
their evil speakings, so as they repent not from the heart and truly: yet I
choose rather the former. That speech of Zachary seems to agree fitly with
this; Their tongue shall consume in their mouth, Zach. 14.12. And that phrase
(...) for pain, is an Hebraisme, mehhamal; (...) answers to the preposition
min: as elsewhere, for sighting, Psalm. 102.6.

11 And they blasphemed the God of heaven: Infinite is the hardness of ma^s
heart, which cannot be tamed by any afflictions. Grant that the Papists be not
convicted by the increased light of the scriptures: will not the destruction of
their holy city move them to acknowledge the truth? VVil they now burst out
again into blasphemy; where there is no hope but by asking forgivenes? But it is
not in him that wills, nor in him that runs. God strikes and softneth,
what hearts he thinks good. And where it is said, for their soars; by it is
signified, that these are the same men, on whom the former vials were powered.
But mention is made specially of soars; because every calamity, caused not
sensible pain. The Sea changed into blood, was so far from working any sorrow:
that it rather ministered matter of rejoicing to men that knew not their misery.
Furthermore it is hereby manifest, that the former vials do yet reteyn their
force; and vanish not straight way, when new ones come in place. But above all,
Envy, which we said was the soars, does most torment: which causes greater
grief by the felicity of their enemies, then by their own destruction. Who
would look for any feeling of the former soars, when the sorrow for their
wasted throne was upon them? O envy, great is thy power.

And repented not of their works: For this Beast is the Pantheresse, chap.
13.2. it cannot change the skin. But the power of God should not have bin so
eminent in times past, if Pharaoh had repented at the first miracles. So shall
there be many subtle devises after the throne is overthrown: Antichristian
religion shall still be retained among the Papists. But let none be afraid: the
Beast is reserved only for the triumph.

12 And the sixth Angel powered out his vial on the great river Euphrates: This
river is not either the Tyber or any other fortress of Rome; (whose
destruction was taught us by the former vial; and why should the thing done, be
now done again?) but it is that which runs through Mesopotamia Eastward from
Judea, as before, chap. 9.14. which notwithstanding is used figuratively for
any impediment, that may hinder the passage into this country. The first event
is, the drying up of the waters thereof, as of old the Red Sea was by the
Eastern winds, and as Iarden was to the Jews when they passed into the Land of
Canaan, Exodus 14. Ios. 3. The end of drying up these waters is, that the way of
the Kings from the East may be prepared. But who be these Kings? Are they those
four Angels spoken of chap. 9.15. The counpt of the time will not bear it. For
the tro^pet sounded many years agone: but this vial is not yet begun to be
powered out: it follows after Rome is wasted, which yet flourishes, and which
the trompet saw flourishing long. Are they those Kings of the earth and of the
whole world, mentioned in the 14. verse of this chapter? But, these to whom
Euphrates gives place, are the Kings of the E^st only, not of the whole
world. It would be long to reckon all the interpretations of other men; much
more to refute them. It seems unto me, that they are here meant, for whose
sake alone the scripture mentions the waters of old to have bin dried up;
namely the Jews, unto whom the read sea yielded passage, and Iarden stayed his
course, til every one were gone over, journying on foot through the deep. This
miracle is proper to this people only: for that which Josephus writes that
the sea of Pamphilia gave way to the Macedonians, when Alexander led his host
that way: (Antiquit. b. 2. chap. 7.) Other writers do plainly show, how the
thing is to be understood. Plutarch, (in Alexand.) says that Historie-writers
amplifyed the thing beyond al credit: and that Alexander himself never boasted
of any such wonder in his Epistles. Arianus writes that usually there is no way
to pass through the sea near Phaselis, but when the North winds blow; which
blew vehemently when Alexander went that way, that they seemed, not without
Gods power, to have yielded them an easy passage. But Strabo book 14, writes
most plainly, that the soldiers traveiled all the day even up to the navel in
the waters. So then Alexander passed through the waters that were shollow, and
not quite dried up. Neither do I think can it be found in any record; that
such a thing did ever happen to any other people then the Jews. The vanity of
writers may feign many things: but the Scriptures do challenge this, as
peculiar to this nation only. I will say, says God, to the deep, be dry, and
I will dry up thy floods, Isa 44.27. And again, Art not thou the same, which
dried up the sea, even the waters of the great deep: making the deeps of the
Sea, to be a way for the redeemed to pass over? Isa 51.10. And least some
should think this miracle was only for the time passt, and not such to be
looked for ever after: he adds in the next verse; So the redeemed of the Lord
shall return, and come with joy into Sion etc. And in Isa 63.11. where should
he be that brought these up out of the sea with the shepherd of his flock?
which cleft the waters for th^se, to make himself an everlasting name? which
led these through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, so that they
stumbled not? It is no marvel therefore, if the peculiar note and ensign of
this nation only, be putt for the men themselves. But what need there a way to
be prepared for them? Shall they return again to Jerusalem? There is nothing
more sure: the Prophets plainly confirm it, and beat often upon it. Yet not to
the end that the ceremonial worship should be restored: but that the mercy of
God may shine unto all the world, in giving to a nation now scatered over all the
face of the earth, and dwelling no where but by leave; their fathers
habitations, wherein they shall serve Christ purely and sincerely, according to
his own ordinance only. A thing of old commonly spoken of by the ancient
Jews, which they understood by the Prophets, although but narrowly and through
the lattisse. Whereupon it was berayed with old wives fables, both in ages past,
and so is now at this day. The feighned Esdras saw some sparkles of this truth;
which he overwhelmed with so many and great fictions, that he had need be a
wary and attentive reader, and one of no mean judgment, that would gather gold
out of that confused heap. They entered in, says he, speaking of the ten tribes
that were led captives, at the narrow passages of the river Euphrates: for the
most high then showed them signs, and stayed the springs of the river, til
they were passed over, 4. Esdras, 13.43.44. A Jewish fable: but nearer to the
truth is that which there follows, ver. 47. The most high shall hold still the
springs of the river again, that they may go through: etc. which agrees with
this place, and may both of them be understood metaphorically: though nothing
lets, why it may not please God again to show his ancient power of drying
waters up extraordinarily. Seeing therefore it is certain, that this nation shall
earnestly flock unto the Gospel, and that in the last times, as Paul teaches,
Romans 11.25. and the last period of things is of the vials: and it is not likely
that such a wonderful matter should have no mention at al in this clear
Prophecy: unto which also here is added the proper ensign of this nation, for
whose only sake, both sea and river (as we read) were dried up: I am not
altogether unadvised, in supposing, that this is the only matter here in hand:
which must either be found in this place, or be wholly omitted in this book.
Wherefore after Rome is overthrown and cut off there shall be a common bruit of
this new Christian people: at the hearing whereof the Gentiles shall be
astonished. But what, are the Jews Kings? why not? seeing al Christians are
Kings, Rev. 1.6. and the fowr and twenty Elders, which represente the whole
company of the faithful, do all wear crowns: chap. 4.4. And this magnificent
name does the Spirit give them, because it shall be very honorable, after so
many ages, and so stiff stubbornes of that nation; for them to come again, as
it were by recovery of law, unto the truth; and religiously and holily with all
observance to honor the same, having their incredulous and obstinate hearts
subdued. But besides this the whole East shall obey them, that not without cause
ar this people caled Kings, in respect of their long and large dominion and
Empire. But they seem to be called plainly Kings in Isay 24.21. if we
diligently mark the words and meaning of the place: And it shall be, says he, in
that day the Lord will visit the host of the high, in the high place; and the
Kings of the earth, upon the earth. And they shall be gathered with a gathering
as a prisoner into a pit, and shall be closed up in the close-place: and after
many days shall they be visited. And the Moon shall be abashed, and the Sun
ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem:
and shall be glorious, before his Ancients, and the Kings of the earth, are al
one; who after are gathered into the pit, after many days are visited; and at
whose deliverance, the Moon is abashed etc. Which last words are certainly
meant of the full restoring of the Jews: wherefore the first words intend also
the same. Whom God, in heavy indignation, because they refused his Son, did
thrust into the pit or dungeon, for many ages together, and kept them closed up
in a very hard prison. But at length after many days he will visit these
prisoners, and bring them out of the gayl: for whose ferve^t zele and singular
study of true godliness, the Churchches of the Gentiles as the Moon and Sun,
shall be abashed at this greater brightness. They are caled the host of the high,
in the high; because the Jews were the peculiar people of the high God, and of
his Church which is heavenly: whereupon they are often caled in Daniel, qaddische
hheljonin, the Saints of the high; Dan. 7.22. etc. But this is enough to find
out the meaning of this place: I may not now stand longer upon it. I have
handled it the more at large, for to give occasion unto our men to mind these
things more diligently. These Kings come from the East, because the greatest
multitude of Jews, is in those countries: and these first of all shall see the
truth, and embrace the study of it. But, thou will say, The Temple is shut,
until the seven plagues be fufilled: which we showed to be spoken in respect of
the Jews, chap. 15.8. But that is to be understood of their universal caling:
and here only the beginning of it is taught, as we shall declare after more at
large. And by these things we may see, how the sixth vial, answers to the sixth
Trompet. The trompet, sent from Euphrates, four furies into the world: the vial
shall minister great joy from the same place: which shall yield new huige troops
of Christians, by whose virtue those furies shall be sent back to hell. But as
Romes Idolatry, caled for those cruel Turks: so after that Rome is utterly
abolished, straightway this comfort shall appear.

13 And I saw out of the mouth of the Dragon: The second event is first a
preparation unto war; whereof there are three Princes Authors, and as many
Administers, three unclean Spirits like froggs; in this verse; whose work is
described in the verse following. The Princes are, the Dragon, the Beast, and
the false Prophet. The Dragon always throughout this whole book, is the open
enemy: which were the Roman Emperors, so long as they continued hethens: in
these last times, the Turks do carry this person. The Beast is the more covert
and crafty enemy, Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God; as in the 13 chap.
The False Prophet is now first named, and often henceforth after the fifth vial.
But there must needs have been some description of him some where before: for
John speaks as of a person well known. And this verily we shall find in that
subtle and crafty second Beast; of whom we heard in chap. 13.11. etc. who
wrought signs and wondrous lies. Both of them perteyned to the constituting of
the same Antichrist; but with this condition, that the first signified the
temporal and civil tyranny: the second, the spiritual fraud and malice, as is
said before. This second Beast is now plainly caled the False Prophet, by
reason of the more manifest revelation, which shall be under this sixth vial. For
though he reteyne yet with him many attendants, yet the better part of men, and
they of his former worshippers; shall know him for a crafty lying hypocrite, and
detest him as a loathsome creature. For now the event will teach, after Rome is
destroyed, how glorious lies those were, about Peter's Chair; the Holiness of
the Church of Rome, the invincible stedfadnes and perpetual constancy of it,
against the practices of al. Wherefore the Beast and False Prophet is one
Antichrist; but having a double power, al which he will now use, both civil and
spiritual; to deceive the unskilful, and draw them again to be of his side. He
will open his treasury, he will spare no charges, he will levy huge bands of
souldjers, and other things that perteyn to force. Neither will he be less
diligent to catch the simple, by all spiritual fraud, counterfeisance,
fallacies, and other like legierdumain of lies and errors; whereby he may abuse
their pain and help unto this last battle which he now prepares. So the Turk,
the Caesarean Bishop, and Pope-Balaam; are these three mouths, which at last
will belk out the Froggs in their time.

Three unclean spirits like Froggs: The Ministers of these mischeevous heads.
To weet out of the Dragons mouth; Turks, Bashshnes, Agnes, B^goes, and the
other officers of his army. Out of the mouth of the Caesarean Bishop; his
Captayns also of war. Out of the mouth of the Pope false Prophet, he has the
Jesuits in special, and the other toades of his wicked Hierarchy. They come
forth out of the mouth, because by their masters commandment they take this
work in hand; as is manifest by the vow of mission, whereby the Jesuits are
bound to the Pope. But why are they called Spirits? Is it because they are like
the breath which comes out of the mouth and have very near alliance to them of
whom they are breathed, both refreshing and animating them, and again borowing
of them heat and stink? Verily these three Emissaries, ar joynd in near
alliance with these their masters: they draw from them heat and life; and life
they give unto them again. Or is it perhaps because they show themselves no
less diligent and mighty in executing their business, then the Spirits be?
Surely the world has now experience of the singular vigilance and almost
incredible industry of these three Emissaries; and it is not likely that they
will be more sluggish in the last combat. They are like to Froggs; because they
rejoice in their most filthy and unclean pollutions, from which they draw
beginning and life. They refuse to be clothed with Christ's righteousness,
boasting themselves to be clean enough before God in their own mire. And when
before, the Sea was made like dead man's blood: what other thing ca^ take
pleasure in such a foul Camarine-puddle, than Froggs, Toads, and other like
fennish and execrable filth? But besides their uncleannes, they have also an
importunate croaking: for no means do these stirrers up of troubles, and
fighting furies, leave unaptented; for to set all the world together by the
ears. But why is there no difference between the Ministers of the Pope and of
the Turk? Because albeit nothing is more common with them than the name of
Christ; (whereupon they will be caled Jesuits;) nevertheless, whiles they hope
for life and salvation by their own merits; they differ nothing from heathens,
which despise Christ altogether.

14 For they are Spirits of Devils: He describes yet more largely the nature
of those Spirits, by their Lords, their monstrous works, and their Embassage
unto all the Kings of the earth. Their Lords are the Divils: because the
Princes whom they serve be the vassals and Feoffies of the Divil himself, chap.
12.9. and 13.2. Signs they work, by the force and power of the Divil, for of
them is he a marvelous artizen, and with such faculty did he furnish the second
Beast, 2 These. 2.9. Rev. 13.13. They go forth to gather the Kings of the earth
unto battle: for after that Euphrates shall be dryep up, and the way prepared for
the Eastern Jews: the Turk fearing himself, will prepare war against them,
with as great furniture as he can; as is more largely declared in Daniel, chap.
11.44. Nor will the Romish Beast together with the false Prophet in the West, be
less studious to abolish utterly all them that favor pure religion. He will
prudently take his opportunity, when the Turk shall be employed in the Eastern
war. Whereby it shall come to pass, that in one and the same time, the safety
of the whole Church shall be in very great danger. This is that war, whose
alarm these Froggs do sound unto the Kings of the earth.

15 Behold I come as a thief: These words do trouble the learned man Th. Beza,
as if they had crept in hither amiss from some other place. But feing these
times shall be very calamitous, as in respect of the Jews Daniel foretold, chap.
12.1. neither is it likely that our Christian nations shall be in better case:
let not this warning seem superfluous or importune unto any. The greatness of
the peril, may deterr even the strongest man. But least any should hitt against
this rock and make shipwrak; Christ bids him be of good courage, and not
through any fear, to forsake the righteousness of faith, (which here he calls
garments, and which the adversaries will most seek to bereav us of:) promising
that he will come as a thief unwares, and do vengeance on the enemies above al
expectation, and defend his Church.

A like comfort there was, chap. 13.10. and 14.13. that we may know, such
hortatorie voices must needs be new, and are not fruitless, but seasonable and
very necessary. Neither are these words brought in abruptly; but whereas in the
words next before, mention was made of God almighty, these ar for more force
related in his person.

His garments: The hope of forgivenes of sins through Jesus Christ alone,
whereby our sins are covered, Romans 4.6.7. Neither be there any other garments,
wherewith al our nakedness can be covered. The purity of the Saints or of our
selves, will not so much as cover our shoulders, so far is it from hiding our
more deformed parts. These garments are in deed caled afterward, (...) the
justifications of the saints, chap. 19.8. where we shall see what is the force
of these words.

16 And he gathered them together into a place: Here is the third branch of the
second event. But who is this that gathered them? Christ verily; and therefore
he speaks not as of many they gathered, to weet those three spirits.
Whatsoever the Kings shall purpose, Gods secret providence shall so govern
them, that themselves shall feel the same destruction that they intend to
others. Unless perhaps that which this verb answers unto, be the Spirits in
the 14. verse, which there are said in the singular number (according to the
property of the Greek tongue) to go forth, (...): unto which these words may
be joined (...) and they gathered them together: for the 15. verse is
interposed by a parenthesis. But by whose means soever they be gathered;
governed they are by the secret providence of Christ. For being led by the hand
of God, they come together of their own accord into that place, from whence
there shall be no way to escape. Which place is caled in Hebrew Armagedon, as
Montanus and Plantins edition reads it with a single d; as also does Aretas,
save with difference of a letter, Ermagedon And perhaps these had done right,
if they had kept the aspiration Harmagedon, for so I suppose this word shoul be
written, as, (if I be not deceived,) will appear by that which follows. Th.
Beza will have d to be doubled thus, Harmageddon, as also the vulgar Latin; as
if it were made of Har and Megiddo, which is the place where Josias was slain,
2 Chronicles. 35.22. But this place was pernicious to the Church, prosperous to the
wicked: but Armagedon here seems the contrary. John Fox our countryman of
blessed memory, brings a fitter application, as me thinks, for he says
this place has not respect unto Josias, but unto that notable victory which
Debora and Barak with a small company, got over the huge host of Sisera, at the
town of Megiddo situate on a mountayn, Iud. 5.10. etc. Notwithstanding whiles I
consider the thing attentively with my self, there seems no such matter here
to be meant; but that an allusio^ rather is made unto that of Daniel, chap.
11.45. And he shall fix the tents of Aphadnon between the seas (Lehar tsebi
qodes^h) in the mountayn of holy beauty. By many arguments it may be showed,
that this prophecy of Daniel, and that of John, do perteyn to the same times
namely to this sixth vial, as at some other time, if God permit, we will
manifest. The difference only is, that there particularly it is spoken of the
Turk, the enemy of the Christian Jews: here jointly it is mea^t of the enemies
of the whole Church, as well of Gentiles as of Jews. And the place is designed
by name, where the Jews enemy shall camp, namely lehar, tsebi qodhesch, in the
mount of beauty of holiness, that is, in the holy land, between the Siriak sea
and Euphrates, which is also caled, a sea, in the Scriptures. But in this
Prophecy, where the Spirit universally does describe the place of that war, he
could not use that name which is proper to the Jews. Therefore he made a new
word which should be common to each people, and come very near unto that in
signification. For Harmagedon is made of Har a Mountayn, and meghadhim of
delites; or with an affix in the singular number maghdo, of his delight. The
very same that Har tsebhi is, the mount of the Roe. For tsebhi a Roe,
signifies also pleasantnes or delight. A word of paramours, when they would
speak to their loves most amiably; as in Salomons song, my beloved is like a
Roe etc chap. 2.9. By these things then it does appear, that the place is
foretold by name in Daniel, where the Turk shall fight with the Jews: but here,
where the Beast shall combat with the Church of the Gentiles, the same is only
intimated generally. As if Armagedo^ were the common name of both, distinguished
into har tsebhi qodhesch, the mount of holy bewty; and the western place
without name, save the name of the whole. Which notwithstanding teaches that
this war shall there be made, where the Church flourished with greatest purity.
For this is the mount of delites unto Christ: which place we shall see somewhat
more distinctly manifested, in the explication of this time, chap. 19. But let
us observe to our confort, that the holy Church among us Gentiles, is no less a
mount of pleasures unto God, tha^ that which is to come of the Jews. God
respects not persons: in every nation they are dear unto him, that truly
honor him in Christ.

17 And the seventh Angel powered out his vial upon the aier: This vial shall
have a common event, a^ being powered into the aier, which compasses the earth
and seas round about. Which yet is not this clementish aier wherein we breath,
but some other thing signified by this manner; after the manner of the other
vials. And we know that the Divil is caled in the Scriptures, the Prince that
rules in the air, Ephesians. 2.2. whereto perteyn those chains of darkness, which
Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 2.4. and Jude in his Epistle ver. 6. Seeing then the
Aier is the place of his dominion, this last vial shall import most grievous
calamity upon all the Divils Kingdom. The former vials nipped some parts
thereof severally: this, shall undoo the whole body of the impious, with a common
destruction.

And there come a great voice out of the Temple of heaven: The first event, is
a great voice, which is described by the place whence it comes, and the thing
that it speaks. The place, is not only the Temple of Heaven, but also the
throne it self; the description whereof, was in chap. 4.2. The Temple is the
dwelling place of the Saints, as we have seen before: this Throne is the seat
of the highest Majesty: which being placed in midds of the company of the
faithful, shines with the incomprehensible brightes of the most holy Trinity.
Wherefore this voice comes immediately from God in respect of the Ministry of
the Church. Whereby is signified, that God under this vial, will in extraordinary
manner and almost beyond exspectation, provide for his; showing forth his power
from heaven, for the destruction of all the enemies, which were gathered, (as
even now we heard) unto the place Armagedon: which interpretation we shall see
more fully confirmed by that which follows, where a larger explication of this
vial is handled. The voice uttered is, It is done: (...): most fit for the
finishing of things, as we know it was used in the creating of them, Genesis 1.
and it has this meaning, as if he should say; Al things now have bin, which I
decreed to be done; neither remains any more of my promises, the compleme^t
whereof should be exspected on earth. For this same, Is done, has refere^ce
unto that in chap. 10.7. In the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when
he shall sound the trompet, the Mystery of God shall be finished. Now shall there
be an end of al prophesies, when both all the enemies are utterly extinguished,
and there is one sheepfold made throughout the earth, of all the elect, Jews
and Gentiles, under the one Pastor Jesus Christ. It is certain that this
kingdom of Christ, thus begunn, shall be eternal; never to be interrupted
again: and shall at last be translated from earth into heaven. But of the time,
wherein this translation shall fall out, which is to be performed at his second
coming: I find no mention in this book. This prophecy proceeds no further,
then to the last destruction of all the enemies, and full restitution of the
Jewish nation: the estate of which people so restored, and of the whole Church
of al nations, he tells shall be most happy, but sets down no moment of
time, when they shall leav the earth, and go to their heavenly heritage. These
things shall be made manifest by the interpretation following: some taste whereof
was here to be given, least any perhaps too much attending unto the whole order
of things, should slip into that error of setting down the certain time of the
last day: which thing I see some godly and learned men to busy themselves
about; as if by this vial some very near moment thereof might be assigned.
Which thing, upon more diligent examination, we find to be wholly laid up in
exspectation of hope, and not at al put in any comhrehension of sense. Now the
agreement of the seventh vial with the seventh trompet is, that in this,
Christ's Kingdom is begunn, the enemies being in part abolished, as chap.
11.15, whereupon a voice there said, the Kingdom of the world is become
Christ's: but in the other, Christ's Kingdom is consumate, al enemies being
quite taken away; wherefore the voice of this is, It is done.

18 And there were noyses and lightnings etc. Of the second event there are
three branches; first, by what things the execution of the judgment was done;
in this verse: secondly, upon what; in verse 19.20. Thirdly, what effects, in
respect of the reprobates; verse 21. Lightnings, thonders, voices, shall come
from heaven: the earth, shall be moved and shaken: whereby is taught, that both
heaven and earth shall conspire, for vengeance on the impious: both which shall
power out whatsoever direful-punishment it has, upon the wicked crew. And this
not after the usual manner of former times; but with such horrible terror, as
never was since the world was made. For now there shall be a visible semblance of
the infernal punishment, which it shall feel at length, in the last judgment.
Moreover these kinds of punishments do declare, that the enemies shall be
destroyed rather by the extraordinary power of God, than by any work and
endeavor of men; which after appears more clearly, in chap. 19.20. and 20.9.

19 And the great City was rent into three parts: The second branch of the
second event, upon what this judgment shall be exercised; which partly are
places, partly men. The places be cities and nations. The cities are three, in
this verse; the great city; the cities of the Gentiles, and Babylon. But what
is this great City? We have heard before, that a city signifies not only some
town compassed with walls, which many cityzens dwell in, conjoined together by
the bonds of the same laws and right: but also the whole dition and empire of
any city; as the tenth part of Rome fell, when Germany withdrew it self from
the yoke of the servitude thereof; chap. 11.13. Is it then the Roman Empire
only? In deed so this was caled before, the great city, chap. 11.8. but
forasmuch as in this place, the full destruction of all the wicked is handled,
(for the vial is powered into the aier, as we said;) it compriseth whatsoever
Dominion and Empire the foes and enemies of the Church, have in any place. It
comprehends therefore the Turkish tyranny also, which together with the
Romish, constituteth this great city, as is more evident by the destruction of
this city. For it is rent into 3. parts, proportionable to the three Princes,
by whom it is ruled; namely the Dragon, the Beast, and the False Prophet,
before in ver. 13. Wherefore by this three fold declaration, there falls
together, all the Turkish and Mahumetish tyranny, that is, the Dragons: all the
power of the Beast, that is, of the Caesarean Bishop: all the authority of the
False Prophet, that is, of Pope Balaam: for this man of syn, after the ruin of
his throne, remains even unto this last overthrow. The first vial, was but a
preparative for the war: this seventh, is of the last destruction.

And the cities of the Gentiles fell: We heard of the universal Empire of the
impious. But not this only shall fall in common: but also in particular all the
confederate cities and provinces, both Turkish, Mahumetish, and Popish. For
Gentiles be al they that are aliants from the truth: whither they be farther of
from the same, as the Barbarous nations, or nearer as the Papists, who by a
false title are counted Christians. For we have seen before, how to the
Gentiles was given the Court which was joined to the Temple, as also to them
was given the holy city: which were the places of that rowt which boasted to be
Christians, by a vain title, without substance.

And that great Babylon: The third place which shall utterly perish, is that
great Babylon. But did not that perish before, under the fifth vial, when Rome,
the Beasts throne did fall, verse 10? For so we saw it caled before, Fallen
Fallen is Babylon the great city; chap. 14.8. In deed Rome did perish before:
but it was new Rome, new Babylon, to weet, Constantinople. For every mighty,
proud, Idolatrous, bloody, impious city, may be caled Babylon: but specially
next after Rome, Constantinople; the only daughter and heyr unto a farthing of
her mother Rome: whose natural disposition as she drew by stock; so did she
deservedly take the name, being caled new Rome. And surely it seems the same
order of things shall be here: first that all the Turkish and Popish forces shall be
beaten down and destroyed: secondly that all the co^federate cities and
provinces, if they also do not quite perish, shall yet at least be under new
Governors: thirdly, that the chief city of the Turks, this Babylon, shall bear
the just punishment of her impiety. And it may be, the West Christians, after
that the Popes name is extinguished, and that the Turk is overthrown in the
East; will show forth their wrath on Constantinople, and execute the judgment
mentioned in this place. By which now we may understand, that al our
enterprises against the Turk, shall be vain; until Rome be overthrown. For she at
the first caled for the Turk, as we have learned from chap. 9.20.21. nor shall
his scourge be removed, til the cause be quite taken away. But after that the
Beasts throne is consumed with fire, and the last Popish war is done: then
shall this horrible tyran, without any trouble of ours, be thrust down into
hell: neither shall we ever need to fear any more molestation from any relics
of him.

Came in remembrance before God: Now both the cause is mentioned of the
destruction of the Constantinopolitan Babylon; and the punishment which shall be
inflicted on it. The cause is, Gods remembrance: who is said to remember, both
for mercy and for judgment, when he performs in deed, what he decreed to be
done. So long as he deferreth vengeance and wrath; he seems to forget, and to
have no care or respect of our affairs and actions,

And this does very well express the horrible cruelty of this Babylon, where
with God suffers them that are called Christians, to be pressed: and does not
in the mean time punish the adversaries, nor yield any defense from injury. Who
will not acknowledge that God turns away his eyes from beholding our miseries:
when without punishment he suffers us to be beaten, robbed, vexed with all
reproaches and contumelies, virgins and wives to be defiled, whole flocks of men
to be carried bound and chayned into bondage; infants to be plucked from the
breasts for to be instructed in Mahumetish blasphemy, and the parents to know
that they bring forth children unto eternal destruction? Who, I say, minding
these and many more things, al which, Idolatry has brought upon us: may not
worthily say, that God has quite forgotten our misery? He winketh therefore at
Babylons wickedness, that he may drive her to increase calamities on the men,
which will be taught by no warnings. And at length when our men's impiety shall
cease, the shop thereof being burned and consumed: he will cast his eyes upon
Babylon, and call to mind al her wickedness, for to mesure meet punishment unto
her. But thou may observe, that the Spirit does not exaggerate the iniquity
of this city, with so many words as her mother Romes: because the sins of
Hethen men, although they be very heavy, ar lighter then theirs that abuse the
grace of God. As touching the words, (...) was remembered, is used passively, as
Act. 10.31. so also (...), that the cup might be given etc. The punishment
shall be the cup of the wine of the feircenes of wrath. A Cup is a part or
portion; as, the Lord is the part of my portion, and of my cup; Psalm. 16.5. and
11.6. a metaphore taken from Governors of feasts, which were wont to part unto
every one that which he should drink; whereupon Homer mentions a distributed
drinking; Iliad. d. Like unto which are the judgments of God, inflicted on
every man in just weight and measure. And judgments are a cup of wine, because
they shall be as pleasant to God, as wickedness was to the men: that is, he will
take delight in destroying them; as chap. 14.10. Unless it be therefore of
wine, because the severity shall take al sense from Babylon, as over much
quaffing in of wine, is wont to do: whereupon, she shall no more escape the
evil, then a man that has lost his senses through drunkenes. In which respect
it is said in Zachary, I will make Jerusalem as a cup that causes slomber, and
I will smite every horse with stonishment, and his rider with madness, Zach.
12.2.4. And this heaping together of the feircenes of his wrath, signifies
grievous and most sharp punishements: although it be not showed expressly,
whither it shall be so plucked up by the roots, as old Rome was before. It is very
like, that after the great calamity which it shall suffer, the city it self
shall still remayn, possessed of Christians; and always thenceforth shall obey
unto them.

20 And every I Will fled: We have seen the calamity of the cities and next
provinces: these words now respect the nations further off; whom distance of
place, shall help nothing at al. This desolation shall pass over the sea, and
consume them in their Islands. Nor shall it ought avayl them, that dwell on the
firm mountayns; for these also shall be plucked up by the roots, and perish for
ever; as before in chap. 6.14. Notwithstanding, this trouble shall be far
heavier than that. For there, the Mountains and Isles were only moved out of
their places: here, they are so utterly abolished, as no footsteps of them do
remayn. But an Jle in this place, is not only a land compassed round-about by
the sea: but also the continent or mayn land, after the Hebrew manner, which
call al countries beyond the sea, Islands; Psalm. 72.10. and so it compriseth
Aegipt also, and Africa.

21 And a great hayle as of talent weight: Hitherto has been the calamity of
the places. Now on the men, it rayneth hayl of talent weight, as of old in Ios,
10.11. And as they fled from before Jsrael, and were in the going down to
Beth-horon, the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them, until
Azekah; and there dyed more of them that dyed with the hayl stones, than they
whom the children of Israel slew with the sword. But here he speaks of stones
of huge bigness, which would not only be enough to kill, but also to crush the
men to powder; For never before, was there seen or heard, such an horrible
vengeance, as this shall be.

And the men blasphemed God: The effect of all these, as touching the
reprobates, who yet will spew out their blasphemy against God. This therefore is
not the end of all things, when the wicked shall with their approbation
subscribe to the sentence of the law, and say, Amen; acknowledging their
condemnation to be most just, Deuteronomy. 27.15. etc. But there shall still remayn some
wicked ones in the earth, but for to bear the yoke only; for never shall they
be able to hurt the Church more: which now shall have the cheifty throughout all the earth. And thus have we a brief and distinct representation, both of things
present and to come, even until the end.

CHAP. 17.
AND there came one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials, and talked
with me, saying unto me, come, I will show thee the damnation of the great whore
that sits upon many waters.

2 With whom the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the
inhabitans of the earth are drunken with the wine of her fornication.

3 So he carried me away into the wilderness in the Spirit, and J saw a woman
sit upon a skarlet colored Beast, full of names of blasphemy, which had seven
heads and ten horns.

4 And the woman was arrayed in purple, and skarlet, and gilded with gold and
precious stones, and pearls, and had a cup of gold in her hand, full of
abominations, and filthiness of her fornication.

5 And in her forehead was a name written, a Mystery, that great Babylon, that
mother of whoredoms, and abominations of the earth.

6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, J wondered with great
marveile.

7 Then the Angel said unto me, wherefore marvailest thou? J will show th eeth^
mystery of the woman, and of that Beast, that bears her, which has seven
heads and ten horns.

8 The Beast that thou have seen, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth
shall wonder, (whose names are not written in the book of life, from the
foundation of the world,) when they behold the Beast that was, and is not, and
yet is.

9 Here is the mind that has wisdom: the seven heads are seven mountains,
whereon the woman sits.

10 They are also seven Kings, five are fallen, one is, and an other is not yet
come: and when he shall come, he must continue a short space.

11 And the Beast which was, and is not, is even the eight, and is one of those
seven, and goes into destruction.

12 And the ten horns, which thou saw are ten Kings, which yet have not
received a Kingdom, but shall receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast.

13 These have one mind, and shall give their power and authority to the Beast.

14 These shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he
is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are on his side, called and
chosen, and faithful.

15 After he said unto me, the waters which thou saw, where the whore
sits, are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

16 And the ten horns which thou saw upon the Beast, are they that shall
hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire.

17 For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to consent and
give their Kingdom to the Beast, until the words of God be fulfilled.

18 And the woman, which thou saw is that great city, which reigns over
the Kings of the earth.


The Analysis.
THVS far has bin the distinct Prophecy of the last Period, divided in to
his seven articles after the manner of the Seals and trumpets: there follows
a continual narration, and more large explication of the three last vials, as
which are of greatest weight and special moment. The fifth of which is handled
in this chapter, and also in the whole chapter following, and in the first five
verses of the nineteenth: the sixth is comprehended in the next fifteen verses
of the same nineteenth chapter, unto the twentieth verse. The seventh is
continued through chap. 20. and 21. and unto the sixth ver. of the two and
twentieth. And from thence follows the conclusion of the whole book. It
makes much for perspicuity, to know what things agree to the time, and nature
of the matter. As touching the fifth, it is wholly bestowed against the throne
of the Beast (as in the chapter before ver. 10.11.) partly in declaring what and
of what sort this throne is in this whole chapter: partly in relating what
things do go together with the ruin of it in the chapter following, and in
the beginning of the nineteenth. The declaration of the throne has first a
preparation inviting to know the damnation of the whore, ver. 1.2. And the
better to know it carrying him away into the wilderness, ver. 3. Secondly a
description by a double type, one of the Beast, ver. 3. the other of a woman
setting on the Beast, sumptuous, and most filthy, ver. 4. the mother of all
whoredoms, ver. 5, a Murderer of the Martyrs, ver. 6. The interpretation
whereof is set forth by the occasion of it, which John's wondering ministered,
ver. 6.7. afterward it is propounded in very deed, showing what the Beast is,
in respect of his whole ver. 8: attention being stirred up, the disclosing
might not pass without fruit, ver. 9. Secondly in respect of the parts and
heads, ver. 9.10.11. and horns, whose rising up is showed in verse 12. the
humble service which they shall giv to the Beast, ver. 13. and at length their
overthrow by the Lamb, ver. 14. Such is the Beast. Of the woman, the
interpretation is first of her dominion. both flourishing, ver. 15. and also
afflicted by ten horns as instruments, and the will of God as the principal
cause, ver. 16.17. afterward of her palace ver. 18.

Scholions.
1 Then came one of the seven Angels: We said in the Analysis that this
continual declaration which is contained in the chapters following, even unto
the conclusion of the whole book, belongs only to the three last vials.
Which how true it is, the thing it self will show. In the mean time it may be
demanded, why the explication of the former is omitted?

The reason whereof seems to be this, because those former partly were before
past, partly present, at what time the vial was powered out upon the throne: and
therefore had no need of a larger exposition then either the late memory or
present use and condition of things should give: but the other to come did need
a more ample declaration, and for the same cause all the labor remaining is
converted to that point. Therefore as touching the Angel, one of the seven, this
is the fifth, who shall bring calamity to the throne, chap. 18.10. Of which
calamity nevertheless there be certain degrees, so as by the labor of some,
certain easy sprinklings are made, before that the whole vial is powered
forth. Who yet all are reckened in the common name of the fifth Angel. Which
thing appears from that chapter, which is wholly spent in declaring the
damnation of the whore; although her last destruction is reserved unto the
next. These things set down in this wise, let us consider the matter it self.
First the Angel prepares himself a way to that which he intends, both by
inviting John to learn, and also by carrying him to that place, where he might
most conveniently behold the whole matter. He inviteth him partly by
compelling, (...), says he, that is, hither, for (...) come hither, a
defective kind of speech among the Greeks: as if John desired to understand the
matter, but went not the right way to find it out. For so we are wont to call
back them that are desirous, and that go out of their way, to show them the
path, or whether they themselves desire to go, but in vain: partly by
increasing in him a desire, the greatness of the thing being rehearsed, saying
I will show thee the damnation of the great whore. Which damnation
notwithstanding is not a present destruction, but to come by and by after. And
(...) properly signifies judgment, which solemnly being pronounced in this
chapter, should a little after be executed: but the damnation of what whore I
pray? We have had no where before express mention of her: she must
notwithstanding be known, whose judgment he calls for to see, as being a
thing greatly desired. Certainly she is that Jezabell, of whom we heard in the
Church of Thyatira, that noble harlot lying sick now a long time in her bed,
now at the last to be punished with death, and to be thrown out of the window,
least she die of a disease, rather then by punishment, chap. 2.20. She is
that great Babylon after in verse 5. of this chapter, whom we have heard
nobilitated the mother of fornications and abominations of the earth, chap.
14.8. Therefore she is not any new or late whore, but the old strumpet, now
almost stale, in a most apt abridgment containing whatsoever Sodom and Egypt
did note out; without controversy the ring leader to both sorts of
fornication, both spiritual and corporal, chap. 11.8. A brief description of
whom the Angel delivers here to be tasted before, and the manner of the place
where she sits, and of her fornicatours with whom she had to do. Her
seat is upon many waters, that is, upon people, multitudes, nations, and
tongues, as after in ver. 15. Wherefore she is no common harlot that will be
hired for a farthing, but a Princely whore, worthily called Iezabell and that
great one, being of so large and spacious a jurisdiction. The fornicatours are
the Kings of the earth, who consented to the same Idolatry with her. A most
usual metaphore in the Scriptures, because spiritual adultery is of equal, yea
of greater, both filthiness and wickedness in departing from the true God.
Neither only did she commit fornication with the Kings, but also with the
other inhabitans of the earth, Peers of the Realm, Earls, Marguesses,
Governors of Cities, (for her lust refused none;) whom she made drunken with
the wine of her fornication, so thoroughly making them foolish with the delights
of her superstitions, that being utterly bereft of al sense of true godliness,
they suffered a certain unsensiblenesse of drunken men. These few things may
be sufficient to manifest this whore, and which is the throne of the Beast. For
is not Rome that great Beast? Have we not convinced her before to be Iezabell?
Does she not set upon many waters? Has she not entised unto Idolatry by her
craft, the Kings and inhabitans of the earth? Such are not in doubt, that judge
the thing i^ self by the truth, and not by affection. Yet notwithstanding
that there may be left to the adversaries no place of halting, the Angel
rests not contented with these common marks; but having made him self this
entrance, promises yet more evident ones. As touching the words to be drunken
with wine, is an Hebraisme, as hear this, thou miserable and drunken, but not
with wine, Isaiah chap. 51.21. Although he speaks the same in an other place
without a preposition, as they are drunken, but not by wine, chap. 29. After
which manner the Grecians speak (...) or (...).

2 And he carried me away into the wilderness: Such was the inviting. Now John
is transported into that place, where he may behold the thing most plainly. He
is carried into a desert and wilderness: but thou will say, what need was
there of a place not inhabited, being already in Pathmos, and in banishment?
John here represents the person of the faithful, the carrying of whom into a
solitary place, signifies the event: in which respect also he stood before on
the sea sand, chap. 12.18. VVherby is taught, that the manifestation of this
throne is to be fetched and received of the faithful, from some men set in an
obscure place, as it were in a desert and wilderness, from whence no such thing
was expected. For as once the first light of Christ arose among the people
dwelling in darkness, and sitting in the regio^ and shadow of death, Mat. 4
15.16. So the counterfeit Vicar, as touching his seat, in some part should
rese^ble our Lord herein. Not but that he should be known before to the world
in part, but because the wilderness should give yet a clearer light, so as he
scarce should abide to look upon the faces and countenances of men. We know
that the Whore some few years since has laid shame aside, but there shall
come out of the desert a new dishonor, whereby she shall be constrained to
hide her face, unless peradventure she has learned to blush. Therefore my
brethren set upon the whore with a new assault: neither let any be discouraged
because his name is of no estimation: God will have some light to come out of
darkness.

Neither let any hereafter marvel, why Antichrist or the Whore cannot be seen
at Rome. There was need of a wilderness for this thing. The famousnesse of the
place and great resort of people, take away the beholding of the Papists. If
they desire to perceive the thing clearly, let them go thither, where only
leave is given to see.

And J saw a woman sit upon a skarlet colored Beast: Thus far the
preparation, now he enters into the description, propounding a common type, a
woman sitting upon a Beast; which both joined together, do give a certain and
undoubted knowledge of the Throne, which is the only drift of this chapter.
Although according to the proportion of the clearer knowledge of this,
necessarily also will follow a more ample knowledge of the Beast, when his
den has been examined and viewed narrowly. For the woman and the Beast
shows to us the place; more over the time will declare when that place is to
be counted the Throne. Which two things are necessarily required to this
matter. And the Spirit prosecute both most plainly (as by his help we will
open the things,) as it were of set purpose, meeting with the fraud of the
Jesuits; whom by his most wise providence he fore saw, that being convinced
touching the place, they would wrangle about the time. But by this so exact
description, he takes away all halting from them. Therefore as touching the
Whore, her so express nothing out by Babylon, seven hills, seven Kings,
flourishing power, and at length destruction, the rest of the world being safe;
finally by the name of the city, used in stead of an interpretation, do most
strongly prove that the universal City of the Divill is not meant, but some
special city, and namely Rome: and so much the more because this whore is the
Throne of the Beast. And we know that the Throne of the Divill was attributed
to a certain City, to weet, Pergamus, before in the second chapter and
thirteenth verse. Therefore worthily Bellarmine, that opinion being rejected,
says, It is better in his judgment, that Rome be understood by the whore; as
Tertullian expounds in his book against the Jews, and in his third book
against Marcion. And Hierome in his 17. Epistle to Marcella, and Quaest. 11. to
Algasia. Bellarmine touching the Roman Pope, in his third book, and in the
thirteenth chapter. Here then we have our adversary confessing. What therefore
lets that they should not agree with us about the Antichrist? They have
invented a double crafty shift for themselves, one of the place, an other of
the time, of the place, that albeit Rome be the Whore, yet is it not the seat
of Antichrist, but Jerusalem. Of the time, that Rome was the Whore, when the
Heathen Emperors ruled, but now she is not, since she became Christian, and
therefore that she is not the seat of Antichrist, seeing he shall not come but
a little before the last judgment. But the Papists are holden with their own
snares; for granting Rome to be the whore, they must also needs grant the rest.
First of all, that not Jerusalem, but she is the seat of Antichrist. For is
not this Beast the very Antichrist? This also Bellarmine yields, and though
he had not yielded it, the truth will force him to confess it, as we shall see.
But he affirms that Antichrist shall hate Rome, from v. 16. after, well
acknowledging that the Beast is Antichrist: but how truly he spoke of hatred,
we shall examine at that place. From his confession we have, that both the
whore is Rome, and the Beast Antichrist. From which it is of necessity, that
Antichrist shall have his den at Rome, seeing he is the very Beast, on which
the whore is carried. Does not the Spirit show a very great conjunction and nigh
familiarity of both, of the whore in setting upon, and of the Beast in bearing?
There is none but he will say that a man is nearly joined to the horse on who^ he
sits. Certe^ly if Antichrist was to reign at Jerusalem, Rome being set so
far from her saddle, should walk on foot humble and base, who had so little
aid from the Emperors, after they removed to Byzantiu^ where they were not
far. Secodly as touching the time, how absurd is this distinction that the
whore should be Heathenish Rome the first 300 years after Christ; but that
Antich. the Beast should not come u^til about 3. years and an half before the
last day. Shall she sit on the Beast not yet borne, yea not conceived a very
long time after. For shall the Beast when he comes bear the whore, being dead
so many ages before? For the whore shall cease to be 1300. years, and how much
more we know not, before Antich. shall come. These ar dreams and wholly
mo^sters of bearing and sitting upon. The Spirit has taken from you al such
subterfuge, coupling these 2. things by so u^separable a band, whereby he
forbids both to seek Antichr. else where then at Rome, and also to think her
to be this whore at any other time, then when Antichrist should have his seat
there. Needs ar these two things to be joined together, both in place and time.

But when shall this time begin? for this yet has some doubt. Surely when
we shall see the whore to have been carried on this Beast; and by his help, and
authority placed in dignity, and lifted up on high Which though I hold my
peace, Leo will confess to have been done in the 1. sermon of the Nativity of
the Apostles, when the pre-eminence came to the Popes, and Rome began to excel
through the opinion of her religion. Rome, says he, being made the head of the
world, by the sacred Chair of S. Peter, has more ample authority through
divine religion, then earthly dominion. For although being enlarged by many
victories, thou have extended the fraunches of thine Empire by la^d and by sea,
yet notwithstanding it is less, that which warrelike labor has put under
thee, then that which Christian peace has subdued. Likewise Prosper in his
book de ingratis: Rome is of Peter the Seat which in honor Pastoral
Is made of the world head, what by the right Martial
She does not possess, yet she, by religion hold free.


Therefore this one common type ministers a necessary argument, both of the
seat and Kingdom of Antichrist: which alone might be sufficient to take away
all controversy; were it not that men loved themselves more then the truth,
and would not cesse to bark against it, till that their mouths be altogether
stopped. Wherefore the Spirit stays not here, but goes on yet to clearer
things, that for whom the morning light is not sufficient, they may have the
Noone Sun an helper, if peradventure they will then see. The sitting being in
such wise declared peculiarly, afterward he descends to both, and first to
the Beast, which is described by the color, names of blasphemy, heads, and
horns. The color is of skarlet, made readde by the little worm Coccus.
Wherefore this Beast is honorable, shining with the same color with Kings:
and no less wicked and bloody. For this same color is attibuted to most
grievous sines: If your sins were as skarlet, says Isaiah chap. 1.18. Not
only because it is a deep color which cannot be washed of: but chiefly for
the cruelty of shedding blood; which wickedness among the rest seems most
horrible. VVo sees not that this Beast is at Rome, where the Pope sits,
whose feet Kings do kiss; and who does most cruelly murder Christians, not
acknowledging his divine power both in the city and also through all the
Dominion? But that color has not pleased chiefly the Romish Court at all
adventures; which has come to pass by the providence of God, that the Fathers
might set before the world a visible show of this skarlet colored Beast.
Touching which thing see a most fine Epigrame of Theod. Beza. Secondly, this
Beast is full of names of Blasphemy. How fruitful an increase of a naughty
thing? Long ago the heads did bear the names of blasphemy, chap. 13.1. now
the whole body is full of the same. And first of all the Primacy was chiefly a
blasphemy; and therefore it was well carried on the head, but the time added
daily others, the heap whereof grew every day, until at length they came to
the Council of Trent, and Masters of controversies, by whose pains now the
whole Beast is so covered with most wicked errors (the whole sea of doctrine
being turned into deadly blood, as has been said in chap. 16.3.) that thou
can see noe place free from some new blasphemy. Let an indifferent judge
consider so many horrible errors as in three great volumes Bellarmine
deffendeth by the Popes approbation, and let him speak sincerely, whether every
hair almost of this Beast is not spotted with some notable blasphemy. Thirdly
he has seven heads and ten horns: of which, what is the meaning, the
interpretation will declare, which the Angel will make by and by. In the mean
time let it be agreed of, that this Beast is the same, which we saw in the
thirteenth chapter, and to be the former of the two. For of the second are
rehearsed only two horns, there in the 11. verse: he makes mention but of
one in this place, because both make but one Antichrist, as in the chapter even
now spoken of we have showed: and of the former only, because it is his intent
to set before our eyes whole Antichrist from his first original, of whom the
second Beast represents only the half figure; but now because in the last
times, in which the Beast should be fully discovered, Rome the whore should
depend more upon the civil authority of the Pope, of which that first is the
type, then upon the spiritual; we see at this day, that the patrimony of Peter
avayleth more, then the doctrine, which they feign to be Paul's; that neither
Spain, nor France, nor others very many have any regard to Rome, but in so
much as her authority serves for their profit. There is no man but knows
that Italy despises her now a long time at home, howsoever she has been
content to suffer her to be worshipped of strangers like a God. For these
causes therefore the former Beast only is set forth. Frances de Ribera the
Jesuit avoucheth that this Beast is not that of the 13. chapter, but a new and
new first seen. Why so I pray? because no article, says he, is prefixed before
Woman, or Beast, as it is wont to be done in things known. Certainly if he
should conclude from the new form, wherein they now first appear, it might
have some weight which he says; but seeing he gathers that therefore neither
of them was simply and absolutely before, because they were not seen before in
this form, to which only thing, the defect of the article has respect; he
deals either foolishly, or fraudulently, after the manner of the Jesuits. So
J saw, says John, and behold a Lamb stood upon mount Sion, chap. 14.1. where
also the article is wanting. Is this therefore a new Lamb? If any should say
that there was new form of him standing upon mount Sion, and accompanied with
and hundred forty and four thousand, he should say nothing contrary to the
truth: but it is the same Lamb in very truth, of which mention was made
before, chap. 5. After the same manner a new show is here brought in, not a new
person, as is manifest in the woman; which being called in the first verse a
whore, had the emphasis of the articles, which did manifest the old whore. So
now the same coming forth in a new decking, wants the same articles. The
woman then and the whore are al one; and this Beast is the same with that in
the thirteenth chapter, having the same seat, blasphemy, heads, horns,
worship among men, the cause of the like eternal destruction, and partaker of
all his properties: unless that some of them should now be more increased in
process of time, and all things under this fifth vial more evident, then they
were when they began. For now he appears full of that blasphemy, which before
possessed the heads only. And was that former Beast Antichrist; and shall not
this be he, which is more blasphemous? The wonderers also at whom, are no
less reprobates, then they that wondered at that? What shall the Jesuit then
gain, if that former being sent away to Jerusalem, he has left this more
pernicious Beast at Rome?

5 And the woman was arrayed with purple and skarlet: Such is the Beast: now of
what quality the woman is, whom we shall see adorned most sumptuously: of which
thing Tertullian spoke wittily: Who has deserved the name of an harlot at the
Lords hand; she is made equal to her name in her attire. She sits verily
in purple, with skarlet, and gold, and precious stone, which are cursed,
without which a cursed woman and harlot could not be described. These things
spoke he, but peradventure somewhat too severely, in his book concerning
womans apparel.

The attire is altogether Princely, and belonging to triumphs, such as
Belshazzar promises to them that should read the writting, saying, He shall be
clothed with Purple, with a Chain of Gold about his neck, and shall be the
third Ruler in the Kingdom, Daniell chapter fifth verse seventh. Attire surely
fit for her, which reigns over the Kings of the earth, as after in the 18.
ver. But purple was sufficient for dignity: To what end is there also skarlet?
That it might note out great cruelty joined together with it. She is of the
same disposition with the Beast red with the murders of the faithful, in
the twelve Chapter and third verse. There are many Cities made famous for their
notable cruelty: but together therewith the dwelling place of Antichrist ought
to flourish in exceeding great Majesty, which might be discerned from all the
rest. Both which victories even the Jesuits themselves cannot deny to be due
to Rome.

But there is added also Gold, Precious stones and Perles; which beside the
Majesty, note also most excessive riot: which is an other token of this woman.
And who can reckon the infinite costs of this City, bestowed on Temples,
Theaters, Galleries, hot Bathes, Palaces, Obeliskes, Pillars, Arches belonging
to triumphs, Private houses, and other ornaments? Into this one City, has bin
laid up in store the glory of the whole world, taken from very many other: to
let pass ancient things, what an huge sum of money bestowed of late Pope
Sixtus the fifth, in the year one thousand five hundredth four score and eight,
upon a conduit which he built on the mount Quirinal? It is recorded that two
hundred and threescore thousand crounes were spent upon this thing. Neither did
any necessity wring from him this charges, but that the Pope might summer the
more pleasantly in that mountain. The Vaticane Library renewed of the same
Pope, scarce peradventure stood him of less. Yet notwithstanding the same man
brought fifty hundred thousand pieces of Gold into a new treasury, which he
erected in the Castle of Saint Angel, that thou may understand that the
Popes are not yet brought to beggerie. But this Gold and precious stones do
not only seem riots; (for Rome has been far more riotous, and wealty in
former times, then at this day: but to what end should he cast in her teeth
now her immoderate decking, of which he spoke nothing when it exceeded by many
degrees?) but also to be tokens, to whose riches she should lean in these
last times: for we shall see after in the eighteen chapter and two and
twentieth verse, that this Purple, Skarlet, Gold, Precious stones, and Pearls,
consist in those wares, whereby Spain is signified.

Therefore let this braverie be to this end, to show that Rome shall most of all
glory in the aid of the Spaniards, at what time the vial shall be powered out on
the Throne of the Beast. Otherwise the Spirit would have me^tionned the former
ages, when her clothing was more sumptuous and exquisite.

And whither is not SPAIN at this day, and has not been also since CHARLES
the fifth, the chief upholder of Rome, leaning as ready to fall?

If any peradventure knows not these things, let him know at length the
things to be so by the testimony of the Pope Clement the eight, governing at
this day the Romish Church, who of late in the year one thousand five hundred
and nintie six, being about the creating of some new CARDINALS, protested
openly before, that although he did this creation of his own proper motion,
yet that he had not ben able to deny this duty to the King of Spain, but that
he should create some Spanirads, because he is the stay of Catholic religion:
to whom in this decrepite age that was not to be denied, but rather we ought to
gratify and content him in this thing, as Iansonius does relate en his
Italiques. This therefore is the reason of the adorning proper to this time,
whereat John wondreth, as if it were new, as after in ver. 6.

She had a golden cup in her hand:, Now the fowlenesse of her dishonesty is
revealed, which is twofold, one which she uses toward men known and more
famous, whom she speaks to as it were by name, and reaches the^ the cup of
her fornication: the other regards those that are unknown, whom she
allureth by the name written in her forehead in the verse following. For she
desires that no man should avoid her snares. She comes forth with a cup,
as a fit instrument of her lust, as once at Rome every one carried a token of
that trade which he practiced. For the Spirit has made mention before of the
wine of her fornication: and drunkenesse and gluttony are most apt stirrers up
of lust. From whence the whore in Solomon extolleth her prepared dainties,
Proverb. 7.14. She has therefore this cup in her hand, reached out to most
famous Kings and Princes, to whom she sends Ambassadors, Cardinals,
Jesuits, and other unclean Spirits of that sort, who may draw them in and
retain them in the fellowship of the Romish Idolatry. In which thing the most
vehement desire of Rome is known, which spares no, either labor or coast, so
that she may by flattery allure them to this wicked society with her. Which
that she may be able to do the more easily, the cup is golden, very precious
without, and in the estimation of men; the Romish impiety being set forth with
all po^pe of words, by consent, multitude, antiquity, perpetual succession,
the very Chair of Peter, and such fair painting, whereby it may seem more
precious then any gold to the unskilful. But within, this cup is full of
abominations, and filthiness of fornications, that is, if the doctrine be tried
and examined, and cut to the quick, nothing is so filthy, but the fowlenesse
of this will surmount it. For to express this horrible filthiness, the Spirit
has chosen that kind of dishonesty, which blushing suffers not speak. In
one word this whore is of this kind of Heretics called Borboritae, of whom
see Epiphanius in Panario, and Oecumenius on Inda.

5 And in her forehead a name written: An other kind of filthiness, whereby she
carries written in her forehead most impudently, that she is a common harlot.
She would not have any man to pass by unknown and uncalled, but from the
inscription to know where he may turn into a whore. It can scarce be spoken of
how monstrous lust those little sacring belles, and sance belles of the stews
were instruments, which this same whore Rome used long since; as Socrates
declares in book 5. chap. 18. But this name written passes that impudency.
For they were silent some time, and sufferred the sense to rest from the foul
provoquer: this inscription gives no rest to the eyes, always running upon
them and provoking unto dishonesty. Therefore apparel is not enough for her to
declare her profession, u^lesse also this sign on the forehead be joined with
it, which Ivy bush should make her wine vendible. O impudency! The whores
before time were covered with a veil; thou in thy forehead discovers, and a
tittle written upon it manifests thy dishonesty. But what is this name? Not
this word Mystery, as it seems, which Aretas joyneth with the word written,
without any distinction of a comma in this manner: And upon her forhead a name
written a Mystery: great Babylon etc. As if the word a Mystery were the
abstract, instead of the concrete (...) Mystical, as though he should say, and
upon her forehead a mystical name written, Babylon etc. Surely this syntaxe
requires that a noune joined with a noune without an article, should pass
into the place of the predicate, as they speak. As, and in the forehead a name
written, which is a mystery. From which it is manifest that the word Mystery
is not to be written with a great letter in the beginning, as if it were a part
of the name, and the mark of the forehead, but to be read together with those
things, which go before. But the meaning is all one, teaching that a certain
mystery lies hid in this name, which is otherwise to be expounded, then it
shows outwardly. Wherefore the name written on the forehead is the whole
period of these words: Babylon that great, that mother of fornications and
abominations of the earth. But thou will say, that no City does vaunt so to be
in express words. Neither does the Spirit say so, but declares that this is
her true name, which John saw written on her forehead, in so many letters and
syllables, howsoever the true Babylon should have a name written on it, which
should signify this same thing in other words by a mystery, to wit, the
Empress Rome, the Pillar of truth, a looking glass and pattern of all
Churches, from whose statutes, whatsoever she ordains, we must by no means
depart: Distinct. 19. Enimvero. This is that name painted with great letters
on the whores forhead: whose meaning if thou shall search diligently, thou
shall see that by a mystery it comes to the same end, to which that did which
John saw. For whatsoever ancient corruption either has been long ago, or is
yet left in these our Western and Northern Churches, all that flows from
Rome: in which respect she vaunteth that she is the Mother of the Churches or
rather the stepmother, which has mixed deadly hemlocke to her daughters. Such
then is this name, which yet notwithstanding remains mystical in this last
period, as the Spirit shows manifestly, prefixing before it the word Mystery.
And therefore neither shall it now be manifest to all men, as we may see in the
Papists who do worship this name as Holiness to the Lord. The Jesuits confess
by constraint, that this Babylon is their Rome, as a little before we have
seen: yet what windings and turnings in and out do they seek, whereby the
Popish turpitude and impiety may vanish away? Bellarmine will have the Heathen
Rome to be meant, such as it was once under the Emperors that were enemies to
the name of Christ. Fra^ces de Ribera would rather that a future time should be
regarded, when by Antichrist, as he dreameth, the Pope should be driven from
Rome. So are they blinded in this name, which sounds any thing to them,
rether then that which the thing is. But we have showed sufficiently, that
these inventions are no less foolish, then pernicious to the embracers of
them: and the things that follow in this very chapter, will make it more
manifest; that no other Babylon is here mentioned then the Rome belonging to
the Popes at this present time, and as it has been for many ages past. Did the
Heathen Emperors labor to impose the Roman Idolatry on the conquered
nations? Or if they had strove to do it, should this impiety have had any
mystery? It was plain that the Heathenish superstition was detestable to
Christians; but this Babylon should infect Christians by the contagion of her
superstition, which thing cannot belong to any other Rome, then that of the
Popes. But let it be to come, and let the Pope be driven from thence, and let
all impiety come on with force openly, which o Ribera thou must necessarily
grant. Where then shall be this Mystery. Who can be ignorant of your great
naughtiness joined with impudency? Therefore, that which you imagine,
abhors all likelihood of truth.

Therefore Babylon is that ROME, which should deceive her people with an
outward show of godliness, which should be counted a Holy City, and should
possess the uttermost Court, as we have showed in the eleventh chapter,
verses first and second: which unless it now deceived you Papists, I should
not acknowledge her to be Babylon: but your, either witting or ignorant
obstinacy, makes the truth of the Prophecy clear. Let us take up from hence
that which the very words do yield us manifestly: That the Whore shall not
make war against Christ openly, but shall fight against him privily and
secretly, through a Mystery. Which thing, what force it has to find out
Antichrist, we shall fee after.

6 And J saw that woman drunken with the blood of the Saints etc. The third
property is notable cruelty, wbich did wholly swim with the blood of the
Martyrs. Ye she killed our Lord Jesus, as before in chap. 11.8. From whence
the beginning being made, how much Christian blood shed the wicked Emperors
afterward? Whatsoever slaughter was any where through the whole world almost,
that came either from her commandment, or exhortation and approbation. It
cannot be spoken, how many and how great wars the horrible Popes stirred up
in the times following, setting all the Kings of Europe together by the ears.
And beside the slaughters of public wars, how many holy men lost their life,
because they agreed not with Rome? Who were banished as Heretics, and
cosumed with the torments of the flames. She continues at this day in the
same stepps, which not long ago in the year 1595. at length burnt alive a
certain English man for smiting to the ground out of the hands of the
Archbishop of Ambronen, their sacrilegious sacrifice of the altar, after his
right hand cut off, and the rest of his body, being drawn through the city,
was burned by the tormenters in sundry places with burning torches. Behold, I
pray you o English men, whither you flee, thither assuredly, where so great
impiety reigns; that if so be there be any seed of electjon in you, ye would
rather die a thousand deaths, then bear with it by your silence. Is not the
same Rome at this day the shop of rebellions, the place where Christian
Princes are tormented? Certainly this assembly of furies does first decree the
murders of Princes, and then sends by stealt Jesuits privy murderers and
poisonners: who execute the same after manner that they desire. It were an
infinite thing O Rome, to recke^ up all thy butcheries. Thou art drunken surely
with blood, tumbling thy self in thy surfeit, which thou have spued out through
exceeding much devouring. Now then all these common properties joined together,
do show unto us such a whore, to weet, augmented, upheld, by the Beast,
Princely, rich, gay. that great Mother City, and spiritual Babylon, the
author of allsuperstitions, yet deceiving craftily by her vain shows, and
finally a cruel Martyrs-murtherer: which all, if together they can be found no
where else, saving in Rome alone; let us acknowledge that damnable City, and
let every one betimes provide, that her society hurt them not. least he perish
together in her destruction, that shall come shortly.

And I wondered: Hitherto the typical description; now he passes unto the
interpretation, the occasion whereof is related in these words. But how does
John wonder, seeing this belongs to men that are reprobates, after in v. 8.
This is an a^gry wo^dering for so great prosperity of the wicked whore, whose
destruction had bin just in the first co^ceptio^, or at least in the infa^cy
But the wicked have in admiration and wonder at the same woman with a certain
reverence, from an opinion of a certain excellency, even as they are said to
wonder after the Beast in chap. 13.3. But whither was he ignorant of the Beast
which he saw in the thirteenth chapter? In no wise: neither is he said to
wonder at the Beast alone, but at the woman joined with it, both which he had
not seen before in this new form, and whole apparel. And who would not be
abashed at this, that the Dragons throne, which John saw after the Dragon was
thrust out, in some sort become the sheep fold of the Lord, had been able
again to clime up to this heigh of impiety. But we may not rest in the only
person of John, who now represents the common type of the faithful: but we
must understand that certain godly men under the fifth vial, considering the
horrible blasphemy of Rome, which they are very sure of, and also therewithal
minding this her felicity such as it is, will greatly wonder with themselves,
how so great impiety can abide so long unpunished. Which admiration did move
the Angel to undertake a full declaration of these things.

7 Then the Angel said unto me, wherefore marveilest thou? The interrogation
has a certain blaming of negligence and unskilfulnes; as though he should
say, unless men had shamefully despised the observatio^ of former times, now
they should not have had need to wonder at the Whore, because they saw her
flourishing in this whatsoever felicity. But the merciful father, who pardons
all sins to his children for Christ's sake, forgiveth also this carelesnes.
And therefore he sends his Angsl, to make the whole thing most plain. For this
is that which follows, I will show thee the mystery etc. yet warning, not
darkely, that also the interpretation it self shall not be clear to all men,
but shall remain yet hidden to all that are hardened, as before at verse 3. and
5.

8 The Beast which thou have seen: The first interpretation is of the Beast
according to the whole in this verse, as we have distinguished in the Analysis,
wherein is declared his diverse condition according to 4. alterations of times,
such as at length he should be known to be most plainly under this vial. The
first time wherein he was; the second wherein he is not; the third wherein he
ascends out of the bottomless pit; the fourth wherein he shall go into
destruction. As touching the first, it is not to be understood of any time
which went before the age of John, or this Prophecy given to him. For the
Angel avoucheth plainly that this Beast was not yet come, ver. 10. that is,
that he was not yet, when John received this Prophecy, but should receive power
at the same hour with the ten Kings, who in John's time had not yet received a
Kingdom, ver. 11. Therefore this Beast is not properly the Devil, as some of
the ancient Fathers expound it; and the Jesuit Ribera snatcheth it greedily.
Of him it could not be said, that he was not yet come, or that he had not yet
received power: whose Kingdom then both flourished very greatly, and did
flourish before Christ came in the flesh. Afterward we shall see, that the
original of this Beast is to be set at that time, wherein the Dragon was thrust
out of heaven, and gave him his Throne. And so there are two and forty months
of his chief power, which same is the space of the woman lying hid in the
wilderness, and of the two Prophets clothed in sackcloth. These chapters
13.5. and 12.6. and 11.2. will challenge the same beginning to all these. Which
we have showed to have fallen about the times of the beginning of the reign
of Constantine the Great some ages after, that John was dead. After which
beginning the first part notes, that there was a time when the Beast
flourished for a season, to weet, at the end of the public persecutions by
open enemies, whom the prowess of Constantine put to flight. The second, that
after that prosperous tranquillity, a new tempest arose, which afflicted the
Beast so vehemently, that for just cause men should say, that he was in time
past, but that now he is not, as whom they should think to have perished
utterly in those troubles, as it came to pass, after that refreshing under
some few Emperors, (in which time the authority of the Bishop of Rome
increased marveilously,) when the invasion of the Barbarous people spoiled
miserably all Italy; cruelly destroyed Rome it self, the Throne of the Beast;
and did cut off almost to the very root, the authority of the Pope, growing
too rankely. Should not men then have cried out by right, that the Pope was,
but is not: whose not only authority, but also seat, they might think to
have been altogether past recovery? This second time was caled the wounded head,
in chap. 13.3. which did bring with it, the knowledge of the former, of which
there could be no knowledge, until this alteration had befalle^. But the Beast
lay not always in this destruction; he rose out of it again, as the third
member declares, he came out of the bottomless pit: which came to pass, when
he lifted up his head again, after that Barbarian storm of adversity was
mitigated. This time comprehends both the curing of the wou^d by Justinian
and Phocas; and also his rising out of the earth, or out of the bottomless pit
by Gregory the second; of both which in chap. 13.3.11. and 11.7. and 9.2.11.
This Gregory exercised that power, which his Ancestors had obtained of the
Emperors, yea a far greater: not only as an Universal Bishop, but as the
highest Dictatour, taking away and giving the Empire to whom he thought good.
It is sufficient in this place to observe the first beginning of things. Who
first bestowed the name of an Emperor upon men in the West part, we have
showed in an other place. Therefore the Beast ascended then, when the Popes had
gotten this terrene power to themselves, as in chap. 13.11. has been said;
which earth he called here the bottomless pit; as elsewhere in the Psalmist;
and make me to ascend from the depthes of the earth: Psalm. 71.20. And so is
the third time. The fourth is, shall go into destruction, which declares that
this dignity revived shall not remain for ever; but be diminished by little
and little, and leasurly consumed, while it be at length utterly abolished: as
we have heard before in the second chapter of Jezabell lying sick in her
bed, the paramour of this Beast, and languishing of an incurable consumption.
Even as at this day, thanks be to God, we see in Rome, and in the Pope: but
the burial, and funerals are yet to come: about what time, the Revelation
will show us after. These are the four notable changins, whereby the Beast
might become known to men being not blind willingly; from which we have a most
strong argument to prove both the time, when Rome is the whore, and of the
person of Antichrist. For that City is the whore, in which reigns Antichrist,
to weet, the very Beast which was, which is not, which ascends out of the
bottomless pit, and goes into destruction. But Rome is the City, in which
from Constantine the Great, the Pope has reigned, which was, which is not,
which asce^deth out of the bottomless pit, and goes into destruction:
Therefore Rome since Constantine is the whore; and the Pope of Rome since the
very same time is the Beast, and Antichrist, in whom we see all these
alterations at this time, so far as doubtless may be done, the same being
not wholly taken away: From whence it is not to be doubted, but that he is that
adversary, that man of sin, that great Antichrist, whom all ought to flee and
to fear greatly: and to wish d^struction to him, and procure it to his power.
If any thinks the Beast cannot be known before his last destruction, (which
surely is to know too late,) let him observe that the Angel does stop in the
end of the verse in the third member, seeing, says he, the Beast, which was,
and is not, and yet is. Whereby he declares, that a sure knowledge may be had
at this third changing.

And the Inhabitans of the earth shall wonder: In giving all honor and service
to him, being astonished with the renown of his false dignity: which before was
said, to wonder after the Beast, chap. 13.3, Yet notwithstanding least we
should think, that all men should be carried away into this destruction, he
numbreth among this company the inhabitans only of the earth; to weet, the
citizens of the false Church, whose names are not written in the book of life.
O good God how much concerns it you o ye Papists, to deliver your Pope from
all likeness to this Beast? If he be found covered with his hide, which this
chapter will make more clear then the light at noone tide, you are utterly
lost; unless you shall flee very quickly all fellowshippe with him. I pray
you, as you regard your own salvation, that lying aside all hatred,
prejudice, and bitterness of minds, you weigh the matter with me in equal
balances. A great matter is in hand, either the vantage or loss of eternal
life. See you not that the Pope and the Beast, did tread in the same steps
always, even hitherto? Attend to those things which follow; we find both of
them to walk in the same path, which the Spirit has marked out, with equal
pases and hand in hand. But you will cry out that this is a new interpretation:
yet appointe not the Spirit at your pleasure; he stistributeth most wisely,
according to his pleasure, a measure of knowledge to every time. Rather regard
the consent of the whole Prophecy, which will yield a most clear proof of the
truth; and esteem that most ancient, which you shall find true. Why do ye
suffer your selves to be deceived with the names of them, whom the most certain
event declares to have been very greatly deceived in very many things of this
Revelation. This is the notable craft of the Jesuits to call forth chiefly
those witnesses, and Interpreters, by whose reverend ignorance, they may cover
and hid the impiety of the Pope: there was not so much danger from him, to
those ancient Fathers, living either before Antichrist, or by and by after his
beginning.

They understood sufficiently, that which perteined unto them; other things,
God would have to be wrapped in darkness, while the fore appointed time
should come, that the reprobat seeing might not see, and a way so be made open
for his decree: awake ye therefore at length, and open your eyes to the shining
truth, which if ye shall behold glistering more clearly, then that it can be
obscured by false remote calumnies; remember that those are not written in the
book of life, which have the Beast in great admiration: and then take advise,
according to the greatness of the thing. You also my brethren, (for so I
esteem you, as long as any hope remains,) I would admonish in a few words,
who through lightness of mind and desire of novelty, within two or three
days space, become Papists. It seems a pastime to you casting away the
truth, to fall to the Pope, but take heed that in your sport ye perish not in
earnest. And willingly wipe your names out of the book of life. You pretend,
that you will be Catholics, but consider that whom you hold for Catholics, are
reprobates, unless they shall escape at length from these tents, into which
ye fly for salvation. But these pretenses of salvation are toies. I know what
grieveth you, either want, or dishonor at home, or a greater reputation of
other men. But what gain shall be even the most ample stipend, if ye shall
loose your souls?

What dishonor can be greater, then to be added in the company of cast awayes?
Or who has not honor enough which is counted the child of God? Mind, I pray
you, these things, and such like, and think it not a light matter, forsaking
the true God, to associate your selves with the Divill. Behold also what
mischievous persons ye do nourish in your bosom, who gladly do intertaine
the Jesuits. He which joins you to the friendship of the Pope, procures unto
you certain and undoubted destruction. How miserable a thing is it, with the
hazard of this life, to seek an undoubted loss of eternal life? Do not
judge any longer, a thing of so great moment, rather by the painted lies of
those men, then by the very manifest truth. Neither do ye despise my
admonition. I am ad adversary only to your errors. I desire from my heart that
your selves shoul be saved by Jesus Christ. Try the things that I say; I
require not otherwise to be believed; and when the things are thoroughly known
by searching, acknowledge the fraud of the Jesuits; thrust them out of doors,
detest these pestiferous men; perceive your own danger, and if you have any
regard of salvation, now at length be ye wise.

From the foundation of the world: So before was showed the eternal Decree,
touching the death of Christ, and the force and efficacy thereof in chap. 13.8.
Now the same kind of speaking notes out the eternal election of them that
shall be saved. Which two things are most nearly coupled together.

Beholding the Beast, which was, and which is not, and yet is: Those last
words, (...) and yet is, seem that they are thus to be read, (...), and is
present. The difference is, that those signify, that the Beast remains alive
in the very destruction, as though he should say; although in men's opinion he
is not, yet he is: and so both members are referred to the same time, as before
John saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, which yet was not wholly
killed in chap. 13. The other reading notes out more plainly the third time,
in which after the hurt endured, the Beast should recover; which thing Aretas,
the Complutent edition, and other copies distinguish plainly, which read
(...), and shall be present: and as Primasius translated, shall come. Yet that
former reading of Theod. Beza may carry the same sense; albeit in men's opinion,
the Beast of late was not, yet now he is. In which sense they are to be taken,
that they may have respect to the Beast coming forth from calamity, not
continuing in the same. For they are answerable to the third distinct time in
the beginning of the verse, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, as is
clear from the men admiring the Beast, who admire not the same contemned and
afflicted, (which should be necessary, if the words respected the same time
with the member going next before,) but recovering his dignity contrary to men's
expectation, and the same greater then he had before; as it came to pass in
his third change, after he was recovered of his wound, chap. 13.3. Wherefore the
vulgar Latin reading corruptly, passes over this third member, making men to
wonder at the Beast when he is not: which is contrary to the truth of the
thing. Furthermore, it is certain, that it is not to be read in the future
tence, but in the present: because admiration belongs not to a future, but to
a present dignity. From which let us observe, what wondering, is a token of
reprobation, to weet, of a Beast reviving after the hurt received, which is the
second Beast, in chap. 15.11. Even until that time he was not so desperately
impious, but that he might easily deceive the Saints: but at length he came to
that naughtiness, that he must be banished from the Kingdom of God, who will
acknowledge him to be such an one by admyring, as he professes himself to be.
But whereas the Angel in these words, prosecuteth not his variable condition
beyond the third time, thereby he shows, that he shall be openly known to the
world before his last end shall come.

9 Here is the mind: Thus far the Beast has bin showed us according to his
whole; now he enters into the interpretation of some chief parts: whereunto he
prepares himself a way by this Preface. Which yet is uncertain, whither it
is to be referred to that which went before, or to this which follows: it
seems being set in the midst, to have respect to both alike, for to cause
attention. The speech seems defective, and to be supplied after the manner of
that in chap. 13.18. Here is wisdom, let him that has wit, count etc. So here
is wit, let him that has wisdom understand: as in the Epistles to the seven
Churches, let him that has ears, hear: or it may be a perfect sentence of it
self, here is the mind that has wisdom; as though he should say, consider
the foresaid chaunges: likewise consider the interpretation; the understanding
of which things is true wisdom indeed, whereby a man may avoid eternal
destruction. But these are the words not only of exhortation, but also of
Prophecy, which declare that in the most open light, in which the Beast shall be
set, every one shall not acknowledge him, but they only who are endued with
wisdom, and have their eyes enlightened of God. The Beast is like in this
thing to the whore, whose name written in her forehead was a mystery, which
should be hidden from very many, no less then some obscure and inexplicable
riddle. For Prophecies fulfilled become not manifest to all men, as we will
after show that Bellarmine trisleth, but unto some certain men, to whom it is
given to understand, the rest remaining in their former blindness. Which short
admonition, confuteth a threefold error of the Papists, one touching the
common name Antichrist: the other, of the doctrine: the third of the public
persecution; of which we will speak more at large, in the refutation at the
end of the Chapter.

The seven heads are seven hills, upon which the woman sits: as touching
the parts, first he teaches what are Heads, both permanent in this verse, and
transitory in verses 10.11. whereby it may be known what is this whore, in
regard both of the place, and of the time. Those heads are seven mountains
upon which the woman sits, that is, seven hills of the city of Rome,
Palatinus, Quirinalis, Aventinus, Caelius, Viminalis, Aesquilinus, Janicularis:
by which this City is renowned through the whole world; and thereupon called of
the Grecians (...), seven hilled by Varro. And this circumlocution seemed
fitter for the eloquent kind of speaking of the Poets, then the specifying of a
proper name. Virgil in the second of his Georgiques toward the end, has these
words, to weet Rome is become the most beautiful of things, which has
enclosed her seven towers with one wall. Likewise Ovid in his first book de
Trist. Eleg. 4. speaks thus of it; But Rome is the Seat of the Empire and of
the Gods, which from seven Mountains vieweth the whole world. And again in
the third book ver. 7. And while Rome the victorious shall behold the subdued
whole world from her seven Mountains, I shall be called Martia. And God would
have the thing testified, not only by the verses of Poets, but also by a
public festivitie. For the Romans kept the Fest called Septimontium, because
of the seventh mountain joined to the city, and Rome become thereupon
Septicollis, as Plutarch relates in (...). These things are so manifest, that
the Papists themselves ar now constrained will they, nill they, to confess
them. We have showed that Bellarmine prefers this sense before the rest, in
his 3. book. chapter 13. of the Pope of Rome. Ribera the Jesuit yields also the
same, co^firming it with many words, on the 14. chap. of the Revel. number. 30.
from whence no controversy could now remain of this thing, if only men were
in their right wits: but we have touched before their madness, who do separate
the things which are joined together by an u^divided ba^d. They grant that the
whor is Rome, yet by no means do they abide her to be the seat of Antichrist:
as though they could be sundred, of which the one sits upon and the other
carried: but if this co^joyning be too weak, behold a straighter, yea a most
straight, such as of the head with the body, so as they which shall remov the
Beast to any other place the^ to Rome, must make him to be without his heads.
From hence therefore I thus conclude demo^stratively: The city where remain
fixed the heads of the Beast or of Antichrist is the seat of Antichrist: Rome
is the city where remain fixed the heads of Antichrist: Therefore Rome is the
seat of Antichrist. By no means can ye giv me the slip o ye Papists. This
argument must needs be as firm and sure as ar the very mountains of your
Rome. Yet what you ar able to object against it, we will discuss by and by in
confuting your devised Antichrist.

10 And they are also seven Kings: Such ar the permanent heads: the
transitory, which are seven Kings do follow. There is a double application of
this one type, teaching that there is an inseparable joining together of the
mountains and Kings. From whence is ministered an other necessary proof of the
seat of Antichrist, thus; The seat of seven Kings is the seat of Antichrist:
Rome the city of 7. mountains, is the seat of 7. Kings, for the heads are
both mountains and Kings: Therefore Rone is the seat of Antichrist. But who ar
these 7 Kings? not so many singular persons, as Victorinus would have it, but
soveraignties and regime^ts. For if every several head should note out singular
me^, 5. of which were fallen in John's time; to wit Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
Vespasianus, Titus: Titus Domitianus the 6. ruled then; Nerva the 7, was to be
expected; whom remaining alive but for a little space, should succeed
straighway Traianus the 8. and together also the 7. If I say, the heads ar to
be so counted; it must needs follow that this Beast should have ceased in his
last head Traiane, and that the world should not now fear that he should do
any mischief. Unless perhaps we think, when all his living heads ar cut off, he
yet remains alive, or they being cut off, other, as it were a new Hidra,
spring up, of which yet John made no me^tio^. But that we may not think that
those 7. are taken figuratively; where are the ten Kings that arose together
with Nerva? It must needs be that these were together with the seventh head in
the twelft verse beneath: or how when Nerva was dead, seemed the Beast not to
be; especially seeing before his death, he had adopted Traiane? or for what
cause were they rather reprobats that wo^dred at Traia^, then those former: for
such is the co^ditio^ of the seventh head, that the followers of him are
reprobates, before in ver. 8. Many things of this sort do not suffer any
peculiar men to be meant. Hereunto is added the manner of speaking, which is
such, that it bewrays that the Kings are so long the heads of the city, as
long as the mountains ar. Otherwise for some short time perhaps, the heads were,
both the mountains and Kings, but to a far longer time, they neither were nor
should be; if there should be made a separation of the heads, which the Spirit
joins together, the mountains only remaining after the other be dead.
Therefore the Kings, howsoever they al were not together, as the mountains, yet
shall obtain as long continuing a name of heads, as those.

But concerning the person, the time shall yield a demonstration in the
eleventh verse. But if the Kings be Dominions of what sort are they? Ribera
the Jesuit being privy to himself, that the thing cannot be touched so
lightly, but that the soar will be renewed therewith, flies unto the seven
ages of the world: the first of which he makes from Adam to Noe: The second
from Noe to Abraham: The third to David: The fourth to the transmigration into
Babylon: The fifth to the coming of the Lord: The sixth from thence to
Antichrist: The seventh from him even to the day of judgment. Which wit of his
brings into my remembrance, that of the Poe^: If the foolish Painter will
conioine unto a man's head,
The neck of a horse, and so of birds feathers over spread: etc.
For to see being let in, friends keep your selves from laughing.


The Jesuit passes the Painter, who has framed an head, which may be applied
alike to all and every city of the whole world. The Spirit would deliver a
certain mark, whereby the Throne of the Beast might be known: the Jesuit, as
the houpe, faineth the grief to be in an other place, that he may withdraw
from the neast, I know notwhither. But understand Ribera, that the seven
mountains belong to the city of Rome alone: But that those seven Kings
appertain to the same city, to which the mountains. For the heads are both
mountains and Kings, and therefore that these Kings belong to Rome alone: so
do we free thee from the great labor of seeking; proving by a most certain
argument, that he is found at Rome; to find whom, thou have compassed all
lands in vain. But the time is spent to no profit in confuting thy toies,
which yet I could not pass over wholly, but would admonish the Papists at
least by this small labor, that they should not suffer themselves to be
deceived any longer by the trisles of the Jesuits. The thing it self is thus.
These dominions are proper to that city, whereunto belong the mountains, and
the seven regiments are those, by which the city has been no less famous,
then for her seven mountains. And Cornelius Tacitus in the beginning of his
history nu^breth these regiments in this wise: Kings held the City of Rome at
the first: L. Brutus instituted freedom, and the Consulshippe: the
Dictatourshippes were taken up for a time: neither continued the power of the
office of the Decemviri, above two years, nor the Tribunes authority
pertaining to Consuls, was of force any long time etc. The power of Pompey and
Crassus went quickly to Caesar. By which words he declares plainly, that six
kinds of government had held at Rome, from the building of the City even unto
his time, Kings, Consulls, Dictatours, Decemviri, Tribunes, of the soldiers,
Emperors: the seventh of Popes he knew not, being taken away from the living
before he could see it.

Five are fallen: Kings, Consuls, Dictatours, Decemviri, Tribunes: For those
five kinds of ruling had ceased wholly and vanished away before John his time.

One is: the sixth kind of governing by Emperors, in whose power was the
chief rule of things when John lived,

And an other is not yet come: The seventh King, the Pope, was not yet a
Governor of Rome, when the Apostle lived. And not without cause has he
shunned the adjective of order: for he says not, the seventh is not yet come,
but an other is not yet come, by the same signifying that this seventh shall be
very greatly unlike the former. All these were Political Kings; the seventh
should be spiritual; or of a mixed kind, unlike to every one before; from
whence it is manifest that the Christian Emperors are not the seve^th King.
For they differred nothing in civil government from the former, only they
took unto them the Christian religion. And in ancient times new religions
were often added; the form of government in the mean time nothing altered.
Furthermore the seventh King ought to govern in the same place, where the
seven mountains are, as has been declared in the former verse. But the
Christian Emperors never had the seat of their Empire at Rome; But the whole
use of the city was the Popes; from whom alone after the seventh King began,
her glory did grow. That member is not yet come, teaches that there was a
very short time remaining to the coming of the seventh King. For so we are
wont to speak of things that will come not very long after. Therefore foolish
is Ribera the Jesuit, who assigns the sixth kind of governing after the
coming of Christ, even unto three years and an half more or less before the
last day, and together with him all the Pastists, who will not have Antichrist
to be expected before that same very time; as though the Angel saying is not
yet come, should speak of a man, whom the world yet sees not after a thousand
five hundred years.

And when he is come: After the seventh Kingdom, to weet of the Popes, shall be
begun, the Dragon being cast out of heaven, and Constantine the Great being
Emperor.

He must tarry but a short time: About an hundred years after Constantine, then
to be overwhelmed for a time by the overflowing of the Goths and Vandals, who
so evil entreated Rome, the tower of the new dominion, that it might seem to
have perished utterly. Gensericus bereaved it wholly of every dweller, see
Blond. in his second book of his first Decad. And Totilas again brought it to
a wilderness, so as neither man nor woman was left in it, as the same Blond.
writes in his second book of his first Decad. See chap. 13.3.

11 And the Beast which was and is not: That is, and that seventh King the
Pope, which had come, and was as touching the rising and original of his power
for the space of an hundred years after Constantine. And is not, after that
time utterly perished in men's opinion by the invasion of the Barbarians: this
Beast, I say, is the eight, and one of those seven. Whereby it is to be observed
that the seventh King by himself alone does obtain the name of the whole and
to be called that Beast, whose description was in the eight verse by four
succeeding courses of times. All which chaungins are proper to this one, from
whence now at lenght after the second mutation, whereof he made mention in the
former verse, he adds a double condition of him in the very words of the
first description: showing in the same that these words, and when he comes he
must continue a short space, are all one with these, the Beast which was, and
is not.

And he is the eight: to wit, King. For here octavus the eight agrees not in
gender with Bestia, the Beast. The common translation translateth amiss (...),
the eight Beast. For there are not eight Beasts, but eight Kings, the seventh
of which is this Beast. The pronoune relative (...) he, seems in this place
to be a demonstrative, as sometime also else where, he is the eight King, that
is, the eight King. Also the whole antecedent member of the sentence makes the
supposite of the verb substa^tive, as though he should say, The Beast which
was, and is not, is both that eight King and also is one of the seven. This
eight King is the same Pope after his dignity recovered from that maine
overthrowe which the Barbarians did make, when his wounded head w^^ c^^ed, as
in chap. 13.3. or when the Beast which is not, did asce^d from the bottomless
pit, as at the 8 verse of this chapter: or when the second Beast aros^ from the
earth, chap. 13.11. When Gregory the second and his next successors did
appear with two horns, Pipine and Charles the Great. For we have showed
already before, that all these things perteined to that third mutation. But
from whence then is this eight, has the Beast eight heads, which even now were
but seven? In no wise, but this eight is the same with the seventh of the same
nature, purpose, sovereignty, (whereupon it is added, and is one of those seven)
only of a greater impiety, blasphemy and sacrilege, wherein he passes the
seventh. The Popes in their beginning after Constantine were not so wicked, as
after Phocas. But more and less do not distinguish the kind. Therefore the
Pope revived is the eight, most worthy of all to be pointed at with the finger,
and to be said that it is he.

From which now the reason may be apparent, why in chap. 13. one Antichrist is
painted out by a double Beast: to wit, because he is the seventh King and the
eight.

And goes into destruction; To be destroyed utterly in his due time; this last
member is the fourth time of the Beast fetched from the general interpretation
in ver. 8. And so that which there is said was, and is not, and shall ascend
out of of the bottomless pit, and shall go into destruction, here is
expressed in words some what diverse, so as to the first member these are
answerable, when he shall come: to the second, he must continue a short space:
to the third, and he is the eight King, and one of the seventh: the fourth is
the same in both places. Wherefore that which was spoken generally of the Beast,
we may see pertains to the special mutation of the seventh head. Seeing then
this Beast is the seventh King, who should have the next place after him who
bare rule in John his time, and the regiment of the Popes at Rome followed by
and by that Heathen Empire, by a second most sure demonstration we have found
out both Antichrist himself, and also the time wherein he was borne. Which that
it may become the clearer, may be proponded after this manner.

The seventh King succeeded next after the Heathen Emperors who made the sixth
King reigning at that time, when John wrote, ver. 10. Five are fallen, one,
that is, the sixth is. But Antichrist is the seventh King, ver. 10.11. Therefore
Antichrist succeeded next the Heathen Emperors: and seeing the Pope of Rome
after the time of the Heathen Emperors is that seventh King, as before we have
manifested, it follows also necessarily that the Pope of Rome from the time
of the Heathen EMPEROVRS, is that chief Antichrist, of whom the Scripture
forewarne us so diligently, and that the City of ROME from the same is the
whore.

See now ye Jesuits, from how necessary principles the argument proceeds;
apply what engines you can to overthrow the same, you shall do more good, then
if you should bring ladders to conquer heaven. But your things which you do
treat off concerning the time of Antichrist, are divised, are absurd, and more
foolish then any toys, as we shall after declare.

12 And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings. Thus far touching
the Heads: Now follows the Horns, which by their consent, do bring yet a
more full light of time. For by how much things are nearer together, they are
so much the more clearer, and the more perceived and observed.

Therefore to the end that, that seventh head might become known by more
tokens, and his first beginning more undoubted, it is furnished with these
horns, as it were with a certain pomp and company of servants, by whose noise,
as it were, we should be stirred up to regard his coming. The Angel expounds
these horns to be ten Kings; which afterward are described of what sort they
are, both by their Kingdom in this verse; and mind in verse 13. and the war
which they shall make, verse 14. Their Kingdom is declared by a double or
twofold time, the first of it, not yet received; Who, says he, have not yet
received a Kingdom. The second of it received, but they shall receive power at
one hour with the Beast. The first meets with a doubt, whereby some body
peradventure might think, that these Kings reigned at the very same time, in
which John wrote: no, says he, they reign not yet, but shall reign shortly.
For otherwise the warning had been superfluous, if they should not come but
about three years and an half before the last day. The second time exhibiteth
yet a clearer knowledge of the thing, by a certain mutual bewaying, which the
horns and the Beast do one for an other. They shall receive power as Kings at
one hour with the Beast; for so I translate (...) in the accusative case; in
which these words are taken some time for the space of time, as, these last
have wrought but one hour, Mat. 20.12. Also, watch with me one hour, Mat.
26.40. after the same manner in Marcke 14.37. And so the best Greek writers
every where, thou art in business watch ^g the whole night: Xenoph. Paediae 2.
Sometime they are taken for the term of time, when, as in the 70. Iterpreters,
behold to morrow this very hour, I will ruin a hail: Exodus 9.18. So to morrow
about this very hour, J will deliver them all wounded: Josh. 11.6. In the New
Testament, yesterd^y the seventh hour the fever left him: John 4.52. The ninth
hour of the day, Act. 10.3.30. What hour I will come: Revel. 3.3. It is
doubtful therefore whether the words note the continuing of the power, or the
term of beginning it. The former signification contains the second. For if
unto one hour they shall receive power with the Beast, it must needs be, that
they receive it both together at the same hour also, and not the contrary;
seeing the power of one may be continued longer then of the other; of which both
there was altogether the same beginning. The History also accords with the
former wonderfully, clearer by a double and more general mark, and giving a
greater knowledge of the Beast; whom seeing the Spirit without doubt would have
to be most surely known, let us judge of right that there is this only meaning
of the words. The vulgar Latin tra^slateth the following words (...) with the
Beast, (...) after the Beast, against the authority of all copies, and contrary
to the truth it self. For in the rising of the Beast the horns are reckened
in the first place, yea also before the heads, or any other shape of the body;
which thing, had not been done at all, if they should grow up after ward,
chapter 13.1. Ribera will have the sense to be all one, whether we read with
the Beast, or after the Beast, as though to begin their reign together, and
after were the same time. But he refers neither of these to the time, but
unto service. But this also is unlike, and absurd, seeing to receave power
either with or after the Beast, cannot be one with to deliver power to the
Beast. Beda deceived with the vulgar Latin, seems to expound it so. But I
require a fit exemple of reason. To commit fornication after Idols is to serve
the same: but if to receive power after one, has the same consideration,
doubtless the Pope of Rome serves the Divill, after whom he received power.
Seeing therefore the words are so, from hence let us observe a double mark of
these Kings; one, that together with the Beast they rule; the other, that they
shall enjoy this power for a short time only. For that, a short space in ver.
10. the Angel expounds to be one hour. And that which there was spoken of
the seventh King only, here is attributed in likewise to all the ten Kings.
Not because having reigned this one hour, they should exercise no power ever
after (for how shall the Beast, of whom together this is spoken, enjoy only
one hour of authority, which has two and forty months to tyrannise? chap.
13.5. But because the first power after a few years should be interrupted with
some notable hurt for a time; and the ten Kings in their beginning should have
trial of the same adversity with the Beast, to the end that he might be more
clear and manifest to all men by this token. Therefore that now we may see the
very thing, we have said in chap. 13.5. that th^se Kings are the first
Christian Emperors: which now shall be made plain by the applying of every
thing. First the horns are Kings, neither of the common and inferior sort,
but Monarchs and of very great authority, who have crowns, wherein they differ
from the horns of the Dragon as has bin observed in chap. 13.1. He also has
ten horns, proper to the heads, to wit, the City Rome, where abode the
Majesty of the Highest Empire, the other Provinces being subject to this
Queen. But now the case being altered in the first rising up of Antichrist,
the chief Empire should be in an other place, then at Rome, as we know it came
to pass when the Christian Emperors lived at Byzantium, or Millane, or
Ravenna, who retained in their own power the chief sovereignty over the whole
Christian world. For hitherto they spoke as Lords, We, because thou art a
Christian, have judged thee worthy of the Bishopric of our City, as
Constantius said to Liberius the Bishop of Rome, Theod. book 2. chap. 16. Yea
some ages after. In the sixth General Council at Constance, Act. 1. Constantine
himself gave for a gift his Holy, as they spoke, in these words: I give to the
Arshbishop of our ancient Rome. Which thing also the Popes gladly
acknowledged. Boniface to the Emperor Honorius in Distinct. 97. of the Church:
Rome is the City of your gentleness. Gergorie unto Mauritius signifies his
obedience in proclaming his law, though he approoved not the sentence of the
law. As for me, being subject to your cammaundement, J have caused your law to
be sent through many parts of the world, book 2. Epist. 61. at the end. And
Agatho speaking of Rome: This is the servile city of your Majesty. in the
Council of Constable. 6. Act. 4. Where then all this time was the Donation of
Constantine. Although even the very donation, if a good and lawful should be
granted, would bewray sufficiently in what place then the Empire was. Secondly
these Kings are the horns of the Beast, by whose means the dignity of the Pope
of Rome increased, while they drove far away all the violence of the enemy,
which might seem to be able to detract any thing from it. Neither only gave
they it leave to grow by their wars, but also enriched it with exceeding
wealth. For although the Papists brag impudently of Constantines donation, as
we touched even now; nevertheless it is certain that they adorned both the
city, and Pope with many privileges, and that they which followed, took away
nothing; but rather to have added to the heap. Thirdly, they are said ten,
because so many of the first Emperors should be notable for their care, and
diligence in subduing the enemies of the Romans. Through which opportunity the
Beast lately bread, might get strength; and might grow up to his perfect
stature. And these were 1. Constantine the Great; 2. Constantinus, Consta^s,
and Constantius his sons; 3. Iulianus; 4. Iovinianus; 5. Valentinianus, and
Valens; 6. Gratianus, Valentianus secundus, and Theodosius the Great; 7.
Theodosius with Arcadius and Honorius; 8. Arcadius and Honorius alone; 9.
Honorius and Theodosius Junior; 10. Theodosius and Valentinius third. For so
Hierome, Prosper, Victor the Bishop of Tunise, Marcellinus Comes, and al other
writers, both Greek and Latin, whom I have read, do reckon for one the
Emperors that reigned together; for the Roman Empire was but one, though
divided in states, and Governors, as also the Image in Daniel chapter 2.40.
shadowed out one Kingdom by the legs and feet divided. As long as these
reigned, the Beast risen up of late flourished; much indeed, and grievously
afflicted when they were gone; when as there was no horn for a long space, that
was able to keep away, and remove the enemies from their necks. Although all
the horns were not certe^ly of an equal strength; but the two last were
weaker, Rome being twice taken under Honorius; Alaricus and Arnulphus being
Captains; and nevertheless the Head of the Beast not yet deadly wounded, when
as the overthrow was more ignominious then dammageable,) Pompon. Laet. on
Honorius,) being repaired by and by again, when the horn began to exercise
his, and Honorius to be stirred up, the Goths being expelled out of Italy, and
Attalus their King triumphed over Rome; and then after his right hand cut off,
by the commandment of Honorius carried in to Lipara, Sabel. En. 8. book 1.
Doubtless Constantius and Aetius employed their endeavor valiantly afterward,
and nobly delivered the majesty of the Empire from all barbarousnes; howsoever
the chief rulers Honorius and Valentinianus were slothful and cowardous. But
after these tow last horns were fallen, how many and how great calamities were
accumulated daily, when there was no aid either from the West or East part,
that could repress and thrust away the malepertnes of the enemies running
furiously upon him? Therefore by the want of his horns, he came into that
state, that men thought he had perished and was not, as the second part of his
time does manifest, ver. 8. Therefore are they ten for just cause; in which
number is contained the defending of the Beast, which afterward failed for a
time, as soon as that number was ended. This is that one hour, for which the
Beast received power, and not he alone, but those ten Horns together with
him; which together also fell down, when as there was afterward no strong or
manly thing in the West for a long time, which was able to resist the
fiercenes of the enemies. For the rest that followed, Avitus, Maioranus,
Severianus, Anthemius, Rethimer, Olymbrius, Glicerius, Nepos, Orestes,
Augustulus, to wit the last of the Emperors, were of no less continuance,
force and power, then they are at this day of no fame, scarce known either from
the speech of men, or by Histories. Fourthly the time of the Kingdom not yet
received was the time when John lived, and when this Revelation was made. The
Heathen Emperors yet kept the stage, to wit the very Dragon, while in the
mean time the woman not yet strong enough, or in time not yet ready to bring
forth her child, endured grievous pain in traveling, as in chapter twelve
ver. 2. etc. For howsoever in some ages next after John there were some men a
little more inclined toward Christians, yet the Dragon forthwith devoured all the new hope, lying in wait most vigilantly for the woman travailing with
child, until the full time to bring forth a valiant issue should come. Fifthly,
the time of receiving power is the same hour with the Beast. For we have
showed that the term also of beginning is included in the space of continuing.
But seeing this is a large hour, in what moment of it was this power give^?
Truly in that, wherein the Lamb cast down from the Empire Diocletia^, and
Maximinian, chap. 6.15. for we shall find that the Beast did appear at this
time, as it is made apparent from the elect then sealed chap. 7. From the
burning mountain cast into the Sea a very little after, chap. 8. From the
Church going into the inner Temple, while the wicked have sway in the court,
chap. 11. From the space of forty two months, all which she lay hid in the
Temple and wilderness, chap. 11.3. and 12.6. From the same time of the power
given to the Beast, and from the Throne, which he received as a gift from the
Dragon chap. 13.25. But chiefly from the next succession made to the sixth head,
to weet the Heathen Emperors, ver 10. of this chapter. The common term of all
those depends from the Dragon his driving out of heaven, when after so
wonderful a manner, the Emperors resigned their authority. For what other
cause is there, why the Church then should be in so afflicted state, but for
that the Beast was risen up? Therefore the woman trembling more for fear of him
then of the Dragon, brought forth, and together fled, that is, after she had
procreated the Christian Emperors, among whom Constantine obtains the first
and chief place, hating the ambitious and fraudulent Popes introducing
shadows and images of godliness, instead of a solid and express pattern more
then professed enemies, she hid her self in the dark straight way, chap.
12.6. Therefore these alone are those horns, to who^ only all these properties
agree most fitly. The Kings that arose after the dissipation of the Empire,
began not together with the Beast (as we have given him a rising like as other
men every where, in the year 606.) but almost two hundred year before. For
the Suevians, Alanes, Goths, Vandals possessed Spain when Honorius reigned.
The Vandals also held Afrike, the Goths, Burgonians, Francons, obtained France;
the English men Britannie, the Hunnes Pannonia; and others challenged for their
own other countries. These Kings flourished, the Beast in the mean season
being almost consumed with a most grievous wou^d. Neither received they power
for an hour, as the true horns, but by succession of their heirs, the which
dignity being once gotten, they hold it constantly even unto this very day: the
glory, I say, of the Kingdoms never decayed, howsoever the families
peradventure were often changed. Finally, neither succeeded they next the sixth
head: but they have the Popes and Christian Emperors placed between, and in
the midds. By the same arguments all things fall down, which are brought by
Ribera the Jesuit concerning the ten horns, Revel. 12. number. 11. as may be
evident to him that weighs the thing on both sides, that I may not spend time
in refuting his toies. If any object that some of those Emperors were godly,
and holy, let him again take this answer to himself, that the good Princes
knew not what monster they nourished, even as very many learned men, who had no
less care to set forth the Beast by their writings, then they to defend him
by weapons. From whence it is no marvel, though both strove to their power to
adorn him, whose counterfeit show had a certain majesty; but his filthiness yet
was more hid, then that it could be seen openly. Neither is it needful that
all the horns should be together, more then the heads, which succeeded one
after an other. And the Beast himself is a rue of Popes, as we have showed,
which a long order of succession concludes, not any one person limiteth. Yet
these first Emperors are so the horns, that together they contain the whole
order following, but therefore before the rest elected, as it were by name,
both because the traveile of these should be famous, and the first in advancing
the Pope, who being destitute of the same for a time, should be contemned: and
also because the certain, definit, and excellent number of these in the very
first beginnings of iniquity, should lead men straight forth to the extolling
of the Beast in the ages following; and should more abundantly instruct us for
to understand this whole mystery. For these horns which shall eat the flesh
of the whore, and at length burn her with fire, are far off from the times
of the first horns a thousand two hundred three score years at the least, as
appears sufficiently from those things which have been said before.
Necessarily therefore is a succession to be understood, to al which the name of
ten horns agrees, because the first of this number were notable. Which
things now in this wise declared, we have the third demonstration, of those
that are taken out of this chapter, both of the Antichrist and also his
coming. For the Beast which received power at one hour with the ten Kings,
who had not yet received a Kingdom in John's time, but should receive it
straightway when the sixth head was gone and then present, is the Antichrist.
But the Pope of Rome is the Beast, which a thousand three hundred years since
received power at one hour with those ten Kings, as we have made it plain.
Therefore a thousand three hundred years since he is Antichrist. So al things
agree most fitly with themselves, and do marveilously level at the same mark.

13 These have one mind: Such was the^ the beginning of the Kingdom. The
intent of these Kings is, with one purpose of mind to bestow their strength
and power in maintaining the Beast. Which in few words, but clearly enough do
show how the Emperors should be affected toward the Pope of Rome, chiefly for
the space of the two and forty months of his flourishing tyranny. For the
defection should not begin forthwith at this term: but shortly after the
former good will should decay, and abate somewhat by little and little of the
former heat. But who may not wonder, at so great consent of minds, through so
long a succession, that all in like wise should desire, that the chief
dignity, should be in the possession of the Pope of Rome, and should let pass
nothing, that might pertain to the advancing and making famous the same? The
thing is manifest to every one in the first ten horns. Only Iulianus help
also somewhat at least in vanquishing the enemies of the Empire. Neither in the
destructions of Rome and when the Popedom was almost abolished, was there want
in the Emperors of a care to reserve the former authority to old Rome, when it
seemed meet to translate the Primacie to Constantinople, the seat then of the
Empire; especially the Bishops of Constantinople chalenging to themselves the
same with exceeding great contention. Yea at length they restrained this
ambition of theirs, and commanded them to be subject to the Roman Pope. New
Horns at length arose in the West, Pipine and Charles the Great; they fought
far more fiercely for the Beast, then any before, in chap. 13.11. Moreover at
length it came to this point, that by an oath of fidelity, the Emperors were
bound to the Pope, and should now do necessarily, that which before time they
did of their own accord, and voluntarily. It seemed to the Beast to stand with
wisdom for his greater security to use this mark afterward, as we have
showed at chapter 14.17, Which custom must desce^de to the posterity, until
the words of God should be fulfilled, as after in verse 17. Some few Emperors
indeed had great strife with the Beast: but in every one of them this is to be
marveiled at, that they though they had to do only with a man, not with the
Pope. They hated him peradventure as an enemy: but the Popedom they adorned in
the mean time very studiously. But neither the^ had the Pope need of those
horns, who prevailed so much by his own forces, that he compelled the
Emperors struggling with him, to be subject in spite of their teeth: and
themselves now to undergo the yoke, by whose help before he brought others
under the yoke. Or grant that some one, who saw more then the rest, hated
also the Popedom, yet one swallow makes not the spring.

As touching the words, Montanus reads in the end of the verse (...) do
give in the present tence, do give their power to the Beast: as in the
beginning of the verse (...) have, albeit the speech be of that which is to
come, but this is usual in narrations. Theodorus Beza has (...) shall give.

14 These shall fight with the Lamb: Now he declares the war of these
horns, which they should make against the Lamb. But did Constantine and the
other good Emper. e^devour any thing against the Lord, for whose sake they take
up weapons against others? Certainly men fight against the Lamb, when any thing
is defended earnestly, which is contrary to his ordinances. And if any looks
into that manifold superstition, which was brought in when even the best
reigned, by the same, if not the authors, yet the favorers thereof; he shall
easily see this battle, although the holy men thought nothing less, (for so I
may call them, whom God pardons for his Sons sake, and sinning not of
purpose, but through ignorance,) then to oppugn the Lamb, whom alone they
desired to bear rule. This, I say, may be called a battle against the Lamb:
yet those first Emper. were far from that war, which was at length to be
made with the Saints after the two and forty months were finished. For so
we heard before, when the two witnesses have finished their testimony, the
Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them,
and overcome them, Chapter 11.7. Which we showed to have been done, partly by
the authority of the Pope himself, when at Trent he subdued the truth by his
purpled company: partly by the weapons of the Emperor Charles the fifth, who
together by a most lamentable war, persecuted the Princes of Germany craving
liberty to worship the Lamb; who had begun a little before to shine again
upon the world after long darkness. The Angel speaks in the plural number,
as though all the horns should make war together with joined forces. But it
is no new thing that it should be said done of all, which is done of any one
of the same degree. Many were the entreprises before against the Lamb, but
this one deserves the name of war above all.

And the Lamb shall overcome them: See how with this war he joins the
victory of the Lamb; which may be understood of this alone. But the Emperors
got the victory in that war; that is true indeed, if we respect the very
time of darkness, by the space of which the two witnesses must lie slain and
unburied. But after those few fore appointed days were ended, they which of
late triumphed as conquerers; now the case being altered, were overcome.
Mauritius put to flight the Emperor, and at length compelled him to grant
liberty to true religion, as we said in chapter 11 11.12. This free profession
of the truth is this victory, which the Lamb wrong from the Emperor against
his will. And not from him alone, but also from the rest which followed;
Ferdinandus, Maximilianus, Rodulphus, who seeing that they kicked in vain
against the prick, caused noe trouble to the reformed religion.

I would to God at length the Emperor would set forth the victory of the
Lamb, not only by resisting, but also by detesting the Romish impostures. and
by embracing the wholesome truth it self. Why minds he not, that he now
follows unwares the Lambs chariot? For it happens not by chance, but
belongs to a mighty conqueror, to make great states of a realm favorable to
his Church. But whether were it not better, to accompany the triumphant
chariot, a fellow and partaker of the victory, then a prisoner and miserable
spectacle of the disconfiture received? God open his eyes, that in rewarding
the whore from his virtues: he first of the horns may receive the price of
that victory, which if he shall not regard, nevertheless some other shall
have it shortly.

And they which are with him, called, and chosen faithful: The Christian
sauldiers Mauritius, and the armies of the Protestants, by which the La^be got
the victory. For it pleased him not by sending fire from heaven to overcome the
enemies by his own power alone, but by the labor of his faithful servants. So
then we have these horns declared by this war, no less notable mark toward
their end, then the number of ten was at their beginning: so the beginning
and end being known, here can be noe doubt of the other race that comes
between.

15 And he said unto me, the waters which thou saw: Hitherto the exposition
of the Beast: that of the whore follows: and first in respect of the whole
dominion, and the same flourishing in this verse. Waters which he mentions in
the first verse he expounds to be people, multitudes, nations and tongues,
that is, nations of every tongue obeying Rome the Empress. So the Prophets are
wont to signify a great multitude of people, as waters do come up from the
North, and become a swelling flood, Ier. chap. 47.2. And of right do they
attribute this name unto them, because of the notable variety, inconstancy,
and often cha^ging of their opinions, as of waves tossed with the wind: whose
troublous motions are greater, then of any arm or straigth of the sea, as
says the Orator. These therefore are the waters of the whore ruling far and
near, what kind of dominion she had once, while her age and favor was
flourishing: in the last times, when old age should disfigure her forehead
with wrinkles, they should become far more shallow, and narrower, as
follows in the next verse.

Where the whore sits: That is, upon which the whore sits, as in the
first verse. But nations and tongues are said two for one, as though he should
say, nations of diverse tongues.

16 And the ten horns which thou saw on the Beast: Now he comes to the
afflicted condition of the whore; declaring by whom it shall be brought upon her,
and how: to which he adds a common cause, the will of God in the next verse.
As touching the words, in stead of upon the Beast, the Compl. edition, which
Montanus and Plantine follows, does read, and the Beast, as if the Beast
himself at length should hate the whore: contrary unto Aretas reading, the
vulgar Latin, and Theod. Beza from the authority of very many copies, and in
very deed contrary to the manifest truth: for, by the desolation of the whore,
which he foresheweth here, the Spirit understands that calamity that shall be
brought upon the Kingdom of the Beast, by the vial poured out upon his Throne,
chap. 16.10.11. Therefore how can the Beast show himself a helper for to
abolish and root out the whore, as it follows from the false reading, whose
fall he shall take so grievously and immoderately, that he shall gnawe his
tongue for exceeding great grief? Furthermore, John saw the woman sitting upon
the Beast, at what time she comes forth to condemnation and punishment. When
then shall be this separating of company, which they would have, when so great a
concord remains even to the last destruction? Wherefore it is a vain thing,
which Bellarmine endeavors to stablish from this place, that Rome is not the
seat of Antichrist, because Antichrist shall hate the whore, which he grants
to be Rome. For he shall not hate, says he, his own seat. But the whole
assumption is manifestly false, and leans upon no other thing, then a corrupt
reading. But why dares he now depart from the vulgar Latin, which with so
great praises he extolleth elsewhere, and the Council has decreed to be
authentical alone? The force of the truth has compelled him to seek all
corners, which if by any means he could avoid, he knew pardon would easily be
gotten of the Council. Wherefore they which shall hate the whore are the
ten horns, not the Beast together with them. For the relative of the neuter
antecedent is masculine, because by these horns, men are to be understood. But
as in the war against the Lamb, that was attributed to the ten Kings,
which was done only by the labor of one, ver. 14. So all are said to hate the
whore, and at length to torment her with the last slaughter, which
nevertheless is peradve^ture the commendation of one of these. For there are
not wont to be many Emperors together of the same dominion. And it may be,
that even at the rising of the Beast, the ten first Emperors were famous for
good will toward the Pope: so contrariwise, nigh his end the ten last shall be
for a certain peculiar hatred to the whore; the last whereof shall burn her
with fire. But I say the last, not as though they should cease when the Pope
cease, but because they shall be no longer his horns, whose now they are
counted: from which it is manifest, that the Turk is not he, by whom Rome
shall utterly perish: but one of the Emperors, to who^ these horns agree in
beginning, progress, and end. Neither indeed would the Turk, if he knew to
provide for himself, attempt any thing against Rome: as long as she shall
continue safe, our armies shall do him no harm. Take ye an example o
Christians, from that victory at Karesta, a few years since, to wit, in the
year 1596. What was the cause that overcomming, ye ran away headlong by a
sudden terror? Why when the Turks sled, and left their camp and tents three
whole days in the fields without any keeper, on the other side you should
run with violence into a most desperate flight? Some men in time past knew
not to use doubtful victory; but after the enemies slain and disconfited and
undoubted victory, for the conquerrers to betake them to their heels; this
exemple, I believe, may be the first, not seen, nor heard before. A thing to be
greatly wondered at, but the reason whereof is not unknown. This rod is not
to be burnt, until both the Idolatry of the West be forsaken by repentance,
and Rome the fountain and beginning of this impiety, be destroyed with the
last punishment. The cruel enemy was sent into the earth for this cause, as we
learned from the end of the ninth chapter. Neither was any other fruit of the
Hungary expedition to be expected, when the standart of the chief Captain
Archduke Maximilian was marked on the one side with the Image of blessed Mary,
with the inscription of the Patroness of Hungary. Impiety doubtless drawn
from the cup of the fornication of Rome: but learn now by experience, how
little it is to your profit, the true Patron of heaven and earth being left, to
take unto them other Patrones, with exceeding great injury to the Saints.
Certainly this Patroness made you conquerers to run away. Be ye wise at
length, and convert your wrath against Rome, which makes you a pray by this
fraud. This cup of fornication, and shop of Idolatry being taken away,
there shall be no need of our armies to punish the cruel Turk: but destruction
shall come to him from some other place; so as he shall cause no trouble even
after, to the Christian name. Neither do I speak these things of my self
rashly, but partly those things which have been said before in chap. 16.13. and
in other places, partly those things which follow, declare to be most certain.
Wherefore, thou most High Emperial Majesty, to whom it shall be peradventure very
profitable to be delivered from this enemy; and you the rest of the Christian
Princes, understand at length, by what way you may procure, as to your selves
honor and tranquillity, so quietness and joy to the whole Christian world. You
have failed hitherto in setting upon the enemy. Draw your swords against Rome;
and Constantinople shall never procure you any trouble. Burn ye the whore and
bring her to ashes; then shall ye see the brethren to come from the East part,
whom the world yet little or nothing minds, of which the Turk shall be punished
with the last universal slaughter, for all their abominations and horrible
cruelty. The fifth and sixth vial of the former chapter, gave some taste of this
thing, of which the first declares the desolation of Rome, the second, that
the caling of the Jews, shall come by and by after. Which, what it avails to
that thing which I speak of, shall appear in his places more clearly. At
length, weigh diligently the things that are written. I would not dare, being
unknown, and even at home of no fame, speak unto most famous Princes, the
lights of the countries, concerning a matter of so great moment, unless
confidence in the divine truth had encouraged me. Which I submit to the
ce^sure of all equal judges. Wherefore if after diligent trial, ye shall find
out that which is brought, to be true and certain, deliver at length, by the
name of God the most afflicted Eupope, both from the firebrand of civil war,
which this whore carries about, and also from the most just matter of external
war. Address your selves against Rome, and destroy her, as being a most
certain destruction both of the bodies and souls of all those, who are trained
up in her wicked ordinances.

Shall hate the whore: Hitherto by whom the whore is to be tormented: now by
what means; whereof there be five degrees, hatred, forsaking, nakedness,
eating, burning. As touching hatred, why should they not worthily detest the
Sorceresse, who has made the Kings of the earth mad with her Circean cup?
Which is the butcheresse of the Saints, the only fortress of the Turks,
very Sodom, Egypt, and the City which crucified Christ our Lord? Of all which
things this Revelation has convinced and condemned her most evidently. But
they shall make her desolate and naked; partly by forsaking her, partly by
ministering no aid against the assault of the enemy. They shall eat her flesh,
by taking clean away her yearly revenues, and in prohibiting afterward the
Romish markets in their countries: peradventure also by taking again
Romandiola, the country Picenum, now called Marca de Ancona, and Sena,
commonly called Peter's Patrimony, and the rest of Italy being of the dominion
of the Empire, whereof the Beast once wiped the Emperors by fraud and subtilty.
The Venetians in the division of the Empire were left free, by the consent of
both the Emperors, counted of neither of their jurisdictions. They of the
City Bononia, they of Florence, they of Genua, they of Luca, and some others,
bought their freedom with money; but by what right does Rome challenge her
territories? Have the Emperors given them unto her?

In such wise, as Constantine the Great gave to blessed Silvestre and his
successors his Palace, the City of Rome, and all the Provinces, places and
Cities of Italy, or of the Countries in the west part. But grant that Pipin
and Charles gave them through ignorance; for the weal, as they thought, of
Christian piety: but after that it has been known by experience, that nothing
has redounded more to the destruction thereof, why may they not take their own
again, and get from the whore the wages of her whoredom? But the Princes have
no need to be taught what is their right, if only they would open their eyes,
that they might acknowledge the whore such as she is in very truth. And who
sees not that these things were begun ever since the time of Charles the V.
whom I suppose to be the first of these ten last horns; especially from that
moment, in which he was overcome of the Lamb by the arms of the Protestants?
Of him God would have that Rome, though a few years before, should be taken,
and miserably sacked, by the Prince of Borbon, as it were for an example, and
pledge of those things, which at length she should suffer at the hands of one
of the ten horns, of which he leads the rank. Ferdinandus, Maximilianus,
Rodulphus, who at this day enjoy the Empire; if they have done nothing more
grievous against Rome, they left her certainly forsaken and naked. Took they up
weapons for her sake? Suffered they not freely their subjects, the Romish
superstition being rejected, to profess true religion? But now they shall
succeed next, who shall eat her flesh, that is, who shall not only suffer
her to lie naked and forsaken utterly, but also shall deal with her by
violence, and shall no longer provide for her profits in their dominions, but
shall hold it sufficient for subjects to pay tributes to their lawful Princes;
yea peradventure shall enter an action against her, requiring again the things,
that I made mention of even now. And at length shall one rise up, who shall
consume her with fire, as which cannot be purged with any other nitre; which
day comes with speed, as may be understood from the things before spoken: but
we shall hear of a nigher term from the things following.

17 For God has put in their hearts: Now he shows the fountain, and whereupon
the Emperors should be for so long a time, so obedient, and why at length they
should alter their minds; both comes from him, in whose hands are the hearts
of Kings. He in his just judgment blinds whom he will, and bestows the
light of truth on others, whom he will embrace with his truth. But, which
thing is almost incredible, that the elect might be more assured of this future
judgment, he sets before their eyes the reme^berance of the time past,
saying, God has put into their hearts to give their Kingdom to the Beast,
until the words of God be fulfilled; as though he should say, as ye know for a
surety that overpassed consent of the Emperors unto humble service, so certain
is this future alienation of their minds, and at length that final destroying,
which I spoke of: There is one and the same author of both. Neither let us
take it grievously, if the judgment seem to stay long; the divine wisdom
has set a time, which to accuse of too much slackenes, would be a token of
overhastie desire, and importunate wish: for until, says he, the words of God
be fulfilled, that is until the decree shall be ended and accomplished, which by
his word he has foreshewed to be hereafter. VVherby is signified the time of
the fifth vial, at the pouring out whereof, shall be fulfilled all those things
touching the whore: which will be shortly, seeing our times have reached unto the
fourth, as we have showed in the former chapter.

18 And the woman which thou saw: So was the interpretation of the Dominion;
now of the Palace: which, all circumstances omitted, declares most plainly
that this woman is the great City, which reigns over the Kings of the earth.
Therefore this City is not the whole state of the wicked, whose dominion is no
more famous over the Kings, then over the multitude of people: but a City in
deed well known for her rule over the highest among mortal men: and so much the
more because these words are in stead of an interpretation; neither is the
Spirit wont to give an exposition darker the^ the things that are to be
expounded. Therefore it is a city properly so called, great indeed, and the
Lady of other Princes; there can be no other such Head City in the Christian
world then Rome, an abridgement of the whole world; the Queen of the nations,
Lady of Kings, and once in wars, now in superstition the chief: to whom,
even in this decrepite age, her former large possessions being greatly
minished, the Emperors, Spanish, French. and Polonian Kings yet submit
themselves, besides other Princes of inferior degree. Therefore this whore can
no longer be hid, she is found out at length, she has been warned to come to
her trial, she has appeared, her cause is heard, she is found guilty, she
is condemned to be burnt. I have exhibited unto you the sealed writings of the
public acts; neither do any thing now remain but the last punishment,
which is to be left to them, for whom God has reserved this glory. So at
length we have now seen the true face of the whore and Antichrist; it
remains that we examine in few words what the Papists teach concerning these
things, and especially because if this one cause be thoroughly know and tried,
the discerning of all other things shall be easy. For if the Pope of Rome be
Antichrist, what need is there to contend about the Church of Rome, about the
seven Sacraments about free will, about good works, or about any other point
in controversy? It is evident enough to all men, that the doctrine of
Antichrist is to be suspected, avoided, detested. Therefore my brethren strike
at this root, throw your axes against it with all your might. This one
controversy is enough for us. All the branches shall be cut down together with
the tree, with much labor spared; in which respect I will not be loath to
digress to this point a little while.

A refutation of the Antichrist which Bellarmine desscribeth, and confirms by
such arguments as he can, in his 3. book of the Bp. of Rome.
Chap. 1. Of the common name of Antichrist.
ALTHOUGH, I suppose, it cannot be obscure unto any, that d^sirous of the
truth, has diligently marked the things before written, but that the Pope of
Rome is the great Antichrist, and how long he has so been: yet least the mist,
whereby the Papists endeavor to hide the truth, should dazel the sight of any;
I have thought it expedient, before I go on with the rest of the
interpretation, to scatter it all into thinn aier; that so the Sun may
henceforward shine with clear beams on whomsoever.

Bellarmine deduceth this whole question into nine chief points: of which the
first is Of the n^me of Antichrist; the second, whither Antichrist be one man,
or a kind of men? The third, of the time of his coming, and death; The fourth,
of his proper name; The fifth, of what stock he is to be born, and by who^ he is
chiefly to be received; The sixth, where he shall fix his seat; The seventh,
of his doctrine and manners; The eight, of his miracl s; The ninth, of his
reign and wars. What is to be minded of these all, and how the desperate
Papists ar deceived in every of them, may be manifest to any, by the things
which the Angel has taught us in the former chapter; touching the condemnation
of the whore. For if Antichrist be come, and has fixed his seat at Rome, ever
since the Empire was taken away from the hethen Emperors: then can it not be
doubted, but Antichrist, in a common name, is a secret adversary; an impious
Kingdom, and not one singular man; that the time of his coming is past, and
not now to come; that his proper name is Lateinos; that he is not to be born of
the Jews stock, nor to reign otherwhere then at Rome; that his doctrine, is in
name, Catholic and Christian; and that his mitacles, reign, and wars, ar no
other then we have had experience of these many ages But Antichrist came at the
said time; for the Angel has taugh us, that Antichrist is the Beast which was,
and is not, and should ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into
destruction: chap. 17.8. And we have showed, that the Bp. of Rome, from the
time of the Hethen Emperors, has long since undergone the three first of
these fowr notable cha^ges, giving most sure documents of the fourth also.
Secondly, Antichrist is the seve^th head of the Beast, which next succeeded the
hethen Emperors, who made the sixth, which then was when Ihon wrote; Rev.
17.10.11. Therefore so soon as they ceased, came forth he that had the dignity
of the next head. Thirdly, the then horns, which are ten absolute Kings, had
their soveraingntie after that the sixth head was fallen; that is, after that
the Hethen Emperors were expelled. For from the time that the Beast began
first to reign; they never wanted crowns, chap. 18.7. And crowns have place
no where else, but on the heads and horns: therefore of necessity so soon as
they be taken away from them, they are transferred unto these. But seeing the
seventh head, that is Antichrist, receives power at the same howr, with the
ten horns: it follows that then began he to exist, when the Roman Hethen
tyrants ceased. Fourthly, the woman fled into the wilderness, when the Dragon
was cast out of heaven, that is, when the Hethe^ Emperors were deposed; as is
largely declared in the 7.11. and 12. chapters. And whom should she more fear
and flee, than Antichrist? Therefore she getting her self into the wilderness,
at his rising up: it plainly shows that Antichrist came at the same
abdication of the Emperors. Fifthly, since the Hethen Emperors have been done
away, Rome has most va^ted of the defense and patronage of the Pope. And at
that time should this City be both the whore, dnd seat of Antichrist, when she
should be carried of the Beast, and shine chiefly with his dignity. Sixthly, the
consent of the whole Prophecy confirms it; which according to this account,
very well agrees with it self, both in the whole, and in all the parts thereof:
whereas otherwise, as it were with members rent and torn asunder, it yeildeth a
pourtrature of inexplicable confusion. Lastly, even the Papists themselves
unwares do acknowledge, that Antichrist has drawn his original, from this
very beginnin. For whiles they boast of Constantines donation, and the whole
West to be subject to the Bishop of Rome: they show sufficiently, by their own
confession, about what time this Adversary of Christ came forth. Now was
poison sown in the Church, as a voice from heaven said, as Platina records in
the life of Sylvester. And if any do object, that after this time there were
some godly Bishops, or at least weise tolerable: I answer, that Antichrist is
not pa^ticular men, but a certain Kingdom and succession; from which God may
exempt according to his own will; wherein he shows the riches of his
immesurable mercy. But al these things, we have more largely handled and
unfolden, in opening the words of the Apostle: now we would but gather them
into a brief sum, that the things which were spoken dispersedly, being set
under one view, might show more clearly, how by the Apostles few words, al
Popish and Iesuitish subtilties, as touched with lightning from heaven, do fly
on fire, and come to nothing. These therefore be the common arguments, and to be
applied unto all the chapters of the disputation following: which we thought good
to warn thee Reader of, that thou may set them rather from hence, unto every
question, than that we should often repeat them. Things that properly belong to
every place, we will relate, as the matter shall require. Now therefore let us
enconter with Bellarmine hand to hand, and not baulk any of his demands: that
he may the better see how in vayn he has tried his strength against the truth.

The first chief point is, of this common name of Antichrist: which he
enforces to signify one contrary to Christ; and not contrary in what sort
soever, but so, as that he striveth with him for seat and dignity; that is,
one which is Christ's envious adversary, and would be accounted the Christ,
when he which is indeed the Christ, is cast down. The first part of which
interpretation I easily grant, that Antichrist is one contrary to Christ: but
whereas not content with this, he requires such a contrariety as was between
Marius and Sylla, Pompey and Caesar, that openly warred one with an other; the
Spirit convinces that of falsehood, teaching that the Beast has two horns like
the Lamb, Revel. 13.11. that he is a false Prophet, and that it is a point of
singular wisdom, to know and perceive the Beast; Here is the mind, says he,
that has wisdom: Revel. 17.9. Can any man be so blockish, that if open war
be waged against Christ, he should not know his enemy? Need any man be
deceived, where the matter is carried by professed force? The great Antichrist
shall deceive more than he shall compel: he shall come with all deceaveablenes of
unrighteousnes among them that perish, says The Apostle, 2 These. 2.10. whereto
the Apocalypse agrees, and he shall seduce the inhabitans of the earth, chap.
13.14. Shall this seducer have his deceits and sleights in open view? Nothing is
more contrary to his disposition. Be it therefore that there is some Antichrist,
which will openly vaunt himself to be Christ: yet is not this the property of
the Great Antichrist. But think not therefore that any goes before him in
wickedness. The Divil hurts more under the shape of an Angel of light: then
under the horrible hiew of a Dragon.

But you go about to prove the thing, three manner of ways. First because the
name Antichrist, cannot by any means signify Christ's Vicar. For Anti in
composition, never signifies subordination, as is manifest by the exemples of
all such names. But a Vicar signifies not opposition but subordination: and
the Pope is Christ's Vicar; and therefore not Antichrist. I answer; Though I
should grant you that Antichrist cannot signify Christ's Vicar: yet were the
Pope no whit the further from being Antichrist. For the argument is framed of
an aequivocation; and therefore concludes nothing. In the first proposition,
you put a true and proper Vicar, such as Antichrist in deed cannot be; who is
a malicious, although a secret enemy; that it is a true name whereby the
Scriptures do describe him, of Adversary, Man of sin, Angel of the bottomless
pit, and Beast. In the second, you assume a Vicar, not natural and lawful, but
one that is such by wicked ambition, sacrilegious usurpation, and false
boasting. From which no other thing can be concluded than this, that the Pope
is not Antichrist by his own confession; which I easily grant you. For we
reason not, I trow, by what name Antichrist shall call himself: but, what name
he is worthy of, and what the Scriptures give unto him. It is not to be
exspected, that he will bewray himself, and freely confess that he is the man
of sin, the son of perdition, the Angel of the bottomless pit, the Beast, and
the like: which if he should do, verily he should not play the false Prophet.
Fayrly therefore have you freed your Pope, in arguing that he is not Antichrist
by his own testimony. Secondly I answer, that it is false which you affirm of
the signification of this word Anti, (though now it be little to the purpose
what force it has;) which I will make plain also by examples. Antimist hotos,
is one that is hired in an other man's sted; Antibasileus, is a Viceroy, or one
in the Kings stead: Antistrategos, is the Lieutenant, or he that is in stead of
a Captayn; as H. Stephen shows in These. Graec. even the same that
Hypostrategos is with Appio in Anabaic: and the same that Propraetor, as
Budaeus teaches, from Demosthenes. Antuputhos is the Deputy or Proconsul. In all which Anti signifies subordination. But, say you, Hypostrategos, is an
equal Captain, even as with the Latins Propraetor and Proconsul signifies
not the vicar of the Prator or Consul, but he that is the same in a Province,
which a Praetor or Consul is in a City: and that herein Musculus was deceived,
who because he read that Antistrategos signified a Propraetor, thought that it
signified a Vicar of the Praetor, which is false. I answer; the first
Proconsuls had but a deputed Magistracy in sted of others, as witnesses L.
Fenestella de Magistr. Romans lib. 2. cap. 11. All which time, says he, the
Proconsul exercised not an ordinary but a delegated jurisdiction: though after
through custom it came to pass, that this Magistrate got a proper
jurisdiction. And this is that which Dionys. Halicarnas. says in Ant. Romans
lib. 11. that the first Proconsuls were created in the third year of the 84.
Olympiad: though he had before made mention of T. Quintius created Proconsul in
the second year of the 79. Olympiad; that is, 21. years before; lib. 9. To
weet, because these Proconsuls, as T. Quintius and the like, exercising but a
power of thrust; were not to be reckned among the ordinary Magistrates, but
those that after the limits of their governance proroged, had proper authority.
And then of right carried they the dignity granted, and the name of Magistrate.
Yet those Proconsuls of-trust, were called Anthupatoi, as appears by
Dionysius speaking of this T. Quintius. Wherefore Musculus was not deceived in
this as you say: but your self are egregiously beguiled, who through affection
of oppugning the truth, see not the thing that is most certain.

Secondly, you prove it by scriptures, from which you rightly judge the
signification of this name is to be chiefly fetched. And first you allege,
that he is caled Antichrist. which is exalted above all that is caled God, 2
These. 2.4. which certes, say you, is not to be the Vicar, but the enemy of
Cgrist, the true God. I answer; First seeing here is the same aequivocation in
the word Vicar, which was before: this argument has like force with the
former, that is, none at al. Secondly I say, that to be exalted above all that
is caled God, is figuratively spoken, not properly. For the true God, is never
caled al God, but one, as The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8.5.6. For though there be
which are caled Gods both in heaven and in earth, (as there are Gods many, and
Lords many,) yet to us there is but one God even the Father, and one Lord Jesus
Christ. The other Gods which are many, are often caled, all; as Psalm. 97.7.
worship him all ye Gods. Therefore to be exalted above every God, is not above
the one God in heaven, but above every God on earth, that is, above the civil
Magistrate, to whom the Scriptures do attribute the name of God. Which also
is evident by the word which follows (Sebasma) worship. For if God be taken
properly, how is that set after, which is less? In distributions, that which
is less, is wont to be set before; so that one can not rightly say, who is
exalted above every King or every subject; but contrary, he that is exalted
above every subject, or Ring. But taking God figuratively, the speech
increases elegantly, thus; who is exalted above al Magistrates, and not only
the inferior sort, but also above every worshipful Majesty among men, even
the highest Caesar's; which are caled Sebastoi and Sebasmoi, 1. venerable.
Finally, as touching the true God, how should Antichrist, acknowledging no God
but himself, sit in the Temple of that God? as the Apostle teaches, 2 These.
2.4. Doubtless he would abolish the Temples of all those, whose names, and
much less their worship and honor, he cannot abide. Neither should he be
subtle, if he boasted himself superior unto God in heaven; but in all men's
judgment, most doting and fanatical. Wherefore by these words, Antichrist
should exercise his pride against the civil Magistrate, whom he would tread
under his feet, as by too many lamentable examples your Pope of Rome has done.
But this supreme eminency above al earthly powers, makes no necessity of open
war against Christ, but may very well consist together with the feigned
humility of his Vicar.

The second place is from 1 John. 2.22. that he is caled Antichrist, which
denies Jesus to be the Christ; that is, say you, which denies Jesus to be the
Christ, that he may vaunt himself to be the Christ. I answer; this
interpretation is Iesuitical, that is, quite from the purpose of the holy
Apostle. You will have this denial to be open, manifest, impudent: the Apostle
seems to signify no such matter, but rather al things contrary. For it was of
men which newly and privily had crept in, of whom the faithful scarsely
suspected any such thing; but had need to be warned, that many Antichrists were
come already, ver. 18. It was of them which went out from us, but were not of
us; ver. 19. that is, which bare the name of Christians, as did Ebion,
Cerinthus, and others of that leven, who reteyning Christ's name, could not
openly deny him, but only privily and trecherously. Finally, it was of such an
Antichrist, as should deny alike the Father and the Son, as ver. 22. But he
would not openly deny the Father, for so he should manifest himself unto al,
to be altogether Godless, contrary to that which the Apostle teaches, that he
should sit in the Temple of God. Therefore, when the Apostle speaks of a
privy denial, and you would wrest it unto that which is put before al men's
eyes: you shall get nothing from this place, but a proof unto us of your
egregious skill, to conclude from any thing, whatsoever you list.

The third place is from Mat. 24.5. For many shall come in my name, saying, J am
Christ: and again verse. 24. For there shall arise false Christ's: from which you
gather that he shall affirm himself to be Christ, which surely, say you, is
not the part of a Vicar, but of an adversary. I answer; this Vicar is very
fertile unto fraud, that corrupts so many arguments with the ambiguity
thereof. For here it dallyeth as it did before, with the diverse acception of
the word. But besides that, why do you not observe, that many shall come in
Christ's name? and that false Christ's shall arise? Our Lord treats not of one
singular man: but shows that many shall arrogate to themselves his name of
Christ. If these things therefore be spoken of the very Antichrist, then surely
he shall be no one singular man. So this place, in sted of gayn which you hoped
for, turns to your damage. Our Lord chiefly notes out the Antichrists of
the Jews: whose impudency, though it should be greater, yet the hurt by them
should be lesser, then that which should redounde from the great An^ichrist.
But we shall have occasion hereafter to interpret this place: in the mean while,
these Scriptures do help your cause nothing at all.

Your third argument, is from al authors which have written of Antichrist; and
from the consent of al Christians: And in sted of them al, you mention of the
ancients Damascen, and Hierom; and Henry Stephen of our writers. I return to
you again, of the ancient Fathers, this one S. Ephrem, (whom Ierom celebrateth
with the praises of an high wit) that hence forth you boast no more so
lavishly of al authors. Thus speaks he in his sermon of Antichrist: Jn this
habit shall the foul theif come. For that the deceiver and deceitful speaker,
may deceive al men; he will feighn himsefe humble, courteous, despising
unrighteousnes, shuning Idols, making a show of piety, benign, poor, studious,
fair beyond al admiration, gentle, cheerful unto al men. These things says he.
Where now is that open war, with this notable Iugler? where is that manifest
pride, whereby this deep dissembler of humility, should lift up himself above
every God? where is that manifest tyranny, with this just, pious, beningn,
poor, and courteous fellow in show toward al men? If I would search the
judgments of the rest; I doubt not but you should want much of your sum of
al authors. As for H. Stephen, he acknowledges the word to have this force,
that he judges them also to be reckned by the name of Antichrists, which thou
they profess the name of Christians, yet are in deed the enemies of Christ,
whiles they adulterate his doctrine with many forgeries. For howsoever they
boast of Christ with their mouth, yet in heart they desire his overthrow: and
especially they which with wicked boldness do invade his royal seat: and
likewise they which derogate from his godhead. These be his words; none of
which, but do very well fit the Bp. of Rome. From al which thus disputed, you
now gather up your first argument against us adversaries: and least the whole
should not agree with the parts, you conclude with the same fine equivocation,
that you trimmed all the former with, after this manner: The name of Antichrist
signifies an enemy and rival of Christ: But the Pope of Rome professes
himself Christ's servant, and subject to Christ in all things: Therefore he is
not Antichrist: to weet, by his own confession: which who so yeildeth not, let
him be Anathema. For so you might more rightly have established this most sure
conclusion, than the Fathers of Trent, do their canons. But know, I pray you,
Bellarmine, that continual equivocating, is intolerable trifling.

Chap. 2. That Antichrist shall not be any one certain man.
THE second chapter makes Quaere, whither Antichrist properly so caled, be one
certain man: or a singular throne, and tyrannical Kingdom. The Papists al do
think, he shall be one certain man. But those common arguments, which we set down
in the beginning of this disputation, do evince the contrary. For if
Antichrist have reigned from about the 300 year of our Lord, unto this day, as
is sufficiently showed; then is he no one singular person. Moreover, if any will
but mind those streights of time, the amplitude of this dominion, the multitude
of things that are to be done, together with the greatness, which the Papists
do in their fiction apply to Antichrist: he will wonder that men can so dote,
as to think that all these things are to be found in one person. But besides,
a part of his reign is a thousand years, as shall after be showed, chap.
20.4.5. Let us see therefore, with what reasons you confirm your opinion.

You allege for this purpose, Scriptures and Fathers. The Scriptures are five;
the first out of the Gospel of John, 5.43. J am come in my Fathers name, and ye
receive me not: if an other come in his own name, him ye will receive. These
words, you say, are to be understood of the true Antichrist, and that both by
the testimony of certain Fathers, and by the propriety of the words themselves.
I answer; as touching the Fathers, I like not to discuss their opinions. It
would be long, and not much to the purpose: for all men do confess, which are
not wilfully blind, that in this matter of Antichrist, they erred much, through
darkness of the times. Let us insist upon the sure way of finding out the truth
by the Scriptures, which neither can deceive, nor be deceived. What therefore is
that force of the words, which requires to have him one singular person? This
you endeavor to show fowr ways. First, because our Lord opposes to himself,
an other man; that is, person to person; as appears by his words, J, an
other; in my name, in his own name; me, him. As therefore Christ was one
singular man: so shall Antichrist be. I answer; the force of this Argument
lies in three opposite words, an other, in his own name, him: of which the
two last depend on the first: for what respect this has, the same the other
will have, seeing al are refers to the same thing. But an other, denotes not
one singular person, as Grammarians teach, which give this rule, that (...) the
other is spoken of twayn: but (...) an other, of more then twayn. Ammonius de
simil. and differ. vocabulis. Therefore from this certain and true rule it
necessarily follows; that one certain man is not here meant. Neither is this a
decree of Grammarians only: but the custom of speaking in the Scriptures
does also confirm it, to omit infinite other examples: as One sows, and an
other reapeth, Is here meant one sower, one reaper? Nay, Christ says, J have
sent you to re^p^ that, wherein ye labored not: others have labored, and ye
ar entered into their labors: John 4.37, 38. So, to one is given the word of
knowledge, to an other faith, to an other the gift of healing, to an other
power to do great works, to an other Prophecy, etc. 1 Cor. 12.8.9.10. You will
not say, I trow, that these gifts were proper to singular men, but common to
many. In like sort Paul says, Jf any other seems to have whereof he may
trust in the flesh, much more J. Phil. 3.4. He compares not himself with a
singular man, but with any one of many. You provide very evil for your cause,
to fetch confirmation from thence, whence it is most overthrown.

Secondly you say, Christ here says, that Antichrist shall be received of the
Jews: and it is evident, that the Jews do exspect one certain and singular
man. I answer, there is nothing at al sound in this reason. For neither is this
great Antichrist, whom the Apocalypse speaks of, and of whom we entreat; he
whom the Jews shall receive; as is plain by the things spoken before, and
shall be mor largely declared hereafter: neither is the Antichrist of the Jews,
one certain and singular man: for many shall come, says Christ, in my name,
saying I am Christ: where he speaks chiefly of them that should rise among
the Jews, Mat. 24.5. Also their own History shows, that more than one, have
been counted for the Christ, which have sacrilegiously challenged the name of
the Messiah to themselves. And as touching their exspectation, this does no
more prove one singular person, then the Papists exspectation proves him to be
one certain man. We do exspect, that you should bring forth some thing more
firm, than your foolish exspectations.

Thirdly you say, that Al false Prophets have come in the name of an other, not
in their own name; Therefore Antichrist, which shall come by a special manner in
his own name, is one singular person. I answer, Antichrist shall come in no
other manner, as touching his name, than all the other false Prophets. For name
is not an appellation or title, but authority; as is manifest by the opposite
branch thereof, to weet, the name of the Father: J am come, says Christ, in my
Fathers name, that is, not with the Fathers appellation, as if I were the
Father, but by the mission and authority of the Father. So, to come in his own
name, is not to boast of the proper title of his name, but to come in his own
authority, no lawful power being given him of God. And thus do all the false
Prophets come both in the name of an other, and in their own name. In the name
of an other feighnedly and counterfeitly; in that they falsely boast of a
sending: but in their own name, in very deed: because they have none but their
own authority, and run when they are not bidden, as says the Prophet.
Wherefore there will be no difference in this thing, between Antichrist; and the
other false Prophets his companions.

Fourthly you say, Our Lord would not have said, If an other come; but many
come; if he would have spoken of false Prophets. I answer, Christ by this word
an other, signifies that many shall come: for it is a nown partitive of
multitude, as we have showed. Neither could that swarm of False-Christs, which
he mentions in Matthew, be intimated more briefly and significantly, than in
this manner. But as you, by your supposed silence, (which yet perhaps you now
perceive is louder uttered than you would,) do endeavor to establish one
singular person: so give me leave, I pray you, by Christ's true silence, to
overthrow most certainly, the same singular person. For do you think, that
Christ in Mat. 24. instructing his Disciples so diligently of future evils,
even until his coming, and specially of False Prophets, from whom much danger
should arise: would not so much as one word make mention of this one singular
man, so cruel a plague, of whom it behooved them most of al to beware? It is
certain therefore that this whole dream of one singular Antichrist was an error
in the ancient writers, and is madness in you, that will persevere in the error.

Hitherto of the first Scripture. The second is that of Paul, 2 These. 2.3.
Except there come a departing first, and that that man of sin be disclosed, even
the son of perdition etc. and afterward ver. 8. and then shall the wicked man be
reveiled, whom the Lord etc. where, you say, the Apostle speaks of a certain
and particular person, as appears by the Greek articles (...). For the Greek
articles draw the signification unto one certain thing: and therefore you marvel
that our men, which boast of skill in the tongues, perceived not this. I answer;
it is true in deed, the Greek article has his force, to recall and restrein so
unmeasured and uncertain a motion, unto some certain thing: but this certain
thing, is as well a certain genus, as a certain individuum or singular,
according to the nature of the thing in hand. Whereupon we novices do think
this new and unheard of, that the Greek article should always signify some
singular individuum. Shall (...) be one singular sower, one singular reaper?
John 4.37. or (...) one particular sin entering into the world; and (...) one
singular death? Romans 5.12. or (...) one thief? Ioh. 10.10. We are furnished now
by master Jesuit with a new rule; which no Grecian, I think, did ever so much
as dream of. Our dull men observed not this thing: doubtless this garlond was
reserved for you, whose name is worthy, for this notable observation, to be
registered in the next edition among the Jnventors of things. But, you say,
Epiphanius teaches this same, Her. 9. which is of the Samaritans, saying, that
(...) signifies a man in common: but (...), a singular man. I answer, this
injury of yours is not to be suffered, that you do to the learned man, whom you
would blemish with so notorious ignorance. Epiphanius teaches no otherwise in
this thing than al other learned men. (...) etc. Where the article, says he,
is adioined to any one definite and most evident thing, there is verily a
certain Emphasis, or force, for the article: but without the article, the word
is to be taken indefinitely of any common thing. Even as, if we should say
(...) King: we express the name, but do not clearly show any definite one.
For we say King of the Persians, and of the Medes, and of the Elamites. But if
with apposition of the article, we say (...) the King: it is out of doubt what
is signified. For by the article is intimated that King of whom the question,
or speech was, or which is known, or which rules in any country. In like
manner (...) God, and (...) the God: (...) man, and (...) the man, (...) dead,
and (...) the dead, and so in the rest. Epiphanius therefore means that by the
article there is denoted something spoken of before, famous, well known, being in
question or in speech, but it never came into his mind, much less did he ever
write, that every word is by this circumscription of the article, always tied
to a singular person. An article, like a Jesuit, can put on any habit,
according to the variety of time and place. Whereas therefore you marvel that our
me^ which boast, as you say, of skill in the tongues, could not perceive this:
I marvel rather that you, a man exercised in learning, famous in schools, a
professor of controversies, on whose mouth almost the whole popish nation
depends: should so miss, in a childish rudiment. But desire of getting
victory, let you from seeing the truth. One way there is to wipe out your
reproach, if you will be a mean to persuade your men hereafter, to conclude any
thing rather from these articles, than one singular person.

The third place is 1 John 2.18. Ye have heard that the Antichrist ((...))
shall come, and even now are there many Antichrists: where the article you say,
is set before Antichrist properly so caled: but none before him as he is
commonly taken: and therefore, that the first is one certain person, but this
later in general is al heretics. I answer, the greatest succor of this cause
seems to consist in this new feigned force of the article; and therefore have
we the coleworts twice sodden set again before us. But we have sufficiently
refuted this your either ignorance or craftynes, in the argument nex before,
with which this is altogether one and the same. Yet least you should complayn
that you have no answer; Be it, that (...) the Antichrist with an article, is
some diverse thing from (...) Antichrists without an article; must it therefore
by and by be one certain person? I deny such an ill coherent consequence. It
may note out a singular kind of Antichrists, of who^ the Apostles taught the
Church so diligently: even as (...) the wicked is often a kind of wicked me^,
(...) the tempter; and so in other. In which the article respects not one
singular, but some thing common, and egregious in his kind. This might have
bin manifest to you by John himself, whiles he warns that (...) the
Antichrist was in his time: For many deceivers are entered in the world, says
he, which confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, he that is such
a one is (...) the deceiver and the Antichrist, 2 John. 7. where yet he speaks
not of that chief Antichrist which was to come, but of some such like sort. By
which it sufficiently appears, that Antichrist with an article, is not a
singular person.

The fourth place is Daniel 7. and 11. and 12. Out of the 7. chapter, you take
those things which are spoken of the little horn, ver. 8. etc. which, you say,
are to be expounded of Antichrist, and that for two reasons. First from the
authority of certain Fathers: then from the words of Daniel himself. I
answer; as touching the authority of the Fathers, I know many learned men do
interpret these words of Antichrist: but this Apocalypse dispelleth the
darkness, which taking away the sight before, suffered not to behold the thing it
self. For it teaches that that little horn, differs much from this
Antichrist whom John describes. For Antichrist is one of the heads of the
Beast, which is of many forms, both in Daniel and in John: but a little horn,
is only some addition joined to the head. Moreover, this arises after the ten
horns: but Antichrist rises together and at one hour with all his. That,
subdueth three horns under it; the other unsubdued, are either foes of the
same, or at least friends of equal power: but Antichrist is over all the 10.
horns, which willingly serve him, until the appointed time. Finally, that is
caled little: Antichrist is not little, who has power over every tribe, tongue,
and nation: Apoc. 13.7. who also bears the whore, to whom peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues do obey, and which reigns over the
Kings of the earth, Apoc. 17.15.18. But, you will say, it may be it is caled
little in the beginning, not in the full age. I answer, the chiefest height of
dignity, when he shall most flourish, shall lift it self no higher, then over the
3. horns, which he shall depresse. Doubtless the Spirit would have made mention
of more, if he had had power over more. That horn therefore is not this
Antichrist: but if we will rightly consider the thing, it is that Dragon of the
sixth vial of this Apocalypse, chap. 16.13. namely the Turk; for of him and the
other enemies that should oppress the Jews, does Daniel only speak, without
any mention of the Western Antichrist; as it may be, occasion will be given
elsewhere, to declare more fully. This disparitie therefore, will by no means
suffer these two to convene in one. Whereupon you may now see, that we are not so
much to look, either who or how many they be that say a thing: as with what
reasons, they so persuade themselves.

Secondly you say from the words of Daniel, chap. 7.24. that this Antichrist,
(whom ancient writers will have to be meant by the little horn;) is a singular
person: for he is not caled one Kingdom, but one King: who of ten Kings that
he should find in the world, should take three quite away, and subdue the other
seven under him. I answer, first, these last words and shall subdue the other
seven under him, is a very bold comment, seeing no footstep of them appears in
Daniel. For he only says, ver. 8. so that three of those former horns were
rooted out from before him: and again ver. 24. and three Kings shall he
depresse: but of the subduing of the other 7. he no where makes mention. And
how, I pray you, should he be a little horn, if he should destroy three, and
have command over all the rest? These things are unadvisedly brought in by some
old writers, but worse retained by you, for to darken the truth. But this is
little to the purpose, for the force of the argument. Therefore, secondly I say,
that it is false to affirm, because he is caled one King, he is one person:
for the Angel before speaks thus: These great Beasts which are fowr, are fowr
Kings, that shall rise out of the earth: ver. 17. which yet are not fowr
singular persons, but so many Kingdoms: as your self can not deny.

The other place of Daniel is from chap. 11, ver. 21. -- 36. where literally is
treated of Antiochus Epiphanes: but allegorically (as Calvin, and Ciprian, and
Jerome you say, do interpret it,) of Antichrist, whose figure Antiochus did
bear. Therefore seeing he was one certain and singular person; Antichrist also
must be one certain person. I answer; great in deed is the agreement of the
wicked, and needs must many things in them be found alike, who are governed by
one and the same Spirit; for which cause, those learned men avouched him to be
the type of Antichrist, after a common sort: but that the Spirit intended him
for the type properly, as he is wont in the other scriptures, I see not how it
can be rightly said It has not such agreement with that which they make the
truth thereof, as is wont to be found in other types. For example: this
Antiochus is the little horn of the Goat, of whom it is said chapter 8.14. that he
should rage two thousand and three hundred days. Shall this be the type of
Antichrist? Then shall he not reign only three years and a half, but six years
and more then an half; and so an other Antichrist is to be looked for, then
ye yet feighn. Or if you will have it, that al things are not so exactly
answerable in the type and antitype: yet in a wise master builder, this, I
trow, must needs be required, that he make not the portch bigger then the
house; that is, that the type reign not longer then the truth. I remember, that
390. days were given to Ezechiel for a sign of so many years: but no where
so many years to be given unto any for a sign of so many days. Secondly I
answer, let Antiochus be the type, yet can not one person be from thence
concluded: seeing one singular type may as well note out many persons, as many
persons one; as we see in that row of Levitical Priests, who al had relation
unto one Christ, as unto their proposed end.

The third place of Daniel, is from chap. 12.11.12. where the Angel says, From
the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the desolating
abominatio^ set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred ninety days. Blessed
is he that waits and comes to the thousand three hundred five and thirty
days. Of this place you add nothing, but rest in some men's interpretation,
which have applied it unto Antichrist. These days you would have to be taken
properly, and therefore that he is one singular person, whose reign is defined
in so short a time. I answer, this number perteyneth nothing at al unto
Antichrists reign for three years and an half, before the second coming of our
Lord. For Daniel asks, when the end shall be of these marvelous things? will you
have the answer to be this: After the end of 1290. days, or at most, of 1335.
before the last end of al things? what would such an answer teach? If one that
is in a far country should ask which way he must go to Rome; and an other
should answer, when you come at the tenth stone from the city, you must turn
this way or that, to the left hand or to the right: might not he well think
himself to be mocked? Or, if one should ask of any climate, how long the day is
in that country; and answer should be made; about half an howr after sun
setting: would he think himself satisfied? Even such an answer do ye
attribute to the Angel, whiles ye judge these to be common days, and to go
immediately before the end of al things. Far be it from us to think the holy
Angel would so jestingly close up this divine vision, and specially the whole
Prophecy. In none of these places therefore do we find Antichrist so properly
caled, much less his singular person.

So much of the fourth Scripture. The fifth and last is Apoc. 13. and 17. Which
places, you say, are meant of Antichrist, for so teaches Jreneus lib. 5. and
it is evident by the similitude of Daniels w^rds and John's: who both of them
make mention of ten Kings, which shall be in the earth when Antichrist reign shall
dure three years and an half. As Daniel therefore speaks of one certain King:
so does John in the Apocalypse. I answer, Ireneus judges rightly, that the
Apocalypse in the said places does treat of Antichrist: but you ar wrong, that
would have such an Antichrist to be meant, as is in Daniel. I have showed that
these two do differ many ways, so as the one cannot be the other. Those ten
horns in Daniel, are not this Beast. Answerable in deed they are to the
Dragons horns; but the Beast has not horns common with the Dragon. Moreover,
that time, times and part of time in Daniel, is not the same space, with the
like manner of speaking in John. There it agrees to the little horn; here, to
the Beast: which being diverse, as we have showed; it is not necessary that one
and the same space should agree to them both. That designation of time in
Daniel, answers to that howr, momenth, and year, Apoc. 9.15. al which space,
is but a little part of this time, times, and half a time in the Apocalypse,
as is sufficiently proved before. VVheras you urge the similitude of the words;
it is even like as if one would conclude that the Pope is the Turk, because
both of them be men, and have dominion over many. Moreover, if I should grant
that one thing is handled by them both: yet speaks not Daniel of one certain
King. You went about to prove such a matter even now; but in vain, as we have
seen: and the thing it self, openly proclayms the contrary. For if the little
horn were a singular person, such as by your opinion the other ten must needs
also be: what manner description of the Roman Empire were this, which omitting
so many ages, should only touch the estate of the last three years? Nay not
of one of the three years indeed; seeing you will have this Empire to be quite
destroyed, before Antichrist come. Therefore the Scriptures afford you not one
word, whereby you may with sound reason conclude that Antichrist shall be a
certain man: but we have by them most certainly showed, that it is the
apostatical seat of those that will dominier in the Church.

Your second argument is from the Fathers; unto whom how should any give credit
when they affirm him to be a certain and singular man: seeing some of them knew
not, whither he should be a man at al, or no? Some will have him to be the
Divil; some, a Divil incarnate: some Nero; and others, I know not what. And
think you that we must believe these men, if they say he shall be a certain
person? Moreover, seeing by the scriptures, no such thing, but the contrary
does appear: what account should we make of the uncertain conjecture of men,
who ar bidden not to be wise above that which is written? 1 Cor. 4.6.

These therefore I will leave unmedled with; and very well might I do the like
with your answers unto our men, seeing they touch none of those things which I
have set down concerning this matter: yet that you may perceive your self to
be no less weak a fenser, than you have been a foiner; I will bestow on you a
little payns in the examining of your answers.

You propound three arguments of our men: two of Theod. Beza; the third, of
John Calvin. First, Beza reasons thus, that Antichrist is not any one man,
because the mystery of iniquity wrought even in Paul's time, and Antichrist is
to be killed at the coming of Christ. You answer, that Antichrist began to
range abroad in the Apostles time, not in his own person, but in his
forerunners, to weet, Simon Magus, Nero, and the like. Whereto I say, that
Theod. Beza and al our men do confess the Antichrist properly so caled, was
not in the Apostles time, but only his fore runners. For that which he says,
Let them show me some one that continues alive from Paul's time, unto the day
of judgment, is spoken after the common manner, as by way of large
amplification; and is to be understood of some one that should come soon after,
that age. And was not he to be born shortly after, whose forerunners made such
a tumult, while the Apostles lived? The Apocalypse speaking of Antichrist,
under that seventh head, says, and the other is not yet come: cha. 17.10.
which manner of words we are wont to use in things so near as they may seem to
be come, though as yet they are not come: and not of things that are to fall out
fifteen hundred years after. Idle therefore are all those things that you gather
of Peter and Paul to be Antichrists; and of Simon, and Nero to be Christ's. Why
prove you not, I pray you, that the rising of Antichrist was not then near? Is
not this enough to refell his singular person, if he were to beginn a few ages
after Paul? But you, like a rude fenser, bear off with your bukler from the
part which you are not laid at; but where you are beaten even unto death, you
leav your self unfensed and bare. The second argument of Th. Beza is, that by
the singular names of Beasts, the Bear, the Lion, the Libbard in Daniel chap.
7. are not meant singular Kings, but singular Kingdoms, whereof one did conteyn
even many Kings. After the same manner therefore Paul 2 These. 2. who marvelously
agrees with Daniel: by the man of syn, and son of perdition, means not one
singular person, but a certain body as it were of many tyrants.

You answer two things: First denying that Daniel always by singular Beasts,
does mean singular Kingdoms: for in the 8. chapter, by the Ram, he means
Darius the last King of the Persians: by the Goat-buck Alexander the Great.
Secondly, you deny the consequence of the argument: because Paul, by the man of
sin, means not any of the 4. beasts described by Daniel, but only that little
horn.

I answer to the first: It is false that which you say of the Ram and the
Goat-Buck. For by the Ram is meant the whole Kingdom of the Medes and
Persians, and which ended in Darius: by the Goat-Buck, the Kingdom of the
Greeks, which began by Alexander. For so, says he, ver. 3. there stood before
the river one Ram with two horns; and his two horns were high, but one was
higher than an other, and the highest came up last. These two horns, at the
two Kingdoms of the Medes and Persians; of which that was first and smallest;
this, last and largest. Have these things place in Darius only, or in the
whole Kingdom? Then it follows in the next verse; I saw the Ram pushing
against the West, and against the North, and against the South: so that no
Beasts might stand before him, neither did any deliver out of his hand, but he
did what he listed, and that very great things. What did Darius of these
things; who in the second year of his reign, being provoked unto war by
Alexander, went to ruin daily? Last of al, explayning this vision in the 20.
verse, he says; The Ram which thou saw with two horns, are the Kings of
Media and Persia: he says the Kings, not Darius only. So also the Goat-Buck
is the Kingdom of the Greeks; not Alexander alone. He is caled in deed King of
Graecia, ver. 21, but it is plain, that King there is taken collectively, as in
other places, namely for Kingdom; as in the end of the verse it is taken
partitively, when he says, the horn between his eyes, is the first King;
namely Alexander; who seeing he is the horn, he is not the whole Goat. Wherefore
no where in Daniel is a singular person designed by a Beast, but a whole
Kingdom. Unto the second I say. By the Man of Syn, is not meant the little horn,
but the Beast. For Antichrist is the seventh head, which also is a Beast, as
Apoc. 17.8.11. And although this Beast be none of those that are in Daniel; yet
the argument from the like is firm. For by the same reason that it is a whole
Kingdom in Daniel, it is so likeweise in the Apocalypse.

Our third argument is Io. Calvin's; who thus gathered that Antichrist is no
singular person; because, the head of the universal Apostasy, which dureth more
years than can be fulfilled under one King, is not one certain man. and
Antichrist is the head of such an Apostasy.

You answer five ways, that Calvin's impudency, as you say, may the more
appear. First, that by the Apostasy, may rightly in Paul be understood the
Antichrist himself. Secondly, that by the same may be meant the defection from
the Roman Empire. Thirdly, that there is no need it should be of many ages.
Fourthly, that it requires not one head. Fifthly, that it is yet a question,
who have departed from the faith and religion of Christ, whither the Papists or
the Lutherans.

I answer to every of these: and first, where by the Apostasy you unnersta^d
by a metonymie Antichrist himself; you confirm the same thing that Calvin
says: so is your wont, to repress his impudency. Unto the second, I say, that
the Apostasy is not a defection from the Roman Empire, but from the true
faith, to weet, from the love of the holy truth, as Paul opens it, and as
shall be made plain after, chap. 5. and 14. Unto the third, concerning the
durance of the Apostasy, we have already learned by the Apocalypse, that it
has prevailed more than a thousand two hundred and sixty years: and this more
evidently, than that any of your subtle reasonings ca^ elude the thing. Unto
the fourth, if you can find any other multitude besides that of the whole
earth, which follows the Beast: I will not hinder you from setting up as many
heads of the Apostasy, as you will, Apoc. 13.3.8. Unto the fifth, namely that
the question is not yet decided, as you say, whither Papists or Lutherans have
made defection; we make this offer, let al holy men be judges. With whom there
is found Idolatry, let them be condemned of defection, as the Scriptures every
where teach. But if any credit be to be give^ unto the most holy oracles of the
Scriptures, all that your worship of Images, invocation of Saints, adoration of
the feighned body in the sacrament, veneration of relics, and many such like
things, is horrible Idolatry, and therefore Apostasy. But Idolatry is spiritual
whoredom: and therefore as the way of the whorish woman, which eats, and then
wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done no iniquity; Prove. 30.20. so is the
way of Idolaters: by no means can they be brought to acknowledge their impiety.
This, Bellarmine, shall be the true trial, both of you and of us, before God and
his holy Angels. The things that you propou^de, are ridiculous. You will have
it, that we have made defection, because we have departed from the superstition
of our predecessors, both in doctrine, and rites full of Idolatry: as though we
were not bidden go out of Babylon, and to have no communion with her at al. We
have made defection from the whore, defection from Antichrist, namely defection
from your Pope of Rome: but thanks be to God, we have made defection unto the
one true God; who of his infinite mercy will crown our defection with eternal
glory, and your constancy, if you speedily repent not, with sempiternal
ignominy, among them which obey not the truth. Now therefore cast up your
accounts, and gather the sum; then see, forasmuch as Antichrist is an impious
and Apostatical Kingdom, and the Popes of Rome have been principal Apostates,
and many; whither Antichrist be a singular person or no.

Chapt. 3. which shows that Antichrist is come.
OF Antichrists coming we gave demonstrations in the beginning of this
refutation; which serve to moderate all the questions in this cause, that they
may manifest the truth of every of them. Yet least this place, where the thing
is purposely handled, should complayn that it is naked and empty: it shall not
be unprofitable, to add unto the former, one reason or two, in sted of
the advantage. And these we draw from 2 These. 2. and first from the 3. verse,
where it is said, except there come a departing first, and that the man of syn,
the son of perdition, be disclosed. In which words the Apostle sets down,
that both of these shall go before the coming of our Lord; and also that the
departure or Apostasy shall come before the disclosing of Antichrist. For that
former is the cause of this latter, drawing this evil with it, as afterward he
teaches, that Antichrist shall therefore come, because they received not the
love of the truth that they might be saved; ver. 10.11. Neither should the
disclosing stay long after the defection, whereunto it is straight annexed, the
Apostle saying, except there come a departing first, and the man of syn be
disclos^d etc. but the impediment being taken away, which we have showed to have
been done shortly after: forthwith came this mischief to light. But this
departure began secretly even in the Apostle time; which is not a defection
from the Roman Empire, but a neglect and contempt of the truth received, as the
same Apostle there interprets it, and it has prevailed now through many
ages, to be seen in the veneration of relics, the invocation of Saints, and
worship of Images, as was said erewhile. For by such manner of Idolatry, the
Lord is forsaken, and men fall from him unto other Gods, as Jeremy says, chap.
16.11. where he is bidde^ to speak thus to the people; Then shall thou say
unto them, because your Fathers have forsaken me, says the Lord, and have
walked after other Gods, and have served them, and worshipped them, and have
forsaken me, and have not kept my law: After which manner the other Prophets
also speak continually. Needs therefore must Antichrist be come long a go;
seeing the conioined sign and cause of his coming, has reigned now in the
world many ages.

Secondly; that impediment is now long since taken away, which only hindered in
the Apostles time, that the man of sin was not reveled, ver, 7. Which was not
the Roman Empire, but the sixth head of that Empire; which had the supreme
government of things whiles John lived; for thus speaks the Apocalypse, chap.
17.10. Five are fallen, one is, the other is not yet come. That one, which the
Angel says was then, was the sixth King: with whom the Roman Empire should not
fall, because a seventh King and head should after succeed. Neither did many
reign together with one head: whereupon the seventh should as well susteyn the
Empire, for his part, as any one other of the former. Therefore so soon as that
present regiment should be changed, which fell out about two hundred years after
John, then that weighty burden, which hitherto did restreyn, being removed,
Antichrist should come forth, and converse in all men's sight.

Thirdly, if the mystery of iniquity wrough whiles the Apostles lived, of
necessity the birth could not be far of, when the pains of bringing forth did
vex so betimes 2 These. 2.7. Otherwise what a monstrous thing is this, that one
should be a breeding in the body these fifteen hundred years, and yet the
yongling is not brought forth; and when at last he shall come forth, he shall be
but a King for three years and six months? But these ar dreams. If the
Apostles scarsely repressed him, much less did they keep him in which came
after, and which had less piety, knowledge, study, diligence: whose gifts
also decaying daily more and more, made way for the speedy rising and
increasing of the Man of syn.

These things being thus laid down, now come we unto yours: which is but one
only argument about this matter. Long enough in deed it is, for it reaches
from the beginning of the chapter to the end: but it is no less weak and
feeble, then long and tedious. Thus it goes: Antichrist is not yet come,
because he came not at the time which some both of the ancient and later men
have supposed. The ancient men you mention are the Thessalonians, Cyprian,
Ierom. Gregory, one Judas, Lactantius, and a Bishop of Florence: the later
are, the Samosatenians of Hungary, and Transylvania, Jllyricus, Chytreus,
Luther, Bulinger, Musculus. And in following this matter, is the whole chapter
spent. I answe twofold; first false it is, that he which came not in the times
spoken of by the said authors, is not yet come. It was not necessary that they
should know the first rising and original of Antichrist. The Beast remains a
Mystery after his disclosing, Apoc. 17.7. whose person was manifest, but not
his wickedness and original. Eor the Mystery were taken away, if that which lay
hidd within, should lie open unto al men. And as Gods Kingdom, though foretold
by the Prophets, came not with observation, Luk 17.20. so neither does
Antichrists Kingdom. The tares are sown, whiles the husbandmen sleep, Mat.
13.25. neither were they perceived in the first springing: but were they not
therefore, because the husbandmen knew not which way they grew? Shall we not
acknowledge the motion of the sun, because we perceive it not as it moves?
Doubtless the crafty enemy, of his ingenious disposition had much rather that
his Vicar should invade men privilie, whereby he might oppress the more unwares:
than that rushing upon them with noise and tumult, he should give men a sign
for to look to themselves. Moreover, when you conclude that he is not yet
come; you should have comprehended all the other times, and not those few only,
which the said ancient and later men do mention. Is not one come in some day,
because he is not come in the first, or second, or third hour thereof? It is a
fault in reckning up the parts, to pass by any one: and seeing you have
omitted many, your proposition is made diverse ways absurd, and the whole
argumentation that hangs thereon.

Secondly I answer severally to the rest; and first concerning the anci^et
Fathers, from whose words, we do more then probably conclude, that Antichrist
is come. For thus says Cyprian, lib, 4. Epist. 6. You ought to know, and for
certain to believe and hold, that the day of vexation is begun to be upon our
heads; and that the fall of the world and time of Antichrist is at hand. Ierom
in his Epistle to Ageruchia, concerning Monogamie, says, He that did hold is
taken out of the way, and do we not understand that Antichrist is near? Also
Gregory lib. 4. Epist. 38. All things foretold, are come to pass; the King of
pride is near. For if Antichrist were near thirteen hundred years ago, or a
thousand at the least; as is evident by these testimonies: how can it be that
he is not yet come? You answer, that the ancient Fathers were deceived, with
opinion that the worlds end was nearer, than in deed it was: and that therefore
Antichrist was then near in false opinion, not in very deed. Whereunto I say, If
the ancient Fathers had grounded their sentence upon the persuasio^ only of
the worlds end; it must needs have been, as they erred in this, so also they
had erred in Antichrist: but seeing they persuaded themselves so by other
arguments, and gathered, not so much that Antichrist was near, because the end
of the world was at hand, as that the worlds end was at hand, because
Antichrist was near; needs must that be firm and stable which they avouched of
this thing, unless beside that vain opinion, you can prove the other reasons
also to be light. But it is manifest by their words, that they had suspicion of
the worlds end, by Antichrists coming, not contraryweise. For Jerome reasons
from the impediment taken away, that Antichrist was near. He that held, says
he, is taken out of the way; and do we not understand that Antichrist is near?
Gregory by the fulfilling all things that were foretold: than which, what can
be a more certain argument? And you confess, that all the ancients, minding the
evilnes of their times, suspected that Antichrists times were at hand. They did
not therefore upon suspicion of the end, conclude of Antichrist. For the last
end is never made a sign of things going before, but the things that go
before are determined to be signs of the last end. The end seeing it is the
last and the most unknown, even to the Angels in heaven, and to the Son of man
himself Mark 13.32. can give no fore-perceiving of things that are before and
more known. By sure arguments therefore they knew that Antichrist was at hand:
but that which they joined thereto of the last end, relied but upon an unsure
and humane conjecture. They had received from Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. lib.
1. a false Chronology of five thousand, seven hundred, four skore and four
years, two months and twelve days past from Adam unto the death of Co^modus
the Emperor. Thereunto was added an opinion of the worlds durance six thousand
years: whereupon Cyprian in the preface de exhort. Martyr. says, the six
thousand years are now almost fulfilled, since the Divil impugned man. And
Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 25. Divinar. Institut. All exspectation seems to be
more than of two hundred years. Add unto these, the conjecture of the worlds
speedy end, after Antichrists coming, and then it will easily appear, that
great difference there is, between those things which are handled of Antichrist,
and of the end of the world. The first they had found out by many Prophesies,
and undoubted signs: the later they did persuade themselves, by some
likelihood of truth, and the infirm authority of men.

The like we do see in Christ's disciples, which exspected as we know a
temporal Kingdom. Yet when they preached that Christ was come, and that the
Kingdom was the^ to be restored to Israel; should any which saw not the
Kingdom restored; disanull their faith touching Christ's coming? surely he
should do them wrong. For that Christ was come, they knew by most sure
arguments, which could not deceive: but their opinion of the temporal Kingdom,
they drew from the dreggs of the common error. Even so, the ancient Fathers,
understood by true signs from the Scriptures, that Antichrist was at the
doors: but that which they affirmed of the last end, was of their own; and
should not diminish the credit of that wherewith it is joined. Therefore you have
not escaped by this your answer, but by the sentence of the ancient Fathers, it
remains firm and steadfast that Antichrist is come: and therefore it was not
for naught, that the Bishop of Florence one of your own men, openly avouched
five hundred years ago, that Antichrist was then come: to stop whose mouth,
the Council of Florence was gathered. But you thought it better, that the fame
of this Cou^cil should rather come unto posterity, than that the acts thereof
should come unto their knowledge.

As touching the later men, in the first place you mention the Samosatenians of
Hungary: whith whom I will have nothing to do. Whatsoever they think or think
not, is al one to me: until they return unto soundnes of mind. The other
learned men have a threefold difference: Illyricus, Chytraeus, and Luther, make
Antichrists coming to be about the year of our L. 500. Bullinger, at the year
763. Musculus, about the year 1200. Surely the second rising of the Beast, in
whose territories they remained, did cast so strong a smell, to those prudent
men, that they could retch their minds to no further thing: even as hownds,
which when they fall upon the denn of the wild beast, do run with full course
and cry, not senting any more the several footsteps. Therefore for the most
part they transfer unto this second rising, the things which belong to the
first, and bring in here some other things that are not to the purpose.
Nevertheless, this light aberration of the time of his rising, takes not away
his rising: but by their voices and cries, we know that Antichrist is; though
the moment when first he began to be, was hidd from them. Let us therefore run
through your answers unto every of them; that you may perceive how they have
not so much erred, as your self have labored in vayn, in oppugning their
judgments.

Secondly therefore you encounter with Illyricus, who says, Antichrist was the^
born, when Phocas granted to the Bishop of Rome, that he should be caled Head
of the whole Church, which fell out in the year 606. You answer; that he was not
born at this time, for two causes: first, because Antichrists temporal reign of
666. years, which Illyricus would have to begin at that arising; should now
long since be ended, and Antichrist should be dead. Secondly, that by his
spiritual reign, which Illyricus will have to be of 5260 years, the Centurie
writers might exactly know the end of the world; contrary to our Lords words
Acts. 1. and Mat. 24. I answer unto the first: It is a foolish thing which you
gather of Antichrists death, at the end of 666. years: when you see they give
unto him a spiritual reign of 1260. years. Can any one reign 594. years, (for
so many is this reign proroged beyond the temporal,) after he is dead? But
perhaps your spiritual Pope has no more vital life without temporal things,
then the serpent has without dust.

Unto the second I answer, it is as lawful for the Centurie writers exactly to
know the year when the world shall end: as it is for your Papists, to know the
very day. Do not you reckon 1335. days, from the beginning of Antichrists
reign, unto the last judgment? Shall that speech of Christ touching this unknown
day, have no longer place than til Antichrist comes? Mark 13.32. How then shall
it come as a snare upon all that dwell on the face of all the earth? Luke 21.33.
Your refutation therefore is nothing. We have showed that that first number is
not of his Reign, but of his nam: and that the other is to be counted from the
first coming of Antic. not from the second. But I will be no longer now about
this matter: I return again to you, and do grant that which you strive for. Be
it, that Antichrist was not then first born. I ask this onething of you;
whither was he then or no? If you deny him then to be; I thus convince it. Then
was the impediment taken away, which only hindered his coming, as Ierom even
now affirmed. Then al things were done, which were foretold should go before
his coming; as Gregory did avouch. Then was there an Universal Priest, such as
the same Gregory confidently says, whosoever caleth himself, or desires to
be caled, he is in his pride the forerunner of Antichrist. lib. 7. Epist. 194.
unto Mauricius. But, if he that desires such a name be the forerunner of
Antichrist: what shall we call him that has the name? Seeing therefore Antichrist
was at that time: now look you how he is not yet come.

Jn the third place you answer to Chytreus, who makes his birth to be about
the same time; especially, because Gregory at this time stablished prayer to
Saints, and Masses for the dead etc. To this you say, that Gregory was not the
first that taught to pray unto the Saints, and to offer Masses for the dead.
For all the ancient Fathers taught the same; and in sted of al you bring forth
one Ambrose, which was two hundred year before Gregory. I answer, surely
Chytreus erred, that though Antichrist to be some years younger, then in deed
he was. He was much more ancient, but did so bear his age, that as an other
Cupid he always seemed to be a child. For the man was deceived by his second
rising, whereby he revived from the dead: and as Aeson of an old man became a
young; so he from youth returned to his cradle. Neither should it be strange to
have him then accounted first, who then seemed to be new. But you so deny his
birth, as you add years to Antichrist, and take none away: as if you should
require inheritance for a ward, and be afraid, least he should go too late out
of his wardship.

Fourthly you come to Luther, who makes a double coming of Antichrist; one with
a spiritual sword, after the year 600. an other with a temporal sword, after
the year 1000. You answer, that the Popes deposed Emperors, and made wars
before the thousand year. I answer, therefore thou Luther also wast deceived:
Antichrist was come before thou supposest. Surely you so defend the Popes, as
if one being charged with theft, to avoid the crime should openly cry, that
that was not the first thing that he had stolen; but for many other greater
things had he played the thief before. You feared not, as it seems, that any
should afterward come, which would search out the higher origin of Antichrist.

Fifthly, Bullinger so expounds that number 666. as to design the year of
Antichrist coming, after the writing of the Apocalypse, namely the year of our
Lord 763. To which you answer, and rightly, that this is the number of
Antichrists name, not of his time. Though from hence your cause have but little
help. For although he were not then first born, yet he might be born before:
which sufficiently shows, that you falsely do avouch, He was not yet come.

Sixthly, Musculus affirms that Antichrist came about the year 1200. moved
hereunto by Bernards authority, who says after many other things, wherewith
he bewayleth the wickedness of those times, It remains that the man of syn be
reveled. Sermon. 6. of Psalm. 90. You answer two things, first that Bernards
suspicion was false, as was Cyprians, Ieroms, Gregory's, in their times. For he
suspected by the evils which he saw, that Antichrist was near. Secondly, that
there were worser Popes without any comparison, in the former age than in that.
I answer to the first, you fayrlie contradict the Apostle. He teaches that the
Apostasy goes before Antichrist: and that he should come into the world for
men's despising the love of the truth: declaring thereby, that there is no more
evident sign both of Antichrist approaching and reigning; than that al kind of
hypocritical impiety licenciously rangeth abroad. You will have Bernard to be
deceived, and that he suspected by the evils which he saw, that Antichrist was
near. In very deed he was deceived in that he thought him to be but near, and
not present. Otherwise he judged more syncerely of Antichrist; than the
Jesuits are wont; or any other Papists. Unto the second I say, seeing they were
worser in the age before, we grant you that his first birth did not now beginn,
but having been brought forth long before, now only he was exstant. And thus,
when al comes to al, you have disputed this question, as if one should contend,
that the Sun is not risen at noon day, though it began to shine in the horison
at six a clock in the morning: because it neither rose at eight a clock, as one
affirmed; nor at nine, as the second, nor at ten, as the third avouched By the
very like argument, you and yours would persuade, that Antichrist is not yet
come.

Chapt. 4. Against the first demonstration, from the universal preaching of the
Gospel.
THIS question of the time, yeildeth great abundance of light, illustrating all the rest, as the Sun with his beams. Whereupon Bellarmine to darken this same,
has prepared six thick coverings, which he caleth Demonstrations, under which
he hops to be drawn from so many certain signs, as he says, of Antichrists
coming; whereof two do go before; namely 1. the preaching of the Gospel in the
whole world, 2. and the desolation of the Roman Empire: two do accompany it,
namely 3. the preaching of Henoch and Elias, 4. and a very great and known
persecution: two do follow, namely 5. the destruction of Antichrist after
three years and a half; 6. and the end of the world. None of which, says he,
we see as yet to be performed: we will help therefore this blind man, if God
will, and with a faithful hand, will pull the scales from his eyes, if so he will
suffer it.

For a groundwork of the first demonstration, you set down that which is
written Mat. 24.14. this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in the whole
world, for a testimony to al nations: from which an argument is thus framed;
which let me, I pray you, bring into form, that we of the ruder sort may more
easily observe the art of demonstration. He that is to come after the preaching
of the Gospel in all the world, he is not yet come: Antichrist is to come after
the preaching of the Gospel in all the world: therefore he is not yet come. This
is your demonstration, wherein we find many strange and new points, never
delivered by any Demonstrating Masters: namely, that principles are used for
demo^stration, which be neither true nor first. For as touching truth, the
proposition is either manifestly false, or at least doubtful, as after more
plainly shall appear, and therefore not meet for a demonstration. Moreover, if
any would doubt of the minor, what strength has it from Matthew? what one word
is there in him of Antichrist to come after a general preaching? How is this an
immediate principle, which if it have any credit, must borow it from elsewhere?
Pardon, I pray you, this my morositie. I thought it necessary to make trial of
some one of your demonstrations: of al which, seeing we have now a pattern in
this first, we shall not need to deal so exactly in the rest, but may judge of
what sort al are, by the nature of this. But your self saw, how trifling and
unworthy a demonstration this was; and therefore you flee unto a probable
reason, which as a propp you put under that ready to fall. To confirm the
Minor, that Antichrist is to come after the general preaching, leaving now
Matthew, whole name at first was vainly obtruded; It may be proved, you say, by
reason: because in Antichrists time, the cruelty of the last persecution, will
hinder al public exercises of true religion. I answer, how truly this is said
of the public ceasing of religion, we shall see after in the chapter of
Persecution. In the mean while I avouch that you dispute not so much
unskilfully, as in deed falsely. For time is threefold; past, present, and to
come: neither can any thing be concluded that it is to come, unless it be
before proved, that it is neither present, nor past. Will you then infer that
Antichrist shall come after the general preaching, because he cannot be together
with the same? But why, I pray you, may he not be before it? Yea what if by
this your demonstration, he must needs be before it? Surely neither can he be
together with the general preaching, for the cruelty of persecution, as you
say: neither can he come after, because Christ says, when the Gospel is
preached in the whole world, then shall come the end. You see nothing to come
between the universal preaching and the end. Therefore by this your reason, he
must needs come before the universal preaching. This is not the least virtue of
this undoubted demonstration; that it makes more for your adversaries cause,
than for your own.

But, say you, the adversaries admit not of this reason. Surely nor your
friends, I beleev, unless it be some foxes, that praise the crow for his sweet
singing. But I am glad for you, that at last your self are weary of this
demo^stration. Furthermore you say, Neither is there time now to deduce it from
the principles thereof, and therefore you will prove the thing by testimonies of
the Fathers. What? Have not you time, which undertake the most copious handling
of all controversies? And, which bring not forth one argument of any weight,
in this cause? I know your Iesuitical cunning: what you can not do, for
needynes; that you may not do for have unto other matters. But let us go
forward and see, how you follow both parts of the former argument. For the new,
as it seems, affords nothing; but the old nest was to be trimmed, that some
show of building might appear. First therefore you bring Hilarie, Cyrill,
Theodoret, Damascen, affirming, that Antichrist shall not come, til after an
universal preaching. I answer, there is now no need curiously to inquire into
their sayings, seeing in this thing they teach agreably to the scriptures. For
Antichrist was to come, because the love of the truth was refused, 2 These 2.
And the punishment is not inflicted before the fault. Neither could the fault
be committed, before there was the use of the truth. Here therefore I contradict
nothing. Moreover, in some sort I do grant your proof from the text. For the
Gospel was to be preached before that great tribulation spoken of Mat. 24.21.
But herein you err, that you think this is both the last tribulation, and the
persecution of Antichrist. For it is no other than the destruction of
Jerusalem; as Chrysostom also does acknowledge, though typically he would have
it referred unto Antichrist. Let Antichrist therefore come after the universal
preaching of the Gospel. But what? Has not the Gospel been noised as yet
through all the world? In deed so you say; though the thing it self be
otherweise. Christ being to ascend into heaven, bade the Apostles to go into
all the world, Mark 16.25. And promised that they should be his witnesses unto
the utmost end of the earth, Act. 1.8. It can not be, either that the Apostles
should neglect that which was commanded; or that our Lord should not perform
that which he promised. Neither wanted the thing an issue, as the Apostle
teaches, saying that the faith of the Romans, was published through the whole
world, Romans 1.8. and that the Gospel was come unto the Colosseans, even as unto
all the world, Col. 1.6.23. You answer, that the whole world in these places, is
not properly and simply taken, but figuratively: but the Gospel should be
preached in every nation properly and simply, before Antichrist come. Which
you prove by testimony of Fathers, and by three reasons. The Fathers are
Augustine, Origin, and Ierom; besides those fore-alledged. I answer, There is no
doubt but the Fathers do accommodate their words, unto the words of the
Scriptures; and therefore they often say, that the Gospel should be preached in all the world, through the whole earth, in all lands etc. but whither they speak
more expressly or no, and do signify by name that these kind of speeches are
to be taken simply, not figuratively, may well be doubted. Ierom in his Epistle
to Ageruchia says, He that held, is taken out of the way, and do we not
understand that Antichrist is near? By which it is plain, that he understood no
other preaching through the whole world, than such as was in his time: for
otherweise, how could Antichrist be near? So Gregory, as is before mentioned,
says, Al things that were foretold are come to pass: the King of pride is
nigh. Therefore this universal preaching was then done; but not properly as you
would have it, which as you say, is not performed to this day. Turn over the
Fathers therefore, and weigh their words more diligently: perhaps though these
things were very dark unto them, you shall find no such preaching with them, as
you do dream of.

Of the three reasons which you bring, the first is, that, the preaching in all
the world, is a sign, Christ says, of the end of the world: for so he
annexeth, and then shall come the end. But if the Gospel should not be preached
in the whole world properly, but by comprehension of a part for the whole, the
sign would be of no value. For in that manner the Gospel was preached by the
Apostles through all the world, in the first twenty years. I answer; whereas from
these words you affirm, that the preaching in all the world, is a sign of the
end of the world: this is yours, Bellarmine, not Christ's. He says no more but
and then shall come the consummation, or the end. That, of the world, he adds
not. Neither is the end or consummation whereof he speaks, of the world, but
of the temple, and of the Jewish polity: the law whereof was abrogated in
Christ's death, but now also by dissipation of the nation, the whole use should
be taken away. For the Disciples inquired of a twofold end, ver. 3. of the
temple, and of the world. Of the first, Christ answers unto the 23. verse: of
the later, in the rest of the chapter, under the name of his coming. Neither
had he satisfied the demands, unless he had comprehended both. Wherefore that
universal preaching, was a sign of Ierusalems destruction, the nearer token
whereof was the abomination of desolation, foretold by Daniel: which being next
added, may teach, of what end the former words do speak. For Christ answers
not so confusedly and intricately, as that from the last end of the world, he
would straightway leap back again to the Jews affairs. Seeing therefore in
this place he speaks of this consummation, and not of any other: there is no
necessity that the preaching through the whole world, should be properly.

Your second reason is: that properly al nations are promised to Christ, Psalm.
71. All nations shall serve him: therefore the preaching ought to be general
properly. I answer; I deny not but all nations shall be gathered unto Christ, and
that by a general preaching properly, before he come unto judgment. For
preaching is that silver trumpet which is appointed for the gathering together
of the elect: and I find in the Scriptures a twofold general preaching,
figurativ, and proper; as in the end of this chapter I will more fully declare.
But what is this, to the coming of Antichrist? It is showed, that he is com a
thousand and three hundred years ago. Also his destruction, shall be a long
space before the last judgment, as shall be showed after, chap. 9. Of the end of
the world, and in the rest of the enarration of this Apocalypse. Therefore that
may be before Christ's coming, which shall follow after Antichrists destruction.
And in very deed, the general preaching shall not beginn, before Antichrist be
at an end; or at least be ready soon after to dye. The times may not be
confounded; nor that which is proper to one, be transferred to an other.

Your third reason is, That the Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, for
a testimony to al nations. Therefore a general preaching must go before the
general judgment. I answer; This argument is one with the former, but that it
is after a sort distinguished in the subjects. That treated of the salvation of
the elect; this, of the just condemnation of the reprobates. But the answer is
one. For I grant, a general preaching must go before the general judgment:
but when you shall have proved that the general judgment, and Antichrist, are
things so conjoined, as that which goes before the one, must needs also go
before this other: then will I easily grant you, that a general preaching must
properly go before Antichrist. And now as if you had put the matter out of al
controversy, you go in hand to answer unto Paul concerning those wores Romans
10.18. Their sound is gone out unto all the earth: the interpretation whereof you
bring from Augustine, Ierom, and Thomas. The sum is, that they are to be
understood figuratively. Which you might easily have obtained, without so much
a do. There is no man but grants, that the like Scriptures fore-alledged, are
not to be taken properly. But if Paul speak figurativelie, why may not Christ
likeweise? Because it is not absurd, you say, if we grant that our Lord spoke
properly, and the Apostle figuratively. For the reasons whereby we are compelled
to take our Lords in a proper signification, have not the same force, if they
be applied to Paul's words; especially seeing our Lord spoke of a thing to come,
and Paul of a thing past. I answer; Seeing that end whereof Christ spoke, was
only of the city, not of the whole earth; to weet, of Jerusalem, not of the
world: there is no reason which more compels us to take our Lords words in a
proper signification, then those words of Paul, in the Epistle to the Romans
chapter 1. verse 8. Coloss. 1.6.23. spoken of before. For whereas you say, that Paul
To. 10.18. speaks of a thing past: you might have remembered from Augustine,
that he took the time past, for that which was to come, as David did whose
words they are, as you wrote a little before: and that so the Prophets are wont
to speak almost every where, of things to come, as if they were past. In the
other Scriptures, Paul speaks of that thing performed, which our Lord
foretold should be performed. This your first demonstration therefore is
altogether lame, having no certainty, no truth: but it is such a sign, (in
the sense that you would have the preaching to be taken,) of Antichr. to come,
as the Jews have feighned to themselves of Christ to come; namely such as man's
bold ignorance has feighned, without any authority of the oracle of God.
Wherefore seeing you have written nothing right of this matter, I will endvour to
show some surer thing, as even now I promised, whereby the readers may have
what to think concerning this matter.

Universal preaching therefore is twofold; as I said; figurative and proper. The
first was given to the Apostles for a sign of the Jewish desolation; and so
likewise should go before the Antichrist, who should not come forth until some
ages after all that Polity was utterly extinguished. The later, which we call
general properly, shall not go before Antichrist, but follow. For after he is
slain, the Gospel shall be spredd far and wide, even unto those nations which as
yet never had the hearing of it. For then shall the nations bring their glory
and honor unto the new holy city, Apoc. 21.24. Then shall the tree grow
amidds the street of the heavenly city, whose leaves shall minister cure and
health unto the nations, Apoc. 22.2. Then shall the temple be opened, into which
no forreyner could enter during the seven plagues with which Antichrist is
consumed, Apoc. 15.8. and chap. 16. Then shall the waters flow out of the temple
toward the East, and unto all the country round about; by whose wholsomnes, a
very great multitude of fish shall be engendered Ezech. 47. And then after the
little horn is taken away, the Kingdom shall be given to one like the son of man,
that al peoples, nations, tongues, may serve him, Dan. 7.14. which Kingdom is
not that which shall be in heaven, where no distinction is of peoples, nations
and tongues: but shall come in earth, and be administered by the scepter of his
word. Whereupon after the cutting off of this Horn, (which men commonly do
interpret, partly of Antiochus, partly of Antichrist, but is in very deed the
Turk, who shall be rooted out within a while after the true Antichrist;) there
shall be a most ample promulgation of the Gospel, with much larger limits, than
ever heretofore. For then all the nations indeed shall serve him Psalm. 72.11.
and Jehovah shall be King over all the earth; and in that day, shall Jehovah be
one, and his name one, Zach. 14.19.

These things and many such like do make it plain, that howsoever the doctrine
of salvation surveyed many lands before Antichrist: yet after he is
extinguished, the tents of the sacred truth, shall be much more amply displayed;
so that into them shall assemble a very great congregation, in respect whereof
the assemblies of former times have been small, or rather none. These things do
the scriptures teach of the universal preaching, and they are constant, firm,
sure, full of majesty, power, mercy, if you look unto God; and if you turn your
eyes unto our selves, they are no less full of al joy and confort. Whereas on
the contrary, the things which you have brought, are either uncertayn guesses,
or vain fictions: which will both deceive, at least, your expectation, and in
the mean while, lead into error and destruction.

Chapt. 5. Against the second Demonstration: from the desolation of the Roman
Empire.
The second Demonstration, you say, is taken from the other sign that goes
before the times of Antichrist, which shall be the utter desolation of the Roman
Empire, which seeing it yet endures, Antichrist is not yet come. Hereupon you
take in hand to prove two things; first that Antichrist shall not come til after
the utter desolation of the Roman Empire: secondly, that the Roman Empire
does yet endure. The first you confirm by fowr scriptures: of which, the three
first, namely Dan. 2. and 7. Apoc. 17. do rely upon the interpretation of
Irenaeus, book 5. But let us leav, I pray you, men's names, and let us weigh the
thing it self, in the balance of truth. If the matter should be discussed by
the contrary opinions of men, which might be found many in these dark places;
there would be no end. Let us deal rather from such principles, as may lead and
bring us to some certainty.

As touching therefore the 2. of Daniel, and that succession of the chief
Kingdoms until the worlds end, which the Images shows, nothing out by the
golden head, the sylver breast, the brazen belly, the legs, and the feet partly
iron and partly clay; the 4. chief Kingdoms on earth, of the Assyrians,
Persians, Greeks, Romans; the last whereof the Roman you say, was a long time
parted in two, as the legs are two and long. Moreover that of the two legs
should spring ten toes, and in them the whole Jmage have an end: to weet
because the Roman Empire should at last be divided into ten Kings, of whom
none should be King of the Romans, as no toe is a leg. As touching these, I
say, what one word is there in all this vision, which intimates that Antichrist
should come after the Roman Empire is utterly defaced? I hear there are tow
legs, and the feet divided into ten toes; but not a whit concerning
Antichrist, whither he should come after this division, or before it, or in the
time of the divisio^. Do you go on thus to build your Demo^strations, without
any so much as show of a foundation whereon they should rely? Yea what if the
contrary may from hence most firmly be concluded, that Antichrist shall come
before Christ comes? But the Roman Empire shall not altogether be destroyed,
until Christ be come. For the^ feet of iron and clay shall dure, until the stone
out of the mountayn, cut without hands, shall smite them and beat them to
pieces, as is plainly showed, ver. 34. thou saw until a stone was cut out,
which is not in any hands, and smote the image on his feet of iron and clay,
and brake them to pieces: and again in the 44. verse, And in the days of these
Kings shall the God of Heaven rise up a Kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed etc. But these feet, are the Roman Empire: weaker in deed than it
was before, of the legs; yet is it the Roman Empire notwithstanding. For the
Image deciphreth fowr Kingdoms only: but if the feet should have an other
Kingdom than the legs, there should be five. Whereupon also that is false which
you say, that the Roman Empire shall at last be divided into ten Kings, of
which none shall be King of the Romans, as no toe is a leg. For thus you bring
in a fifth Kingdom, which the Spirit by the Image says not. Neither is that of
weight, that a toe is not a leg: seeing no one member is an other, though both
be parts of one whole thing, even as the toe and leg, be of the fourth
Kingdom. Now therefore you may see, how fayrly you have made demo^stration of
your nakedness; which the more you seek to cover and hide, the more conspicuous
and filthy you do make it.

The second place is out of Dan. 7.7. where, you say, the ten horns which come
out of the last Beast, are the ten last Kings which shall arise out of the
Roman Empire, but shall not be Roman Emperors: as the horns arise out of the
Beast, but are not the Beast it self. I answer, as even now I did to the former
argument, which was the self same that this. If these ten horns have a
Kingdom diverse from that of the Beast: then ar there not fowr Kings only, but
five; contrary to that the Angel affirms, ver. 17. these great Beasts which
are fowr are fowr Kings, which shall rise out of the earth. Moreover, do you
think that the 4. horns of the Goat, which rose up in place of that broken
horn, was another distinct Kingdom from the Kingdom of the Goat, to weet, an
other than of the Greeks? Dan. 8.8. If so you think, the Prophet shows you
are plainly deceived, who teaches that this Goat of the 8. chapter, is the
Leopard of the seventh: and that the Leopard is one Kingdom only, and the
third: chap. 7.6.17. As therefore the Goats horns make not a different Kingdom
from the Kingdom of the Goat: so neither do the ten horns of the fourth Beast
make a different Kingdom of the 4 Beast. There be also the ten horns of the
Dragon, in this Apocalypse, which are not rebellious Princes against the Dragon,
but his chief defenders, legates, and administrators, by whose help he most
exercised his tyranny, Apoc. 12.3. Besides, the ten horns are not the
dissolution of that Empire, whose body remains after they are risen up. But
so the vision teaches evidently, that the Beast (namely the fourth) should not
be slain and his body destroyed, before the horn, which springs up after
those ten were broken and taken away, Dan. 7.11. Wherefore the ten horns, do no
way signify the dissipation and fall of the Roman Empire, whereby to afford us
any help, for the finding out of Antichrists coming. Unto these may be added,
that which this argument has common with the former, that neither is there any
mention of Antichrist here. In deed the little horn grows up after the rest;
and some learned men do apply it hither: but neither do your self now insist
upon this horn; and we have showed before, in the second chapter hereof, that
this exposition is untrue.

The third place is out of Apoc. 17.16. where the ten horns you will have to be
ten Kings, which shall reign together; but shall not be Romans, because these
Kings shall hate the whore and make her desolate, and so shall divide the Roman
Empire among themselves, and utterly destroy it. I answer, It is even marvelous
that you see not the plain contrary to that you intended, here proved. For if
this hatred, wherewith the ten Kings shall hate the whore and make her desolate,
be the fall and ruin of the Roman Empire, then shall Antichrist come before the
Roman Empire be desolate. For there shall be hatred long before this, and the ten
Kings shall serve her a great while before they shall thus rise up in wrath
against the whore, according to that which is written ver. 12.13. And the ten
horns which thou sewest, are ten Kings, which have not yet received a
Kingdom, but shall receive power as Kings at one hour with the Beast. These
have one mind, and shall give their strength and power to the Beast. Moreover,
these are the horns of the Beast, not of the Roman Empire divided, ver. 3.
Which if they signify any division, the Beast shall be divided from his first
arising. And further, seeing they shall rise at the same hour with the Beast,
they shall not go before him, whereby to declare by some praecursion that he
follows behind them. Wherefore nothing at al can be concluded from hence
concerning the desolation of the Roman Empire, as of any sign of Antichrist
coming.

The fourth place is out of 2. These. 6.7. And now ye know what withholdeth that
he might be reveled in his time, only that he which now holds, may hold, til
he be taken out of the way, and then shall the wicked man be reveled etc. Where
the Roman Empire, you say, hinders Antichrists coming, who shall take his
Empire out of the way, for their sins: and so do the Greek and Latin Fathers
expound this place. I answer, I do acknowledge that the ancient Fathers (as I
have often said,) did not level aright in these matters, for that being far
dista^t from the event of things, they were led only by conjectures. They knew
so much as concerned their own times. Yet remember, I pray you, what manner
desolation Ierom understands, who will have him that did hold, to be taken out
of the way, in his time; he that did hold, says he, is taken out of the way
etc. as before I cited him. So that by his judgment, the Roman Empire was
then so desolate, that there was no let, on this behalf, to hinder Antichrists
coming. And surely Gregory said not right, All things are done that were
foretold, the King of pride is nigh, if such a desolation had been to be looked
for, as you speak of; or such ten Kings should go before, as you Papists do
mention. Therefore those Fathers were either altogether ignorant that there was
this let: or they so wavered to and fro in a doubtful opinion, as no firm and
stable thing can be gathered from their sayings. But the Apocalypse being now
very much illustrated by the event, puts the matter out of controversy, and
explaineth Paul most certainly and faithfully, teaching that the withholder is
not the Roman Empire, but the sixth Roman King. Five says he, are fallen; one
namely the sixth, is; the other is not yet come, chap. 17.10. that is, the
Hethen Emperors, which make the sixth King, do now reign; which being at
length removed, and delivering Rome empty to the Pope, the seventh King shall
come, eve^ Antichrist. The Roman Empire is after a sort one; but the manner of
administering it by diverse Magistrates, and the kinds of governing, was
manifold. Neither could it be said, five Roman Empires are fallen, but five
Kings, which were the Rulers and Moderators of that one Empire. More over
Antichrist is the seve^th Roman King; for so the Angel plainly says, and the
Beast which was, and is not, and is the eight, and is one of the seven, verse
11. Should the Roman Empire be desolate, whiles the King thereof was alive? nay
verily; but rather by bearing of him, the whore Rome should greatly flourish.
Therefore when Antichrist comes, the Roman Empire is not to be destroyed, but
during that time fore-appointed of God, is marvelously to be conserved,
increased, amplifyed. We may understand therefore Paul and the Angel to speak
of the same impediment: but the Angel more plainly and clearly describing it by
place, dignity, and number; by which most plain and true signs we might be led
as by the hand, unto Antichrists cradle. Wherefore Antichrist should come,
whiles the Roman Empire is safe and flourishing: and there was need that the
Emperor should give place to the Pope, and leav his habitation free. You
therefore Bellarmine, rely upon a manifest error, whereby it will come to pass,
if in time you take not heed, that not expecting Antichrist before the last
overthrow of the Roman Kingdom, you will be by him oppressed and destroyed,
before you perceive that he is come.

Your second proposition is, that the Roman Empire does yet endure, which I
grant without contradiction, and now as you see, without any detrime^t to the
cause which I have in hand. Although in the head of this Empire, which I will
tell you in few words, you are surely much deceived. You think the Emperor has
this dignity; and in deed I confess, he has it in name and title; but the
Pope has the thing it self. For the Roman King must be the head of the whore
Rome, which the Emperor is not, but the Pope, who makes the seventh and eight
head, as is declared Apoc. 17.11. Moreover the Emperors, since first the Beast
began, have wholly served him, as the Apocalypse also shows, saying, and they
shall give their power and their authority to the Beast; and the practice of al
times, confirms it. Which servitude proceeded so far, that they received a
mark, and yielded an oath of fealty; that I speak nothing of the other most
unworthy ways, whereby the Beast trod under foot the Emperial Majesty.
Finally, the toes of the foot now divided, are holden together by no common
bond of the Emperors name, but only of the whore of Rome. For what have
Spayn, France, Venice, Florence, Naples, to do with the Empire? Al these toes
cleave together in the common foundation of the Popes authority, which is the
only foot now, wherein these al agree and grow together; and not the Empire,
with which they have in a manner nothing to do. Therefore the Emperors are in
deed the Beasts horns, but neither the leg of the Roman Empire, nor the foot,
but a toe of the foot, or the great toe perhaps when it please the Pope. You
Papists with certain painted titles do dazel their eyes; but they will at
length awake, and handle your Rome, according to their authority. The things
which you dispute for the Empire and Emperor, are vayn. There remains yet,
you say, the succession, and name of the Emperor of the Romans: and by Gods
marvelous providence, when the Empire failed in the west, it remained safe in
the East: and when this failed, it was erected again in the west. I answer; the
succession of the Empire remains not in the Emperor, but in the Pope. When
the sixth head fell, the seventh succeeded, to weet the Pope, and not the
Christian Emperors, who then received a horned dignity; the succession of
which dignity, and no other, they transferred to their posterity. They have
the name of Roman Emperors, but it is a title without substance: even as the
Roman Church is caled Catholic, and many such like. But in refining the truth,
we must look to the authority of the holy Ghost, not to the vayn words and
voices of men. In deed Gods marvelous providence shined in considering this
dignity, such as it was, both in the East and West. But this providence is
careful no less for the horns then for the head: that is, as well for these that
are caled Emperors, as for the Pope. Both of them are by his decree, which
appointed, that some of the toes of the foot, should be of iron. Neither does
he hinder him, you say, from being Emperor, though he wanted Rome, which you
prove by the example of Valens, Arcadius, Theodosius the younger, Charles the
Great, and his successors: then by the dignity of going before al other
Christian Princes: moreover by the election of the Romans: and finally by the
Lutherans confession. I answer to every of these; and to the first, that if
Valens, Arcadius, and Theodosius the younger, wanting Rome, remained
nevertheless Roman Emperors; then the Western Empire failed not, neither
does the Eastern Empire fayl at this day, though the VVestern Emperors want
Constantinople, if right be enough without possession. But the Kingdoms of
this world are his that holds them: and although they be gotten for the most
part by wickedness; yet God by his just judgment takes from one, and gives to
another. Yet does not this his administration, quitt the robbers of crime: but
he punished in marvelous manner, both by abasing one, and contrariweise
advancing an other. It is therefore somewhat of more weight to want Rome, for
this that any should be the Roman Emperor, than you speak of.

Unto the second, namely that dignity of going before al Christian Princes, I
confess the Emperor goes before all the rest: notwithstanding, he that goes
before al these, comes after the Pope, as none is so unskilful but sees, in
whom the Majesty of the Empire truly resideth.

Unto the third, be it that Charles the Great was created Roman Emperor with
consent of the Romans: yet the Apocalypse teaches, that the Roman Empire is
tied to the city of Rome, not to the clamor of the Roman people.

Unto the fourth, the Lutherans boasting that they have three Prince Electours
of the Roman Emperor, do rather follow custom of speaking, then the truth of
the thing: or if in deed they so persuade themselves, it is through the common
error; the meaning of the Apocalypse, not being by them as yet enough
perceived. Wherefore you gull the Emperors with a deceitful title, who whiles
the Roman Pope possesses Rome, neither truly are nor shall be Roman Emperors:
and thus you contending that the Roman Empire does yet endure, have not found
in what place it is, whose both head and habitation you are ignorant of. From
this restored Empire by the Pope, do Luther, Illyricus, and Chytreus rightly
gather, that he is that great Antichrist. Yet not so much because Charles the
Great was declared Empetour by him, as for that the Empire did revive in the
Pope, who being a Bishop in name, was made Emperor in deed. This is evident
by this, that the Beast has a head both wounded and healed; for both these
perteyn to the same Beast. Also, the Beast which was not whiles the Barbarians
prevayled, is that very same which is when they are extinguished. Moreover
Antichrist is both the seventh King from Constantine, unto the Kingdom of the
Goths; and the eight by a new rising up after the healed head by Justinian,
and Phocas, and the rest following, as is explayned Apoc. 13.3.11. and 17.10.11.
You answer, that the healed head, is not the Roman Emperor, but Antichrist,
who feighneth himself dead, and by divelish art, shall rise himself up again:
and that so almost all the ancient Fathers do expound it. Unto this, I say,
that you do not rightly disjoyne the Roman Emperor, and Antichrist: which
two, if we would speak properly according to the Apocalypse, do make one and
the same person. Not that he which at this day is caled Emperor, is
Antichrist: but because whatsoever is in this name Emperor, it naturally
belongs to the Pope. For both Pope, and Roman Emperor, or Roman Empire,
were wounded to death by the invasion of the Goths. For the seventh head which
then seemed to perish, was both a hill and a King; that is, Rome or the Roman
Empire, and the Pope, Apoc. 17.9. It is true therefore which you say, that the
text it self plainly compels us, by that head of the Beast, which was dead
and revived, to understand not Charles the Great, but Antichrist. For Charles
the Great, was not Emperor indeed: but howsoever he did not dye and live
again, yet the Roman Emperor or Empire in the Pope, did die and live again,
as is sufficiently said before. By which also may appear, that that which is
commonly spoken of Antichrists feighned death and resurrection, is a plain
fiction: a feighned death is in sport and voluntary; but Antichrist dyed this
death against his will, and with sore pain; from which death when he began to
come forth, very great was the torment of his fresh wound, as witnesses
Gregory the Great, by his many mournful lamentations.

Chapt. 6. Against the third Demonstration, from the coming of Henoch and Elias.
HITHERTO of the signs going before: now of them that accompany him: and first
of the coming of Henoch and Elias, who are yet, you say, alive; and do live
for this, that they may set themselves against Antichrist when he comes, and
keep the elect in the faith of Christ, and at length convert the Jews: which
notwithstanding it is certain is not yet fulfilled. In this cause you deal by
three arguments, first from the Scriptures; secondly from Fathers thirdly from
reason. The scriptures you bring are four, Malach. 4.5.6. Ecclesiasticus
48.9.10. and chap. 44.16. Mat. 17.11. Apoc. 17.11. As touching Malachy, his
words are; Behold I will send you Elias the Prophet, before that great day of
the Lord shall come, and he shall turn the hearts of the Fathers unto the
children, and the hearts of the children unto their Fathers, which cannot, you
say, be understood of any Doctors whosoever, as of Luther, Zwinglius, and the
like. For Malachie says that the Jews shall be converted by Elias, and for the
Jews he shall chiefly be sent, as appears by those words, I will send to you,
and in Ecclesiasticus, to restore the Tribes of Jakob: but Luther and
Zwinglius, converted none of the Jews. And neither can they be understood of
John Babptist literally, but only of Elias.

I answer, first, here is no word of Henoch, whose conjoined coming was
propounded also. Secondly, no mention neither is here of Antichrist; but that
he shall come together with him, that wholly depends on a false supposition,
of which we will speak in due place. This therefore is a notable Demonstration,
that propounding to it self the coming of three, is altogether silent of two of
them. But let us discuss him whom it speaks of. The Prophecy, you say, can
not be understood of Luther, and Zwinglius and the other Ministers of the
Gentiles Church: which I also readily acknowledge. For I do not think it to
perteyn unto us which are Gentiles.

But why may it not be expounded of the Jews? because it agrees not, you say,
unto John the Baptist: which is as if you should say, either it is to be
expounded of the Baptist, or of none: which maimed and unnecessary disjunction,
no adversary can grant unto you. But to pardon you also this third trespass,
why perteyns it not, I pray you, unto the Baptist? Because, say you, Malachie
speaks of our Lords second coming, which shall be for to judge. I answer; if we
granted that he speaks of the second coming, may he not withal speak also of
the first? Most certain verily it is, that Malachie does so: for he speaks
generally of the Lords coming; which comprehe^deth as well the first, as the
second. And whereas your self confess it of the second, neither do I deny it:
of the first we have Christ interpreting the words of the Prophecy, where he
speaks of the Baptist, this is Elias that should come, Mat. 11.14. Seeing
therefore the words are so; behold now, how I fetch from hence a true
interpretation, against that literal of Elias. He that speaks in the same
words, of two times: he as he is to be understood of the one time, so is he to
be understood of the other: But Malachy speaks of a twofold coming of the
Lord; and of the first, he is to be understood figuratively, for so Christ
interprets it, saying, that the Baptist is the Elias that was to come.
Therefore he is to be understood also figuratively of the second; and such an
Elias is to be looked for, as the Baptist was before the first coming. But
whither he shall be one singular man or no, is not so evident: it may be there
shall be one chief, and excelling among the rest; although the whole company of
Prophets, when it shall please God, to gather his rejected people, shall be so
furnished with the plentiful gifts of his Spirit, that for the notable godliness
and zele wherewith every of them shall be inflamed, Elias may well seem to be alive
again in every one. For these abiding watchmen on the walls of the City
Jerusalem, all the day and all the night continually shall not hold their peace;
neither shall they that make mention of Jehovah, keep silence, nor suffer
silence to be of him, as says Esaias, chap. 62, 8.9. Surely these new
preachers of the Gospel, shall burn with so great a desire of godliness, that as
consecrating themselves wholly to the glory of God, and salvation of his
people, they will do this one thing only, nothing at al esteeming in respect
hereof, even the necessary regard of their body, by sleep and rest. And what a
fervencie shall there be in the Ministers, when among the common people, a father
and mother which have begotten a son, shall strike him through when he is found a
false Prophet? Zach. 13.2.3. But whither this Elias shall be one singular man, or
more, he shall not be Elias properly, but so as the Baptist was, as we are
taught by this necessary reason which I have alleged. But you insist and
contend that this coming in Malachie, is the second only, (although the
interpretation of our Lord ought to have stoped your mouth:) for so, say you,
Malachie says, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. For his
first coming is not caled a great and terrible day; but an acceptable time, and
day of salvation. Whereupon also there is added, least coming J smite the earth
with cursing. But in his first coming our Lord came not to judge, but to be
judged, nor to destroy, but to save. I answer; you have brought nothing, which
necessarily proves it the second coming only: the same things which you
mention, the Jews and Disciples knew also, who nevertheless did then look for
Elias, before our Lords rising from the dead. And hereunto perteyneth that
question, when the Lord had made mention of this matter, Why then say the
Scribes that Elias must first come? Mat. 17.9. And as for the great and
terrible day, why does it not agree unto his first coming? Lo says Malachy,
the Lord shall come speedily into his Temple. And who shall abide the day of his
coming? and who shall endure when he appears? for he is like a Finers fire,
and like fullers soap, Malach. 3.1.2. etc. And these things are spoken of his
first coming. And is not that day terrible, wherein the axe is laid to the root
of the trees, and they that are unfruitful are cut down, and cast into the
fire? How fearful is it, to have among them, him whose fa^n is in his hand, who
will purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the barn, and burn the chaff
with unquenchable fire? Mat. 3.10.12. But he came not to judge, but to be
judged? He came not indeed to judge solemnly in a tribunal seat, as he shall do
at length in the last judgment: yet in the mean while, the father has given
al judgment to him, John 5.22. which he both exercised of old, and daily now
exercises upon al contemners of the truth, as we may see in the Jews, that
crucified him: upon whom even to this day abides the longest and heaviest
punishment of all that ever were since the first man's fall, as it were a visible
document of eternal torment in hell. This time of grace is acceptable to the
elect; but to the unbeleeving and disobedient, there is none more hurtful, whom
the Son of God punishes daily with blindness of mind, and hardness of heart,
until they have heaped up to themselves the just measure of wrath, in their
last and never ending perdition, Heb. 10.28.29. Vherfore nothing hinders, why
the Prophets words may not be understood, both of the first coming, and of the
second: whereby that literal Elias faleth, whom you would gather from the same.

The second place is out of Ecclesiasticus, chap. 44.16. Henoch pleased God,
and was taken away; an example of repentance to the generations. And cha.
48.9.10. which wast taken up in a whirlewind of fire, in a charret of fyrie
horses, which wast appointed for reproofs in times, that thou might pacify
wrath before rage, and might turn the hearts of the Fathers unto the
children, and set up the tribes of Iakob. I answer, it was not to be expected
of the Demo^stratour; that he should bring those witnesses, whom they against
whom he uses them account not of sufficient credit. But I will not lay this
blame upon you too severely, seeing the words conteyn nothing contrary to the
Scriptures. But say you, they agree not, save to those particular persons. In
deed Henoch was taken away after a particular manner; but I do not find the
least signification of his return. For as concerning that example of repentance
to the generations, he is made this by his going away, not by coming again. His
taking away cries openly, and shall cry unto the end, how great good things do
in deed abide for them that repent.

It was also peculiar unto Elias, to be taken away in a fyrie whirlewind: but
to turn the hearts of the Fathers unto the children, does not so agree unto
him, but it migh, as our Lord also taught, be applied unto the Baptist; and
afterward unto the like Eliaes, that should come in the last time, such as the
Baptist was. Wherefore here is no one syllable, nor the least title of his
return in his own person. Which Janson; one of your own men, saw; at whom
you marvel, that one of your selves durst utter any thing sincerely. A rare
liberty in deed it is among you, who are wont not to search the truth out of the
Scriptures, so much as the maintenance of your error.

The third Scripture is from Mat. 17.11. Elias in deed shall come, and shall
restore all things. Therefore, say you, the true Elias, not John: who was
already come, and could not be said that he was to come. I answer, The
Disciples in the former verse, had made mention of Elias to come; whose speech
Christ taking, so speaks as if he should say; true in deed it is which you
say, Elias is to come. Are we wont to speak otherweise, so often as we relate the
speech of others concerning one to come? Further, let us suppose, that Christ
speaks of some one to come; yet shall not he be any other Elias then John
was; as the reason before rendered, does sufficiently convince. But you would
prove it by two arguments: First, that the Disciples moving the question by
occasion of the transfiguration, did speak of the true Elias: and therefore
Christ answering, did speak of the same particular Elias, I answer it may be,
that the Apostles were not yet free from the Jews common error about Elias:
notwithstanding it is not necessary that the answer should always be made
according to the mind of him that asks the question. Which is manifest even
in this place, when after it is said, the Disciples understood, that he spoke
these things unto them of John Baptist; ver. 13. How understood they it of
John; if our Lord did speak of the true Elias? The second argument is from
those words, and shall restore all things: that, say you, John did not. For to
restore al things, is to call again unto the true faith, al Jews, and
Heretics, and perhaps many Catholics deceived by Antichrist. I answer, except
this restoring of al things did in deed after a sort belong unto John: the
Disciples which saw no such restoring, did misunderstand our Lord to speak of
John. But a great restoring did he make, from whose days hitherto, says the
Lord. the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force, Mat. 11.12. unto whose Baptism, resorted both al Jerusalem, and al
Judaea, and all the region round about Jordan, and many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees; as Mat. 3.5.7. Although I will not deny, but there shall be yet a more
full restoring, and that of al things properly, that al Israel may be saved, as
the Apostle speaks, of which, that restoring by John, was as it were a
shadow. But it is not necessary, that the Minister of this restoring, should be
the true Elias; but one so caled by a similitude, as is said upon the place of
Malachie. And this Elias what manner of one so ever he shall be, shall not
accompany Antichrist, but follow after him: and shall not show himself, before
Antichrist be abolished, or his kingdom at least be very much darkened; as this
Apocalypse makes plain. Wherefore we find no foostep in these words, of the true
Elias properly so caled: much less in those, and if you will receive it, this
is Elias which was to come, Mat. 11.14. Where even against your will, you
acknowledge that John was the promised Elias, not literally, but allegorically.
Which seeing it is so, and that now by your own confession, we have our Lord
him self interpreting those words of Malachy allegorically: show you I pray
you, by what co^petent author, they are to be understood literally: which until
you do, we will rest in that one allegorical exposition, unto which we dare add
no other, without some guide, against whom no exception can be taken.

The fourth Scripture is Apocalypse Chapter 11. verse 13. And I will give to my
two Prophets, and they shall Prophecy one thousand two hundred three score
days. Which are to he understood, you say, of the singular persons of Henoch
and Elias.

But in sted of answer, I ask of you, whither also fire shall come out of their
mouths properly, which shall devour their enemies? For so it is there said, in
the fifth verse of the chapter: and there seems to be the same consideration of
this fire, and of their persons. Which if it be so, then Woe to ANTICHRIST, for
whom such companions are appointed and prepared.

One may well marvel, how he shall fulfill the three years and a half of his
reign, and not rather be consumed the very first day, by this devouring fire.
But if these things do not satisfy you, I have showed upon that place, that
the words can in no weise be understood of their singular persons; whereof I will
yet give you now a more full confirmation. These two Prophets do come into the
world, clothed in sackcloth, straightway after the Hethen Emperors: for these
are clad with sackcloth, and the Temple is mesured, both at a time. The mesured
Temple, is the woman's shelter in the wilderness, whereunto she fled, at the
rising up of the Beast. The Beast the seventh Roman King, succedeth next unto
the sixth, to weet that which reigned in John's time. Therefore when the Beast
sprung up straight way after the Hethen Emperors, these sackcloth-Prophets
began their mornful office: and therefore they are not properly Henoch and
Elias. Now see, if there be any thing foolisher then your dotage of these two to
come in their own persons: your dotage, I say, for the ancient holy Fathers
might miss and be deceived; but you continuing in open error, I see not what
it differs from madness. But let us go on to the other reasons.

You prove that the Apocalypse speaks properly of Henoch and Elias, because it
is said, they should be killed of Antichrist, and their bodies remayn three
days in buried in the street of the great City: and that after three days
they should rise again, and ascend into heaven: which things, you say, have
never as yet happened unto any. I answer, that I have made it plain, by the
order of the time, and agreement of al things; that al these things are already
performed; namely, when the Fathers of Trent, killed the Holy Scriptures,
spoiling them of al authority, and tying the meaning of them unto the Pope.
The^ that which John says of the death of these Prophets, affords a
necessary argument against this literal sense of those singular persons. For
Henoch shall not dye otherweise then of old by his taking away; the Apostle
saying, by faith Henoch was taken away that he should not see death, and he was
not found, because God took him away: for before his taking away he had
testimony, that he had pleased God, Heb. 11.5. The like reason there is also of
Helias. For God is always like himself, and gives like things to like
persons, for like ends. Therefore they are not to be killed by Antichrist. But
Tertullian, you say, in his book De anima, chap. 28. says, Henoch and Elias
were taken away, neither is their death found, for it was deferred: but they
are reserved for to dye, that by their blood, they may extinguish Antichrist.
I answer, Tertullian has nothing save a guess, that these whom the Apocalypse
mentioned, are Henoch and Elias: but the Apostle evidently and plainly teaches
that Henoch was taken away that he should not see death. Now the choice is
easy. whom we should rather beleev. It becomes not holy men, to avouch their
blind opinions, against the open words of the Scriptures.

Hitherto has been your first argument. The second is from the consent of the
Fathers; unto all whom I oppose the consent of the Scriptures, which had
indeed been enough for them, if through darkness of the times they could have
perceived them. There is no need therefore to tarry long in examining their
opinions, which they themselves, if they were now alive, would with their own
voices condemn.

Thirdly, you prove it, because otherweise there can no reason be rendered, why
these two were taken away before death, and do yet live in mortal flesh, being
one day for to dye. I answer, that these last words, being one day for to day,
do contradict the Apostle, as we showed even now: and then, that they convince
the words next before, of falsehood. For if Henoch be not for to dye, it cannot
be that he does yet live in a mortal body. For that is not mortal, which is
not for to dye. But whither they yet live in the flesh or no, is not so
manifest, nor indeed necessary to be known. If it be lawful soberly to inquire
about this thing, they seem to be exempted from the common death of men, as the
Apostle speaks of Henoch, that he should not see death; and not to live as
yet in their bodies. For they live not on earth. For seeing they are adorned of
God, with more excellent good than the rest: they cannot be inferior unto
other souls, in this thing. And the souls in heaven, have greater joy and
more ample felicity than can be on earth. Neither could they together with
their bodies enter into heaven; the Apostle avouching that flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, nor corruption inherit the nature incorrupt,
1 Cor. 15.50. But against this may be objected, that they had the same change,
that those which are aliv shall have at the coming of the Lord, according to
that which is written, we shall not al dye, but we shall al be changed, 1 Cor.
15.51. I grant that there might have been this change, (though this would no way
further your cause,) if that saying of the Apostle hindered not, And these al
through faith, obtained goo report, and received not the promise, God providing
a better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect, Heb.
11.39, 40. For if they felt that change, how obtained they not the promise, to
weet glorification: which is the felicity of the soul joined together with the
body immortal? And if they obtained the promise without us, that is, before
us: what cause can there be why also without us they are not made perfect? These
two things seem openly to be repugnant unto the Apostle. Those two therefore
being cut off, namely their death to come, and their present mortal body, both
which are manifestly false: and that being let pass which is not sufficiently
known, whither they be at al as yet in their bodies: if now you think there is
no other reason why these two were taken away before their death, save that
they might come again to fight with Antichrist; you are willingly blind. The
Apostle says, that Henoch was taken away, because he pleases God, walking
continually with him: Ecclus. 44. that he might be an exe^ple of repentance,
that is, that he might stir up men uto repentance, which look and think upon
this notable example of Gods singular lov toward his. And do you think it a
light matter, that there should be unto all ages of the world a most clear
document of the immortality of the body, and of the ascension thereof at last
into heaven? Before the Law and the flood, Henochs ascension confirmed this
faith to the men of that age. For unto men at least weise he ascended, for he
was not found, as the Apostle says, Heb. 11.5. Under the Law, Elias ascended;
of whom there is the same reason. After the Law, Jesus Christ, the first fruits
of all that ascend: by whose merit and power, both those former, in what manner
soever it was, did ascend, and all the elect shall at length ascend. Only
Antichrist did so stick in your eyes, that you could see none of these things,
or any such like. But deceive your self no longer, with vayn exspectation of
Henoch and Elias: loose not your labor with the men of Jericho, seeking their
bodies upon the earth; what say I? your labor? yea a greater loss hangs
over your head, namely, be not you found in the number of them, that following
the Beast, have not their names written in the book of life. Ap. 17.8.

Chapt. 7. Against the fourth Demonstration, from the publik persecution.
AN other conioint sign you make to be the publik persecution, which, you say,
shall be most grievous and notorious, so that al ceremonies and sacrifices of
publik religion shall cease, none of which things we yet see. According therefore
to the threefold mark of this persecution, you make a threefold proof; first
that it shall be most grievous, 2. most notorious; 3. that it shall cause a
ceasing of religion. And you prove it shall be most greevous, from Ma. 24.21.
there shall be the^ great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of the
world neither shall be. and from Ap. 20.3. where we read that the^ Satan shall be
loosed, who until that time had been bound. And you co^firm it by testimonies
of Aug. in the 20. b. de civit. Dei, chapter 8. and 9. of Hippolitus martyr, and of
Cyril: unto which you add at last, that the persecution by the Pope is not the
most greevous, and therefore he is not Antichrist. I answer to al, and first as
touching the greevousnes of the persecution from the words of Mat. I say, that
you care not what you bring for confirmation. Those words perteyn to the
calamity of the Jews, which they felt in the desolation of their city by
Titus, within a few years after Christ. Luke expresses this people by name,
saying, for there shall be great distress in this land, and wrath on this people,
Luke 21.23. So Mat. then let them that are in Judea, flee to the mou^tayns, chapter
24.16. And what else means that prayer against flight on the Sabath, but
properly to note out this nation? So far verily is it, that Antichrists
persecution is from these words proved to be most greevous, as the contrary may
plainly be concluded: for they evidently do confirm, that no tribulation
shall be to be compared wit that of the Jews; and therefore, not that which
Antichrist shall procure. I know that Chrysostom referrs it typically unto
Antichrist, but not truly, nor advisedlie: for when Christ openly says, none
shall be like it, he cutteth off al typical interpretation: not obscurely
forbidding the words to be further drawn for to signify any thing to come. For
the type must needs be inferior to the truth of it, and a greater distress
must follow afterward, contrary to that Christ says, if so be the words should
be expounded by a type. Matthew therefore makes nothing for the vehemence of this
persecution; and the Apocalypse does even as much. Satan in deed shall rage when
he is loosed, but the outragiousnes which is mentioned in that place, is
nothing to that which he showed before he was bound. For Satan is the same that
the Dragon, Apoc. 12 9. and before his imprisonment, he lived in heaven,
drawing with his tail the third part of the stars of heaven; which he cast
unto the earth, until by Michael he was overcome, and thrown down from thence.
That is to say; the Hethe^ Emperors, not only lived, but also ruled in the
midds of the Church, which they vexed in most cruel manner, til Christ put them
out of the Empire; as upon that place I have showed. From that time the Divil
that is the open enemy, was bound for a thousand years: which being fulfilled,
his bounds should be loosed, and he should be styrrd up again, but not with
that ability to hurt, as before; for here he should have no place in heaven,
that is, in the Church, but should abide only in the utmost borders and
territories thereof, compassing the tents of the Saints, and the beloved city,
as Ap 20.9. whereupon he should not so much raise persecution as war; neither
should the saints dye lik sheep, but resist lik soljers. How much therefore an
inward and noisome enemy is mor greevous than an outward; so much greater is
the affliction of the former times, tha^ that when Satan is loosed, in the last
age. Morover Antich. reigns a 1000 years, whiles Satan lies in prison, Ap.
20.9. Whereupon if when he is loosed, this fellow do trobel al: there should be
great tra^quility when he is bound: and so the greatest part at least of his
reign, should be void of those turbule^t storms, neirher should Antich. have an
helper of his persecution in the other part of his reign: seeing he should abid
within the Church and Satan without as is manifest by the things forespoke^:
also that now he was appointed for the scourge of Antic. himself, not for their
ha^gma^ and torturer, whom he should use for the tormenting of others.

For the Divil being now loosed, the four Angels at Euphrates are loosed, who^
God sends to punish the Angel of the bottomless pit, with his infernal
crew, which came out of the pit, Apoc. 9.20.21. all which things we have made
plain in their places. Therefore where Augustine says, that Antichr. shall most
rage when the Divil is loosed; as though he were now first loosed, and should
be his helper unto cruelty; he judges not rightly of this loosing: for he was
loosed before in heaven, Apoc. 12.3. etc. which could not be a prison and pit
unto him, seeing he took it heavilie to be cast from thence: unless perhaps he
went out of prison against his will, Apoc. 12.10. Neither is Hippolitus to be
hearkened unto concerning this persecution, when he teaches that Antichrist is
no man, but the very Divil, that should take false flesh of a false virgin.
And no better account is to be made of Cyrill, if he though that the Divil
should personally range abroad, making Antichrist to be a true man, but one
that should be a Divil also, because as he thinks, he should be made man by
incarnation. What sincere thing could they utter about this matter, whose minds
were possessed by such manner errors? Wherefore this grievousnes of persecution
which you speak of, has no confirmation at al from the Scriptures. A very
greevous persecution in deed there should be but of an other sort then you
mention; even such as should consist not so much in killing of bodies, as in
murdering of souls. For Antichrist is Balaam, who though it better to put a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, that they migh eat of things
sacrificed to Idols, and committ fornication, then to follow the^ with the
sword, Apoc. 2.14. He is that Beast, whereon Iezebel the whore sits, with the
wine of whose fornication, the inhabitants of the earth are drunken, Apoc.
2.20. and 17.2. He is the Angel of the bottomless pit, who opening the pit,
the Sun and aier is darkened with the smoke, Apoc. 9.2. Finally he is that man
of syn, whose coming is with the efficacy of Satan, with all power and signs
and lying wonders, and with all deceit of unrighteousnes in them that perish,
for that they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
Therefore God sends them the efficacy of deceit, that they may beleev a lie:
that they al may be damned, which have not believed the truth, but taken
pleasure in unrighteousnes. 2 These. 2.9.10. Behold the true persecution of
Antichrist, being rather pernicious to the souls than to the bodies: although
he should not refreyn from this wickedness of shedding blood; for he should also
cause that whosoever would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be
killed, Apoc. 13.15. And he is that skarlet Beast of bloody color, gotten by
the blood of the saints, springled on him. But that spiritual persecution is
the more outrageous, by so much as the sowl is better than the body, and as the
conioynt destruction of both, is crueller than the perdition of one. Whereas
before you say that there is no comparison of the Popes persecution of us, whom
you call Heretics, with the persecution of Nero, Domitian, Decius, Dioclesian
and others, as if from hence it were certain that the Pope is not Antichrist;
now every man may see, that it is nothing to the purpose. For Antichrists
cruelty, is not to be measured by the privation of mortal life, but by the
loss of life eternal. And this is that which surpasses al prisons, swords,
wild beasts, fyres, burning yrons, molten lead, or any exquisite torment that
either Nero, or any other of the tyrants exercised. This is that, for the
torment whereof, men sought death, but found it not, and desired to dye: but
death fled from them; namely because they felt pain sharper than death, Apoc.
9.6. This is that for which straightway at the rising up of the Beast, the
woman fled into the wilderness, which could not be put to flight by any gibbets
or flames, wherewith the Emperors raged, Apoc. 12.6. etc. Wherefore though we
should grant, that a greater slaughter of bodies was made by Nero and such like
tyrants: yet nothing lets, but the cruelty of the Bishop of Rome may
surpass in an other respect, and be such, as whereby he may manifest himself
to be the great Antichrist.

But, say you, many more of the Catholics have our Heretics killed, these 10 or
15-years, in France and Flanders; then the Inquisitours have burned of the
Heretics, perhaps in one hundred years. And if it may be caled persecution, the
Catholics do rather suffer it, than the Lutherans or Calvinists. For the
Catholics ar they which being driven out of many countries, have lost
Churches, patrimonies, and country it self, the new Ministers of the Gospel
invading them. I answer: whereas now you ar resisted, and some of you whiles
they oppugn the good estate of others, have lost their own: that nothing
hinders the spiritual persecution of your Pope. He rages yet with no less
deadly feud against the truth, than at any time before; yea with greater, if
greater may be. But this slaughter of his men, somewhat mitigateth the corporal
persecution. But the Spirit has foretold, that that shall be brought at last
upon your own heads, which you were wont to do unto others. For Christ
threatened that he would slay Iezabels children with death, Apoc. 2.23. and that
they should go into captivity, which do lead into captivity, and be killed
with the sowrd, which do kill with the sword, Apoc. 13.10. Finally, that the
rivers and fountains of waters should be turned into blood, and that they
should drink blood, which did shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, Apoc.
16.4.5.6. Neither is this divine recompense to be caled a persecution, unless
perhaps it be persecution to repel force by force; or to take from thieves and
robbers, the goods, which they have stolen from the right owners, or to drive
out of the country, them that betray the country, or to drive away the wolves
from the folds. Your wickedness is now known unto al, your treasons, murders,
poisonnings, cutthroat boldness, subtle plottings against Princes, unto which
you apply your selves with all diligence, and often accomplish them with
overmuch. These things cause many of you to loose your heads, these be the
merits of your Martyrs, these be the crowns, these be trophies or signs of
your victories. It is to be wished of al which love the publik peace and
safety, that by the faithful diligence and vigilance of the Magistrates, this
persecution may more increase daily. And thus much of the greevousnes of the
persecution: which howsoever it be great in deed, yet you see it is an other,
than you supposed.

Secondly you prove that Antichrists persecution shall be most notorious and
manifest, from those words Apoc. 20.8. and they compassed the tents of the
Saints, and the beloved city. And that the Popes persecution is such, as
neither they which say they suffer it, nor you which are said to infer it, can
say when it begann. I answer; those words of the Apocalypse perteyn nothing unto
any vexation that shall be inferred by Antichrist, but by Gog and Magog.
Antichrist was slain and cast into the lake of fire, in the end of the former
chapter; whereupon he has no part in this battle, neither shall the last
affliction be raised by him, as you falsely do often avouch, but by an other
that shall for a while survive Antichrist. And that you may understand how
Antichrists persecution, shall not be most notorious in the doing of it: you
must remember that Antichrists property is to invade with all guile and fraud,
not with open and displayed flaggs. Therefore that he shall carry his matters with
very great silence, and privily, which be arts fittest for secret ambush, not
that he should be espied of al. Moreover, when all the earth should worship the
Beast, needs must the affliction be of the lesser part, and so not most
notorious, Apoc. 13.3. That which is done by the most, is commonly counted to
be done by right; and to deserv no reprehension. Besides, his persecution is
specially spiritual, which easily deceives the bodily sense and eyes:
whereupon though it should not be so readily discerned, either when Antichrist
shall come, or unto whom he shall first appear, or when his persecution shall
begin: yet this makes the thing it self no more doubtful and ambiguous, than
it is uncertayn that the plague is the plague, because it is not evident unto
al, from whence it first proceeded; or that a fire consumes and devoureth al
things, because it is not found out, how first it began and grew. But howsoever
these things have heretofore perhaps been more obscure: see now how much we
have profited by this Apocalypse, by help whereof we are come nearer unto that
beginning which you seek. For from hence we learn, that straightway after the
Emperors were for done, the woman fled into the wilderness, and a burning
mountayn was cast into the Sea, chap. 8. For then the bars being burst, the
Roman ambition could no longer be held in: then began error and superstition
of every sort, speedily to enter: then was instituted the Feast of the
Inve^tion of the Cross; and Confirmation made a new Sacrament, and that
greater, as Bishop Melchiades would have it, than Baptism. Then all the
neighbors in their order, strove who might most heap up new adulterate rites:
until at length it came to the opening of the Bottmlesse pit, at what time the
whole infernal darkness broke out. Neither yet was this an end of the calamity,
but at last, by the Trident Council, the two Prophets were slain, the
Scriptures being killed, and their bare carkesses cast out, as we have showed,
cha. 11.9. whereupon soon also it came to pass, that by the Jesuits, the
Masters of controversies, the whole Sea of Popish doctrine, was turned into
abominable and deadly putrifyed blood, chap. 16.3. This is the uprising and
proceeding of your spiritual persecution. The corporal also cannot now be hidd
from any: which beginning after the second uprising of the Beast,
excommunicated Leo Isauricus; deposed King Childericus; war with the
Emperors; put some of them from their Empire; fell with noisome signs upon
the Albingenses, and almost quite destroyed them; would not help the Greeks
against the Turks, unless they would first subject themselves to the Latin
Pope; did break Europe with continual wars, by setting the Princes together by
the ears; burned John Husse and Jerome of Prage: armed Charles the 5. against
the Protestants; consumed many Christians in France with flames, showed the
same cruelty upon many in England: made that memorable massacre in Paris: set
up the tormenting boucherie of the Inquisition in many of his dominions:
finally, which sent the Spanish Navy into England: invaded Jreland by force of
arms: exposed the Realm of our gracious Queen, to the spoil of any
whomsoever: and destinated her sacred person unto death; her people, to the
prey; and the whole nation to most cruel slaughter. These things are now known,
and will ere long be more manifest: but while the matters were a doing, they
were dect and covered with so fair a show of piety and zele for the house of
God, that the injury which was done unto any, seemed not so much to be hatred
and persecution, as either the just defense of the Church, or punishment of the
wicked. This publik knowledge therefore, which may be somewhat when the things
are done, but is very small or none at al rather, before the issue comes; is no
note of the persecution of Antichrist.

The third sign you make to be, the ceasing of the publik and daily Church
offfice and sacrifice, because of the cruelty of the persecution. I answer, it
is here in special worthy to be observed, that this cessation shall be not in one
country alone, but universally in all: which both you urge in many places, and
reason does enforce. For if the Gospel must be preached before Antichrists
coming, in the whole world, and that not figuratively but simply and properly
so said, as in your first Demo^stration you pleaded: needs must the ceasing of
al publik religion, extend as far, as the preaching did before. Therefore the
cessatio^ shall be not only in these known parts of the world, but in all lands
also yet unknown, among the Tartars and Scythians, the Asians, the Indians, and
all the Eastern Islands, in the deserts of Africa, in the Southern continent, in all America, the new Zembla, and al those coasts under the North. Let the
studious observe, that in the whole superficies of the earth, Archimedes h^s
tetragonisme or quartering, has the unity of a circle superfluous: whereby
perhaps the true tetragonisme may be found out.
Al which superficies, as by Geometrical reckning is manifest, consists of a
hundred forty eight thousand thousand, four hundred fifty thousand, nine
hundred and nine English or Italia^ miles: which space if we will divide into
the several days of your Antichrist that shall reign three years and a half,
he must travel every day provinces that are a hundred seventeen thousand,
eight hundred and eighteen miles over. Surely al Spain and France, taking the
whole length and breadth of them together, are very small countries unto the
mesured portion of his every days way. And shall he have leisure also to build
a Temple, and sit therein? But, I pray you, shall he make this journey together
with his army, or himself alone? It may be, that as the Monk of Oxford, being
carried by his familiar Divil through the aier, described in an Astrolobe the
whole Northern Climate; so Antichrist may mount on some such like winged
Pegasus, and may provide his army such horses also, and then in every nation
whiles he flies over the countries, he may with the clapping of his wings
only compel true religion to keep silence. It may also be, that he will spare
his own payns, and will go over the countries by his Legates: yet I beleev he
shall have enough to do, every day to give commandments unto so large a
dominion as he is to administer. But in this general and so deep silence of
true religion, where shall your Henoch and Elias be? shall not they oppose
themselves; or shall they do it in vain, out of whose mouth fire comes forth,
consuming their adversaries? Apoc. 11.6. But what do I mean? Are you not
ashamed of such monstrous opinions as these? Such strange fantasies are rather
to be hissed away, than to be refuted by any serious disputation.

But, say you, Daniel does plainly teach this point, chapt. 12. in these
words: From the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, shall be 1200
days; as the ancient Fathers do expound it; and the meaning it, that
Antichrist shall forbid all divine worship, that now is exercised in the
Christian Churches, and specially the holy sacrifice of the Eucharist. And
experience testifies that this sign is not yet fulfilled. I answer, that
Daniel treats of nothing less in that place, than of Antichrist. The Fathers
that so expound it, will have this number of days that is mentioned, to be of
his reign: but inco^sideratlie, as the words do sufficiently show. For if
these be the days of his reign, he shall make all publik religion to cease,
before his reign beginn. For these days take their beginning, from the daily
sacrifice being taken away; which therefore must needs go before. Wherefore
either these things perteyn nothing at al to Antichrist, or al those things are
vayn which the Fathers mention of him, whiles they thrust al his tyranny into
the straights of so few days. There is no soundnes therefore in this their
exposition: the true sacrifice which Daniel means, is the daily sacrifice,
which was taken away before Antichrist was born; for it was taken away together
with the Temple of Jerusalem, unto which it was tied by the institution of God.
For all this Prophecy is of the children of Daniels people, that is, of the
Jews, as the Angel speaks in the first verse of that chapter. Not so, say
you, but this daily sacrifice, is our sacrifice of the altar, which succeeded
in place of that old. Away with this dotage, and sacrilegious sacrifice, which
neither Christ instituted, nor the Apostles knew of, nor the purer Church ever
dreamed of. Should there be any daily sacrifice now in the Church, besides
that of thanksgiving, and of a contrite heart, after that Christ in the midds of
that week, as the Angel speaks, abolished al sacrifice and offering? Dan.
9.27. etc. Should not the sacrifice of himself alone, be the only and perfect
sacrifice: as the Apostle so often testifies to the Hebrews? chap. 7. ver. 27.
But many are your blasphemies that from hence arise, neither to be stood on at
this time. It is enough for us in this place, that the ceasing of this
sacrifice, is without the compass of the 1290. days: and therefore not rightly
attributed unto Antichrist. But this place is sertile, and three notable points
are gathered from it: First, that Antichrist is not yet come whiles the daily
Sacrifice does still continue. I answer; you may as certainly conclude, that
he is not yet come, because the Temple of Jerusalem, does still remayn whole.
Secondly, you say, the Bishop of Rome is not Antichrist, but most contrary unto
him; seeing the sacrifice which he shall take away, this man most adorneth and
defends. I answer, Antichrist shall take away nothing less, than your
sacrilegious sacrifice: than which, nothing is more contumelious against
Christ. For if Christ profits them nothing, which bring in circumcision: they
are fallen from grace, which bring in the daily sacrifice, Gal. 5.2. But yours,
you will say, is not the legal rite. I answer, it is so much the more impious,
in that it is merely humane and Popish. Thirdly, you say, that the Heretics of
this time, are above al other, the forerunners of Antichrist, for that they
desire nothing more earnestly, than utterly to abolish the sacrifice of the
Eucharist, I answer, unless Satan had blinded your eyes, those whom you call
Heretics and forerunners of Antichrist, you would acknowledge them to be the
forerunners of Christ: forasmuch as of his great mercy he uses them, as the
Spirit of his mouth to destroy the Pope, who is by all tokens famously known to
be Antichrist; and whom now very shortly at last, he will utterly abolish with
the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. But it is no marvel that you which
count Antichrist for the Vicar of Christ: do call Christ's true servants by any
name rather than their own. And now it were to be wished, that Antichrist
might no more attayn to the Saints by persecuting, than you have attained to
any part of this question by disputing: for so, his persecution would be
tolerable, as your disputation is intolerable.

Chapt. 8. Against the fifth Demonstration, from the durance of Antichrist.
THE fifth Demonstration you draw from Antichrists durance, which you make to be
but three years and a half. But seeing the Pope has now reigned you say,
spiritually in the Church, these 1500. years, neither can any be named, that
was counted Antichrist, which reigned precisely three years and a half; the
Pope is not Antichrist: and therefore Antichrist is not yet come. I answer, how
vayn this opinion of three years and a half is, I have showed by most firm
arguments from the Scriptures. For if Antichrist have reigned from the time of
Constantine the Great, unto this day, whereof the Apocalypse has give^ such
demonstrations, as no Jesuit shall ever confute: then is there nothing more
frivolous, than that three years reign and a half. But the proper argument of
this place, is to be taken from the things that follow, chap. 20.6. whence
plainly it is gathered, that some part of his reign shall dure a thousand years;
for thus he says: And J saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which worshipped not the Beast,
nor his Jmage, nor had taken his mark on their foreheads, or on their hands,
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the
dead me^ lived not, til the thousand years were fulfilled. This is the first
resurrection. From hence it is evident, first, that Antichrists adversaries do
reign a thousand years with Christ, before the first resurrection. Secondly,
that Antichrists ubiects, that dyed by his tyranny, lay dead 1000 years. But
there can be no exposition against Antichrist, whiles yet he is not: neither is
he able to hold his people dead 1000 years, u^lesse his tyranny should so many
years endure. Therefore some part of his reign, is for 1000 years: a part, I
say; for these thousand years, are not those whole 1260, days, but some part
only, as in their places is more apparent. But let us see, how you co^firm
those three years and a half. For this thing, you use six arguments. First
from Dan. 7.25. and 12.7. Apoc. 12.19. where we read, you say, that Antichrists
reign shall dure for a time, and times, and half a time. For by a time, is
meant, one year; by times, two years; by half a time, half a year. And that
so John explayneth it, for in Apoc. 11. and 13. he confirms that Antichrist
shall reign 42 months, which justly make three years and a half. And in chap.
11. Henoch and Elias are to preach 1260 days, which make up the same time.
Neither does it let, that in Dan. 12. it is said Antichrist shall reign 1290
days, that is, 30. days more than John spoke of for John speaks of Henoch and
Elias, which shall be slain by Antichrist, one month before Antichrist do
perish. I answer, first, that you unskilfully join Daniel in this thing with
John. For that time, times, and part of a time in Daniel, perteyn nothing to
Antichrist, and to this time, times, and half a time in John, save so far as
some similitude and allusion is between them. For that in Daniel is of a little
horn; which is not the great Antichrist, whom John speaks of in this place.
For he rises up after the other ten horns: Antichrist is born together with
his ten. Also, he gets dominion but over three horns: contrariweise Antichrist
prevails over all his: as is showed before, chap. 5. against your second
demonstration. Secondly I say, that you plainly know not the account in
nu^bring the days months and years. For whereas you say, that the full and
perfect year of the Moon conteyneth 12 months, and every month 30. days, as
Augustine teaches; that is not true. For such a year of the Moon, should have
360. days: but the Hebreues year of the Moon, had only 354 days, and some
hours and minutes over; as all the Rabbines, Calendars, and Cycles of the
Hebrews do show; who are more to be believed in the computation of their own
time, than Augustine is, though otherweise a very learned man. Wherefore, if you
will have these to be the years of the Hebrews; three years and a half, will
make but 1239 days, which want 21 of the number in the Apocalypse. Moreover,
where you make those 1290 days in Dan. 12. to be also of Antichrists reign;
besides that which we have showed in the former chapter, how it can no way be
referred hereunto, see how great a new contrariety you make in the account. For
neither does this number fall under the reckning of the time times and half a
time, seeing it cannot be divided into three whole ones and a half; neither
agrees it with John, who numbreth precisely 1260 days. But, say you, this
number is of the death of Henoch and Elias, whom Antichrist shall survive one
month. Unto this I say, then Antichrist shall reign not only three years and
six months, as Ireneus says expressly in the end of his 5. book: neither
three years and a half only, with an exclusive particle, as Cyril speaks,
Cateches. 25. but a month over the number shall now be added, and for 6.
months there shall be 7. Neither shall the half of a time prefigure six, as Ierom
says on Dan. 7. but seven. And thus, while you go about to make Daniel and
John agree, you set the Fathers against them both. But let us leave these
disagreers, and draw the truth out of the true fountains. I confess that the
number of 1290 days, is not of Antichrists whole reign, but is ended at the
death of the two Prophets, whose names I now stand not upon; and that
Antichrist shall survive they two being slain: but not one month only, as you
falsely suppose, but many years, the number whereof we have gathered elsewhere:
which thing verily is from hence manifested. For the two Prophets are killed
under the sixth trumpet, chap. 11.8.14. and Antichr. perishes under the last,
which comprehends 7 other plagues caled vials, under the last whereof, he is
quite abolished. Shall therefore all the seven vials have their effects in those
your 30. days? So four days shall be attributed for the execution of every
one: for they are not powered out al together, and confusedly: but the same
order and course is kept doubtless in the executing, that is kept in the
declaring. Wherefore, to let pass the five first vials, those unclean Spirits
of the sixth, which come out of the mouth of the Dragon, of the Beast, and of
the false Prophet, and go forth unto the Kings of the whole earth, to gather
them together unto battle; shall they effect all this in the four days next
before the last? We have heard of Antichrists incredible swiftnes, going over
the whole earth in so small a space of his reign: but greater shall be the speed
of these his ministers, who shall both survey the whole earth in four days,
and bring forth unto battle very populous armies. Verily this expedition is
most expedite or soon dispatched: and such as only deserves properly the
name of an expedition. Do you not yet perceive how false, absurd, trifling,
and mere ignorance the things are which you babble about these matters? When
you shall prove that the seven last plagues shall be al to be accomplished in 30.
days; we will assent unto you that Antichrist shall survive the two slain
Prophets, one month only; as also that there is an agreement of these numbers
in Daniel and John: in the mean while we will determine that these two have
their diverse intendements, and do not Prophecy of the same things by these
numbers. Thirdly I say, although that whole indefinite space did consist with
most exact agreement, of those either months or days; yet are you never the
nearer for obteining your purpose. For the question is, whither those months
or days or years be to be taken properly or no, not whither the account do
agree; which may agree alike, whither they be taken properly or figurativelie:
seeing there is the same proportion in the type and the truth; though neither
the type be the truth, nor the truth the type. How therefore do you prove, that
they are to be taken properly? By testimony you say, of the Fathers, some of
which you bring forth in the answer to Chytreus, and the men of Maydenburgh. I
answer. those ancient Fathers are to be pardonned, that being ignorant of the
event, thought they should hold fast unto the letter: but seeing many things
are now made clear by the issue, whosoever does abuse the patronage of their
names, to confirm himself in error, he shall procure on his own head just
condemnation. Therefore you must either bring forth some thing of greater
weight; or freely confess, that that reign of 3. years and a half, has no
defense from these Scriptures.

Secondly, you prove it by this, that the time of the Divil loosed, and of
Antichrist should be very short; as Apoc. 12.12. Woe to the land and sea, for
the Divil is come down unto you, having great wrath, knowing that he has but a
little time. I answer, a little and indefinite time concludetht nothing at al,
for a certain and definite reign of 3. years and a half: so that little help
or none rather you get from this place. Moreover, that which you call the time
of the Divil loosed, is the time of the Divil bound: who so soon as he was
cast out of heaven, was cast into prison. For every place is to him loathsome,
and like a prison, without the assembly of the Saints, among whom he most
coveteth to converse, for greater opportunity to his wickedness: whereupon the
Lord says, that the unclean Spirit being cast out of a man, walks through
dry places, as in which there is no pleasure for his mind, Mat. 12.43. etc. But
these things we have made evident in explayning the Prophecy. Seeing therefore
the Divils prisonment is for 1000 years, and here that time is spoken of
whereunto you will have Antichrists durance to be equal: his reign shall be much
longer by this place, than you are willing to grant. But, say you, how can so
many years be a little time? I answer, if the words be rightly interpreted,
here is no mention of durance, but of opportunity. For where you read, knowing
that he has but a little time, it is properly thus, knowing that he has little
opportunity. So (...) properly signifies, noting the quality of time, not
the quantity, whereby it is distinguished from (...), as Ammonius shows. And
reason convinces that so it is to be taken in this place. If it should be
understood durance, the Divil should be angry for the thousand years of his
prison, (in which he lives, by those words, as we have said;) as being bound
for a lesser space than he would. Which how far it is from his disposition,
his diligence night and day to destroy men, does sufficiently show. The time
therefore was longer than he desired, but the opportunity little: leav being now
given him only over his own, who^ he had rather spare, and show his cruelty
on the elect. Wherefore this place is nothing to the matter, for many causes.
The second is, Apoc. 20.3 he bound him for a 1000. years, and afterward he
must be loosed for a little time. I answer, now in deed he speaks of time; and
therefore whereas before it was (...) season, whiles he lay in bands; now it is
(...) time, when he is loosed. But how say you, shall this be true, if
Antichrist shall reign 1260 years? I answer, this is not the loosing of
Antichrist, but of the Divil; that his time is short, but Antichrists time
long, who reigns not only when the Divil is loosed, but also when he is
bound; as Apoc. 20.3.4. where the Divil is bound 1000. years, whiles the Beast
in the mean time is despised of the elect, but dominiereth over his own, by
his Mark, and other signs of servitude; as upon that place shall be spoken more
at large. Thirdly you say, because as Augustine and Gregory do reason, except
that greevous persecution should be very short, many should perish, which are
not for to perish, whereupon our Lord also says, unless those days were
shortened, no flesh should be saved, Mat. 24.22. I answer; this of Matthew,
agrees not to the persecution of Antichrist, but to the affliction of
Jerusalem. What flight shall there be under your Antichrist, (such as there is
mentioned,) when all the world shall plainly obey him? Or what shall the Sabbath
hurt Christians that flee? Or how shall new false Prophets have place, after
your great Antichrist, who shall come you say, a little before the end of the
world? how be it after that affliction, the Lord foretells that such, shall
come a fresh: ver. 24. Therefore what names soever you pretend for this
interpretation, there is no firmnes in it. Moreover, if I should grant that this
persecution is both Antichrists, and short: what is this for 3. years and a
half? The Spirit said to the Angel of Ephesus, unless thou repent, I will come
against thee shortly, Apoc. 2.5. Was that Angel punished within 3. years and a
half? Therefore here is no probability of Antichrists durance, but this your
Demonstration is like your other. This also I will tell you of in as word, though
it perteyns nothing to the force of the argument, that you had rather speak
amiss many should perish, which are not to perish, then to say with the
Scripture, that they should deceive, if it were possible the very elect. For
that which the Lord says, no flesh should be saved, he spoke of the
destruction of the flesh, with greevousnes of the slaughter: not of the peril
of salvation of souls.

Fourthly you say, Christ preached only three years and a half; therefore it
is meet also that Antichrist be permitted to preach no longer. I answer, you
are a notable disputer verily. Will you have Christ, to be a type of
Antichrist? If it were so appointed, the agreement of years would perhaps be
meet: but being as you mind, they directly cross one an other, it is rather
meet all things should be contrary; namely that Antichrist should reign very
long, because Christ did it ope^lie in the world a very short time. So also
should Christ's glory appear the greater in subduing this enemy: the longer
that his tyranny has continued. Enemies do not set themselves to imitate
their enemies: and in many other things they are quite contrary. For as
Christ was very poor; so Antichrist is very rich: as Christ was a subject, so
Antichrist is a King: as Christ patiently suffered al injuries, so Antichrist
studiously infers them: as Christ had not where to lay his head, so
Antichrist abou^deth with so great wealth, as he is also able to carry the
whore. Will you require a similitude of years in these?

Fifthly, you say, because the sum of 1260 years, which the adversaries do
appoint, can no way be applied unto those words of Daniel and John, a time,
times, and half a time; I answer; I have often already showed, that we are
not much to be trobled about Daniel. But what lets, I pray you, the
application unto these words of John? Because by a time, you say, without doubt
must be understood some one number, as one day, one week, one month, one year,
one five-yeres-tide, one Jubilee, one hundred-yeres, one thousand etc. I
answer, but you without doubt are egregiously deceived: neither do I thing
that you wrote these things waking, but a sleep, or nodding. Do not you see,
that by this reason, you reject not only the years of the adversaries, but
even the days and months which the Angel himself sets? A time, you say,
must be doubtless some one number, as one day, one week, one month, etc. Be
it therefore one day, then times shall be two days, half^ a time, half a day.
Now have we the sum of three days and a half: where then shall be the other
1256. days and a half? So let a time be one month, times will be two months,
half a time, 15. days; al which joined together, make three months and 15.
days; will the 42. months be brought at length to these? But I will not ask
too loud least I be troblesome to your sleepy head: I will whisper to you as low
as I can, that a time of days, is not one day, but three hundred and sixty
days; times, are twice as many, namely 720: half a time, 180. Likeweise also
a time of years, is 360. years; times, 720. half a time, 180. So a time of
months, is 12. months; times, 24. half a time, six These things, when you
are awake, think on, I pray you: and in the mean time dream sweetly those 3400.
yeree which by your account you have wrung out from your adversaries.

Sixthly, you say, the 7. times in Daniel chap. 9. are seven years; if they
should be taken otherweise, so many days for so many years, Nabuchodonosor
had lived without his Kingdom two thousand five hundred fifty and five years.
Therefore one time in John, shall be one usual year, and 2. times 2. years, and so
forward. I answer, it is ridiculous to tie words always unto one
signification, except where certain reason, and necessity do constreyn. Daniel
himself is said to have fallen on hes knees three times in a day; I think you
will not have it that he fell on his knees three years in a day, Dan. 6.11. And
thus now you have disputed of Antichrists three years reign, as besides the
bare names of some me^, which are not meet witnesses in this matter, you have
nothing which may hold either you or any other Papist in this opinion: yea (I
may say somewhat more and truly,) whereof you and al Papists may not well be
ashamed, which suffer your selves to be deceyved in so great a matter, with
such leight and childish toys. God grant, the truth be not now also showed you
in vayn, as it has been heretofore. There remains one thing in this chapter
to be considered, which you answer unto the argument of Illyricus, where you
say, that in the Scripture there is found indeed and rightly said weeks of
years, but not days, for years, or months of years: and that it is rightly
caled a week, because it has the name of the number seven: but months and
days are names of number, but of the course of the man, or time of light. I
answer, whereas first you say that days are not found for years: it is
manifestly false. Says not the Lord to the Israelits, according to the number
of the days, wherein you serched the land, even forty days, you shall bear
your iniquities forty years? Number. 14* 34. what can be plainer? Likeweise unto
Ezechiel, A day for a year have J given thee: chap. 9.6. But, say you, he will
not say, for days literally are meant years, but the days are truly taken for
years, and they are said to be given for years, because they were a sign of
years. O wit, worthy of Neesing wort! A day is not a very year, but only a
sign or signification of a year: as if any ever thought a day to be a year
truly and properly? Or if a day might signify a year in Ezechiel, and other
places, but might not in John? But now let us hear the reason why a week may be
of years, and not a day likeweise: forsooth because a week signifies number; a
day not. To this I say, unity indeed is not number, and a day answers to
unity, and this very subtly. How be it we dullars do think that number is
the gathering together of unities; and that unities ar such as is the whole it
self which is made of the^. Therefore as 7 days signify 7 years; so I pray you
with your good leav, let it be lawful for one day to signify one year: which if
you will let us obteyn at your hands; in thanks for so great a benefit, we will
grant your Pope a long lasting reign, even 1260. years

Chapt. 9. Against the sixth Demonstration* from the end of the world.
THE sixth Demonstration is taken from the last sign that follows Antichrist,
which shall be the end of the world. If Antichrist, say you, had bin come long
since, the world had been at an end long since; for he is to come a little
before the end of the world: but the world is not yet ended: therefore he is not
yet come. I answer, If that of Antichrists three years reign, had been certain;
this which you say, should have some weight: but forasmuch as we have proved
that to be a vayn fiction, partly by taking away your reasons, partly by
propounding such as you will never be able to refute; the end of the world may
well teach Antichrists end, but is of no force at al to demonstrate his coming,
if we will speak of it properly. From the places by you cited, some perhaps may
argue thus. The end of the world is conjoined with the end of Antichrist: but
the end of the world is not yet come; therefore neither the end of Antichrist.
But what is this to the purpose? We make question of his coming, not of his
end. You might have spared this labor; unless perhaps you thought these were
to be prepared against a new battle, when Antichrists case shall be debated in
hell. There this domonstration may have some weight, where it shall be certainly
known whither the Pope be perished, together with the destruction of all the
world, or no. Wherefore the testimonies which you bring are quite from the
purpose, and make nothing for the matter in hand. Yea what and if they prove
not that end which you think? Then will this your demonstration be altogether
both without head and tail. Let us see in few words, that we may also
illustrate as it were by the way some obscure places; whose meaning it will be
very profitable for to know. First you allege that of Dan. chapter 7.9. J
considered the horns and lo an other little horn came up, and three of the
first horns were plucked away from before him. I beheld til the thrones were set
up, and the ancient of days did sit etc. And afterward explaining the vision,
he says, The fou th Beast shall be the fourth Kingdom: and the ten horns ar ten
Kings, and an other shall rise up after them, and he shall be mightier than the
former, and shall subdue three Kings etc. And they shall be given into his hand
for a time and times and half a time, and judgment shall sit. I answer,
neither is the little horn, the Antichrist, as we have showed neither if he were,
does his end lead unto the knowledge of that coming But leaving these, let us
weigh for what cause this is cited. From these words you would teach that the
end should straightway follow that little horn. But you ought to have considered
withal the words after, in ver. 14. and to him was give^ dominion and glory
and kingdom, that al peoples nations and tongues should serve him*

That is, he which shall obteyn the Kingdom, when the little horn is destroyed,
shall be an universal King, unto whom al nations shall obey. But shall there remain
a distinction of peoples, nations, and tongues, after the last end? yet is it
more plain after, if plainer may be, in verse 27. And the Kingdom, and
amplitude, and rule of Kingdoms, shall be given to the people of the holy most
High, whose Kingdom shall be a perpetual Kingdom, and al Rulers shall serve it.
VVher first it is to be observed, that the dominion of this Kingdom, shall be of
the things under heaven: then, that it shall be the holy Most-High; and finally,
that al rulers shall serve this Kingdom: which things cannot have place in the
heavenly Kingdom. The thing ^s thus; that little horn is the Turk, who being
at last extinguished, the Jews co^verting universallie al of them unto the
faith, shall have a perpetual domination, that shall dure until the coming of our
Lord from heaven. For the little horn in Daniel, is Gog in Ezechiel, who being
slain, the Christian faith shall exceedingly flourish among the Jews, as is
showed by that typical building of the Temple and new City. The same reason is
of the new Jerusalem in this Apocalypse, after Gog is slain, chapter 20.21. These
things we have partly taken out of the 16. chap. of the Apocalypse; partly they
shall be explayned hereafter more fully. And this is that which Lactantius
writes, lib. 7. chap. 15. The name of Rome, says he, wherewith the world now
is ruled, (my heart is afraid to speak it, but speak it I wll, because it shall
come to pass) shall be taken away from the earth, and the Empire shall return
into Asia; and the East again shall have dominion, and the West shall serve. The
second place is Ap. 20.4 After this he must be loosed a little time: and I saw
seats, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them. I answer,
these things are far from the last end. For they follow not as you think after
the Divil is loosed; but these seats are placed during his imprisonment.
Again, there are 1000 years before the first resurrection; then they that
first rise, do reign 1000 years, as is expressly said ver. 6. Therefore these
seats and this judgment. which you suppose to be of the last end. do go
before it 2000 years at least; such a stranger are you in these mysteries. Then
to that which is alleged out of Dan. 12. Blessed is he that wayteth and comes
unto the 1335 days, that is, say you, unto 45 days after Antichrists death,
for then the Lord shall com to judgment, and will give the crowns of righteousness
to them that overcome. I answer, as touching this place, we are to explain it
after, chap. 20.11. and it may be one day we will take in hand the full handling
of it. In the mean while let us know, that the destruction of Antichrist
properly so caled, is not here handled, nor our Lords coming to the last
judgment, which shall not make al blessed upon whom it comes, when many shall
desire that they may be covered by the mountains from his sight: but the full
caling of the Jews, where Daniel stays his Prophecy; neither do any
Prophesies go further.

Fourthly you come unto Mat. 24. this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in
the whole world, for a testimony to al nations, and then shall the end be. I
answer, here is no mention of your Antichrist: and again, the end in this
place, is the end of the Jewish polity, not of the world, as I have showed chapter
4. against your first Demonstration. But you add the words following;
Straightway after the tribulation of those days, the Sun shall be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give her light, and then shall appear the sign of the Son of
man. I answer, neither does these make any thing for Antichrists destruction
to be joined with the end of al things, seeing they speak not of him at al. Yet
that we may see the interpretation of the words, let us discuss them a little.
With one consent, as I suppose, it is applied unto our Lords last judgment.
But this Apocalypss teaches both to think and to speak more distinctly of this
thing. For from hence we do understand, that the Lords coming which is yet to
be hereafter, is twofold; the one spiritual (so named for excellency,) in the
caling of the Jews; the other corporal, at the general judgment. And that
coming in Matthew, seems to be spiritual, which is in deed described to be
most glorious and powrful, by the corporal furniture; as that which shall be both
a clear resemblance and as it were a certain pawn thereof, and also no change
shall afterward come between, which may make the corporal to appear as new And
that thus the thing is, may easily be perceived, if we mind how the Disciples
in the beginning of the chapter inquired of the end of the Temple, of the Lords
coming, and the end of the world. Without doubt under Christ's coming they
comprehended the restoring of their nation: and therefore after the Lords
resurrection, supposing that this was the coming which he had give^ them hope
of; they ask him again, Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to
Israel? Act. 1.6. But Christ answering, and by a continued order prosecuting
the things to come, teaches first the destruction of Jerusalem, and
dissipatio^ of the Jews: then he annexeth the rest of the course of things,
neither any where mentions he any restoring, before this his glorious
coming. Therefore it must either be contained in this his appearing, or there will
be none: which opinion, if the Disciples had in mind conceived by this answer,
surely they would not have nourished any exspectation of a Kingdom afterward.
Besides, a tribulation next goes before this coming, for so he says,
immediately after the tribulation of those days, the Sun shall be darkened; and
then shall appear the sign of the Sun of man etc. But before his corporal
coming, no such tributation shall go immediately before. For after the caling of
the Jews, and the new constituted Church, God will wipe away every tear from
their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall mourning, nor crying, nor
sorrow be any more, for the former things are passed away; Apoc. 21.4.
Wherefore that coming is not corporal. It may be also that has some force,
which he says that the sign of the Son of man shall appear; as if purposely
he would distinguish between this spiritual coming, and the corporal following.
Hereunto perteyneth, that those words All the Tribes shall wail etc. Apoc. 1 7.
we have there showed to belong unto the Jews; and that this wailing is of
repentance, which will be too late at the corporal coming. Thus much briefly
touching the meaning of these words: which though they help your cause nothing,
how ever they be taken; yet was it not impertinent by the way to seek out the
truth that is hidd in them.

Therefore I answer unto that These. 2.8. Then shall the wicked man be reveled,
whom the Lord shall slay with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the
brightness of his coming: there is the same meaning of this coming, that is of
that in Matthew. At the caling of the Jews, when he shall give a most bright
rese^bla^ce of himself present in the Church, shall Antichrist utterly be
destroyed: as we made plain in the former chapter. For after the throne of the
Beast is darkened, the way shall be prepared for the Kings of the East; that is,
the Jews shall be caled straight after Rome is destroyed. For she only
hinders this joy. Then, after the Beast and False Prophet and Dragon are cut
off; that is, after the Bishop of Rome, and the Turk be extinct (as after
shall be showed more at large;) the mystery shall be finished, and the full caling
performed, Your Pope, whom you, Bellarmine, boast to be the head of the Church,
shall neither be head nor foot in the holy congregation of the children of God.
And now see how far these mountayns are under heaven; whose tops, you standing
a far off did think, were hidden among the stars.

The last place is 1 John. 2.18. Children it is the last hour, and as you have
heard that Antichrist comes, even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we
know that it is the last hour. I answer, what John here concludes, we easily
see and acknowledge: he proves that it is the last hour, because then many
Antichrists were come. For Antichrist should come in the last hour. Where is
to be observed, that John alluding to the parable of the laborers, Mat. 20.6.
of whom some were hired about the eleventh hour: co^pareth all this age from
Christ until his last coming, unto this last eleve^th hour. Then, that he says
this noisome age shall be of Antichrist, whom he puts not off unto the last
minute of this howr, but deferrs him to some indefinite space thereof. These
things does John truly, holily, agreably, to his other writings. But what must
you needs conclude from hence; who will not have Antichrist to be yet come? Even
thus, and no other way: He that shall come in the last howr, he is not yet come;
Antichrist shall come in the last howr; therefore he is not yet come. I bring it
into form, that you may see your usual manner of reasoning, and be ashamed.
Your sylogism walks on fowr feet. In the major, by the last howr you understand
some little space, to weet, 3. years and a half before the last end: or
otherweise, if it comprehend all the time from the first coming to the second,
the proposition is most false. In the minor, the last howr is taken in the
sense that John uses it, for the whole time of grace, until Christ's second
coming: or if it be taken more strictly for 3. years and a half, it is a
foolish begging of the question, and John's authority is pretended in vayn. You
bring a similitude to illustrate John's argument, namely that he speaks of
Antichrist, as one may do of the Sun, whose beams when it arises he caleth
the Su^, and that so his argument is firm. Even as one may raison of the last
howr of the night, the Sun rises in the last howr of the night: the Sun beams
do now lighten the aier; therefore this is the last howr of the night. I
answer, the similitude is fit enough for the signification which the Apostle
uses: for always in the same howr the Sun beams and the Sun it self are
seen. Whereupon he that makes all this last age, one howr; does not amiss, to
mention his forerunners in the beginning of it. But you that make the last
howr to be 3 years and a half: what help ca^ you have by the similitude of the
Sun and beams? For if you part the howr into sixty minutes, Antichrists
forre-ru^ners do come before him no more than 210. years. What are these few
years, unto the 1500. years, in all which you grant Antichrists beams have been
co^spicuous, and yet hitherto he has not appeared; and when at length he shall
appear, he shall be to be seen but 3 years and a half? How unlike is he to the
Sun? And how unlike are his ministers to the beams? The beams go scarcely half
an howr before the Sun; which straightway arising yeildeth it self to be seen
12. hours: but these forerunners of Antichrist do glister 1500. years, and
Antichrist himself is not yet appeared; and when he shall be come, he shall not
shine one minute in respect of that space. If therefore Antichrist be answerable
to his forerunners, as the Sun is to his beams: he must needs be come now many
ages since, seeing his forerunners shined in John's time. Take heed hereafter
how you have to do with the Sun. This Delius as his manner is, hides not
vices, but discloseth them. At last, from scriptures you descend to the consent
of Fathers, and the confession of adversaries. They with their consent will help
you nothing, who al of them verily, if they were this day alive, would with
like consent acknowledge that in many things they erred. I confess also, that
our men do think Antichrist shall reign til the worlds end: but I pray you, let
them have place to change their mind, when they are taught better. In things
not yet sufficiently found out, they think it sufficient to insist in the
footstepps of other men: but when they shall see the truth, (to whose voice
alone they know for to hearken,) shine from another part, being confirmed by
most sure arguments and use, you shall perceive that they departing from you,
will leave you naked, of whose confession you now do boast.

These things thus finished, you come to the insoluble Demonstration, fetched
partly from Antichrists three years reign, and partly from the worlds
dissolution conjoined with his death. Antichrist, say you, is not yet come,
neither is the Bishop of Rome he: because straight-after Antichrists death, the
world shall be ended, and Antichrist shall not live, after he has appeared and
begun to reign, but three years and a half. And the Pope has reigned now with
both swords in our adversaries judgment above 500. years, and yet the world
dureth still. I answer, I trust I have already sufficiently manifested, that
that first point, to weet, that the world shall end straight after Antichrists
death, is not with any co^petent reason by you confirmed; but that the
scriptures alleged, do speak an other thing, far distant from the last end.
Then that the second point also, viz. that Antichrist shall live but 3 years and
a half after he has begun to reign, is in the former chapter convinced to be
most false: and to be nothing else but the efficacy of error, to deceive them
which believe not the truth, that at last they may perish in eternal
destruction. And therefore that which you gather from these rotten foundations,
viz. that Antichrist is not yet come, and that the Pope of Rome is not he; is
most vayn. Seeing albeit the Pope has reigned with both swords abov 500. years:
yea and to yield you more, has fulfilled 1300. whole years: yet nothing
lets it him from being the Antichrist; nay he is the more convinced by this
to be the wicked man; as we have showed by undoubted reasons, grounded on sure
and tried principles.

Ghapt. 10. Of Antichrists proper name.
THE fourth chief point comprehends two disputations; one of Antichrists
proper name; another of his mark. His proper name, by all men's joint consent,
is gathered from that number chap. 13.18. And his number is 666. And this we
have showed in handling that place to be no other than Latinos, it being
plainly confirmed by use, and the agreement of al things. And surely Irenaeus
many ages ago, (whither led by conjecture, or that he had so received from
others, the auditors perhaps of the Apostles,) wrote that it was very like to
be this name. His words hereof are these; But the name Latinos also has the
number of 666. and it is very likely, because the most true Kingdom has this
title. For the Latins are they that now reign, but of this we will not boast.
Thus writes he. I confess Irenaeus rests not in this name, but supposes
Titan to be more worthy of credit: yet his conjecture of the Latin Kingdom,
came nearer the mark tha^ he weened. And because you feel your self pressed
with his authority as with a great prejudice; you thought it best first to
weaken that; and therefore his conjecture, you say, is at this day nothing,
because the Latins do not so much reign, as the Turks, Spaniards, Frenchmen.
I answer, this your instance is altogether nothing. For it is not needful that
the Kingdom of which Antichrist should spring, should always be most mighty:
but it is enough if it have been so some long time; as the Latin was after
Irenaeus for many ages. Antichrists Kingdom shall be weakened by little and little,
before the absolute and last wasting, until at length it be utterly ruinate.
We have heard that Jezabel should be cast into a bed of languishment, chap.
2.22. And have you not read afterward that Babylon is fallen, is fallen: chap.
14.8. That the worshipers of the Beast were made botchie; his throne darkened,
that Antichrist him self with his, should gnaw their tongues for rage: chap.
16.2.10. Final, that the Kings should forsake the whore, make her naked, eat
her flesh, and at last burn her with fire, chap. 17.16. Have you not, I say,
read these things; and do you require notwithstanding that Antichrists Kingdom
should flourish unto the last moment of time, even as it did in former ages?
Certainly you take for defense, that which most of al kills your cause. For
unless the Roman Kingdom were fallen at last from the highest top unto this
so low a step, it should not be Antichristian.

Secondly you object, that Latinos, for to signify the Roman, is not written
by a diphtong ei, but by simple i, and then it makes not that number. I answer:
Irenaeus doubtless knew the orthographie of the word, as well as Bellarmine. He
would never have said it was very likely, if so be the just writing of it had
disagreed from the just account. And he that so exactly warns of the name
Teita^ saying that the first syllable is written by the 2 greek vowels e and i:
could he not see what Latinos needed for the true orthographie? And whereas
Latinos is at this day written by single i? you need not, I trow, betaught that
long i among the Romans was wo^t to be pronounced lik the diphto^g ei, and had
little e included. So Cic. wrote Bini in latin, for the greek binei, lib. 9.
Epist. unto Papyrius Paet., in the Ep. which begins thus, amo verecu^dia^.
And we at this day both pronounce and write Celeberrimi, Vis, primus, Captiv.:
which yet are found in ancient Inscriptions, Celeberrimei, Veis, preimus,
Cap^^^vi. Although therefore we now write Latinos, yet is it not to be doubted
but of old it was written by a diphtong, as Irenaeus has it without any
stammering. So the ancient Greeks do indifferently express the Hebrews great
Chirik or I, sometime by single i, sometime by ei: whereupon in that complaint
of Christ Eli, Eli, etc. some write it Elei, Elei, as John Drusius has
observed. This therefore which you object about the writing, is leight, and of no
moment al al.

Thirdly, you say, Antichrists name should be proper unto him, and most usual:
for it must be showed for a sign of all that buy or sell And no Pope was ever
caled by this proper name Latinus, neither do they commonly call themselves
Latins, but only Bishops or Popes. I answer, Experience in deed does very
well satisfy this argument. But, say you, Latinos is not the proper name of any
Pope. Well then, let some Frenchman or Spaniard, or German, or any other, take
to himself the name and authority, either of the Latin Pope, or Latin
Bishop, or Latin Patriarche; (for Latin is not a nown substantive, as they
say, but an adiective, to which some thing must needs be joined;) the Bishop of
Rome, I trow, will be nothing angry, who loses nothing by a common name. Or
rather will not the Antipapal war be renewed: the Roman cursing the man with all
execrations, who shall challenge that which properly pertains unto his seat?
So far therefore is it, that this name is not proper to any Pope, as it is
proper to al, for the time they hold the chair: seeing Antichrist is a
succession of Bishops, not a singular person, as is showed before. Neither are
Forenames and Surnames only proper; but whatsoever notes out a thing plainly,
distinctly, certainly, and truly, is to be counted a proper name. Unless
perhaps you only can not tell who is the Greek or Syrian or Egyptian
Patriarch, because none was ever caled by these proper names? Again, the same
use may teach, how this name is showed of al for a sign. For let there be some
one of us, with you Papists, and let him openly declare himself to be an
enemy of the Latin name, religion, Empire; shall he sell any thing among you,
unless it be his head? Or shall he buy any other thing then a sure gibbet? The
Greeks are for a proof, of how great moment this name is; which could receive
no comfort from these of the west, before they acknowledged this name, and
subjected themselves to the Latin Pope: as we showed before, chap. 13.

Fourthly, you say, there are innumerable names which make this number. I
answer, this name is not only to be judged by the number, but also by all
properties joined together, which the Spirit has fixed as railes, to describe
the greatness of it. For there must be such a number of 666, as should make a
numerable and famous name, at that time when this Prophecy was given to John:
which notwithstanding for the Churches good was not then openly to be divulged,
least it should procure unnecessarie peril: and finally, by which men which
take the mark thereof, are received unto mutual traffic. That this is the
true and natural description of this name, we have learned from Apoc. 13.18. as
upon that place we showed: and now if al these properties do agree to
innumerable or many names, let them be al of like account. But seeing neither
Teitan, nor Arnoumai, nor Lampetes or other of like sort; nor Martin Luther,
nor Luther, nor Dabhidh Cithraiu David Chitraeus, nor Saxoneios, or any other
like fiction can be fitly applied unto that purpose: needs must Latinos, not
only for the convenience of the number, but for the agreement also of all the
properties, be counted the only and true name of Antichrist.

The last refuge and insoluble argument is, that men do yet strive with great
controversy about this name: for if, say you, Antiehrist were come, and the
Bishop of Rome were he: his name would be certainly known: for all Prophesies
when they are fulfilled, are made most certain. Christ's name noted of Siby lla
by the number 888. was hidd from al, before his coming: but after he was come,
al controversy was taken away, and al men plainly know that he is caled Jesus.
I answer, that is false which you simply and absolutely do avouch of the
clearnes of Prophesies after they be fulfilled. The Prophesies in deed are
clear, when they have their event, but unto them whom they concern, and whose
eyes God opens: as for the unbeleevers and the other wicked multitude, they
continue dark and obscure unto them, no less when they are fulfilled, than
before. For why do the Jews deney Christ to be yet come, when so many ages
since, the thing has been performed? Why did they not acknowledge Elias in
the person of the Baptist: when as that of Malachie, pointed at him evidently
with the finger? There is no doubt, but that abomination of desolation which
Daniel foretold, and Christ bids so diligently to be considered: was
fulfilled in the destruction of Jerusalem. But do all even Christians agree,
what this abomination was? As for Sibyll, her Acrostik verses might have
taught, what this name should be. Yet the Jews do neither beleev Sibyll,
neither will they have the name Jesus fitly to agree unto that number. They
strive about the orthographie, (as you erewhile did for yours;) they take away
the last letter, writing the name unperfect and maimed Jessu: or if they grant
the letter Ain should be joined thereto, yet they ask by what reason the Greek
Sigma is put in the place thereof; seeing otherwhere it is wont to be expressed
by A or by N. Do you see then how vayn and frivolous this argument is? Do
you, for to prove that Antichrist is not yet come, afford help to the Jews;
that withal you may evince, that Christ is not come neither? But it suteth well,
that Christ should be oppugned, and Antichrist defended, with the same
arguments. You cannot, Bellarmine, whiles you ar environned with the thick
smoke of the pit, behold with pure eyes the Angel of the bottomless pit. You
must go forth into the wilderness with John, from out of the vapor of the
infernal cave: and then will al things appear unto you clearly.

Chapt. 11. Of Antichrists Mark.
IN what things the Mark of the Beast consists; I have largely declared chap.
13.16.17. Against which Bellarmine obiecteth two things; one from the text;
another from the antiquity of the signs by which we define the mark. From the
text he gathers four things. First, that the mark shall be one, not many. For
always, says he, the Scripture speaks in the singular number, as well of the
mark as of the name, and of the Number of the name of Antichr. And therefore
s^ing the adversaries do make so many marks, as the oath of fealty, the
Priestly unction, the profession of the Roman faith etc. they know not what
mark it is. I answer: that which you say of the singular number of the Mark, is
very infirm; seeing Aretas, the Compl. edition, and some other copies of no
small authority, do read, that they might give them (...), Marks, or
Characters: ver. 16. Neither is that by reason of the multitude which
receives: forasmuch as the same copies with one consent do express the seal
of God in the singular number, although they speak of many; as they which have
not the seal, (...), not, the seals, chap. 9.4. Moreover, is it strange unto
you that any multitude should be signified in the singular number, and
contrariweise, one thing in the plural number? But the name and number of the
name, you say, are singular things. Be it so; surely by like reason you might
conclude that Musraijn is of the form singular, because Put and Canaan, with
which it is joined, ar of that form: Genesis 10.6. Who ever urged this, that al
words should be of lik force, which are rehearsed in any one sentence? But, if
Grammar perhaps will not satisfy you, yet Logike will constrein you to rest;
which teaches that a mark or character is one in the name, but manifold in the
thing. For a mark is that which necessarily al must receiv, ver. 16. but it is
necessary that al receiv, either the mark properly so caled, or the name of the
Beast, or the number of his name, ver, 16. Therefore these al ar marks; and that
which is universally caled a mark ver. 16 we now perceiv co^teyneth more kinds,
and that you falsely affirm the mark to be one.

Secondly, you object, that the mark is common to all: the oath of fealty, and
Preistly unction, is of few: I answer, the mark is twofold; the one general
co^prehending in it all the other ensigns of the Beast: the other special, a
part and member of the former. For that which is first caled a mark, ver. 16.
is distributed into three members, ver. 17. namely, into the mark, so caled by
the name of the whole; the name of the Beast; and the number of his name. Now
then see how finely you reason. The mark is common to all: the oath of fealty
is not common to all: therefore it is not the mark. In the major, the mark is
taken generally: but then nothing can be concluded thereupon, but that the oath
of fealty, or preistly unction, and such like, is not the general mark: which
I easily grant. Or if it signify a special mark; the proposition is particular,
and so the whole reason, is without reason. After the same manner one may prove
that a man is not a sensible creature. For a se^sible creature is a thing
common to all that have sense; a man is not a thing common to all that have
sense; therefore, no sensible creature. Of all the flours of Logik, you seem
most to delight in Aequivocations: which you use so often, as if you relished
nothing, that is not seasoned with this salt.

Thirdly you say, the mark may be carried indifferently in the right hand or in
the forehead: but the oath, unction, profession, etc. belong not to these parts:
and therefore are not marks. I answer, by your sport you make your self a sport
most of al. Surely no sober man, when he sees the mark to be caled by a
borrowed Speech, would require the places on which it is imprinted, to be taken
in their natural signification. We read that the elect were sealed on their
foreheads, Chapt. 7.3. Think you there was some very brand mark set on those
parts of their face? So Ezechiel saw the godly of Jerusalem, signed on their
foreheads: yet no man ever believed, that the men, (excepting in the type) were
painted with a very ynken mark, Ezekiel. 9 4. The like borrowed speech is here of
the forehead, and hand, and mark. The forehead is the bold and open profession:
the hand is the stout and diligent labor: for the performance of both of these
to the Bishop of Rome, every of his servitours according to the condition of
his place, is bound by mark. Whereupon this mark is not seen only in the knees,
as you would prettily frump our men: but, that you may the more marvel, even
whiles your self in time past ware a cowl on your shoulders, you openly showed
by the mark on your forehead, whose beast you were.

Fourthly, you say, in Antichrists Kingdom no man should be suffered to buy or
sell unless he showed the mark, or name, or number of his name: but many of
the Popes dominion do buy and sell, which have not yielded the oath of fealty,
yea in the City of Rome it self, as Jews etc.

I answer, the necessity of the mark for mutual traffic, is required in the
subjects only; not in strangers, such as the Jews are esteemed. For who
judges them that are without? But if any that is caled a Christian should show
his mind to be alienated from the Pope of Rome, he can no otherweise traffic
among you, than by procuring to himself the danger of his head; as we have
showed more at large Apoc. 13.17. The words therefore of the text, have not yet
refuted these which you call trifles: but plainly do confirm them to contein
one true meaning.

Your other reason is whereby you prove that al these signs are more ancient
than Antichrist. Which that it may the more distinctly be understood, we are to
know, that Antichrists time is two fold; (for this summarie division is now
enough.) The one, of his first rising, whereby he is the first Beast; the other,
of his second rising after his head was healed, whereby he is the second Beast.
Now the Mark is the ordinance of this second Beast, within whose borders it is
contained, though the foundations were laid before: which began then to get it
force, when the Romish ceremonies were obtruded on the Churches, and al were
constreyned to undergo the yoke of them. Whereupon that which you bring of
certain rites, is altogether from the question in hand. For the antiquity of
these rites is not now dealt with all; but the time when first they were used
for a sacrament of Romish obedience: which you shall not find to be before the
birth of the second Beast, if you will cast a true account. For whereas in the
first place you mention the Chrisme of Baptism, we acknowledge the
superstition thereof to be ancient; yet Sylvester the Roman, put to it some new
thing, not necessarily used in other Churches; til Augustine the Monk the
Roman Apostle about the year 600. compelled the Brittans to administer Baptism
after the Romish manner, and to receiv the books of their other ceremonies.
Con. Romans 1. Can. 5. Innocent. 3. Decret. Epist. Beda Histor. Angl. lib. 2.
cap. 2. And this Mark once received, the age following also imprinted deeper,
and propagated larger through al Germany by means of Boniface the Englishman,
who stablished the Romish rites every where, and remooved out of their places
many godly and learned men, that somewhat resisted the same. What should I
mention other countries, of which it is now sufficiently known to every one,
both by what beginnings and proceeding at last al were branded with the same
marks?

Secondly, for the name Catholic, we confess the Romish Church was in old time
Catholic, (so far as this nam ca^ agree to a particular Church) whiles
integrity of doctrine flourished in the same: and therefore was not amiss by
the ancient Fathers often so caled. I confess also, the first declining of
this Church not being well perceived, and Augustine, Victor Vticensis, and
others spoke honorably of this Church. But what is these men's commendation, to
excuse the Antichristian loftynes that followed? It is one thing to be
Catholic; another thing to be the only Catholic. The first, holy men
acknowledged because of the consent of holiness: this other, the later Popes
challenged as proper to their seat, after that they could suffer no man, except
they had him bound unto them by some sign of servitude. Then boasted they
impudently, that it was necessary to salvation, to be subject to the Church of
Rome: Bonifac. 8. Extrav. de Majorit. and obed. tit. Vni, unam sanctam: and
that he was an heretik, which denied the authority and prerogative of that
seat: Nicolaus to the Bbs. of Millain, Distinct. 22. Omnes. Which very thing
you chant at this day to the world: but a thing never heard off before, til the
Beast came forth with his branding iron. You ar wont foolishly to skip, at
this word Catholic so often as you meet with it, as if it were your peculiar
ensign: but bring forth any one place of any approved and sufficient author,
that made Rome a square and rule of faith, so as your Popes sacrilegiously
arrogated to their seat, after the rising of the second Beast, namely after the
year of our Lord, about 600. And if you can not, then acknowledge either the
Mark, or at least your own lamentable obstinacy.

Thirdly, you say, the oath of fealty is found in the time of Gregory, lib.
10. Epist. 31. I answer, miserable is your want, Bellarmine; who were
necessarily bound to insist in the first degree, before the rising of the
second Beast. Could nothing be produced more ancient, whereby you might put the
thing out of controversy? But neither does this oath profit you any thing;
seeing it was not compelled, but willingly offered; nor of any universal order
receiving authority to do a thing, but of one schismatik asking pardon, and
returning to the communion of Rome. Whereupon it was not the Mark, so much as a
kind of resemblance and image of it to come soon after. In creating of Bishops,
I find no oath more ancient than that of Boniface, about the year 726. after
that the second Beast was risen up. And in ordeining of the civil Magistrate,
none before that of Otho the first, in the year 912. Show you something before,
or confess that this sign, wherein the chief force of the special mark is
contained, came not abroad, before the second Beast had brought it forth.

Fourthly, you say, Gregory Nazianzen mentions the anointing of Priests. I
answer, Nazianzen speaks not properly but figuratively. No writer of that
age, makes mention of that ordinance of Anointing. And Innocent 3. takes away
al scruple, who plainly confirms that the Greeks used not this manner of
Anoyting in ordering Bishops, before his time. For so Decret. Epist. lib. tit.
15. he writes to the Patriarch of Constantinople, of a certain
Branditribarense Bishop, who in his consecration had not received the holy
unction as he caleth it. Because, says he, with you, Bishops are not wont to
be anointed when they are consecrated: we have commanded that to be supplied in
him, which he wanted, causing his head and hands to be oynted with the holy
Chrisme, by the Bishop of Alba, two Bishops more assisting him, according to the
Ecclesiastical manner. Whereupon afterward he exhorts also the Patriarch
himself, that he would likeweise be anointed. We warn therefore, says he, your
brotherhood, and diligently exhort, that you also receive the sacred unction,
that you may want nothing to make up the sacrament: and when you are anointed
with the holy Chrisme, that you likeweise anoint your Archbishops and Bishops:
and by them cause the hands of the Priests to be anointed with the blessed oil:
that in ordeyning Priests and consecrating Bishops, you may keep and cause
that manner to be kept, which the Apostolical seat observes. Thus wrote he: By
which it is manifest that neither Patriarch nor Archbishops nor Bishops nor
Priests received any oincting in their ordination* til the Romish mark came
unto them. Which also might be understood by Nazianzens words, who speaks no
otherweise of the Priests oil, than of the use of the talents, of the care of
the flock, and of the oil of perfection: which are all spoken figuratively.

Fifthly, you bring forth, the sacrifice for the dead, and the worshipping of
Images: of the beginning of which impieties there is no need curiously to
dispute. Whosoever was the author by whom first they took place, they became
the symbols of Rome only, after that she would have them exercised by her
only authority. For when she had bereft Leo Isaurus of the Empire of the
West, for being against her Idolatry; she made manifest unto all, both what
her mark was, for which she so egerly contended, and with how great peril men
did refuse to receive the same. Of these signs therefore, some indeed are
before the second Beast, in the beginning of their superstition: but in force
of binding to Rome, they be either al equal, or in age a little after.

But because to the former marks we have adjoined the numeral name Latinos;
least perhaps you should here object the same thing which you do in the other;
I will speak of it a few words. This name is most ancient: who knows it not?
which notwithstanding lay dead for many ages, til the Emperors translated
their seat to Constantinople. Then it somewhat revived, and began to be famous;
as appears by Epiphanius in his book De mensur. and pond. speaking of the
Romans, which are not still caled Romans, says he, but Latins. But this name
was not yet so commonly used, or so obtruded on the Churches, as to have the
dignity of a mark. VVherupo^ Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, Evagtius, do use
the same very sparingly, or no where rather, to my remembrance: but so often as
they speak of Rome, they call it Old Rome, and the Provinces they distinguish by
the names of the East and West only. But after when at length the second Beast
turmoiled al things, and a partition of the Empire was made, and limits were
appointed, by Nicephorus of Constantinople, and Charles the Great: then did the
name of the Roman Provinces remayn in the Eastern countries: and the VVestern
were by a common name caled Latin; as appears by Zonaras, Nicetas, Gregoras,
and Chalchocondilas. Neither was it enough thenceforward for the Greeks to
submitt themselves unto the Roman Patriarch; (for they challenged this name of
Romans to themselves;) but now the chieftie was to be yielded unto the Latin
Bishop, or Bishop of Old Rome; or otherweise no reconciliation could be made,
as appears by the Council of Lions, under Gregory 10. However therefore these
and many other superstitions were in use many years, before Antichrist was
known to the world: yet after they were made bonds to tie men for to defend the
errors of the Church of Rome, then put they on the nature of Brands and Marks.
These things do you dispute against the true Mark, stablishing rather our
opinion by your empty oppugnation, than doing it the least hurt. But what Mark
do your self now feign unto us? forsooth some positiv Mark which Antichrist
should devise, but what it is, shall not be known until he come. I answer; if it
be a positive mark, and al must receive it, as the Spirit evidently says; then
Antichrist must either go to all, or at least must compel al to come to him.
VVhither of the two we make it, here will come again that admirable journey
into al lands in his three years space and a little more; of which we spoke in
the 6. chapter of this Refutation, against the publik persecution. Or though
the performance hereof be committed to his Legates: there will, I beleev, be more
travel and busynes, than can be dispatched in so little a space.

Chapt. 12. Of Antichrists generation.
TOUCHING the generation and stock of Antichrist, you rehearse the opinions of
certain Fathers; some of which, you say, are erroneous, some probable,
othersome sure and certain. Erroneous are the opinions of the Author of the
treatise of Antichrist, among the works of Augustine, of Hippolitus Martyr, of
Origin and Sulpitius. Probable, are those of Damascen, Irenaeus, Hippolitus,
Ambrose, Augustine, Prosper, Theodoret, Gregore, Bid, Rupertus, Aretas,
Richard and Anselmus. The catalogue of whom I now therefore repeat, to put you
in mind, upon what authors you rely in this matter. For when you see these whom
you esteem for chief witnesses in all questions, partly to be in manifest error,
partly to confirm their opinion with no sure arguments: why do you wholly
depend, I pray you, upon their words, as it wree upon some divine oracle, that
could not be deceived? It is no wise man's part willingly to follow blind guides,
especially such as himself ackowledgeth to be blind. Awake then at last, and
learn to know Antichrst rather from the truth it self, than from them which
have scarcely seen any shadowing pourtraiture of him. But to let these pass,
let us come to those things which you count most certain; of which the one is,
that Antichrist shall chiefly come for the Jews, and be received of them as the
Messiah. The other, that he shall be borne of the Jews stock, and be
circumcised, and observe the Sabbath, at least for a time. Both which, the time
of Antichrists coming teaches to be most false. For seeing he has reigned now
many ages at Rome, to weet since the hethen Emperors were expelled; and yet
the Iwes submitt not-unto him: it necessarily follows, that he neither is to
be received of the^ as the Messiah, neither shall he come chiefly for them* Yea
neither was he to be as appears by the testimony of al memory past, which
never relates any Jew to have sitten in the chair of the Pope of Rome, and it
is in some sort certain that there never shall. For he shall not invade by open
force, and bring in a new regiment. For so he should not be the seventh head,
or the eight* which is the same; but the ninth; whereas so many heads the Beast
has not. And it is not likely, considering the sagenes of the Cardinals,
especially being helped by the Porphyrie seat, that ever they willingly will
choose such a one, whiles things remayn as they are. Al these your trifles fall
to the ground, by those engines which the Spirit ministers, and we applied in
the beginning of this treatise. But let us examine what you bring to the
contrary. First you confirm that Antichrist shall come ciefly for the Jews,
and shall be received of them as the Messiah, from the place often cited; J am
come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if an other come in his own
name, him ye will receive: John 5.43. I answer, it is true, that an Antichrist
should be received of the Jews; but the question is of the Antichrist properly
so caled, not taken commonly. The proper Antichrist they would never
acknowledge, as is most sure by many arguments, which may be gathered from the
things fore spoken: the other they would readily and studiously follow: as came
to pass as we read in Seder Olam Zuta of one Cuziba, and a certain Syrian
mentioned by Paulus Diaconus, lib. 21. rerum Rom.; and elsewhere of other such
like deceivers, which vaunted themselves to be the Messiah. That therefore which
is spoken of the Antichrists of the Jews, is wrongly wrested to the great
Antichrist, whom the Apocalypse and Apostles do describe.

Secondly you bring that in 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Because they received not the love
of the truth that they might be saved, therefore God will send them the operation
of error, that they may belpev lies etc. This place, you say, the ancient
Interpreters do expound of the Jews: I answer, as touching the ancient
Interpreters, you know their mind being possessed with some prejudice, inclined
all their cogitations thereunto. Whereupon it came to pass that those holy men,
when once they had conceived in mind, that Antichrist should be a Jew, taking
it so rather one from another than weighing the thing it self: whatsoever any
where was delivered about this matter, they applied for the most part thereunto.
But, say you, the thing it self without the Fathers commentaries proclaymeth
that the Apostle speaks of the Jews. This in deed is worthy to be
considered, for from hence we shall have whereby we may judge of those Fathers
testimony. First therefore you say, Antichrist should be sent unto them which
would not receive Christ. And who are they which more ought and would not
receiv Christ, than the Jews? I answer, rhat which you first propound, is not
firm enough. For the Apostle says not that Antichrist should be sent unto them
which would not receive Christ, but, because they received not the love of the
truth. And there is a great difference between these two; as much surely as is
between Jews and Gentiles. For this manner of speaking which the Apostle
uses, properly belongs to the Gentiles, who shall bring, as he says, this
evil upon themselves; not for that they altogether refused the truth, but
because outwardly professing it, they carry not that study, zele, desire
toward it, that was meet. Even as the Angel of Ephesus is blamed, (and that in
the name of the whole Church of the Gentiles, as there we showed,) for that he
had left his first love; Ap. 2*4. From these words therefore I conclude most
firmly against you, that the Apostle speaks of them which acknowledging and
professing the truth, did not love the same as became them, which agrees
certes to the Gentiles only, not to the Jews: who refusing the whole truth,
are not blamed for want of love: seeing the lesser crime is not wont to be
objected, and nothing said of the greater. Secondly you say, the Apostle
speaks not in the time to come, they will not receive: but in the time past,
they have not received: which agrees to the Jews that would not believe when
Christ and his Apostles preached; when in the mean while the Gentiles received
the Gospel most desirously. I answer, the Apostle speaks in respect of the
time of Antichrist, of whom he treats. God will send Antichrist, because
before Antichrist came, men studiously followed not the truth, as became them.
Neither could he speak otherweise, unless he had set the punishment before
the offense. For if he had said, because they will not receive the truth, it
might seem that Antichrist should come upon the^ for the obstinacy that should
be after his coming. These ar your reasons, which you say, do proclaym that
the Apostle speaks of the Jews: but if you diligently mark, you will confess
that this is not so much as a soft whispering, unto the loud cry on the other
part. For hear what the Apostle says in the beginning of the chapter, ver. 3.
Unless there come a departure first, and the man of sin be reveled etc. Whereby
he teaches that the departure, (or Apostasy) shall go before Antichrist; and
the Revelation of Antichrist, before the coming of the Lord. And whose
departure shall this be? not the Jews: for they received not the truth at all.
And defection is from a thing, which one embraced before. Moreover these men's
defection could not be to come, seeing they from the first preaching of the
faith, did resist the truth. Therefore it should be the defection of the
Gentiles; and not passed, but to come. For if it had been past, the
Thessalonians had seen Antichrist, who had not yet showed himself, being
restreyned by some impediment, as the Apostle after teaches. But you will say,
this departure was from the Roman Empire. But let the Apostle, I pray you,
interpret himself, who afterward expresses that which here he caleth a
departure, by other words, for that they received not the love of the truth,
ver. 10. And what other departure, could bring forth this mischeevous evil? Was
the Roman Empire which crucified the Son of God, so regarded of God, as for
departure from it, he would send Antichrist into the world? These are the
dreams of Romish men that abound with excess and surfeiting: not of such as
with true desire do follow the truth. Therefore whatsoever hitherto you have
said, it is clear enough, that they be not Jews which should receive this
Antichrist, but Gentiles: and that for just causes, Calvin of blessed memory,
and others whom yoy call Heretics, did depart from the ancient Fathers
interpretation; and also did expound these things of you and such like, from
whom certainly, so far as it seems, God has taken away al judgment of
right and wrong in matters of salvation; because you more esteem the honor and
pleasures of this world, than the simplicity of the Gospel. But, by reason
also you would persuade that the Jews are they which shall receive Antichrist,
who should join himself first unto them. For they be ready to receav him,
which expect the Messiah to be a temporal King. I answer, they are ready in
deed to receive Antichrists, and oft-times they have received them, according
to that which Christ foretold: but what is this unto the Antichrist, of whom we
speak? For inquisition is made of Antichrist properly so caled, who because he
has two horns like the Lamb, Apoc. 13.11. they which hate the Lamb, do hate
him also that is somewhat like him. and therefore eschew him as much as they
can. Let the Jews therefore call the Pope of Rome Heghmon, that is tail, and
give him what reprochful names so ever: yet follows it not thereupon, that he
is not the great Antichrist, seeing it is no where said that he should be
honored by this people, in any peculiar sort. For whereas you say Antichrist
shall in like manner come from the Jews to the Gentiles, as Christ came from
the Jews to the Gentiles: surely you either guess or dream. You prove
nothing, unless perhaps you would make Christ to be a tipe of Antichrist;
which impious divinity of yours we heard once before, in the chapter of
Antichrists durance. That which you bring therefore of Antichrist properly so
caled, to be received of the Jews, is altogether vayn. The second, which you
said was also most certain, is that Antichrist shall be a Jew, and circumcised:
and this, you say, is deduced from the things forespoken: I answer, those
things already spoken from which this is deduced, we have sufficiently showed
to be most absurd: and therefore this which is builded upon them, is of like
strength and authority. For that which you annex in sted of confirmation, that
the Jews will never receive a man that is not a Jew, and uncircumcised: it
makes against you. For hence it follows that they will never receive Antichrist
properly so caled, whom by necessary reasons we have evinced to be a Gentile
and uncircumcised.

Secondly, you say, Antichrist feynenth himself to be of David's family,
because such a one the Jews do expect; I answer, either Antichrist shall feign
it, or you now feyn it of him. Where, I pray you, does the holy Ghost, among
al other notes of the true Antichrist, describe him unto us by this? But it is
Gods just judgment, that you which turn the truth into shadows should be
deluded by shadows in stead of the truth. And so as your custom is, being
destitute of al scripture and probable reason, you flee to the patronage of
humane authority: whereunto, besides the other things already fore mentioned, I
oppose this reason in sted of a conclusion. The Jews shall have no dominion,
before they return unto Christ: and therefore the Antichrist shall not be of
them; who should be the highest ruler, and as you feighn, by help of the Jews
should subdue the Gentiles. The first part of the reason is plainly confirmed by
many scriptures: some of which I will set down, not so much for your sake
Bellarmine, (though for yours also, if so be at last you shall affect the
truth;) as for my brethrens: whom I would have to be stirred up by this
judgment, unto a more diligent search of many places, which being commonly
counted plain and evident, are yet altogether unknown. The first is Lev.
26.39.40. etc. Where the last plague of the chapter, is this greevous casting
of of the Jewish nation, in which they lie for despising Christ, from the time
he was crucified unto this very day: whose solution and deliverance at last,
is conjowned with the extreme misery wherein they shall be, at the time when this
deliverance shall happen unto them. But if that Antichristian glory, which you
do feyn, do come between: how shall this bounteousnes of God, find them so
miserably afflicted? The second is out of that excellent song of Moses, Deuteronomy.
32.36. etc. When the Lord shall have judged his people, then will he repent
toward his servants, when he shall see that their power is gone, and that the
shut up with the left abroad is nothing: and he will say, where are their Gods?
the Rock in whom they trusted? There Moses sings of the same times, and
t^^cheth that they shall be brought unto the lowest ebb, when God shall arise to
avenge his people. The third is that of Esaias, 49.14. And if Sion say, the Lord
has forsaken me etc. Unto these shall be adjoined Ier. 30.8. etc. Ezekiel. 37. Dan.
12.1. Hos. 3.4.5. Which few places may suffice to open the meaning of many.
From which I conclude although the Bishop of Rome be neither at any time a Jew,
nor by the Jews received for the Messiah, but rather be by them hated: yet
this is no cause why he should not be the great Antichrist; yea and unless
these things were, he should be far from being the principal Antichrist, as in
their places we have declared.

Chapt. 13. Of Antichrists seat.
IN expounding the words of the Prophecy, we concluded by most firm arguments
taken therfrom, that Rome is the seat of Antichrist; and that forthwith, after
the Empire is taken from the Hethen Emperors. For the heads of the Beast,
abide fixed to Rome, where are both those Hills and Kings that the Angel
speaks of. And where these heads abide fixed; there must the seat of
Antichrist needs be. Moreover seeing Antichrist then also showed himself, when
Constantine began to reign, as before is proved at large: he has no other seat
than Rome. For whereas he abode a few years at Avenion: he did that with purpose
to sojourn for a time, not with a mind to change his seat.

But on the contrary, you Bellarmine do contend, that Antichrists seat shall be
Jerusalem, not Rome: and Solomon's Temple, and David's Throne: not S. Peter's
Temple, or the seat Apostolical. Which you endeavor to prove two ways: First,
by an argument unto the man; then, by the Scriptures and Fathers. The argument
is this: If the Pope of Rome be Antichrist, sitting in the Church of Christ:
then the Lutherans and Calvinists, and as many as are aliens from the Church
which is under the Pope, do live out of the true Church of Christ. For Christ's
Church can be but one, as Christ is one. And our men do affirm the Pope of
Rome to be Antichrist: therefore our men all do live out of the Church. I
answer, the Proposition is false, and relyeth only upon the Churches unity
misunderstood. For the Church is both commonly so caled, and properly. The
first, has piety corrupted; the word adulterated; the Sacraments depraved; is
full of superstition, and humane devises, reteyning Christ's name only, and
boasting in the title thereof: and also commonly so accounted, whiles any whit
of the foundation is remaining. The other is chaste, pure, entire, clean,
harkening to Christ's voice in all things, and not departing from his praescribed
rule any whit at all, so far as mortal infirmity suffers; and this always
is the only and true spouse of Christ: how ever the whore also takes this
name to her self. So before, the Temple and Altar was proper to the elect, and
mesured by the Angel: but the Court was not set forth with any description, but
cast out, and permitted to the Gentiles, to weet, the profane multitude, which
for their neernes, falsely challenged the name of the Temple. To whom the holy
city also was given; which having their seat in the said court, they trod
under foot at their pleasure, during the appointed time. Apoc. 11.1.2. More
plainly in the 7. Churches, which all ar Christ's, though Sardis lived but in
name only: and the Angel of Laodicea was neither hot nor cold, forthwith to be
spued out, unless he repented. chap. 3.1.16. Therefore that is not rightly
transferred unto the common Church, which pertains unto it properly so caled.
One may be an alien from the Church commonly so caled: and yet be a true
citizen of the true Church. If you could show that the Pope of Rome has his
chair in this, which properly inioyeth this name: you might rightly conclude us
all to be fugitives and very miserable. But whiles you shuffle together things
disjoined, and contrary; and dally, as your manner is, with a plain
aequivocation; the absurdity which you thought to throw against us, is lighted
upon your own head. So your argument unto the man is lying, like him, whose
cause you have in hand.

Secondly you prove it from three Scriptures, the first whereof is Apoc. 11.8.
where, you say, John says that Henoch and Elias shall fight with Antichrist in
Jerusalem, and there be killed. I answer, that which is spoken of Henoch and
Elias to come. and fight with Antichrist, is altogether vain; as I have proved
in the 6. chapter, against your third Demonstration. But because it skilleth
nothing, for the force of this argument, what the names of these Prophets be:
we let that pass for the present, and do say, that that which you tell us how
they are to be killed in Jerusalem, is false. For the Spirit designeth not
Jerusalem by name, but only by this circumlocution, where our Lord was
crucified: which agrees as well unto Rome, seeing Christ was crucified by the
sentence of Pilate the Roman Deputy. By which fact, he made his City guilty
of this blood, which was shed by this cities authority; as we have showed on
chap. 11.8. This argument therefore is worthless and weak, assuming that which
cannot be proved, yea the contrary whereof is plainly evident by the Scriptures.
Neither was there any cause, why either Chytraeus should purposely pass by
these words, as you feyn, where the Lord also was crucified; or why you should
so trouble your self, to prove against Ierom, that Jerusalem may be caled
Sodom: which we acknowledge to be so caled otherwhere. Although in the
Apocalypse your Rome only is Sodom; and you should rather have streyned your
sinews to acquitt your selves of this than have spent your strength in a
matter for which there is no fight. The second place is Apoc. 17. where John
says, that the ten Kings which shall divide the Roman Empire to themselves, and
in the time of whose reign Antichrist should come, shall hate the purpled whore,
that is, Rome, and make her desolate, and burn her cke with fire. How then, say
you, shall it be Antichrists seat, if at the self same time it must be
overthrown and burnt? I answer, the Apocalypse easily takes from you this
scruple. You ask, how Antichrists seat can be burnt, he being alive and seeing
it. The Apocalypse tells, that the fifth vial shall be powered out on the Beasts
throne, and his kingdom shall be made dark, so that they shall gnaw their tongues
for so row, chap. 16.10.11. which vial verily, is no other thing, than this
burning, whereby the ten Kings shall consume the whore to ashes. For you see that
this city which is to be consumed with fire, is Queen of the nations; which
agrees not to Jerusalem, that has been laid even with the ground now many
ages since. And if you doubt how the ten Kings should be inflamed with such
hatred, who so dearly loved the whore before: hear how the Angel says, that
for a time they would yield themselves wholly to the Beast, but should at
length be stirred up of God to destroy her, whom they most honored before,
ver. 16.17. This hatred therefore, will afford your Rome no comfort. The other
things which you heap up to exaggerate this argument, are of no weight at all.
For that Antichrist the Jew, we have chased away in the former disputation:
and those things that are mentioned of the Kingdom of Asia, are some small
pieces of truth, shining clearly in the fabulous heap of confuse earth. Certain
it is that the Empire shall return thither again; but which Antichrist shall not
constitute, but Christ himself shall build, taking pity on his people, and
declaring himself in his Church, to be King of al nations.

The third place is in those words, so that he sits in the Temple of God: 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. where you bring four expositions of the Temple. The first is theirs
that by the Temple, understand the minds of the faithful. The second is
Augustines, who interprets the Temple to be Antichrist himself, with his
whole people, which will have himself and his, to be thought the true spiritual
Temple of God. The third is Chrysostoms, that takes the Temple for Christian
Churches. The fourth is theirs that understand it of Salomons Temple. Of these
four expositio^s you chose this last, worst, and furthest from the truth: even
as women when they are troubled with the green sickness, do long for coals and
lether more then for wholesome meats. The Temple in this place, must needs be
that peoples, whose the apostasy is, for which Antichrist is sent: and this we
have showed to be the Gentiles only, which came in deed unto Christ, but
served him not with such affection as was meet: and that it can not by any
means agree to the Jews, who never would be written citizens of this Kingdom.
Moreover, neither did Antichrist come, while the old Temple stood; neither shall
he sit therein afterward, seeing it was overthrown long since, never to be
reedified more, as the Angel teaches, And the desolatio^ shall continue even to
the consummation and end. Dan. 9.27. Besides, how could the Apostle call that
Gods temple, which God would detest, and which shall not be founded by any
authority of his, but by Antichrists commandment alone; as you will have it,
vau^ting himself for the only God? These and many other things do teach,
that it is least of al to be understood of Salomons Temple. Yet you say, this
opinion is the more common, probable and learned. But by what reason, I pray
you? Beeause, say you, in the Scripture of the New Testament, by the Temple of
God, is never meant the Christian Churches, but always the temple of
Jerusalem. Which short sentence contains two notable falsehoods. The first
is, that you say, by the temple of God, is never meant in the Apostles
writings, the Christian Churches. For, Paul in Ephesians. 2.21.22. speaks thus of
the Christian Church, Jn whom all the building fitly coupled together, grows
unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are built together, to be the
habitation of God by the Spirit. And what other thing does the Apocalypse mean
by that so often name of the temple: but the holy Christian assemblies? Arise
and measure the temple of God, chap. 11.1. Then was the temple of God opened,
chap. 11.9. And they came out of the temple: neither could any enter into
temple, chap. 15.6.8. The temple of Jerusalem was destroyed, before this
Revelation was made: least perhaps you should think, that that is meant by
these words. This is the first falsehood. The second is, where you say, the
temple of God evermore signifies the temple of Jerusalem, in the new
testament. For what? Are there so many Jerusalem temples, as there are faithful
persons? Unto the Corinthians Paul speaks in words common to every
Christian, Know you not that ye are the temple of God? And if any destroy the
temple of God etc. 1 Cor. 3.16.17. Know you not that your body is the temple of
the Holy Ghost? 1 Cor. 6.19. To let pass the things I mentioned a little
before. You certes are a more speedy builder than Solomon, which can build so
many temples in so short a space: but what ca^ not you do, which make a
Christ every day of Bread? But this is a small matter, you say, that the
Scriptures do so speak. Therefore you bring some greater thing, namely that the
ancient Fathers Latin and Greek, for many ages, never caled the Churches of
Christians, temples; but Oratories, the Kings-houses, or howses of Martyrs. I
answer, the ancient Fathers both Greek and Latin, did speak so as the
Scripture speaks: as Cleme^s Alexand. Strom. lib. 7. One temple, says he, is
great, as the Church: an other little, as the man, who reteyneth Abraham's seed.
And Cyprian in his first book against the Jews, chap. 15. that Christ was to
be the house and temple of God, and he had ended the old temple, and begun a
new. And lib. 5. Epist. 8. Although love should no less enforce us to help our
brethren, yet it was to be considered in this place, that they are the temples
of God which are taken; and that we ought not to suffer by long delay and
neglect of sorrow, the temples of God to be holden captives long. But, you will
say, that you mean not either Christian assemblies, or particular faithful
persons, but howses and aedifices wherein they meet together for publik worship.
I answer, you dispute therefore bravely, who now conclude not the question. For
thus you reason. No howses of publik worship were caled temples among
Christians for many ages: but some temple of God are howses of publik worship;
therefore some temple was not among Christians for many ages. And what then, I
pray you? For though some temple was not, yet some temple was among Christians
also in these ages you mention; even such a temple as Antichrist afterward
should sit in. Unless perhaps you think that holy howses only are temples:
which if it be so, then Antichrist shall be no longuer Antichrist, than he shall
sit in these material howses: or if so he shall be out of the holy howses also,
the great Antichrist may also be out of the temple of God, and thouh he do not
show himself as if he were God. For this sacrilegious vaunting of him self,
shall be only whiles he sits in the temple of God, as is evident by the
Apostles words. And so we shall have a new great Antichrist, such as the
Apostles never saw by the Spirit of Prophecy. Great is the force of your
argumentations, which every where bring forth such monsters: but let us go
forward. Whereas you say, that the howses of prayer had not the name of temple
given unto them, til Ieroms time, whom you cite: you may understa^d that
Eusebius who was before Ieroms age, absteyned not from this name lib. Hist. 10.
c. 2. whom Ruffinus makes to speak thus, lib. 9, Hist. Eccl. cap. 10. Renewed
places by building to rise up more high and excellent, and high temples to be
lifted up, for the low meeting howses, And again Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 13. by
whose industry a sumptuous temple was builded in Tyrus, the most famous
throughout all the nation of Phaenicia. So also in a public oration which one
made of the building of Churches, ascribed to Paulinus Bishop of the Tyrians,
And thou o great praise of the new holy temple of God; and afterward again,
he constituted this maiestical temple of the most high God. And certainly the
Spirit most wisely meeting with your fraud, would have the name of temple,
about that time when Antichrist should appear, to be given even to the holy
Christian aedifices: that every way it might be evident how he sits in the
Temple of God. Whereas therefore concluding this point you say, it seems certain
that the Apostle speaks of Jerusalems temple; that writing how Antichrist
should sit in the temple of God, he would say something which he would have
understood by them to whom he wrote, and they then would understand and well
perceive the name of the temple, nothing but the temple of Jerusalem: you may
easily now see how false it is, that I say no more, though I speak truly. The
Thessalonians might understand that he should sit in the minds and conscience
of men, whom he should seduce by his guile and hypocrisy, as Anselmus does
interpret it; or that he should reign in Christian assemblies, as Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Theophilact and Oecumenius do expound it: or that he should boast
himself to be the temple and Church, as Augustine explaineth it: But
Ierusalems temple could not come into their mind, which they knew by Christ's
words should utterly be destroyed, Mat. 23.39. and. 2. and never be builded
again, seeing wrath was come upon the Jews even to the utmost, as 1 These. 2.16.

Unto these you adjoin, as you speak, the common exposition of the Fathers; but
the contrary judgment of those before mentioned, will not suffer it to be
common: neither ought the ignorance of a few, to hurt the clear truth. Thus
have we seen your arguments, whose force I now leave to be judged by the
reader: and in a word I will consider those your answers, whereby again you
endeavor to put away the reasons of some of our side. First, where our men do
object from Apoc. 17. that the chief seat of Antichrist is Rome; because this
seat is the great city, which sits upon 7. hills, and which has reign
over the Kings of the earth, al which are found in Rome; You answer three ways.
First that by this city is not meant Rome, but the universal city of the
Divil. But in this answer you rest not, neither is it in deed of any moment,
seeing it is not the universal city of the Divil, which shall be burned by the
ten Kings, especially the wicked remaining alive, which shall lament her fall,
Apoc. 18.9. For how shall the whole city perish, whose citizens shall afterward
remayn? Leaving therefore this, you betake you to an other, and you grant that
by the whore is meant Rome, but hethenish Rome reigning, worshipping Jdols, and
persecuting Christians: but not Christian Rome. I answer, you do evil disjoin,
what the Spirit has coupled. For Rome is then the whore and seat of
Antichrist, when it is carried of the Beast: and it was not carried of the Beast
whiles the Hethens reigned. For it is carried of the seventh head, which was not
yet come, when John received this Prophecy: Apoc. 17.9.10. Moreover, if
Hethenish Rome reigning, be the whore: then Antichrist came during that
Hethenish Empire. For the Spirit would have th^se two to be undevided
companions, until the burning of the whore. The Beast carried; the whore sitteh:
neither of them has vital life without the other. Again, if that be true, now
she has plainly left to be the whore, nor should she be found such, when
Antichrist should come; because as afterward you tell us, Peter's chair cannot
be separated from Rome, lib. 4. de Romans Pon. cap. 4. And how agrees this, I
pray you, that Rome being Christian, holy, Catholic, Peter's chair, as you will
have her; should at last suffer the punishment of a whore; which when she was
Hethenish, and according to your opinion, played the whore most lavishly, bare
no punishment for it? Apoc. 17.16. Surely Ierom seems not well to have
affirmed, speaking to Rome, I speak unto thee, which by confessing of Christ,
have wiped out the blasphemy written on thy forehead, lib. 2. contra Iovinian.
For Rome has not wiped away her blasphemy, but imprinted it deeper after she
became Christian, seeing now she shall bear the punisment of her fornication.
Your sesond answer therefore, is no less infirm than the first. Let us see the
third. And this says, Although that woman were Christian Rome, yet our
argument should have no force at al: because Antichrist shall hate Rome, and
fight with her, and make her d^solate, and burn her. Therefore Rome is not
Antichrists seat. I answer, that which you speak of Antichrists hatred, and
fight against Rome, is plainly false. You borow this from Ap. 17.16. where you
read thus; and the ten horns which thou saw, and the Beast, these shall hate
the whore etc. which reading we have proved, in handling that place, to be
faulty. The true reading is, and the ten horns which thou saw on the Beast,
these shall hate etc. The difference is, that the true reading teaches, that
only the horns of the Beast, shall hate the whore; the false would have it, that
both the horns, and the Beast, that is, both the Kings and Antichr. should hate
the whore. Aretas reads so as I say; the Vulg. Latin, (to which you ar bound
by the decree of Trent,) has it also; many other copies have it so, to which
the rest of the Apocalypse gives approbation, most adverse to that which you
bring. Whetfore unless you can find a better answer, you must needs confess
that Christian Rome is the seat of Antichrist.

Unto the second place which our men bring, from 2 These. 2.4 that Antichrist
shall sit in the temple of God; you answer, that Paul speaks of Solomon's temple:
and you referr us to the things that you said before: and so do I the the
reader, to the refutation of them. Then, unto that reason, that the Jews
temple was in deed Gods, but it is now ceased, when the Jewish Sacrifice and
Preisthood ceased* you answer, that it ceased not by and by to be Gods temple:
for the same temple might have bin the temple of Christians, and so in deed
was, whiles it remained, for the Apostles preached and prayed in it. Luk 24.53.
Act. 3.1. and 5.20. I answer, and ask, what all these things do make to
confirm the sitting of your Antichrist, in Solomon's Temple? Because the Temple
of Jerusalem wherein the Apostles preached and prayed, was whiles it continued,
the Temple of God: shall therefore the Temple of God wherein Antichrist shall sit,
be the Temple of Jerusalem? Surely I could show you, how after the old
ordinances of religion were abrogated, a titular sanctity at least might
remayn for a time in that temple of Solomo^s: eve^ as a boat does not by and
by cease to move, after the oars be stayed: if it were not vain to spend labor
in a thing of no co^seque^ce. For you might with as much certainty conclude,
that the temple of God wherein Antichrist shall sit, is Ierusalems temple,
because (with a little change of the Poets words) Ye friends, admitted
auditors, can ye forbear to laugh? as from the antecedent which you have set
down.

Unto that of Daniel chap. 9. And the desolation shall continue until the
co^summation and end, whereby our men prove that the temple shall not be built
again: You answer; it is not in deed to be built again, but in the end of the
world; or though it should be built again, yet would it never be but profane;
or finally that it shall not be built again perfectly, but only begun, and in
it being begun, Antichrist shall sit. I answer, we had need of some Gerion, that
with his hundred hands may take this slipperie eel. How do you wreath your
self into manifold boughts and circles? yet though you should change your self
into a 1000. saps, you shall not slip away. who taught you, I pray, so to
distinguish against Daniel? It is not to be built again, say in the end of the
world: or being built again, it shall abide profane, or it shall be built again
not perfectly, but begun. Did you fet these things out of the Popes chapel?
Surely the truth inspired of God afforded not this unto you. For, that teaches
that wrath is come upon the Jews eve^ to the utmost 1 These. 2.16. and that it
is in part of this wrath, that God has bowed down their backs always, Romans
11.10. Therefore the Jews shall never so lift up themselves under Antichrist, as
to have the least power to entreprise any such thing: but shall always remain
desolate and oppressed, until they shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord; that is, until Christ shall come, and not Antichrist. Mat.
23.39.

Fourthly, whereas our men bring forth some places out of the Fathers, affirming
that Antichrist shall sit in the Churches of Christians, you grant it is true,
and not against you; because the Fathers would not say, that Antichrist shall
sit in the Church as a Bishop, but as a God. I answer, your Pope shall not escape
away by this ridiculous distinction. The same man may sit in the Church, both
as a Bishop and as a God. Antichrist shall sustein the person of both: as we see
in your Pope: in word he will humbly feyn himself a Bishop; but he will arrogate
the authority of God in deed. He will forgive synns by some more superior
power than a Minister can; he will let out of Purgatory: he will put into the
Calendar of Saints, whom he will at his pleasure; he will command new articles
of faith; and many such like things will he do that appertein not to this
mortal condition, but to the highest Majesty. Why should the Fathers speak of
his Bishops office, in this so great a loftines? When great things are
mentioned, the smaller matters ar wo^t to be hidden with the exceeding greatness
of the more excellent. By their silence they denied not that he should sit in
the Church as a Bishop: but when the highest pinnacle of pride was to be spoken
of, they thought they were not to insist in the lower stepps.

Unto our men's fifth argument, taken from the words of Gregory lib. 4. Epist.
38. The King of pride is nigh, and (though it be heighnous to be spoken,) an
army of Priests is prepared for him: you say, from hence the contrary is
gathered, to that which we collect. For it follows not that Antichrist shall be
an universal Bishop: but the contrary, because the forerunner is not al one
with him, whom he runs before. I answer, neither is an universal Bishop
alone with him that would be universal. The Bishop of Constantinople would have
been; but he obtained not his desire: the Bishop of Rome, asked it of Phocas,
and got it. The contrary therefore is not gathered from hence, as you say, but
it is rightly collected that Antichrist shall be an universal Bishop, which
dignity, none beside Antichrist could obteyn. And to the army of Priests, you
answer, that Gregory would not say, that the Priests as Priests perteyned unto
Antichrists name: but that the Priests as being proud, prepared him an army.
Unto this, I say, that now the matter is past danger: the Popish Priests ca^
not be proud. I trow when Antichrist shall come, the Priests then will be either
Popish or proud. What? Shall pride make a new order of Priests? Or if this
haughtines be required in Antichrists soldiers, will there be any nation under
the Sun, prouder than Popish Priests? Cardinals do excel Kings: Archbishops
and Bishops are superior to Barons and Earls; al in their order, do go
before the civil honors; neither is there any of the basest rowt of
shavelings, that will be under the civil Magistrate. Let Antichrist therefore,
seek him soldjers otherwhere: he shall find none in this lowly flock of
Popish Priests. Gregory notwithstanding very expressly bids that
Antichrist be looked for as chief Captain and Emperor of the Priests. And
other Priests there are none on earth, by their own vaunting, besides the Popish
Priests. By his judgment therefore the Bishop of Rome should necessarily be
Antichrist; and not far from his time, seeing by his confession, armies were
then prepared for him. Surely as Gaiphas prophesied that which himself knew
not: so Gregory seems unwares to have told the truth; not by any power of
his seat, but by the mercy of God so governing his tongue, that men might take
heed by this admonition, and the wicked world be made inexcusable, as is
observed Apoc. 8.13. Vayn therefore is that which is affirmed of Antichrist to
sit in the temple of Jerusalem: and so far is it off, that the Pope is not
Antichrist, because he continually tarieth at Rome: as so much the more he may
thereupon be concluded to be Antichrist.

Chapt. 14. Of Antichrists doctrine.
THE doctrine of Antichrist, we together with the holy Ghost, do teach from
the scriptures, to be full of hypocrisy, fraud, treachery, which may deceiv
even the most prudent, whom the Spirit inlightneth not with his truth. For one
had need of singular prude^cy to know this Beast, which has two horns like the
Lamb, and is a false Prophet seducing the earth. Contrariweise the Papists will
have this same doctrine to be so openly impious and blasphemous, that none is
so blockish, but he may perceive it forthwith, and detest it.

Which that you Bellarmine may make plain, you reduce this all unto four heads.
First that he shall deny Jesus to be the Christ, and thereupon shall oppugn al our
Saviors ordinances, as Baptism, Confirmation etc. and shall teach that
Circumcision, the Sabbath, and other ceremonies of the old law, are not yet
ceased. Secondly, he shall affirm himself to be the true Christ, promised in
the Law and Prophets. Thirdly he shall affirm himself to be God, and will be
honored as God. Lastly he shall say that himself is the only God, and shall
oppugn al other Gods, that is, both the true God, and also false Gods and
Idols. And from hence you take four arguments, that the Pope is not Antichrist;
because he denies not Jesus to be the Christ, neither brings he in
Circumcision; or the Sabbath: neither does he make himself Christ, nor God,
and least of all the only God: but honors even Images and dead Saints.
Which what force they have for this thing, we shall afterward see in the
confirmation which you bring. The first point therefore you confirm by this, that
Antichrist by nation and religion shall be a Jew, and be received of the Jews
for the Messiah: whereupon he shall openly oppugn our Christ. I answer, this
foolish opinion of Antichrists stock, we have sufficiently refuted before,
chap. 12. and 13. for he shall sit in the temple of God, and not in Ierusalems
Temple, (which Christ foretold should be demolished, and never built again,)
but in Christian assemblies, as is declared at large: and therefore that he shall
not be by religion a Jew, neither shall restore the ceremonies of the old Law,
which were tied to the Temple, and had no place out of it. And how does it
agree that Antichrist the general plague of the whole earth, should be sent
into the world for the syn of one nation of the Jews in not receiving the
truth, as ye would have it? Surely it were meet that he which should come for
the wickedness of one nation, should be restreyned within the limits of that one
nation: but there is no need of new arguments for this matter.

Secondly, you say, it is proved from 1 John 2.22. Who is a liar, but he that
denies Jesus to be the Christ? From whence you gather, that Antichrist shall
surpass al Heretics, and therefore he shall deny Christ al manner of ways:
which is confirmed, you say, because by Heretics, the Divil is said to work the
Mystery of iniquity: because they privilie do deny Christ. But Antichrists
coming is caled a Revelation, because he shall openly deny Christ. I answer, as
touching that of John, I have showed before, that this denial which he speaks
of, is not open, but secret and treacherous; to weet, by men named Christians,
which had privily crept in, and of whom the faithful had need to be warned,
being otherweise in danger to be surprised by them unwares. And though
Antichrist surpass al Heretics, yet is it not therefore necessary that he
should deal more openly than the rest; seeing the chief reward of wickedness is
not to be given to the outward work, but to the power of doing hurt. For
otherweise men should surmount the Divil himself; who are so foolish in
respect of him, as they do that in the light, which he does most covertly.
Moreover Antichrists coming is a Revelation, but to the elect only: the others
which beleev not the truth, he shall beguile by his crafty shows, 2 These.
2.11.12. The Angel requires no common wisdom to know the Beast, and the
whores name is mystical, as before we have been taught.

Thirdly you prove it by the sentences of certain Fathers: but no equal judge
will not confess, that they are rather to be heard any where else, than in the
matter of Antichrist. Our Lord should consume him with the Spirit of his mouth,
and by his bright coming: whereupon the nearer the Lord should approach, the more
was this man of syn to be discovered. I proceed therefore unto the ceasing of
publik offices and divine sacrifices (as you speak,) which you say shall be in
Antichrists time, for vehemency of the persecution, and that therefore he shall
not deprave Christ's doctrine, under the name of Christianisme, but openly shall
oppugn Christ's name and Sacraments, and bring in Jewish ceremonies, as you have
showed in chap. 7. I answer, at the same chapter I have proved that all these
are most false: and that you have not brought forth any thing, which has so
much as any likelihood of truth. And therefore that no other ceasing of publik
religion is to be looked for, tha^ such as has been these many ages, to weet
from Constantine the Great, unto this day: in all which time Antichrist has
reigned. Whiles the woman lived in the wilderness, and the Saints lay hid in
the temple, there was in deed a lamentable fewnes of true worshipers: and so
great darkness and obscurity possessed al things, more store of smoke bursting
forth daily out of the botto^less pit, that the truth commonly could not be
seen. Yet in the mean time Antichrist dominered in the holy city, and in the
utmost court: whereupon by counterfeit religion he deceived egregiously, whiles
al me^ almost thought, because of his neernes unto the Temple, that he did sit
in the true Temple.

The second chief point of doctrine, you say, is, that he shall openly and by
name call himself the Christ, not his Minister and Vicar: as appears by those
words of our Lord, Jf an other shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.
And those words in his own name, you wittily warn to have been purposely
added against the Lutherans and Calvinists, which would say that Antichrist
should not come in his own name, but in the name of our Christ, as if he were
his Vicar. I answer, you understand Christ's words very perversely. For name in
this place, is not an appellation as you would have it, but a mission and
authority as we have showed in the 2. chapter touching Antichrists singular
person. By which it may appear, that his own name, and the Vicar of Christ, do
not so contrary one an other, but the Bishop of Rome may boast himself to be
this vicar, and do it also in his own name, to weet his own authority, having
no such right given him of God. Moreover if name be an appellation, and
Antichrist shall come in his own name, and his appellation properly is not
Christ: how, I pray you, does he openly and by name call himself Christ? See
you not, that you speak contraries? Can any come in his own name, and openly
call himself an other, whose name he bears not? Besides, we have often
answered, that this place perteins nothing to Antichrist properly so caled, but
to those whom the Jews should submitt themselves unto: who what manner of
persons so ever they were, they do not in all points express the great
Antichrist.

The third chief point of doctrine is, that he shall affirm himself to be God.
and will be worshipped for God, as it is written, so that he sits in the
Temple of God showing himself as if he were God, 2. These. 2.4. not only, say
you, by usurping some of Gods authority, but the very name of God. And here
because your vulgar authentik Latin text, is too weak to defend the Pope, you
flee to the Greek, not (...) as God, say you, but (...), that he is God. The
Argument is this, Antichrist shall in words acknowledge himself to be God; the
Pope of Rome does not acknowledge himself to be God: therefore he is not
Antichrist. Let Oecumenius make answer to the proposition, who thus
interprets that word of the Apostle (...), he says not saying but showing,
that is, by works, signs, and miracles endeavoring to show that he is God.
According to his interpretation therefore, a manifest publishing is not
necessary. Yea let the Holy Ghost expound himself, who by a like manner of
speech in Ezekiel. 28.2. teaches how this is to be taken. Thus he says of the
King of Tyrus, Because thy heart is lifted up, so that thou say, J am God. No
man I trow, requires that this Tyria^ should pronounce the self same very
words. False therefore it is, that Antichrist should in word profess himself
to be God. Notwithstanding because your Pope had liefer abound with tokens,
than barely and slenderly to be furnished with such as are necessary only: we
forgive you the proposition, and pray you to think with your self, whither the
very thing proclaims not quite contrary to that which you deny in the
assumption. For what, I pray you, did P. Sixtus acknowledge himself and the
other Popes of Rome to be, when he said; Whosoever accuses the Pope, it shall
never be forgiven him: because he that sins against the holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him neither in this life, nor in that which is to come. Council.
Tom. 1. in Purgat. Sixti. What did Boniface the 8 when he said, We declare,
define, and pronounce that it is absolutely necessary to salvation, for every
creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome. Extrav. de Major. and Obed. unam
sanctam. I forbear to cite more witnesses; I appeal to your self; why do you
dissemble? Do not such speeches often sound in your ears? But say you, he
does not acknowledge himself God, because he acknowledges himself his
servant. I am ashamed of your proofs; as if out of the same mouth there could
not come blessing and cursing, horrible blasphemy, and counterfeit obedience.
You know that in words, he is sometime servant of servants: but again when he
list, he is King of Kings,

The fourth point is, that he shall extol himself above all that is caled God, or
that is worshipped, 2 These. 2.4. that is. say you, he shall not suffer any God,
neither true nor false, nor any Jdols. To this argument we have answered in
part before, in handling Antichrists name; where we showed that the Apostle
means not the heavenly God, but the earthly, that is, the civil Magistrates,
which are venerable: as also that in Daniel 11.37. And he shall not esteem the
God of his Fathers, nor care for any God, because he shall rise up against
all. Ierom interprets this sacrilegious pride, to be a kind of immoderate
power over al religion; for thus he says: And Antichrist shall war against
the Saints, and overcome them, and shall be pufft up with so great pride, as he
shall attempt to change Gods laws and ceremonies, subiecting al religion to
his own power, Com. in Dan. cap. 7. In which words he finely painteth out
Antichrist and the Pope of Rome, although he was far from this your comment.
For, shall a false Prophet lift up himself above every God? A Prophet is always
the Prophet of some God: needs therefore must he profess himself subject to
some God, whom the Scriptures note out by the name of a False Prophet. Again,
when he shall sit in the temple of God: whither shall this be in the temple of an
other God, or in his own? If of an other, then he acknowledges a superior:
but if in his own, then the Apostle speaks unproperly, and should not have
said, so that he sits in the temple of God as God; but rather, so that he
sits in his own temple as God. But by this manner of speaking, what fruit
had redounded to the Saints? For what manner of sign had this been of this
Monster; when it was no where known what manner of Temple he should have, or
where? But thus ar they wo^t to err from the right, which reverence their
lusts for truth.

As touching the Idols, which you say Antichrist shall despise, hereby perhaps
you might show that the Pope is worse than Antichrist; but it is also false,
that Antichrist shall despise Idols. Whoredom in the Scriptures is Jdolatrie:
and the City of Rome the seat of Antichrist, is that Queen Iezabel, the chief
whore, the great Babylon, the mother of all the whordoms and abominations of the
earth. Shall Idolatry have dominion in his throne, and yet himself not be an
Idolater? By whose authority does the whore worship Idols, but by his on
whose shoulders she sits, and by the majesty of whose name she is
sustained? Shall not Achab follow the Gods of his Iezabel? They which are killed
by the four Angels loosed at Euphrates, do suffer those evils because of
Idolatry, Apoc. 9.20.21. But the Angel of the bottomless pit, King Abaddon
with his subjects suffers that slaughter by the Euphratean Angels, whom he
has fast behind him, Apoc 9.11.12. etc. And therefore the Angel of the
bottomless pit, is an Idolater, who is al one with this Beast, as Apoc. 11.7.
and 17.8. But most plainly, where Antichrist bids an Jmage to be made, and
compels all the inhabitans of the earth to worship it, Apoc. 13.14.15. Do
you think this man will be a breaker down of Images? You are so far from
defending your Pope by this argument, as this is one of the chiefest signs,
that he is the very Antichrist. These therefore be trifles and guegawes, even
as the other things which you have disputed of Antichrist. If you would have
more certainty of his doctrine, remember the things which we have often
mentioned out of this Apocalypse. Here first you shall see, that Antichrist is
Balaam, and his seat Jezabel. chap. 2.14.20. And he, how crafty a knave was he?
She, how Idolatrous a whore, and Prophetess; not defacing al religious
worship, but only promoting and stablishing false worship? Then, you may
perceive that the Gentiles occupying the utter court and holy city, (while the
Saints in the mean time lie hidd in the temple,) are Antichrist himself and
his subjects; chap. 11 1.2. And therefore that Antichrist is most nearly joynd
in outward show, to Christ: so as by his neernes he shall deceiv many. Besides,
the great Antichrist has two horns lik the Lamb, chap. 13.11. Wherefore he
shall not every way be contrary, but shall put on his Image, and sit as his
Vicar: whereas he would rejoice doubtless to be most unlike him, if he should
show manifest hostility. Finally, seeing he is also a false Prophet, he will not
boast himself to be the only God but shall do more harm by lying, than by
force; and not show himself to be such as in deed he is. These few things (to
keep me within the limits of the Apocalypse,) may teach you the true nature of
Antichrist; unless you have leifer willingly to be ignorant, that you may the
more confidentlie serve him.

Chapt. 15. Of Antichrists Miracles.
CONCERNING the Miracles of Antichrist, three things. you say, are found in the
Scriptures: first, that he shall do many miracles: secondly that they shall be
lies: thirdly that there are three examples set down: al which I easily grant
unto you. But why add you not somewhat to make it plain that the Pope is no kinn
to Antichrist, as that the Pope neither does many miracles, nor lies, nor
those three exemples which you mention by name? It seems you feared the trial:
but you must needs be brought unto it, though against your will. That he well
agrees with Antichrist in multitude of miracles; neither can you, neither
doubtless list you to deny: seeing this is one of the chief notes, wherein your
Church glories. Of this first branch therefore, there is no controversy. But
whither those signs be lies, which are done by the Popes and their Ministers,
since Antichrist first began to show himself, let us briefly consider: that
thereby also may appear, whither the crime be true or false, which our men do
charge you with.

I will not use that argument, which the Spirit makes to be a sure token of
false miracles, namely, that whatsoever is done for to confirm error and
superstition, is to be counted for a fraudulent sign: (for you do not
acknowledge your errors, although this should be a sufficient argument, unto
them that have learned the truth:) but I will bring such as even your selves
cannot deny. Let us therfote examine a little those famous miracles of Pope
Sylvester, to whom are attributed chiefly three. One that by sacred Batpisme he
cured Constantine the Great, of a leprosy. An other, that he raised up again a
bull that was killed by Zambri a Jewish sorcerer. The third, that he bound a
Dragon after a marvelous manner: As touching the Leprosy, every man may
easily smell it to be but a stinking fiction by this, that the ancient writers
that lived either next after Constantine, or together with him, speak not any
one word of the same. Eusebius who so diligently wrote his life and heaped up
solemly unto his praise, whatsoever could any where be gathered: would not have
conceled this singular benifit of God. It must needs therefore be that the
later writers drew all this out of the third ditch, namely from the Romish
fables framed for this purpose only, to increase the Popes authority. Again,
seeing the curing of this Leprosy depends on Baptism, and it is certainly
known that he was baptized, not by Sylvester at Rome, but by Eusebius at
Nicomedia, and that not in the beginning of his reign, but in the latter end of
his life: who sees not this cure to be altogether feighned and false? Eusebius
tells that he was baptized at Nicomedia a little before he departed this life.
Jn Vita Constant. lib. 4. Whereto agree Socrates lib. 1. cap. 39. Theodoret lib.
1. cap. 32. Sozom lib. 2. cap. 34. Ambrose lib. De obitu Theodosij and Hieron.
in Chronicis. But you on the othet side object Isidorus, Zonaras, and
Nicephorus, who being but late writers in respect of those ancients, what
credit deserv they in this thing? Could these later men know the truth more
certainly, which were further off from al means to find it out? But let us see
in a word, what ground every of them do rely upon.

Isidorus in his Chronicle, because perhaps he knew that the Romans boasted of
Constantines baptism; and knew withal what the ancient writers had said of
this matter: that both might be thought to be true, he will have him baptized at
Rome, but rebaptised by Eusebius of Nicomedia the Arrian. But he marketh not
well the ancient History, which with one consent reports that he deferred his
Baptism unto that day, because he desired to be baptized in Jordan. How did he
deferr it, if he had received it before at Rome? Moreover he rashly and
injuriously charge the godly Emperor with the greevous crime of violating
his faith: who neither Eusebius of Nicomedia, nor any other Arrian could ever
lead away from the truth; seeing while he lived, he so restreyned them al by his
authority, as they neither could nor durst move any thing against the faith
established. Socrates lib. 2. cap. 2. But the Ariminine synod abundantly
testifies in an Epistle to Constantine his son, that he persisted constant in
the true Nicene faith even to his last end. We have judged it absurd, say they,
even then so soon as he being baptized is departed from men, and gone unto his
due rest, after him to mind for to go about a new thing, and to contemn such
holy Confessors and Martyrs. These things agree not to a man fallen from the
truth. And after that again; And this moreover we entreat you, that nothing be
either taken away from the things which were before ordained, nor any thing
added: but that al things may remayn intyre and unviolated, which through the
piety of your Father, are kept unto this very day. Theod. lib. 2. 19. Sozom
lib. 4. 18. Far be it therefore that we should think he made shipwreck of
faith, and desired a second baptism of an Arrian. Zonaras mentions but one
Baptism, and that by Sylvester; but his tale agrees not with the truth. For he
will have it that Constantine the^ first forsook the worshipping of Idols, and
was cleansed from his leprosy by the Baptism of Sylvester, after that,
Licinius being slain, he alone had the sovereignty. But Eusebius a witness
then living, tells how straight after that miraculous sight in heaven, he
caled the Christians to him, and by them was taught the whole way of salvation,
that he gave himself to the reading of holy Scriptures; had the Priests in
great estimation, and promised that he would worship no other God
thenceforward. Eusebius. in vita Constant. lib. 1. and his promise he indeed
performed, as appears by those Edicts in the behalf of Christians, which he
together with Licinius that reigned with him, caused to be promulgated. Eusebius.
lib. 10. ca. 5. And was not he made a Christian, until Sylvester entered him
into that profession; when he made war with Licinius, because he uncourteously
and ill entreated the Christians? And whereas he relates that Peter and Paul by
night appeared in his sleep, and bade him send for Sylvester: and that he asked
of him whither Christians worshipped the Gods caled Peter and Paul: it is very
ridiculous. Who are witnesses, I pray you, that Peter and Paul appeared unto
him by night? To whom did Constantine report this? Was it to Sylvester, and not
to Eusebius? Or how could he be ignorant of the Christians God, who had before
now so exactly learned of Christians, and himself read the holy Scriptures, and
also vowed, that he would have no other God beside Christ, as we showed even
now from Eusebius? And strange it is that he should not send for Sylvester, but
when he was bidden by revelation, who from his first conversion, so familiarly
used the holy Ministers, as he had them for companions, even making the Priests
of God assistants to him: Eusebius. in the same place. Rashly therefore did Zonaras
prefer the Romish Legends, before the more ancient faithful History.
Nicephorus was moved by the authority of the Church of Rome; and the Font which
Constantine is said to have made at Rome: as also for that the Emperor was
admitted into the Nicen Synod, which the Fathers, he thinks, would not have
done, unless he had been before baptized. But as concerning the authority of
the Church of Rome, and the Font, they shall be of some moment, and have their
weight, when the Church of Rome shall have proved that she feighneth not in
very many other things. And that third thing, of place in the Synod, it is too
leight for to discredit so sufficient witnesses. For why should they not admit
him into the Synod, who^ they ought to admit unto publik prayers, and the
preaching of the word? A synod is as it were an assembly of Prophesiers, from
which, by the Apostles rule even infidels are not to be excluded. But if all,
says he, prophecy, and there come in one that is an unbeleever, or an
unlearned one, he is rebuked of al, he is judged of al: and so the secrets of
his heart are made manifest, and so he will fall down on his face and worship God,
saying plainly that God is in you in deed. 1. Cor. 14.24.25. But Constantine
had obtained like precious faith with the other Saints, and therefore also
might be partaker of the Spirit, as they on whom it fell before Baptism, Act.
10.44. etc. And whereas he delayed his Baptism: the Fathers knew he did that
not of contempt, but of a kind of religion; (of what manner, I dispute not.)
They might also think, that neither Moses counted his children aliants from the
covenant, though they were not circumcised at the appointed day: neither were
the Israelites forbidden to offer sacrifices, and do other service of the
Tabernacle, although they were not circumcised in the wilderness. Wherefore there
was no cause, why entrance should be denied him into the Synod: seeing al
deferring of the outward sign, takes not away from the faithful the right of
children, either with God, or with men in the common duties of godliness.
Forasmuch then as it is certain that Constantine was not baptized til the last
part of his life: it is a lying fable, that Sylvester should cleanse him of his
Leprosy by fotce of baptism administered 20. years before at the least. And in
deed so Iacobus de Voragine freely acknowledges, in the Legend of the finding
of the holy Cross, speaking of Constantines baptism; It is doubtful, says he,
whither he deferred his baptism or no: whereupon there is likeweise more doubt of
the Legend of Saint Sylvester. And a little after, It is evident that there are
many things in the History, which are recited in the Churches, which are not
consonant to the truth. He speaks of the invention of the Cross: but there is
the same respect of al Legends. This therefore is a lying miracle, which is not
confirmed by any sufficient witness, and is contrary to the true History.

The second miracle is of a Bull raised up again by Sylvester, which Za^bres a
Jew (the last of the twelv which disputed against the truth of Christ) by
mumbling some words in his ear, made fall down dead suddenly. This fable is
like the former. None of the ancient writers, that either lived in those times,
or succeeded next, do speak any one word of this thing. Sur^ly he was not yet
born, that should forge this tale from Justin Martyrs disputation with Trypho.
Moreover Zonaras tells the thing as if Helena the mother of Constantine were
together with her son at Rome. The Legend will have her to be absent at the
conversion of her son in Judea, and stomaking that he was made a Christian, she
hastened thence to Rome, with 149. learned Jews, to make trial of the truth by
disputing. Again the Legend is not only contrary to Zonaras, but even to it
self. For in the life of Sylvester, it says, that Helena went into Judea
before her conversion; and in the Legend of the Invention of the Cross, it
says, after her conversio^. For she went to seek the Lords Cross. And certain
it is, she made this journey but once, being also aged, and her nephews
constituted Caesar's; as Eusebius tel^eth in vita Constant, lib. 3. This sign
also relyeth upon no other beside such vain witnesses: and whither it be a lie
or no, let the reader now judge.

The third miracle is of a Dragon lurking in a great deep ditch, who being
malcontent for the conversion of Constantine and his people, killed daily with
his breath more than 300 men. Unto this Dragon, did Sylvester descend with two
Priests, at the commandment of Peter and Paul that appeared unto him: and tied
his chapps with a thread, and sealed with a ring that had the sign of the cross
upon it. This miracle it is enough to repeat; it were folly to refute. By these
miracles therefore of Sylvester, men may judge of the rest. But, you will say,
these things perhaps are falsely recorded of him. I answer, it is al one,
whither the Pope himself do false miracles, or that false ones be ascribed to
him by his men. Al tend to one end, that the Beast may be worshipped, that is,
that the Pope may have chiefest honor.

Secondly, I say, that miracles were ceased in the times of Chrysostom and
Augustine: for so Chrysostom on 1. Cor. 2. Homil. 6. renders a reason, why
signs were done in the Apostles time, and in his time not; namely because by
how much the more certain and necess^ry things are, by so much is faith the
lesser: and a little after, by how much the more certain argume^^ is showed, by
so much is the reward of faith aba^ed: therefore there were no sign^^ don at that
present. So A^gustine also, De vera r^lig. cap. 25. says; For sei^g the
Catholic Church is spread and founded through the whole world, neither are th^se
miracles suffered to endure unto our times, least the mind should always seek
visible things, and by the custom of them man kind should wex cold, which by
the newnes of them was set on fire. Neither ought we now to doubt that they are
to be believed, who when they preach those things which few can attayn, yet
could they persuade peoples, that they were to be followed. And again, they say,
why are not the miracles done, which are reported to have been done? J could
verily say that they were necessary before the world did beleev, to the end
that the world might bel^eve. Whosoever still seeks wonders, that he may
beleev, he himself is a great wonder, which believes not, when the world
believes. These testimonies do convince all your Popish miracles, which are
almost infinite, of fraud and cousenage; at the least since that time. And
surely it seems, God of his singular providence, had put an end to the old
miracles, before that age: that Antichrist with his mates might the better be
known, when he should come forth, with his new pomp of miracles.

Thirdly, there are not wanting men of your own crew, which have acknowledged
the vanity of your miracles; as Alexander de Hales, par. 4. quaest. 53. mem 4.
art. 3. Solu. 2. Jn the Sacrament there appears flesh, sometime by man's
procurement, sometime by the Divils operation. And Nicol. Lyra on Daniel:
Sometime in the Church the people are greatly deceived with miracles feighned
by the Priests, or such as stick unto them for lucre.

Fourthly, examples also prove it, such as (to omit innumerable others) were
in that famous conflict of the Franciscans and Dominicans among the men of
Berne, about the birth of the B. Virgin Mary. Certain Monks, as Peucerus
tells, in his 5. book of Chronicles) when they could not prevail by
authority of testimonies, betook themselves for help unto juggling steights:
For hiding themselves in an Jmage of the Blessed Virgin, that was artificially
made for this purpose, they counterfeyted in her marvelous gestures: so as they
persuaded the people, that she did mourn, lament, complayn, shed tears, and
give answesr to them that asked of her. Which fraud being manifested, the
authors of it were burned the day before the Kalends of July, in the year 1590.
Where is to be observed that this deceit was hid from the ignorant people,
before there rose a contention between the religious themselves, to weet, the
masters of these jugglings, who knowing well by what slight they were wont to
deceive the world, did easily find out the authors of such a wicked prank. But
let me come unto your own family; you know that at Rome the nam of one Father
Justinian a Jesuit was famous, who first feighned himself a leper, that he
might deceiv men by a lying miracle of receaving his health. Then when this
succeeded well with him, he feighned that his Iesuitical habit was stricken
through with the bullet of a certain gun shut off; but when the same came to
his flesh, by Gods admirable power it rebounded back without any hurting of
him. Why yea, for Jesuits bodies be brazen walls. These things at the first
were believed; afterward they were found false: so that now at Rome, when any
impudent fraud is cast in a man's teeth, he is caled the second Justinian. But
this is no new thing to Jesuits, whom many of your own side do confess, (as
is publikly reported,) to make no conscience of sembling, dissembling,
feighning, and belying al things, so as it be for their benefit. For this cause
they speak shrewdly of the miracles of Ignatius, and your Xaverius, in whom you
glory, not only as a principal ornament of the order of Jesuits, but also of
the whole Popish religion: De notis Ecclesiae, lib. 4. cap. 14. And it is no
marvel though Xaverius among the Indians, so far from al trial, did al those
marvelous works, which Maphaeus Ribademeirus and Tursellinus make mention of.
It is rather to be marveled that he dyed the common death, and was not rather
taken away in a fyerie charret, that being reserved with Henoch and Elias, he
might come at last to destroy Antichrist. Do you give credit to these Indian
letters, when as you may remember how that the Jesuits published in a book set
out, that Theodore Beza was dead, and before he gave up the Ghost, was
converted, by means of one of your men, to your Romish religion; and that by
his exemple, many other citizens of Geneva renouncing their former errors,
embraced the Popish doctrine? You have not forgotten, I trow, (for ignorant you
cannot be of a matter so rife in all men's mouths) how Theod. Beza being
marvelously raised again from the dead, did by letters written in French and
Latin, ingrave as on a publik pillar for all Christendom, the incredible
impudency of your Jesuits. Now therefore you may publish the Indian miracles of
Xaverius, when your so egregious pranks be in the open light and eyes of all
Europe. Endless it were to sail into the sea of al your lying signs; therefore
had I liefer to relate one or 2. both publikly testified, and fresh in memory;
than many other almost forgot with age. Wherefore your Pope does so lively
express Antichrist both in multitude and falsitie of miracles, that none I
beleev is so sharp sighted, as that he can discern any even the least
difference.

There remayn those three special miracles, namely, of fire coming down from
heaven; of the Jmage of the Beast to speak; and of the resurrection of
Antichrist, mentioned Apoc. 13. where I have showed how these all do fitly
agree to the Pope of Rome. For first we declared that these things are to be
expounded figuratively, not properly; for these are miracles common to a
Kingdom, (such as by the Apocalypse we have proved the great Antichrist to
be,) and not of a singular man. And that commonly they cannot agree to many
singulars, save figuratively. Moreover if these miracles should be personal,
and proper to one, how could they so come to the knowledge of the whole world,
that it should follow the Beast, with such admiration, as the Apocalypse says?
Things heard, do move less than those that are seen with the eyes. And
Antichrist should excel with such efficacy of miracles, as he should seduce
(if it were possible) the very elect: therefore it is altogether absurd to
interpret these properly. We showed that the fire coming down from heaven, is
the fear and terror of Gods judgment; which Antichrist should strike into men
that obey not his will: that his resurrection, is the curing of his wounded
head, when the papal dignity which by the invasion of the Barbarians seemed to
have perished, began again to wex strong and flourish: that speech given to the
Jmage of the Beast, is the authority of commanding, unto which the relived
Pope did aspire, prete^ding that all that eminency which he desired was no
more, than the ancient Popes possessed of old; whereupon his dignity was but
only an Image of the ancient. These are the natural interpretations of these
miracles, unto which the consent of the whole Apocalypse leads: although if
you would strictly hold the letter; we showed examples of fire descending from
heaven at the will of the Popes, Apoc. 13.13. Francis Xavier Jesuit, raised
the dead by heaps, a few years since among the Indians: and we related even now
out of Peucerus, that an Image in Berne, by means of your men, gave answers to
them that asked thereof. Neither need we seek any other, until you have showed,
that these things must be understood as the words do sound. Here we have
nothing but your bare affirmation. In the mean while there is no doubt but those
three things which the Scriptures mention of Antichrists miracles, are al found
in your Pope, both multitude, and fraud, and special examples: and therefore
that he is the man of syn, whom the Apocalypse describes, and Paul foretold to
the Thessalonians, Epist. 2. But although you could bring nothing in the whole
first part of the chapter, whereby to purge the Pope of this impiety by
testimony of miracles: yet that you might seem to have said something, you will
answer our men, which let us see of what sort it is. The writers of
Maydenburgh, say you, do object that many lying miracles have been done by
the Papists, such as by visions of sowles telling tales of Purgatory, and
begging masses to be sung for them; and cures of diseases which have happened
to such as worshipped Images, or made vows unto Saints. And you answer two
things: first that these are not the miracles which John writes that
Antichrist shall do; but to dye and rise again; to let down fire from heaven;
to give the Jmage power to speak: which you require to be showed, to have been
done by the Pope or Papicts. I answer, that I have showed the Pope was dead
when Rome was taken by the Barbarians* who being driven away, and he promoted
to his former glory, he rose again. That he let down fire from heaven, after
he had persuaded the world, that it was of necessity to salvation, for to be
under the Bishop of Rome; for the^ his wrath terrified all men, as if it were
the wrath of the great God. That he gave the Image power to speak, when he came
to such boldness, as he freely boasted both in deed and word; By me Kings reign.
Al which miracles ar also done by the Papists, which apply their labor for the
Pope, whereby he may the more easily delude the world with these persuasions.
Though Images also do speak among you: Xaverius raises the dead, and for the
Popes sake, flames have appeared from heaven.

Secondly you answer, that those three kinds of Miracles, namely visions of
sowls craving masses to be sung for them; healths obtained by worshipping of
Jmages, and for vows made to Saints, were usual in the Church before that
time when the adversaries say, Antichrist appeared. I answer, that which you
affirm is partly false, partly of no moment, to prove your Miracles not to be
lies. False it is which you say that the sowl appearing to S. German Bishop of
Capua about the year 500. was before Antichrists time. For the Apocalypse
teaches that Antichrist was born, when the Hethen Emperors were taken away,
which fell out about the year of our Lord 300. Infirm altogether it is which
you allege of the like miracles done before Antichrist, as Eusebius relates,
lib. 7. Hist. cap. 14. of the brazen Statue which the woman that had the bloody
issue erected to our Savior; and Theodoret lib. 8. ad Graecos. For both before
Antichrist, and after his coming, lying signs should be done. For now, says
Paul, the Mystery of iniquity works, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. And the Mystery wrought
as well by Miracles, as by superstition and false doctrine, as appears by the
Heretik Mark, who made the wine in the Cup to appear blood, of whom Irenaeus
speaks, lib. 1. cap. 9. So the Montanists also had their miracles, as
Tertullian testifies, lib. de Anim. cap. Nihil animae. And the difference
between the great Antichrist and these little ones, is in more and less. For
these forerunners did Miracles, by a shorter and straiter kind of power: But
the great Antichrist should come with the efficacy of Satan, with all power,
namely to deceive in larger borders Whereupon he should exceed in greatness,
multitude, and impudency of guiles, and al kind of hurting. Miserable therefore
is your defense of the Pope by Miracles, which if in any thing else, do
plainly show him to be the great Antichrist. Neither was it, as I think,
without the singular providence of God, that you which make miracles to be one
chief mark of the Church, should at length know by experience, that they will
turn to your destruction, who hoped by them to have greatest safeguard.

Chapt. 16. Of Antichrists Kingdom and wars.
TOUCHING the Kingdom and wars of Antichrist, we have taught the certainty
from the Apocalypse chap. 11.7. and chap. 13. entyre; from whence the Reader
may fetch the things that are to be holden of them both; and not from these
durty ditches of the Jesuits. But you about these matters do propou^d four
things from the Scriptures as you say. First that Antichr^st coming from very
low degree, shall by fraud and guiles obteyn the Kingdom of the Jews. Secondly
that he shall fight with three Kings, to weet, of Aegipt, Libya, and Aethiopia;
and conquering them shall possess their Kingdoms. Thirdly that he shall subdue
under him other seven Kings, and in that manner he shall become Monarch of the
whole world. Fourthly that with an army innumerable he shall pursue the
Christians through the whole world: and that this is the war of Gog and Magog.
Of al which things, seeing none do agree to the Pope of Rome, it follows
manifestly, that he can no way be caled Antichrist. I answer, neither does
any of these agree unto Antichrist properly so caled: wherefore though the Pope
of Rome be discharged of al these, yet never the less he will be the Antichrist.

As touching the first, Antichrists base original is only touched: for that
which is joined with it, of getting the Kingdom of the Jews, in the
confirmation nothing is said of it: and reason good, seeing it is most vain, as
has been already before declared. His base original therefore is prooved out of
Dan. 11.21. There shall stand up in his place, a despised person, and the honor
of the Kingdom shall be given to him, and he shall come privilie, and shall get
the Kingdom by frawd. You confess, being moved by Ieroms authority, that
these things are to be understood in some sort of Antiochus Epiphanes, yet by
the same Ieroms judgment, are to be far more perfectly fulfilled in
Antichrist, as the things which are spoken in Psalm 71. of Solomon, are meant
verily of Solomon, but more perfectly fulfilled in Christ. I answer, this is
altogether unlike; Solomon was appointed of God a type of Christ; but so was
not Antiochus of Antichrist, unless you will proroge Antichrists reign, and for
three years and a half, grant him six and a half; as many as Antiochus
tyrannized over the Saints. Moreover Antiochus was constreyned to be quiet, by
commandment of the Roman Legate: shall any in like sort command Antichrist,
which shall be chief Monarch? Again Antiochus was an Ethnik and altogether an
aliant from the Church: shall Antichrist also be such an one? Learn therefore at
last not to take any thing of any body indifere^tly; but use the balance, to
try what is spoken, if you have any care of the truth. Certainly if you would
cast a right account, you will rather acknowledge the original of the true
Antichrist to be famous. Do you not see that he wears crowns on his horns,
so soon as he is born? Apoc. 13.1. Was he not to arise at Rome the Emperial
city: where what can be base, that is placed in any dignity? The Bishop of
Rome, as ye are willing to mention, was of great authority, because of the
dignity of the city, with all Christian Churches, before the Emperors gave
place unto him. And I hope that I have showed you such signs of Antichrist, as
you will now doubt no more, but this Bishop is even he; if so be you will freely
confess the thing as it is. Therefore the testimonies which you bring of the
amplitude and gloriousnes of the Bishop of Rome, do more vehemently prove him
to be Antichrist, than that which you bring out of Daniel, prove that he is not.

Secondly for his fight with the three Kings, of Aegipt, Libya and Aethiopia,
you relate that of Daniel, chap. 7.8. J considered the horns, and lo an other
little horn came up among them, and three of the first horns were plucked away
before him: and after explaining it he says, and the ten horns shall be ten
Kings etc. which three are explained, you say, who they are, chap. 11.47.
namely the Kings of Aegipt, Libya, and Aethiopia. I answer, that little horn, is
not Antichrist properly so caled, as I have showed in the second chapter of
this Refutation, and often other where, but the Mahumetan Turk. Whereupon in
that your Pope of Rome has killed no Kings of Aegipt, Libya and Aethiopia, it
may in deed be proved, that he is not the Mahumeta^ Turk: but it does no more
appear from hence that he is not Antichrist, than that David of old was not
King of Israel, because he never subdued these same 3. Kings. The killing of
these Kings by the Pope, perteyns nothing to this cause. He is fowl enough with
the blood of Europe and at home, though he never come into the Libyan and
Ethiopian deserts. Moreover it may also be, that these three Kings, are not
those 3. horns plucked away: for they are the horns of the fourth Beast, as is
plainly said; three of those first horns were rooled out from his face. But
these three Kings, neither a^e, nor ever were horns of the Roman Empire.
Aethiopia was never subject to the Romans, who enlarged not their borders
southward further than Aegipt. Again, three horns are plucked away from before
him: but these three were not al to be overcome: but the Libyans and Aethiopians
should be only at his footsteps, as peoples ayding him rather than subdued;
who should afford him souldjers for his expeditions, and not thems^lve^ suffer
hostile invasio^. Surely if Antichrist should wage no other war than this, his
martial power were not much to be feared.

The third point of subduing seven Kings, is of like strength. Bu^ so, say you,
Lactantius and Jreneus do interpret it. But whither should we hearke^ to them
or to Daniel rather? Certainly the Prophet plainly confirming that three horns
are plucked away, exempteth all the rest from his power: otherweise he should
have said that al ten shall perish: or how should he be a little horn which
should get the command over al? But whither seven or three be subjected to that
little horn, this is nothing to Antichrist: unto whom all his ten horns, as we
have showed, do service from the beginning, not compelled by war, but
willingly and of their own accord. The Fathers in deed perceived not what those
three horns should be; but the event has taught us, that the Turk has robbed
the third part of the Roman Empire, which has yet notwithstanding seve^ horns
left, of which he shall not be Lord, but so far forth as he may bring upon them
some short and suddeyn overthrow. Therefore this horn belongs nothing at al
unto this great Antichrist. But where you say he shall be a Monarch, and shall
succeed the Romans in Monarchy, as the Romans did the Greeks, the Greeks the
Persians, the Persians the Assyrians: this has more ground, seeing Antichrist
shall lift up himself above al which Is caled God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. and the whole
earth wondering should follow the Beast, neither acknowledges he any his like,
or able to fight with him, Apoc. 13.3.4 As also* seeing he should have for a
throne, the great city, which reigns over the Kings of the earth, Apoc.
17.18. These and the like do truly prove him a Monarch But this, say you,
does no way agree to the Bishop of Rome; for he was never King of the whole
world. But were the Romans. I pray you, ever Kings of the whole world? I think
you will not deny it; as these words usually are wont to be understood; or if
you like to stand curiously herupon, Daniel teaches, that the fourth Kingdom,
to weet the Roman, shall consume the whole earth, shall crush it, and break it in
pieces, chap. 7.23. Remember therefore what a little before you alleged out of
Prosper: Rome by Principality of the Preisthood was made more ample with the
towr of religion, than with the throne of power. And what Leo says, Sermon. 1.
de Natal. Apostol. Rome that art made the head of the world by the holy Seat of
S. Peter, thou rulest more largely by divine religion, than by earthly
domination. And what else means the triple crown, but the principality over
all the three parts of the world? The Popes crown has more tops, than the
Emperors Egle has heads. It may be, that shortly it will be quadruple, by the
accession of the Indians, that nothing may escape the Popes almightines, though
something for a time has been hidd from his all skilfulnes. Wherefore the
streights of his dominion, neither stand you in any stead to acquitt the Pope
of this wickedness, neither is this remembrance grateful unto him, who does so
contemn honors and Empire, as he had liefer with large limits of ruling to be
counted Antichrist, than to be defended by an argument of his Kingdom lost or
diminished.

The fourth branch is the battle of Gog and Magog, Apoc. 20. And when the 1000
years are ended etc. Jn this battle, you say, he shall with an army
innumerable, persecute Christians through the whole world. I answer, we have
observed already from these words, the wonderful expedition of Antichrist into
the whole world properly so caled; before in the 7. chapter of his persecution.
And there we allowed for this expedition three years and a half: but here now
it seems that this whole space shall not be spent in the journey; but then it
shall be taken in hand, after the three Kings and the seven Kings be subdued.
There also we marveled if he should go such a journey himself alone, not
hindered with any troup of waiting men: but here further comes the impediment of
an army, and the same nevertheless an universal persecution. Surely
whatsoever you said before against Hippolitus, you seem plainly to think that
Antichrist is no man, but the Divil him self. But to let these monsters pass,
let us come to the battle: which I marvel you saw not that it should be by the
Dragon, not by the Beast. Between which two, there is in deed a great society
of wickedness; but no less difference of persons and of things, than is between
an open foe, and a secret enemy. Add hereunto that the Beast and false Prophet
are both destroyed, before this war is taken in hand, or at least before it
is finished: if that move you not, that both of them are mentioned to be slain
in the end of the former chapter; yet consider that the Divil, that is the
Dragon was cast into the lake of fire, where the other have their place, before
that the Divil comes thither; Apoc. 20.10. Although therefore Antichrist be a
Martial fellow and a great warrier; yet shall he wage no wars after he is dead.
But it is one of his miracles to rise again. Be it so, when he counterfeyts a
death, as you feign of him: but when he is slain by that hand of God, and
deeply drowned in the lake of fire, he shall not find it so easi to rise again,
and when he lay under a coverlet. Separate you therefore those things which
touch not Antichrist; and deal not so, as if you would prove one not to be a
man, either because he has not four feet, or because he wants wings; and you
shall see the rest, so to agree together among themselves in all points, as
nothing more. Surely the things which you have disputed of this Kingdom and
war, are far from every part either of the Kingdom or of the war of
Antichrist: but such stuff as this, are all the things that your men are either
wont or able to bring, for to defend the Pope, and to free him from this most
greevous crime. Therefore you toil in vayn: the thing is manifest, it can not be
hidd by any subtilties. Why go ye about to cast a mist before the Sun? Why
frame ye arguments against the Spirit of God? Purge rather with flames, those
writings of yours, wherewith you have labored his defense: and flee out of his
denn, as speedily as you can.

Here ends the Refutation of Antichrist, Against Bellarmine.
Chap. 18.
AFTER these things I saw an Angel come down from Heaven having great Power: so
as the earth was bright with his glory.

2 And he cried out mightily with a loud voice, saying, It is fallen, it is
fallen, Babylon that great, and is become the habitation of Divils, and the
hold of all fowl Spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

3 For all nations have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and
the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants
of the earth are waxed rich of the abundance of her pleasures.

4 And J heard an other voice from heaven, saying, go out of her my people,
least ye be partakers of her sins, and receive of her plagues.

5 For her heaped sins are come up to heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities.

6 Reward her, even as she has rewarded you, and give her double according to
her works; and in the cup that she has filled you, fill her double.

7 Jn as much as she lifted up her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give
ye to her torment and sorrow: for she says in her heart, J sit being a Queen,
and am no widow, and shall see no mourning.

8 Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and
she shall be burnt with fire, for that God which condamneth her is a strong Lord.

9 And the Kings of the earth shall bewail her, and lament for her, which have
committed fornication and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see the
smoke of her burning.

10 And shall stand a far off for fear of her torment, s^ying, alas, alas,
that great city Babylon, that mighty city: for in one hour is thy judgment
come.

11 And the Merchants of the earth shall weep, and wail over her: for no m^n
byeth their ware any more.

12 The ware of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and pearls, and of
fine linen, and of purple, and of silk, and of skarlet, and of al manner of
thynewood, and of al vessels of yvorie, and of al vessels of most precious
wood, and of brass, and of iron, and of marble.

13 And of cinnamon, and odours, and ointment, and frankincense, and wine, and
oil, and fine flower, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and
charets, and servants, and souls of men.

14 And the fruits that thy sowl lusted after, are departed from thee, and al
things that were fat, and excellent, are departed from thee, neither shall
thou find them any more.

15 The Merchants of these things, I say, which were made rich by her, shall
stand a far off from her, for fear of her torment, weeping and wailing.

16 And saying, alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen,
and purple, and skarlet, and gilded with gold, and precious stones, and
pearls; for in one hour so great richesse are come to desolation.

17 And every shipmaster, and all the troop that converseth in ships, and
mariners, and whosoever traffike on the sea, shall stand a far off.

18 And they shall cry seeing the smoke of her burning, and shall say, what city
was like unto this great city?

19 And casting dust on their heads, they shall cry, weeping and wailing and
saying, alas, alas, for that great city, wherein were made rich all that had
ships on the sea by her costlinesse, in one haure is made desolate.

20 O Heaven rejoice of her, aend ye Holy Apostles and Prophets: for God has
punished her, to be revenged of her for your sakes.

21 Then a certain mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and
cast it into the Sea, saying, with such violence shall Babylon that great City
be cast, and shall be found no more.

22 And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pippers, and trumpeters
shall be heard no more in thee, and no craftesman of whatsoever craft he be,
shall be found any more in thee, and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no
more in thee.

23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more in thee, and the voice of the
bridgrome, and the bride shall be heard no more in thee: for thy merchants were
the great men of the earth: and with thine enchantments were deceived al
nations.

24 And in her was found the blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of
all that were slain upon the earth.


The Analysis.
HITHERTO what and of what sort is the throne of the Beast, as it were the
first sprinkling of the fifth vial; now follows a more copious pouring out
joined with the very ruin of the throne. Which we distinguish into those
things, which go before the destruction, and the things which follow it; those
that go before are performed by the ministry of three Angels, two of which
declare the ruin by bare word. The first a glorious Angel ver 1, more
succinctly ver. 2, 3. The second namelesse more fully, both in exhorting the
godly to fly out of Babylon, ver. 4.5. and also in stirring up the ministers of
this destruction to use deserved severitie, ver. 6.7. afterward in describing
partly the mourning of wicked Kings ver. 9.10. of merchants, ver.
11.12.13.14.15.16. of Watermen and mariners, ver. 17.18.19, partly the joy of
the godly, ver. 20. Such is the ministry of the two Angels: The third beside
his word uses also a sign: which both is propounded ver, 21. and also
expounded, summarily in the same verse: severally, in ver. 22.23.24. Hitherto
the things that go before the ruin: that which follows is a thankesgiving
which the Saints perform, chap. 19.1. 2. 3 4.

Scholions.
1 And after these things J saw an Angel come down: In destroying the City of
Rome God will manifest to the world his admirable long suffering, who beside al
his former warnings, so many, and so diverse, comes not to the last
destruction, before three Angels be used, by whose voice men should be warned
to avoid the plague coming violently upon it. The first of these is an Angel
descending from heaven, that is* some excellent and singular man, who shall come
suddenly, and not looked for, even as things which fall down from heaven. The
things which are borne with us give some show of themselves before they wex
ripe; but things that come from heaven, may be present in a moment without any
perceiving taken before they come. So in the tenth chapter and Angel came down
from heaven, of a sudden, when many courageous deffendours of the truth were
risen up, of whom before there was no suspicion. Which thing other places
co^firm, which may be taken from the former interpretation. This Angel seems,
that by a sudden converting to the truth, he shall manifest to al men, that he
comes from heaven. Such was that coming down in the tenth chapter, where men
brought up in superstition, became suddenly nourrissons of true godliness. This
Angel has great power. But to what end? For no excellent great act of his is
mentioned: it may be he is that man to whom is committed wholly the throwing
down of this throne: who shall not so much bring a new Propphecy concerning the
ruin of Babylon, as show himself prepared to perform the very thing, which
the divine oracles prophesied often should come. Thirdly, the earth is
lightened with his glory, because eve^ they which are strangers from the true
Church shall honor, and admire the glory of his godliness and excellent
majesty. He shall be well reported off, even of them that are without, as
speaks the Apostle. The like use of words in the things past, does give us
this knowledge of this Angel, though yet to come. Which is the only way to
pearse into these things otherways hidden from us. But it is to be observed,
that this Angel, as far as it seems, shall not come forth by and by after
that manifestation of the throne, which we have spoken of in the former
chapter; but at length after some certain and meet time set between. And
therefore this vision is divided from the former by that usual style in writing
of a distance of time somewhat farther of, and after these things I saw.

2 And he cried out mightily, (...), in strength, that is, strongly, valiantly,
and vehemently. The Complutent edition and the Kings Bible have (...), with a
strong voice: so also Aretas: but the sense is al one. This mighty crying out
signifies the efficacy and immutability of the things to be done, as Aretas
notes. Although peradventure no such denuntiation to be made in words is not
to be expected; but even the very attemting of the thing shall stir up in the
minds of men that opinion, as if they did hear this voice sounding in the
ears of men. But seeing this crying out is of one Angel, to whom the business
is committed as is like, of destroying, and burning Rome, it may confirm
somewhat that which we have said in the former chapter; that some one of the
ten horns, to whom the rest of the multitude is figuratively adjoined; not
that whole number, shall bring upon it this last desolation. He cries out with
a voice doubled, It is fallen, it is fallen Babylon, after the manner of the
former Prophets, but yet with this difference, because they denou^ced a
destruction to come long after, this declares that it is already present, now
at last to be performed, by this his expedition. Babylon that great, the seven
hilled city, the chief Empress Rome, as once Babylon the head city of the
Assyrians. There is a double Babylon in this book, as we have heard chap. 16.,
Rome and Conctantinople. But here he speaks of the first, which belongs to
the fifth vial, in which this chapter is employed. The second belongs to the
last vial, to be destroyed in the twentieth chapter

And is become the habitation of Divils: The cause of the destruction is not
here mentioned, which follows after in ver. 3. but the desolation is declared
by a dreadful wilderness, which this kind of inhabitans reioicing in solitary
places and following them, do express passingly. Or rather wherein they
themselves do not so much take pleasure, but into which they are sent, and
thrust even against their wills. From whence that which first is caled the
habitation of Divils, is straightway called the hold of every fowl Spirit, that
is, a prison or iayle into which they are thrust at the pleasure of the Highest
judge. As if by the most just judgment of God the foul Spirits be tormented in
the same places, after they have been deprived of all company of mortal men,
which they have abused, by entising men to abomination and naughtiness. Which
is like a hell to them, to be so kept from men's society: whom to draw with
them into the same torment, they hold it some confort in their damnation. But
they are not so shut apart from men into these secret places, but that often
times they go on with rage in very great meetings of folk, as often as it
shall so please God, but because such wildernesses are appointed to them for
ordinary priso^s. Whereunto that saying of Christ seems to pertain: When the
unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he walks throughout dry places, seeking
rest, and finds none Mat. 12.43. Moreover the evils which were brought into
the Church by Hermites and Monks show abundantly how much the delusions of
Satan do prevail in thos^ foul and desert places, as the most learned Theod.
Beza has observed. But from this place we learn^ how that of Isaiah is to be
understood in chap 13.20.21.22. and again in chap. 34.13.14.15. unto which the
Spirit alludeth manifestly, howsoever he interprets them not word for word
purposely. That is to say, not only of some Beasts and unl^ckie birds, but also
of evil Angels, to whom these names are proper, Divils and foul Spirits, as
the Greeks have translated, partly retaining the Hebrew words (...) and (...);
partly translating plainly Schhirim (...) Divils, in which sense that word is
used in Levit. 17.7. And they shall no more offer their offerings to Divils,
lishhirim properly signifies the word goats; but it is translated unto
Divils, who appeared for the most part to their worshippers rough and hairie:
commonly they are caled Satyrs, (...), as Aquila translateth in Isaiah.

And a cage of every unclean bird: It is not called a custody, because it
should be like a cage, from whence the unclean birds could not flee out, but
because they should be seen continually abiding in those ruins, and to have
their most usual place of dwelling there Such are those flesh-devouring,
ravenous, and unluckie birds, the Egle, Kite, Hawk, the Vultur, Raven, the
Night-wandring scritchowles, Howlets, etc. Of which sort many are reckned up in
Levit. 11.13. etc. And such birds were once counted unclean by the Law. Such
difference has no place at this day: yet not without cause they are so called
to this present time, because they excellently set before our eyes the
disposition of unclean men, who live by stelth, and know no other way to
maintain themselves, except by violence and injury. In this respect also
those greedy birds are hated of all the rest, as they show by gathering a
company, as often as they have gotten one of these ravenous birds alone, and
any occasion shall give an opportunity to oppress them; likeweise also this
kind of men is odious to al mortal men.

3 Because of the wine of the wrath. A threefold cause of the destruction is
rehearsed, because she was the author of Idolatry to al men; because she drew
the Kings into the partaking of her wickedness; and increased with honors and
riches above measure her citizens by her riot. These naughty acts are
ancient, and often cast in her teeth by other Angels some ages before.
Therefore he declares that the shameless forehead of this whore is still
condemned of the same crime, which can be moved with no warnings to put away
her former lewdness. As touching the words, the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, is a fornication whereby God is provoked to wrath, yet so making
wretched men drunken for a time with a certain pleasantness, that it takes
away all perceiving of the impiety thereof, as in chap. 14.8.

All nations have drunk; Montanus has it ransitively, thus; has made the
nations to drink: and so her wickedness is more lively set forth, and more
becoming her, which bears a cup of Gold in her hand, whereby she may provoke
even those that are not thirsty to drink, as before chap. 14.8. It is an
horrible sin to put a stumbling block before the blind: but what is it to
thrust and throw him headlong into the pit? But the kind of speaking seems
to be changed of purpose, least any man should allege for his excuse, that he
has not deceived others. Therefore this common reading is to be preferred which
our coppies have; which also the verbes neuters which follow eporneusan
eploutesan, seem to require.

And the merchants of the earth of the abundance of her pleasures: (...) from
the force of her riot, that is, from the plenty and immoderate desire to enjoy
al pleasures. For Rome is an other Zerxes who by rewards offered, stirred up
men to devise new pleasures. Therefore how should not the devisers and
ministers of these things get to themselves great riches? But of what sort are
these merchants? not of that kind, as it seems who make a gain by carrying
out, and bringing in of wares; for they are in the number of the reprobates,
who shall mourn for Babylon: wgose destruction shall bring very great joy to all
the saints, ver, 20. Neither shall these men's wares be bought any more Rome
being destroyed: yet notwithstanding gold, silver, and the other things which
are mentioned, shall not cease to be in account in other places. Hereunto is
added, that among them to whom this name agrees properly, the chief dignity
is theirs, who fetch wares by sea from far countries: but these exercise
merchandise not so much by sea, as by land; from whence they are called the
merchants of the earth. Furthermore these are the Peers and great men of the
earth ver. 13. in a higher place and honor, then they which sell merchandise.
Last of al we shall see that the souls also of men are among the wares of these
men, ver. 13. which by no means will not suffer us to stick to the proper
nature of the words. Therefore certain common merchants are not here to be
minded, (although these also shall suffer great loss,) but the stately Lords
Cardinals, Archbishops, Popish Bishops, who exercise a merchandise of souls,
and flourish by this merchandise with the glory of Noble men. For we shall see
after, that Rome is compared to Tyrus, because she is no less noble a mart
town of spiritual things, then once Tyrus of al those things which belong to
the deligts of this life, as we may see in Pope Alexander, of whom was this
sung common: Alexander sels the keys, the Altars, ye Christ also,
First of all he had bought them, then by right he may do so.


But Baptista Mantuan writes more fully, not of Alexandre alone, but of the
whole company, and daily custom of the Romish court: -- with us are to be sold,
The Temples, Priests, Altars, the Holy things, the Crown:
The fire, Jncens, the Prays, Heaven and God is to sell.


Who can desire a better furnished market? Neither may thou think this to be
the overmuch liberty of railing Poets, but a just complaint of more holy
reformers. Bernard says, that the sacred degrees are given unto an occasion of
dishonest lu^re, and that gain is counted godliness, in his first sermon of
the conversion of Paul. Budaeus in his Pandects says, the Popes decre^s are
not profitable for the government of manners, but I had almost said, do seem
to give authority to occupy a bank for love. Ludovicus Vives on August. of
the City of God, book 18. chap. 22. says, though all things almost are sold
and bought at Rome, yet thou may do nothing without a law and rule, and
also of a most inviolable authority. But it were an infinite thing to sail in
this sea, no shore of which thou can see, howsoever thou should obtain a
prosperous wind for some few days. Such therefore are both the merchants, and
wares. Although I will not deny the huge excess also of things, which perteine
to the body, by conveying whereof thither, many have waxed very rich. But here
chiefly the marcha^dise of souls seems to be understood; than which no
science has been more gainful now for many ages. Augustine the Monk perhaps
at home of no estimation, yet because he had brought the Britains into bondage
under Rome, was made Archbishop of Canterbury. Venefride the English man,
called Boniface, his name being changed, by this way became Bishop of Mentz,
and together also Governor of the Church of Coloine. Who can reckon up all who
have made a way for themselves to very great dignities by this same mean?
Alan an English man a traitor, betraying the faith, his country, and Prince
to the Pope, deserved by this trade of merchandise to be among the Peers of
the earth, having gained the dignity of a Cardinals hat. Yea that this
trafique might not be cold, whom gain and profits moved not, those the crafty
whore inflamed, with honors and glory. The King of Spain was made the
C^tholike King: of France the most Christian King: The Swissers the Defenders
of the Church, and furthermore endued with two great banners, both the Cappe
and Sword. Some reward is wanting to no man, to the end that they may exercise
the more diligently that profitable merchandise. Threefold therefore is the
cause of the destruction of Rome; because ^he is the mother of Idolatry, the
corruptresse of Kings and nations, and that may be s^ffered no longer for her
arrogance and pride, and buying and selling of souls. By which things this
right excellent Captain being moved, shall undertake this expedition against
her.

4 And I heard an other voice: Such is the first Angel, and the Prince as it
seems of this war: the second as an under Captain does his office in
counselling and exhorting. But here is no mention made of the Angel, but only
of a voice from heaven, as though this exhortation were without an author, his
name being concealed from whom it comes. For which cause we have said in the
Analysis that this Angel is namelesse. It is in deed an odious argument which
he handles, whereupon peradventure he will conceal his name, which being known
would bring no profit, but might procure some danger, the adversaries being of
so spiteful minds. His speech is continued even unto the one and twentieth
verse; so copious shall be the admonition of some faithful man, which together
with the preparation to this warre^, shall be spread abroad, godly and truly
warning men of the present punishment of Rome. Notwithstanding that which we
have spoken of his name concealed is not of such necessity, as that it must
needs be so, seeing the like voice from heaven did show his author, as the
event declared, chap. 14.13. But it is likely to be true that the name is to be
concealed.

Go out of her my people: The exhortation consists of two parts, the first
part pertains to them which live in Babylon, warning them that acknowledging
at the length the filthiness of that city, they forsake the same, and depart
to an other place; that they would no longer for her sake expose themselves to
certain destruction. Wherefore some elect lie hidd yet in the dreggs of the
Romish impiety, whom God remembers in the common destruction of the wicked.
He will not suffer Lot to perish together with the Sodomits: and he used the
like exhortation long since to his people, when the mother of this Babylon was
to be razed, Ier. 51.45. And this commandment shall not be made in vain to his
people, to whom alone it is proper to obey his voice. Therefore even as the
mises perceaving before hand that the house will fall, do run away out of
their holes, so they being wakened out of sleep by the Angels voice, shall
convey them selves by and by out of this detestable city.

Least ye be partakers of her sins: For of what sinners the fellowship is not
forsaken, their guiltines is conveyed to men. Therefore he says not, that ye be
not partakers of her punishments, but which is far more greevous, of her
sins. This fear will provoke and enforce them to run away, who are
convinced in their consciences of the Romish wickedness,

5 For her sins are heaped up: (...), one following an other as chained
together, at length they have reached eve^ unto heaven. But if through the whole
Papistical Kingdom, Rome be the holy city, Peter's chair, which cannot err,
this chained row has suffered a great interruption: which as it much exceeds
the ages of the Heathen Emperors, so much the more easily it does blot out
the impiety of that three years space of Antichrist, which they dream is yet
to come, although it were granted, that he should reign at Rome. How can the
sins in the last times come up even to heaven, from whose full heap so much
is taken away by so long continuing holiness of the Popes? But this Revelatio^
has made the thing manifest, declaring that the Pope received a lamp from the
Heathen Emperors, and to have heaped up new sins upon the former heap in a
continual row; even as the perpetual order and succession of Popes shows; for
which only thing the catalogue of the Popes serves greatly. We have seen this
heap wonderfully increased in these our times: neither shall they which follow,
less ma^fully add to the heap, until they have both brought their sins unto
heaven, and also their wicked city to dust. The Interpreter Aretas translateth
have cleaved to; Montanus, are glued together, one laid on an other, and as it
were soldered with glue. Therefore the filthiness of Rome shall be made yet more
manifest to the elect, to the end that they may think the more in earnest of
flying from her.

6 Reward her even as she has rewarded you; The other part of the exhortation
has respect to the armies of soldjers gathered together against Rome. This
whetteth their anger and stirs it up to a just revenging. Thou say it is
a cruel sentence; he should rather convert his speech to the repressing of
fury, much less excite to the rendering of double. But cursed is every one,
that does the work of the Lord negligently. Neither is it to be feared that
the punishment is more greevous then her deserts, to which no sharpnes of
punishment can be equal. But these things declare the event, to weet, that men
shall use very great severitie in executing this last desolatio^. And it is to
be observed that the citizens now of the Roman jurisdiction shall be the
Ministers of this universal slaughter. For whom the Angel eve^ now commanded to
come out of Babylon, them he now exhorts to reve^gement. It is like that
these being mindful of so long continuing tyranny, wherewith they have lain
oppressed so many ages, and having also the late injuries fixed in their minds,
the sting whereof does yet greeve them vehemently, will more freely give license
to their anger, and will satisfy themselves scarce with any punishment. And
this is that to give her the double, and to fill her the double, in the cup
that she has filled: signifying that a huge calamity shall be brought upon her
with very great cruelty. We have seen before that there is a double cupp in
this book, one of error, whereby the whore made men drunken with the sweetness
of her abomination; the other of punishment, whereby it is taught that the
wicked shall be punished after the like manner that they have sinned.

7 In as much as she has glorified her self: (...), that which (...) weigh
out to her in equal balances, so much torment as there was excess in carnal
pleasure before. O Rome therefore by so much the more miserable, by how much
thou have been the most happy of all. Who shall recite thy calamity, to whose
riot, the deliciousnes of the Sybarites, is not to be compared.

J sit a Queen: The greatness of the punishment is declared two ways; both by
the like cruelty which she has showed against others in the former verse; and
also from her loftiness in this verse, whereunto her abasement must be
answerable in the verse following. But whereas she vaunteth that she is a
Queen, she shows her self to be the natural daughter of her mother Babylon.
Neither are these proud words dark, when she chalengeth to her self a
Primacy over all Churches, braggeth that she is the head of Christianity; the
beginning of eternal life, and many other things of like blasphemous arrogance.
Which Primacy she assures her self shall be for ever, persuading her own
heart that she shall never be deprived of this dignity, neither shall have
experience of any calamity. For what other thing is it that her most beloved
sons do avouch that Peter's chair cannot be separated from Rome, nor the
seat of the Apostles translated from thence, as Bellarmine affirms in his 4.
book of the Bishop of Rome chap. 4. Which although he will not have to be
counted among the articles of the faith, yet it seems to him by some
arguments of so great strength, that at the last he can hadly pe persuaded, but
that it is an article of the Papists faith. Francis de Ribera now gesseth that
some evil shall happen to Rome, but after that manner, that he shows rather his
care, then gives over even the least that may be of his bragging.

8 Therefore in one day: For this thy proud boasting, this threefold kind of
calamity shall make an assault upon thee at once. At length thou shall find how
thou have ben deceived, and how in vain thy Knaves have sung to thee, upon this
rock I will build my Church etc. The calamities which are rehearsed, belong
partly to men, whom death, sorrow, and famine shall devour: partly to the city,
which shall be burnt with fire. Which declare that the city shall not be taken at
the first assault, but by a siege: while the which continues, the past (for so
death was called before in chah. 6.8.) sorrow and famine shall assail within:
and that at length the city shall come into the power of the enemies, who shall
make it even to the ground, and bring her to ashes: then shall be fulfilled that
which Sibyl Prophesied: Rome shall be a street, or empty place; and Delos shall be
obscure, or not found.

For strong is the Lord: He makes mention of the power of the Lord, because it
will be almost incredible that Rome borne up with so great riches, both her own,
and Kings and others her allies can be bro^ght into this miserable condition.
But he is mighty, who shall exercise judgment, whose will cannot be resisted by
any might. That which here is read shall judge, some copies have in the present
tense judges.

9 Then shall bewail: Such was the exhortation; the first mourning of the
wicked, shall be of Kings, but of the earth only, neither properly so called,
but only Romans. Which Kings are the slaves of the Church playing the harlot
These shall begin their lamentable songs, mourning after a wonderful manner,
when they think of how sweet company of the whore they are deprived by this
unlooked for destruction. Wherefore other Kings shall remain besides those
ten, chap. 17.16 which shall destroy the whore with fire. Neither is it to be
thought, that these ten Kings after their hatred satisfied, shall give up
themselves to lamenting, being moved by repentance, as Ribera trifleth. For it
shall be matter of very great joy to all the elect; of which sort are these
Ministers of vengeance, exhorting all the people of God to depart from the
fellowship both of her wickedness and punishments ver. 20. and chap. 19.1. etc.
Moreover after the time is finished of giving their Kingdom to the Beast, the
ten horns with a constant mind shall detest the whore, so far off is it that
they shall be greeved for her miserable condition, chap. 17.16.17. Therefore that
device falls down concerning the ten Kings, in whose power shall be the
dominion of the whole earth, who, if with joined forces (as the Jesuit will
have it) they shall bring the last destruction upon Rome, they should leave no
King to bewail her great misery. We have showed by truer arguments, that
those x horns pertain to the only degree of Emperors, some one of which at
length shall execute this destruction, who yet keeps the name of the whole
number; as it is done for the most part, when speech is had of the members or
parts of some whole thing. While he shall spoil Rome, some other Kings, of
Spain, Polonia, and the like confederate with the whore, shall make this
miserable wailing.

10 Standing a far off for fear: But what need shall there be then of
lamentings? Why shall they not rather make have to help her? They shall not dare
to do it for fear: they shall be greatly afraid of their own safety. Therefore
they shall behold a far off her misery, taking heed that they the^ selves
burn not with the same fire, if they shall come near. You therefore holy
Princes, take the matter in hand, it shall not be a thing of so great trouble,
as peradventure you think. Do you think that Spain, France, or other, I know
not what huge armies, will come to aid her? These are altogether Goblins, and
vain Scarcrowes. Her friends shall stand a far off with waitings testifying
their love, but taking no pains to deliver her from peril. And who would
expect that fornicatours will undergo any danger for a stale Whore? Therefore
it is only needful that you take upon you the matters valiantly, the other
things shall have prosperous success. Euphrates shall open away into Babylon for
Cyrus, if he cannot break through the walls.

Alas, alas, that great city: A lamentable song of the Kings: the often defect
of which, does very fitly express the truth of the affection. The sentence
shall be perfect in this wise, Woe woe to us, because that great city Babylon,
that mighty city is overthrown, and because in one hour thy judgment is
come. They bewail the ruin, and the sudden coming of it.

11 And also the merchants of the earth: The merchants do accord in the
lamentations of the Kings, but of the earth, of which sort are the Kings: we
have showed at the 3. verse, that they were merchants rather of spiritual
things, then of those which respect the body. For which thing there is an
argument from hence. Because, says he, no man buyeth their wares any more.
Therefore gold or silver is not here spoken of, or sylke, or fine linen, or
spices, or any such thing in the proper signification; the estimation whereof
depends not on Rome only. Unless peradventure then they shallbe of far
less price, when so greedy a buyer is taken away. But the words are express,
neither is any such thing spoken of Tire, from whence this whole allegory is
taken, out of Ezech. 27. Where the place no less required an amplification of
the matter. Wherefore these wares are labor, study, industry, to adorn and
enrich the city of Rome, which things shall be most cheap, and of no price,
after she is fallen. For who then will give a rotten nut for them.

12 The wars of Gold and silver: Even now we said that this whole allegory
was taken out of Ezech. 27. where it is spoken of the destruction of Tyrus.
Neither without cause, as we have showed in ver. 3. when as at Rome there is no
less famous a sale of souls, then was at Tyrus of things necessary for our
use. Ezechiel does so reckon every nation, that together also he rehearses
the proper commodities of every country, in which both they abounded, and
carried to Tyrus. According to which manner, sundry kinds of wares seem here
to be reckened up, to note out sundry nations, to which either they belong, or
at least by whose travel they are brought to Rome. Therefore although the names
of the countries are not expressed in plain words, as in Ezechiel; yet
notwithstanding they may easily be understood according to that rule, from the
wares themselves. The wares therefore of Gold, and silver, and the other
outlandish things, which are rehearsed in this verse, may signify Spain, which
fetched those things from the furdest Indies, by whose travel they are to be
sold in this part of the world. Cinnamon, Odours, Ointments, Frankincense and
wine do note out Italy; not because all these things do grow in the same
place, but because as Spain by the Ocean Sea; so this by the intern sea
affoardeth abounda^ce of those things to Europe from Greece, Cilicia, Egypt,
Africa. Her self also being the most fertile in all delicious dainties, of all
the countries of Europe. Fine flower and Wheat may signify the Islands of the
interne sea Cicilia, and Sardinia, the garners and storehouses of Italy The
Beasts, Germany, abounding with them; even as the Sheep, our England, being
greatly frequented with this kind of cattle. Horses and Charets, the French
men, who have great store of horses, and from whence the use of charets have
been conveyed to others. Bodies, the Swisers, who follow an externe, and
mercenary warfare; and in which men, Rome chiefly delights to make them her
guard. The souls of men, are the common wares of all countries, which Rome
does hunte after by her merchants every where, desiring the same to be
instructed in her superstitions: which that so she may gain and purchasse for
her own proper goods, she spares no cost. The makers of portsale of these
wares, are they, that by their pains have brought these nations to be obedient
to Rome. Even as we know special provinces to have bin committed to some
Cardinals and Jesuits: whose care though it be bestowed in common; yet it lies
upon every one severally to declare his diligence in some certain nation. Which
if he can either retain in their duty, or recall forsaking her, by knitting
it again in friendship with Rome, he brings wares of that sort to be sold,
whereby that nation is signified upon which he has bestowed his labor. As
touching every of the several wares by name, Gold, Silver, Precious stones,
Pearls, they were before in the whores apparel, chap. 17.4, And it seems to
be for that cause that Spain in these last times shall be a special orname^t to
the whore. And of fine linen, and Purple, two for one, the Purple of fine
linen, which is a cloth made among the Indians of that kind of flax: so and
of silk and of skarlet, are spoken asunder, for of skarlet silk. Of skarlet
we have spoken elsewher. Silk is cloth of most small threeds, which the worm
do draw as it were from a distaffe out of their own store. It is not made of
flowers as Dionysius sings (...): of the Series, thus: Neither the care of
Oxen troubles them,
Neither the flock of woole-bearing sheep:
But in kembing the branches-bearing flowers,
Garments they make etc.


So Virg. in the second of his Georg.

The thin fleeces from the leaves,
Does kembe the peoples Series.
Unless peradventure the Poets, because the worms do make silk in trees,
therefore do say, that this is kembed from thence, not because it grows in
them, as cotton and the like. See Iul. Caes. Scal. Exerc. 108. 9.

And all thynewood: Thine signifies both universally all odoriferous wood,
also a special kind, as Eustathius notes upon that of Dionysius of Arabia,
which he calls wonderful: Which by burning thynwoods a fragrant smell respire,
Either of thynewood or Myrrh etc.


Wherein the first place thine is generally called any spice: in the second
place a certain kind of odoriferous tree But it is used here not so much for
perfuming, as for finenes of buildings, (for there is mention of odours in the
beginning of the verse following,) whereunto it serves chiefly, as Pliny
shows out of Theophrastus. Who, says he, did give great honor to this tree,
rehearsing the famous boordings of the ancient temples to be of it, and a
certain everlastingnesse of the uncorrupted timber in houses against all
faults: book 13 chap. 16. of his natural History.

13 And Cinnamon: Italy uses such as is brough to them: which she fetched not
from Spain, but from those places where it grows: so also she procures for
her self Odours, Ointment, and Frankincense by her own navigations. The
chief sale of these things is with the people of Syria, Phoenicea, Arabia,
Egypt. To these coasts Italy goes with all speed possible, while the
Spaniard is occupied especially in foreign navigations: she has wine and oil
enough of her own. She brings fine flower and wheat from Sicilia.

And Beasts: It were tolerable if Rome should note out Germany with this
mark, only for the richesse of cattle: but the most proud whore scarce
thinks any otherwise of the most famous nation then of very Beasts. Ambrosius
Catharinus shows this plainly in his book against Luther, whom that most
foolish Ass calls a Beast, almost in every verse: and that not so much for
hatred of his Heresy (as he calls it,) as with a manifest reproach of the
whole nation. Rome indeed speaks mor modestly at this time, not daring to
provoke the fierceness of men by so great a contumely: but secretly with her
self she judges no otherweise then before time; and not only of this people
alone, but of al other people of Europe: all which, her self only excepted,
she accounts almost mere brutes. But God has chosen this foolishnes, if
thou will so have it, of our nations, whereby he might throw to the ground thy
vain wisdom, and at length by thy just punishment, might set forth thy pride
to be derided of all men.

And sheep; a sign of our own England, whose fleece is of gold, excelling in
softnes and finenes above the wool of other countries. Rome has now a long
time vehemently grieved, that these wares are brought sparingly to her faires;
and therefore tried every way, that she may enjoy the former abou^da^ce of
them. For this purpose she maintains English youth, and has made Alan our
country man a Cardinal. She fitteth for her self these merchants, besides
troops of Jesuits, if peradventure she may be again Lord of our sheep. But
we, thanks be to God, know for a surety, that Rome is a denn of wolves, and
other most cruel Beasts. Let her cha^t as sweetly and pleasantly as she can,
we acknowledge her voice to be of strangers and robbers; neither will we be
taken with the sweetness thereof. I hope that our people will no more go to
visit, but with this Angel to the destroying of her.

And Horses and charrets: And of horses, and of charets, and of bodies, to weet
the wares. The two first perteine to the French men, renowned for horses armed
on al parts, and for the invention of charrets: this last of bodies is the ware
of the Swissers, of which very many villages persisting still in the Romish
superstition, do defend the Beast with their bodies. He has these for the
ordinary and domestical yeomen of his guard; also he may take up greater armies
of them serving for wages, as often as necessity shall so require. I would God
they would learn of their brethren, and confederates, not to yield their
bodies to his pleasure, with which being not content he also works certain
destruction to their souls; neither to take wages for keeping of him, whom if
they would utterly destroy, they should bring very great profit to all
Christians. But this merchandise shall have an end shortly. Were it not better
to forsake the wicked Mistres willingly, then in short time to be forsaken of
the same necessarily? The voluntary sorrow of repentance is wholesome; but that
is deadly, which stubburnes brings forth.

And souls of men: These wares are not proper to one country, but common to
all: which Rome does not thing too dear bought for any gold whatsoever. The
like thing offers it self in Ezechiel chap. 27.13. They of Iavan, Tubal, and
Meshech were thy merchants, they used the merchandise of men, and vess^ls of
Brass in thy merchandise: bnephesch adham, (...), the souls of men.
Tremellius and Iunius translate of men and vessels, declaring well the sense.
He means doubtless slaves set to sale, as in the same place they do
expound. Therefore why should not the souls of men obtain the same force in
this place? The Spirit seems to have changed the construction, of set
purpose, to note the difference. For these are not rehearsed in the second case
with those that went next before, and the wares of horses, and of charets, and
of bodies, and of the souls of men: but in these last words, he passes to the
fourth case, and the souls of men, as it is manifest in the Greek, and as we
have translated. Wherein is signified, that there is a separated and diverse
consideration of souls and bodies in this place; and that there is a far
other meaning then of that in Ezech. howsoever in words he alludeth to that.

14 And the fruits lusted after: (...): for the autumn of thy desire (for
(...) seems to be causal.) The Interpreter Aretas, and the time of thy
desire. It is a manner of speaking of the Hebrews for, thy desired autumn, as
(...), in the fire of flame, for, in flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. as though he
should say, thy desired harvest is lost. By which proverbial manner of
speakidg, we signify, that power to gain is taken from one. Or the same
hebraisme may be understood, so as that which goes before may be in the place
of the concrete, and the autumnal desire of thy soul: as also in the 2 Thessalonians.
1.9. And from the glory of his strength, for and from his glorious strength. In
which sense the autumnal desire, notes out that wanton greedines of rath-ripe
fruits, which the richer sort, and the dainty ones have, getting the first
fruits for them by a great price; the more plentiful store of which afterward
they loath: as though he should say: Once thou did lash out huge costs upon
things of little value, but now thou art not so wantonly ready to buy: that
thy former strange longing is gone: those things now would be acceptable, which
of late thou despisedst; according to that of the Poet, the empty stomach does
seldom despise common things; which of the two ways we will take them, we see
that these things do very well hang together with the former, whereby the
mourning of the merchan^s is greatly amplified, that buyers shall be now wanting
altogether; whereas lately, when Rome flourished, they had so quick and ready a
market. Whereof the Spirit tendreth a double reason by this mourning: first,
that now there was no lust to buy; secondly, that al ability was utterly lost.

And al things which were fat and excellent: That is, al plenty and abounce
is departed from thee; which do more confirm the former interpretation. For
seeing these things do signify a rich plenty, it is like, that that which went
before, is to be referred rather to lust, that the same thing may not be spoken
twice; although so it is wont to be some time, when the latter is added in
stead of a more full exposition. The Compl. and the K. Bible read, are perished
from thee. So Aretas and the common translation: but the sense is nothing
altered.

15 The merchants of these things; The cause being declared, now he comes to
the manner of mourning, with a brief repetitio^ of the cause. The merchants,
says he, of these things, that is, they who bestow al their labor about the
associating and retaining of these countries, and joining them to the service
of Rome. Who were made rich of her, getting ample rewards of this their
labor. We have seen before briefly with how great gain they traveled about
this marcha^dise, which opens a way to Bishopriks, Cardinalships, yea eve^ to
the highest Prelateship. And who sees not men of every country, being either
of great wit or learning, of great force either by riches or favor, or famous
for noblenes of birth and descent of blood, whose industry may be profitable
for the beautifying of Rome, to be hired by what means soever, to bend al
their cares and thoughts to this point? Wolseius and Polus flourished in our
country in our Fathers days. The first descended of base parents, but
ambitious, tumultuous, notably framed for the profit of Rome, and therefore
promoted to so great honors, that he was not afraid to vaunt himself somewhat
above the King. The other of a milder disposition, but of great authority for
noblenes of pare^tage: for which cause he waxed rich by the Romish abundance,
until he gave suspicion of a contrary mind, and bewrayed some desire to know
the truth. Then he perceived that Petoum a certain begging friar, to be set
against him of the Pope; whom he should have seen adorned with his spoils and
booties, if the thing had come to pass as the Pope wished. This labor is in
so great account, as that he who only begged a reward, should be equal by and
by to the highest States of the earth. But after that Rome shall be cast down, no
man will hyre this labor, eve^ for one farthing. This evil shall take these
merchants, when they have lost all hope of their gain.

Shall stand a far off: To weet, Cardinals, Bishops, and others, which at that
time sha^be conversant in other places than at Rome. They being set without
danger, with a lamentable voice shall bewail her ruin a far off, but they
shall have neither ability nor courage of mind to repel the danger.

16 And saying, alas, alas: It is the same concealing, which was in the
mourning of the Kings in ver. 10. whereby the truth and greatness of the sorrow
is expressed. The argument is somewhat diverse; for they agreably to their
persons did lament that so great a power was abolished. These complain that so
huge wealth was spoiled, which marcha^ts chiefly regard. Notwithstanding seeing
this fine linen, purple, skarlet, and the other decking signifies the pride
of Rome, upheld chie^ly by the riches of Spain, as at the 12 ver. the
merchants lament and ar altogether dismayed, that al these richesses have
profited her nothing; as thou they should say, how is she come to naught, that
was fortifyed by so great aid of the Spaniards, against which if the whole
christian world had conspired, worthily might any man think that they should
do nothing worth the pains taking?

17 And also every shipmaster: The third mourning is of the mariners and
watermen, that is of the inferior ministers of the Romish court, Deanes,
Abbots, Priors, General, Jesuits, and such like. These al live of the sea by
promoting the ordinances and decrees of the whore. Of which sort were the Spips
and Shipmasters in chap. 8.9.

And all the company of them that dwell in ships: The Complut. the Kings Bible,
and Aretas read thus, and every one that s^ileth in ships, the common
translation, and all that sale in the lake: this is further off, but as it
seems fetched from hence that ploion is a little ship rowed with oars, of
which there is more often use in Rivers and floods. Which interpretation is
not altogether to be refused in so great variety of copies, and declares more
plainly a certain distribution of the general comprehension into certain classes.

And whosoever trafike on the Sea: word for word in the Greek, do labor on
the Sea, as in the Gospel of John, labor the meat, that is, for the meat,
cha. six, verse twenty seventh. In this last member are comprehended all
which do study to the Popish doctrine, teaching, learning, and setting forth
the same either by voice or writings, defending the same to their power, or by
any other way or means whatsoever advauncing and promoting it.

Of which sort are the Mass Priests, Monks, Friars, above the rest at this
day the Jesuits, who do lean upon their cares lustily, and smite this sea
with all their strength, without which if the ship of the fisher man had bin,
it had dashed long since on the rocks. Although while they in rowing labor to
avoid Scylla, they rush upon Charybdis: by disputing they s^^ more openly in
the sight of men, the whores and Popes filthiness, which they strive to cover.

18 What city was like to this great city? As the mariners speak of Tyrus, Ezekiel
27.32. What city was like Tyrus, destroyed in the mids of the sea? And for
just cause did they astonished, ask this, when they considered with them
selves the former riches of the city, flourishing of late by the commerce of
so many, and so great nations, which they thought could be vanquished by no
strength of man. How much trouble wrought it Nebuchadnezar? Ezech. 29.18. How
much Alexander afterward? Who repented him of the siedge, he so despaired of
the winning thereof by force, who yet at an other time thought nothing
impossible for him. But these watermen should be dismayed for iuster causes at
Rome, late the Queen of the whole world. The most ancient city, the chair of
Peter, which alw^yes has overcome all calamities; and should be mighty and
flourishing even to her very old age, both by her own riches, and her friends.
These and many such things will compel them to cry out, what city was like to
this great city? Who would not have thought that so eminent excellency in all
things, should have bin free from destruction? How have we bin deceived,
dreaming of her everlastingnesse? How have we deceived others, vanting that
this ship shall never be drowned? How unexpected are all these things,
contrary to our persuasion, opinion, and vaunting? Such a force has this
wondering question.

19 And sh^l cast dust upon their heads; After the manner of mourners, Job.
2.12. For these shall wail so much the more earnestly, by how much they are
less able to upholde themselves by their own riches. But this Angel speaks
in the time past, they did cast dust on their heads: and also in the former
verse, and they cried seeing the smoke. Yet these things go before the ruin,
which they have joined and knit unto them. For which cause he seems to change
the time, and not only for the most certain truth of the thing to come, as the
Prophets are wont elsewhere.

Wherein were made rich all: Not only those chief purpled Fathers, but also
they who were of the basest state and condition. Behold the whole Hierarchy,
how do all flow in exceeding great riches? In every country very much and
the best ground came to them. Moreover it is a thing wonderful to be spoken,
they which fained to sustain their life by begging from town to town, lacked
nothing, which might serve even for riot. Miserable common people, who were so
deceived that they bestowed money on beggars far richer, then they
themselves, that did give. But such is the cunning of Rome to enrich her
friends. In these days how bountifully and liberally are our traitors,
wanting their country, goods, and friends, entertained at Rome, in Spain, and
elsewhere? They get that reward of their treason abroad, which by honest means
they could not obtain at home. A reward is not wanting at home for well doing.
But they hate true virtue, the fruit whereof they would receive. Rome makes
these men rich, counting it an unworthy thing (for here the whore will be godly)
that the maintainers of her honor should not become rich by her wealth alone,
howsoever they shall be destitute of all other aides. These may therefore for just
cause bewail the destruction of the whore, with whom they found the wages of
their naughtiness: which now they shall be compelled to practice for nothing.
For some are too fully minded, never to be thrifty.

20 O Heaven rejoice of her: Thus far the mourning of the wicked, now he
shows what abundant joy shall come from thence to the godly. Heaven is the
whole multitude of the Saints on earth, as often has bin observed. Apostles
and Prophets, are not those famous preachers of the Divine truth, which were in
ancient times, but all the godly executing the office of teaching in the
Church. For what do our affairs on earth, pertain to the holy souls resting
in heaven? The dead, says the wise man, know nothing at all, to weet, of our
affairs, who in the body are strangers from the Lord: Eccle. 9. And therefore
the Prophet says, that Abraham is ignorant of us, and that Israel knows us
not: Esaias 63.16. Therefore they are living saints on the earth, whom the Spirit
calls Apostles and Prophets, for a comfort in those troubles which they find
in the world; that although they be inferior by many degrees in gifts to the
ancient Apostles, yet they may know themselves to be in the same state and
account with God. He speaks to them by name, because the chief joy shall be
theirs, as their sorrow shall be greatest, because of the more deadly hatred
wherewith the whore was inflamed against them. From which we perceive, as has
bin said before, seeing the joy is common to all the elect, that those wayling
marcha^ts are not of this number; and therefore that they are said to be such,
rather for likeness sake, than for the truth of the thing.

For God has punished her: The Hebraisme is more significant; For God has
judged your judgment on her. This kind of speaking does show a punishment;
but yet, judgment and lawful examination of things going before, not inflicted
rashly. This is the matter of the joy, because God at length would avenge the
Saints on the whore, which so many ages has raged against them scotfree, with
all manner of injuries.

21 Then a certain Angel took up: Hitherto has bin declared the destruction
by words only; now a sign likeweise is used, whereby it may be declared that
it shall be sudden and eternal. And this is done by the ministry of a certain
third Angel; of whom there is no mention made from whence he came: peradventure
because he is that first, whose place from whence he came is showed in ver. 1:
who now is brought in again to perform that very thing, which thar
preparation said, would come by and by. For unless this casting of a millstone
into the sea, be the very overthrowing of Rome, it is not described by what way
it shall be done. In the beginning of the chapter following, we shall understand
that the thing is accomplished. And the former Angels went but a little before
the destruction. Wherefore either now is handled the same overthrow, or he
wholly concealeth how it should be performed.

A millstone cast into the sea: may be a fit sign of the ruin, as the burning
mountain cast into the sea, was of the beginning of Antichristian tyranny,
chap. 8.8. But yet the thing is dark to us. The event will manifest it at
length. This Angel is caled strong, taking up a stone like a millstone, and
casting it into the sea: for by so many degrees is the type proposed. Which
things declare an admirable swiftness of this ruin, and no more repairable. A
great stone by his waightinesse falls down with a great violence: yet with a
greater if it be cast: but with much more being thrown of some valiant and
strong man. Neither is there hope, that that shall flote again in the top,
which both his own weight, and outward force, have fastened in the lowest
bottom So shall Babylon be cast with violence, neither shall it be found any
more, Yet these things are not spoken so, as if he were to be taken at the
first assault, which before we have showed by a probable reason, shall be
besieged for some space: even as also the old Babylon came not into Cyrus
power, but after some long delay: but because after it has bin taken, and
begun to be spoiled, very quickly shall her destruction be finished. It may be
that this type may signify the manner of taking Rome, which we know was used in
Babylon. Of right is the type one, of them both, whose impiety is alike; and
like also shall be the destruction: Ier. 51.63.64.

With such violence shall be cast: The word is joined with the sign, without
which the signs are weak.

22 And the voice of Harpers: He declares this destruction more at large,
after the manner of the Prophets, who are wont to describe a final overthrow in
such words, as Ier. I will cause to perish from them, the voice of gladness, and
the voi^e of mirth, and the voice of the bridgrome, the noise of the milstones,
and the light of the candle, chap. 25.10. All things, says he, shall be
destroyed, which per^eine either to present delectation and necessity, or to
future increasing For hitherto belongs this special rehearsing. Harpers are
they which play on the harp: Musicians are by a common name, such as singe
with loud voice. The pipe and trumpet are windy instruments. Those former are
of a milder sound and sweetness: these of a rougher, and belonging to war:
although there be some use of it in solemnities of peace. But al belong to
mirth, as we learn from Jeremy, from whom these things are fetched: from
whence it would be a thing unpleasant and absurd to deal with the Jesuit any
further about mourning pipes.

Nor any crafts man: After those things of delectation, he rehearses the
things which appertain nearer to the life: of which there is a more necessary
use, as of craftsmen and milles. Where there is any society of men, it is
needful that artificers be in the same place: but chiefly it behooveth that
there be sufficient victuals, which the milles do note out, without which no
man can continue scarce for one day. Behold whither at length our riot has
brought us, procuring also destruction to those instruments which we have
abused to vanity and naughtines: not leaving any common food there, where
gluttony and bellycheere only were regarded.

23 And the light of a candle: Candles are a confort in the night, the use
whereof no man will want, although he be of a most poor condition. But thou will say, what great damage can be in the loss of things of so small price?
Such small matters most fitly describe the greatness of the evil. For if
things most common and of most frequent use are lacking, any store of things of
some moment, is not to be expected: unless peradventure the candles are to be
referred to the bridgroome and bride, which follow. They were wont to be used
solemly in marriages. From whence is the parable of the ten Virgins which
came forth with their lamps to meet the bridgroome, Mat. 25.1. Doubtless
Christ borrows the similitude from a thing in comm usage and custom.
Children in time past were called scotioi, which were born ek ton adadouketon
gamon, from marriages, in which no torches were carried before them, as the
Interpr. of Homer has observed, Iliad. E. It was also a custom among the
Romans, for a boy that had Father and mother living, to bear before the
spouse, a torch of a white thorn, because they were married in the night, as
Plutarche says in his Problemes. But that is clear which is added concerning
the bridgroome and the bride, to weet, that this calamity shall not lie upon her
only for some time, but that there shall be no hope of any better estate in
time to come. This is it which the voice of the bridegroom and bride means,
as though he should say, never shall any marriages be contracted here, whereby
should be made an increasing of posterity.

For thy merchants were the great men of the earth: Here the sins of the city
are rehearsed to be three; Luxury, Idolatry, and the murder of the saints.
Her riot appears, because they that serve her lust are made the great men of
the earth. It must needs be that her excess in pleasures is very wicked, whose
servants are advanced unto so great dignity. We have showed before that this
is a merchandise of souls, and that these marcha^ts are the Lords Cardinals.
Which who sees and acknowledges not to be these great men, manifest
demonstrations of the Romish luxury? Thomas Wolsey our countreyman in often
speech was not ashamed to say, I and my King. Such a Cardinalship is pride. But
why may they not vaunt themselves so proudly, when they shall see great Princes
to sue for this their dignity, or at the least to glory no less in the same
being given them, then in the chief ornament of majesty? There have bin many
of old eve^ of the Kings stock, who judged this degree; not unworthy the
nobleness of their race. With us in Queen Maryes days was Cardinal Poole of
a Princely lineage. Among the Franch of late Cardinal Borbon of the blood
royal, and of Lorrrain, brother of the Duke of Guise. Albert of Austriche yet
flourishes, but yesterday a Cardinal, and brother of Rodulphe the Emperor. Is
not this in very truth a great dignity, which so great Princes do not refuse?
May they not of right be called the great men of the earth, which are placed in
so high a top of honor? But thou will say it yet more if thou shall see the
asse^bly of the stately Lords sitting together at Rome. Let some Prince come,
whom the Pope for honors sake will receive into the company of the Cardinals,
what place has he assigned for him? To weet, before the last Cardinal Deacon,
so as if there shall be a great and full senate, the Prince himself after three
score and eight men clothed in purple garments, shall sit the last save one, as
of late in the year 1593. Maximilian the Prince of Bavarie. This is that
intolerable pride, yet meet for the Romish court; where even Emperors kiss
the feet of the Pope: why should not the Consellers of this Prelate, excel
other Princes in dignity? But at length this pride shall call forth that low
estate, whereby Rome shall be pressed down even to Hell. It is manifest enough
from the foresaid things, how from this fountain, Idolatry has flowen into
all the West part. Neither is there any need of more words concerning the
murders of the Saints, which we have touched before; neither is there any man
to whom they are not most certainly known.

CHAP. 19.
AND after these I heard a great voice of a great multitude in Heaven, saying
Halleluia, salvation, and honor, and glory, and strength to the Lord our God.

2 For true and righteous are his judgments: and he has condemned that great
whore, which has corrupted the earth with her fornication, and has avenged
the blood of his servants shed by her hands.

3 And again they said, Halleluja: and the smoke of her rose up for evermore.

4 And the four and twenty Elders, and the four Beasts fell down, and
worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying Amen, Hallelujah.

5 Then a voice came out from the throne, saying, praise our God all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him both small and great.

6 And I heard like a voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of strong thundrings saying, Hallelujah, for the Lord
that God our almighty one has reigned.

7 Let us be glad and rejoice, and give glory to him, for the marriage of the
lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready.

8 And to her was given that she should be arrayed with pure fine linen, for
the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the Saints.

9 Then he said unto me, write, blessed are they which are called to the Lambs
supper. And he said unto me, these words of God are true.

10 And I fell before his feet, to worship him: but he said unto me, see thou
do it not: I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren, which have the
testimony of Jesus. Worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of
Prophecy.

11 And J saw heaven open, and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon was
called faithful and true: and he judges and fights righteously.

12 And his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns:
and he had a name written, that no man knwe but himself.

13 And he was clothed with a garment dipped in blood; and his name is called THE
WORD OF GOD.

14 And the hosts which are in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed
with fine linen white and pure.

15 Out of his mouth went a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
Heathen: for he shall rule them with a rod of iron; for he it is that shall
tread the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.

16 And he had upon his garment, and upon his thigh a name written; THE KING OF
KINGS, and LORD OF LORDS.

17 And J saw an Angel stand in the Sun, wWho cried with a loud voice, saying
to all the fowls that did fly by the mids of heaven, come and gather your
selves together unto the supper of the great God.

18 That ye may eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Tribuns, and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and
the flesh of all free men, and boundmen, and of small and great.

19 And J saw that Beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their hosts gathered
together to make battle against him that sat on the horse, and against his
army.

20 But the Beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet, that wrought
miracles before him, whereby he deceived them, that received the Beasts mark,
and them that worshipped his Jmage. These both were alive cast into a lake of
fire burning with brimstone.

21 And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sits upon the
horse, which comes out of his mouth, and all the fowls were filled full with
their flesh.


The Analysis.
HITHERTO have bin the things which go before the destruction, or are joined
together with it: now those things which follow it. This is a thanks giving in
the four first verses; and that is twofold: One of the multitude without
difference, both for the just punishments taken of the whore, ver. 1.2. and
also repeated again, because of the eternity of the same punishment, ver. 3.
The other is of the Elders and Beasts, ver. 4. And thus far is the more full
declaration of the fifth vial. There remain yet two, the sixth to be powered out
upon Euphrates: and the seventh into the air. That former is handled in the
rest of this chapter even unto the 20. verse. This last is continued from
thence to the conclusion of the whole book. There were two parts of that former
in chap. 16. The drying up of Euphrates, and preparation to war. Likewise two
parts of the declaration are propounded, after the same manner. We have showed
that that drying up did signify the calling of the Jews which is described in
this place, first, by a provoking to praise God, and by the joy of the friends
of the bridgroome, ver. 6.7. then by the preparation for the marriage, ver. 8.
Furthermore by the certenty of the thing, which therefore he commands to be
written and registered; and the truth whereof he confirms, partly from the
principal author, ver. 9. partly from himself the minister a glorious and
holy Angel, ver. 10. The preparation for war, first is of the Saints, whose
Captain is Christ himself, of who^ a diverse form is expressed, and diverse
names applied to those diverse shapes. All which notwithstanding ar referred
either unto righteousness in judgment, or to fortitude in war, as is showed in
the end of verse 11. Therefore he comes to judgment furnished, both sitting
upon a white horse, and by a fit name called faithful and true, ver. 11. and
also with flaming eyes and an unknown name, ver. 12. He comes forth to the
battle, both himself clothed with a bloody garment called the word of God, ver.
13. And also a great army following him, ver. 14. and having ordinances of
war, ver. 15. Whose name fit for this show is King of Kings etc. ver. 16. And
in such wise is the Captain. The Soldiers are gathered together by the voice
of an herald standing in the Sun, and promising certain victory, ver. 17.18.
The army also of the enemies is assembled; ver. 19. declared now only in a
word, the preparation whereof has already bin spoken off sufficiently in chap.
16.13.14.15.16. Such is the larger declaration of the sixth vial, the which
proceeds no further than the preparation of the war. The seventh follows,
partly consisting in the destruction of the enemies, partly in the happiness
of the Church, after they are destroyed. The enemies are two, the Western
Beast, and Eastern Dragon: of his destruction it is spoken in the two other
verses of this chapter, both of the Prince himself, ver. 20. and also of his
soldiers, ver. 21.

Scholions.
1 And after these things J heard a voice: These first verses we refer in the
Analysis to the fifth vial, the ruin of Rome: by which it is declared, how
joyful an argument of praising God, her destruction shall ministet to the
saints. The Angel exhorted them to rejoice, before in chap. 18.20. And now the
thing being brought to pass, all the godly shall triumph earnestly. But seeing
this executing follows the destruction, it must needs be that either this
throwing of the millstone into the sea, is the very destroying of the city, or
that the manner of destroying of it is altogether concealed: which yet
notwithstanding shall come to pass between that sign given, and this
thankesgiving. The first gratulation is of a great multitude in heaven, that
is, of the mixed multitude of the Church conversant on earth: for we keep in
the common signification of this word: which bears not that these things
should be referred to any knowledge, which the heavenly souls have of things
done with us. The citizens therefore of this militant Church in every country,
where the fame shall come, they shall leap for joy, and shall break forth into
this grateful commemoration.

Hallelujah: Halleluiah is an Hebrew word, praise ye the Lord: whereby the
faithful exhort one an other to give thanks, and prepare their minds as it
were with this preface. True joy suffers not it self to be contained in the
bosom of any one, but takes to her self fellows, to whom she may both
impart her self, and also may be more stirred up by the joint affection of
others. This one word contains large matter of very great joy. But why does
the heavenly multitude speak now in Hebrew? Is there more holiness in these
lettres and syllables than in other? They are toys. Are then some Hebrew words
kept, as Osanna, Amen, Abba, and the like, which we shall use as tokens of our
concord with the ancient Church, that both we believe in the same God, and
invocate him alone? This indeed is a profitable cause of retaining these words:
but especially this seems to be the reason in this place, that the Church of
the Gentiles after Rome be overthrown, shall provoke their brethren the Jews to
the faith, that impediment being taken away, which most of all hindered their
conversion; it could not be that the crucifyers should acknowledge the same
Lord, while this flourished, or was at all, which gave leave to crucify him.
This is the cause why the Hebrew word now sounds again so often. Praises
were not in these words before time: but when the conversion of the Jews is at
hand joined next to this rejoicing, for just cause now the Saints do speak
with the tongue of one sheepfold.

Salvation, and honor, and glory: That is the praise of salvation, honor, and
glory, and praise of power be given to our Lord. Glory is a certain very
excellent opinion which a man has of any ones excellency, therefore called of
the Grecians doxa. Wherefore in this destruction of Rome so bright a beam of
Gods goodness and power shall shine forth, that all the faithful shall admire it,
and be astonished. Honor is that worship both inward and outward, whereby we do
reverence so great excellency. It is and ought always to be joined with glory:
otherweise vain is that estimation of one, which no duty accompanies: the
vulgar latin reads, praise, and glory, and power, be to our God: The Complut.
and the Kings Bible have, Salvation, and power, and glory of our God.

2 Because true and righteous: The truth in judgments respects the promise:
righteousness rewarding according to their deserts. The credit of both these
falls into utter decay with the world because of delaying: from whence now
for good cause God is praised of his people in both these respects; whereas he
has proved sufficiently to the world, that he does punish naughty acts, and
that he neglects not the injuries which are done to his.

3 And again they said: An other thanks giving, the thing being more certainly
known. The first tidings of the taking of the city, shall cause the first, as it
seems; but when the faithful shall have learned that the same is utterly
overthrown, without al hope of renewing, they shall renew their joy, and shall
give new thanks a fresh. The second is done in fewer words than the former:
peradventure according to our disposition, whose first brunt is most vehement.

And her smoke rose up: That is, now is she delivered up to eternal punishment
to be tormented. For an everlasting fire is showed by the smoke ascending for
evermore: by which kind of speaking is signified, that the continual
remembrance of her punishment shall be with all the godly always. A token whereof
they shall have continually before their eyes, the smoke ascending without
intermission, least perhaps they should forget it. He alludeth to the eternal
torment of the wicked. Therefore the eternity of the punishment shall give a new
cause of gladness. And not without cause, when they know that the insolency
of the wicked whore, shall not only be restrained for the present, but also
that none shall have any fear of her for the time to come.

4 And those fowr and twenty Elders fell down: Such was the rejoicing of the
mixed multitude, there follows the assembly of the faithful gathered together
solemly, which do labor openly and jointly to the same duty of thanks
giving. For this multitude of Elders and Beasts gives a show of an
Ecclesiastical assembly: which God the Father, for his sons sake cou^teth
such, as this most holy company represents. And therefore, as often as any
thing is performed by a common name, that is showed by this sacred Senate, as we
have showed in chap. 4. Such therefore shall be the order of giving thanks, that
the end and conclusion of the common thanks giving, be reserved to the public
congregations. And so it has come to pass, that private rejoicing always
goes before the common and publik. Any blast of report is wont to stir up
that first: this is not undertake^ but when the things are thoroughly known and
undoubted. But the four and twenty Elders fall down, when the Beasts give
glory and thanks to him that sits on the throne. It belongs to these to
moderate the whole action in the public assembly; the rest of the congregation
ought to join their prayers, and to testify their consent by a common voice in
the end. According to this custom there are rehearsed here only two words,
Amen, Allelujah. As though that former were of the Elders; this latter, the
sum of the thanks giving which the Beasts utter in conceived words. But this
order has bin declared more fully in chap. 4. from whence this ought to be
understood the same; which now is showed briefly. But observe that the last
songs of the Church of the Gentiles shall be gratulatory, which yield no other
song then Halleluiah. Even as the book of the Psalms is concluded with songs
of praises. She sunge in time past many lamentable songs, and hymns of a mixed
kind, but the last part of the Comedy shall be doubtless a most joyful triumph.
And these are the funerals of the city of Rome, and the rites by which her
burial shall be celebrated. The day and year cannot certainly be set down, in
which her funerals shall be: yet from other scriptures I think it to be clear,
that they shall not be differred at the furdest, beyond three score years The
sixeteenth chapter has taught, that next after that the vial is powered out
upon the throne, Euphsates shall be dried up, that is, after Rome destroyed, the
Jews shall be converted. And other places seem to confirm, that their first
calling shall be about the fiftieth year above one thousand six hundredth. But
how much Rome preventeth that time, it is uncertain: it is like, but a very
little, considering that the choosing of a new people follows it at the
heels. We have seen how far the vials have proceeded. The next is now to be
powered out on the Sun, which is shortly to be expected: by the heat whereof,
after Rome has bin very hot a short space, she shall approach the flamme of
fire by the fifth vial, which shall burn her altogether; then the throne shall be
destroyed, and this gratulation prepared for the godly. Do thou then, o
Rome, keep now a year of Iubile, when thy funeral rather were to be provided
for? In very deed, within the space of one Iubile, that is, about fifty years
hence, thou shall keep Iubile in truth, not so much thy self by rejoicing, as
by giving occasion of exceeding great joy to all the saints by thy destruction.
Do thou then with Balthassar, abandon thy self to eatings and drinkings,
Cyrus compassing abou thy walls, and being already entered into the channel of
Euphrates, which is turned aside? I know that the admonition of an Heretic
(as thou will have me to be,) with thee is of no force; but consider
diligently the man or the thing it self, if hatred will suffer thee, least
peradventure, whom thou countest an Heretic, thou find him too late a true
Prophet: yet if thou despise my voice, let the holy remnant here, if any lie
hid in thee. Awake ye elect, come ye out, make have to flee away, ye have
lain too long in the bedds of Sodom, a shower of brimstone will fall by and
by, unless ye depart quickly, you cannot be safe. Obey the Spirit, who would
have you to be warned by this sacred Revelation. Why do ye hang upon this
purpled company, whose eyes God has blinded by his just judgment? If my
admonition shall have place with you, ye shall refresh greatly the minds of the
brethren, but the fruit shall be your own, to weet the salvation both of souls
and bodies.

5 Then a voice came out from the throne: Hitherto the fifth vial; now the sixth
is handled. For this exhortation belongs to new praises, not to the
destruction of Babylon. For to what end should there be a commandment again
touching this thing, and a new triumph? Therefore now it is declared, how the
waters of Euphrates shall be dried up. This followed next the overthrow of the
throne chap. 16.12. Because the great river shall be turned into dry ground,
from hence we learn that nothing should be a let to the guests, or rather to
the new bride, as is plainly confirmed in verse 7.

Because the marriage of the Lamb is come: Which surely was the reason why we
have interpreted that sixth vial, concerning the calling of the Jews. First
therefore the efficient cause of this calling is set forth, a voice coming forth
from the throne. Which yet is not of the Father himself, but of the Son, as
it is clear from that which follows, praise ye our God. It came out of the
throne, because the Son shall effect this wonderful thing rather by his own
power, than by any aid of man. He shall take to himself alone the duties of
this thing, and shall perform all wholly by himself. Which way also
otherweise, should the Eastern Jews beyond Euphrates first embrace the faith,
which are furthest off from hearing of the Gospel? Yet no sound thundering from
heaven is to be expected; but this voice is the efficacy of the Spirit, whom
God now shall send into the hearts of his people, that being turned to him with
all their hearts, they may acknowledge, praise, and celebrate the one only true
God, his Son Jesus, and the H. Ghost. Now God powers upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitans of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace, and of prayer,
Zach. 12.10. Now he will build the Virgin of Israel, and shall adorn her self
with her timbrels, and shall go before in the dance of them that praise; now he
shall say, rejoice with gladness for Jacob, and showt for joy openly before the
very Gentiles: publish, praise, and say, save o Lord thy peopeople, the remnant
of Israel. Iere. 31.4.7. But it is to be observed how this calling is joined
together with the destruction of Rome. It is severed from it by no other
transition, but as rising from thence forthwith from her fall, becomes clear
to the world. The Temple was full of smoke that no man could enter in, until
God had satisfied his anger upon the whore; but after he has punished her
according to her deserts, then as it were with a quiet mind, he shall co^vert
himself wholly to accomplish the salvation of all his elect, and to receiv
again his people sent away from him by so longue a banishment. Wherefore if we
have kept a true account of this calling, we shall not wander much from the
last destruction of Rome.

Praise ye our God: No man ca^ praise God, but he that knows him, neither al
generally, but the whole multitude of the elect on earth, endued with the
knowledge of God, may consent to praise him. Therefore this provocation
declares that calling, and the same general, when as al are bidden to praise,
both universally, and particularly, as well the small of the Jews, who because
of their new coming to the faith, might seem at that time to have bin scarce
borne; as also the great of the Gentiles, who being more grown in Christ, have
obtained a full maturity by a long profession, who shall praise God for their
brethrens conversion, when they shall see that which has not bin told them, and
shall understand that which they have not heard, Isay 52.14. But the Jews
themselves then with joyful and glad minds, shall hear, that favor at length
is showed them; that their eyes are opened for to know the truth, that they are
reduced again, built, multiplied, and stablished more then before time, so as
they shall satisfy themselves with no praises. Then, faith Jeremy, shall proceed
out of them voice of thanks giving, and the voice of them that laugh, then
shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, the young men and old men together, chap.
30 19. and 31.13. and many the like things, perteining to the ioyfulnes of that
most pleasant time.

6 And I heard as it were a sound: The voice of a new people converted to
Christ, and praising God for this unexpected bounteousnes. This is an exceeding
great voice, by reason of the multitude of the people; then also making a noise
in the beginning by obscure reports, and more easy to be understood what it
means, then the noise of waters roaring confusedly, which yet notwithstanding
a while after shall be terrible, and apaling like thunder. It may be doubtful,
whither this be the voice of the Gentiles, as it were the friends of the
bridegroom, or of the Jews themselves who embrace the calling. The Gentiles
had learned before to found Hallelujah. And now he bids them speak to their
brethren, and to stir up them by a new shoute. Also the next verse following
declares the exultatio^ of friends rejoicing in their behalf. But this
terrible voice, as it were of waters and thunders, seems to belong to the
Jews. Yet nevertheless it may be the joint voice of both peoples. Whose
soever it is, either of the one, or of both, we understand from hence an
effectual calling. But the voice calls them to praise God, because now he
has obtained his kingdom. Christ has always ruled: but the glory of his
Kingdom shall then flourish most clearly, which in former times, partly the
infidelity of the Jews, partly the tyranny of the Dragon and Beast did much
obscure. Now a stone hewn out of the mountain without hands shall reign,
which Kingdom shall not be destroyed for ever, neither be lest to an other
people. Dan. 2.44. He makes mention of Gods omnipotency in getting this
Kingdom, whereby in very truth he declared himself most mighty in destroying
the enemies, who with all their strength, will resist this Kingdom when it
begins.

7 Let us be glad and rejoice: So the friends of the bridegroom seem to
provoke one an other to joy. Let us, say they, adorn ourselves most
gorgeously, as it is wont to be done in triumphs and festival days, and common
rejoicing. And it is a thing indeed very greatly to be triumphed for, to
understand that brethren divided from us by so lamentable a divorce, so many
ages, are now at length chosen into the same body of Christ with us. Of which
joy the Prophets spoke many excellent things.

Because the marriage is come: For as the former coming was called gamos a
marriage, Mat. 22.2. whereby Christ joined to himself the Gentiles, and took
them into the marriage bed: so likeweise much more shall be the time of marriage,
when he shall draw the Jews, whom first he woed, to his love, and company: from
whence it is not without cause, that in the same place it is said, he made
marriages for his Son, not one, but more; the former at his first coming; the
second at this calling of the Jews. Which is more evident in the Greek, where
gamos, marriage, is used in the singular number. The Latins call every
particular marriage, nuptias, marriages in the plural number.

And his wife has made her self ready: Both sisters, as well the Gentiles, as
the Jews, make one wife, being married to the same bridegroom, as once Leah
and Rachell to Jacob. Leah indeed more deformed, to weet, we Gentiles have
entered first into the company of the bed, and became also far more
fruitful; but the chosen and fair Rachell, the people of the Jews, shall at
length also be brought into the bed chamber, and shall become a mother of most
sweet children.

8 And to her was granted: To weet, the new bride, which of late was
altogether void of this apparel. The Church of the Gentiles was most glorious
in her first beginning. A crown of twelve stars adorned her head, and all the
residue of her was clothed with the Sun, chap. 12.1. Therefore this fine
linen is not provided for her: but to that other, which before time lay
ilfavoured, foul, naked, not covered so much as with rags, these fine linen
garments are given, whereby she may hide her deformed nakedness. And this fine
linen is Jesus Christ, made ours for righteousness and salvation by imputation:
which garment the Jews wanted, while refusing Christ and his righteousness,
they went about to establish their own righteousness: but at length being
graffed in by faith, they shall renounce their former hope, and shall embrace
this salvation, clad with this glorious garment only.

That she should be arrayed with pure fine linen, and shining: He says not,
fine linen was given unto her, but, to her was granted, that she should be
arrayed with fine linen etc. This is the difference, because in that former is
signified, that fine linen is given immediately; in this, mediately by faith.
This fine linen is pure and shining: pure, in respect of justification,
because it presents us unblameable and without fault, free from all spotte
and blemish: shining, in respect of glory, both with God, who because of this
purity in his Son, makes us heirs of his eternal Kingdom; and also with
men, to whom it manifests our adoption by her most shining fruits, which the
Spirit working together with us, makes manifest unto them.

For the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the Saints: Behold how
distinctly and plaiynly the Spirit speaks: for he says not that the
righteousnesses of the Saints are fine linen, but contrariweise that the fine
linen is the righteousnesses; neither of the wicked, as when a man is first
converted to God, but, of the Saints: that is, the wholle justification, ye
even of those whose piety does most of all show it self, comes not from
themselves, and from things ingraffed, but abides without in the outward
garment, to weet of Christ, whom we put on by faith only. A most plain
scripture, which, o ye Papists, consider diligently, that your blasphemous
pride being at length rejected, ye may seek true salvation from thence, from
whence alone it may be obtained. Do ye thrust upon God the merits of the
Saints? Away with those polluted garments, the fine linen given, is our
iustifications: the clothing is not made of our virtues, whereby we may be able
to stand before God. No similitude does set more clearly before our eyes the
imputation of righteousness by faith, then this garment used so often in the
Scriptures. But why, will thou say, does he say iustifications rather then
justification? not to destroy the only righteousness of faith, but seeing
dikaioma, justification is a proof whereby a man shows himself to be just,
as chap. 15.4. And there is a double argument to this purpose, one before God
by faith, in which respect Christ is the white fine linen of the Saints,
chap. 7.13.14. Another before men, by the works of sanctification; in regard of
this double argument the Spirit says iustifications, that he may contain in
one word, that which even now he declared by two, pure and shining. For the
works of holiness, if they be taken asunder, are not pure; or if faith be
considered by it self, it is not shining. For it lies hidden within, far
from the eyes of men. Neither of both therefore apart can be called
iustifications, both are to be joined together, to express the force of the
multitude. And to whom this fine linen is given, both are found in them.

9 Then he said unto me write: Who said? Not he that sat upon the throne. For
the Elders worshipped him, ver. 4. This, it was not lawful, being the fellow
servant of John. Therefore it is some Angel, to whom were committed the charge
of sealing this Prophecy. First therefore he bids him write: by which so
solemn commandment he teaches that there is in it a great and strange
matter. We commit to writing things, the credit where of we will have to be
confirmed unto all posterity: for which cause, laws were graven once in
Brass, and set up in a public place. Also God speaking to Jeremy concerning
this same thing; Write, says he, for thy self all the words which I speak
unto thee, in a book, chap. 30.2. As if God providing for our infirmity, should
give us sealed writings, from which we might call upon him for help more
freely and boldly, if peradventure he should seem to forget his promise. But
not only John is confirmed hereby, but also the event is respected, as we have
seen from the like places before: as if it should come to pass that by the
authority of some holy man, some public writing should be set forth, which
most plainly should confirm this thing not to be new, but foreshewed of God
from the furthest times, and that therefore the goodness and truth of God is to
be acknowledged and praised in the same. But the time will manifest, what at
length is to be thought concerning this matter. But what is it which he is
commanded to write? That they are blessed which are called to the marriage
supper of the La^be; a thing indeed wonderful and never heard off before, that
al should be blessed which are called. Before time this rule was in force; many
are called, few chosen: which thing example also has prooved true, when the
calling fell not out prosperously to the ancient ghests, who being called
refused to come. But now it shall be otherweise. All the called shall come gladly,
neither shall allege for their excuse things of small importance, as did those
former, Mat. 22. So great now shall be the efficacy and grace of the Spirit, that
they shall obey at the first hearing. Before, says Isaiah, she travailed, she
brought forth, and before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child.
Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall the earth be
brought forth in one day? Or shall a nation be borne at once? For as soon as
Zion travailed, she brought forth her children etc. So Psalm. 110.3. Thy people
most voluntary of all men in the time of thine armies in the beautiful places
of thy holiness, from the womb of the mourning, shall be to thee dew of thy
youth. Many such things might be brought, and peradventure it would be
profitable; at least weise that occasion might be given to our men to consider
diligently of those places: from the true meaning whereof I fear that we err,
by interpreting the things that are to come, as if they were past. This
sentence therefore, which is commanded to be written, takes away al scruple
from John. He might have minded the former obstinacy of the nation, and for
that cause have doubted of their conversion. But the Angel commands this care
to depart. There shall be so great diligence of the people, that it shall be
sufficient for them to be called away. It is to be observed, that the Jews
both here and elsewhere in many places, are called keclemenous in the
preterperfect tence, by a certain prerogative of calling, as it seems, as who
were called ever since the first times of the world. Mat. 22.3.4.8. But the
Gentiles kletous Mat. 22.14. because they were first called at Christ coming,
or rather after his death. Which difference seems to be observed in this
revelation; from whence chap. 17.14. they, who the Lamb being their Captain,
do subdue the tenn Kings, are named called and chosen, whom, it is manifest to
be the faithful among the Gentiles.

These words are true: The second confirmation taken from the principal
author, as though he should say, respect not me, as reporting any thing of
mine own, but be so persuaded, that this is the decree of the most High God,
as thou thy self heardest even now with thine own ears, ver. 5. but the
natural placing of the words has an emphasis, as it is in the Greek, which by
the displacing is lost; these are the true words of God himself, that is, of
most divine, most excellent, and most certain truth. True are also some words of
men, but there is some infirmity in our most true things. We always speak
from the earth, John 3.31. Therefore some preferment is attributed to this
truth, which appears not, if we change the order of the words. It is no
strange thing, that the words of God should be true.

10 And I fell down before his feet; Why now more then before? Was he abashed
with the majesty of the Angel? But he had bin accustomed now a long time to
wonderful sights. Or was it for joy of the conversion of his nation? so in deed
it seems. For John being ravished, as it is clear from the answer of the
Angel, with the sweetness of this Prophecy, for sudden joy, wherewith he was
carried away, would give more worship then was meet, to so welcome a messenger.

See that not: to weet, that thou worship me not, a defective speech, noting
out the grievousnesse of the naughty act: for he makes speed, and finisheth
not the sentence for have. Even as we are wont to prohibit a thing, either by
sudden crying out, or by the hand, when the thing permits not any time for
words. He confirms the prohibition by two reasons: first from the equal
dignity of the Ministers of Christ: J am, says he, thy fellow servant, and not
only of the Apostles, but also of thy brethren which have the testimony of
Jesus. Al our office is equal: they who preach Christ, and salvation by him, are
in equal dignity with them, which reveal things to come. The office of
preaching is equal to the office of revealing: this is the meaning of that
which is said in the end of the verse. For the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit
of Prophecy. The second reason is, because adoration belongs to God only;
Worship him, says he, to whom alone such worship is due. Do not ye, o Popish
Idolaters, tremble at these words? Ye take great pains about devising reasons,
why the Angel prohibited adoration, as though he himself has not rendered most
clear ones in his own words. But what reasons bring ye? To weet, that after
our flesh taken of Christ, the Angels are greatly afraid to see the same
prostrate before them, as Gregory the Great will have it. Moreover because,
beside this dignity, men are also Ministers of Christ, Prophets, and messengers
of the Evangelical doctrine, and Martyrs for the same. Be it so, do ye not
perceive that you are killed with your own swords? If they fear much to see
our nature prostrate to them, after the same taken of Christ; why do ye cast
down your nature to stones, and painted Images, and put the holy Angels in
fear? If they will not be worshipped of the Ministers of Christ, either at
length, cease to do wickedly, or at least confess your selves not to be
Ministers of Christ. And in this weise is the first calling of the Jews, that
shall be now shortly, which Daniel describes by a certain pointing out of the
time, chap. 12.12. and c, Ezechiel saw it shadowed out by the dry bones, moving
themselves with an exceeding great noise, and shaking, and by and after covered
with sinews and flesh. chap. 37.78. as we shall hear afterward, God willing
more fully.

11 Then J saw heaven open: It being declared how Euphrates must be dried up,
or rather to what end, that is to say, that nothing may be an impediment to
the Jews returning into their own country, now he proceeds to the other
part of the sixth vial, the preparation for war, the Captain whereof is first
described. And such a form of him is exhibited not only as is needful for
this war, but also which declares the whole state of things from that
instant moment, even to the end of al things. It is no new thing, that under
the person of Christ, a short and brief Prophecy of the whole state of his
spouse should be delivered. He is not changed; unless in so much as it is
convenient for his Church. Therefore in this new shape as in a glass, we ought
to behold the face of the spouse, by how much it is to be considered the more
diligently. This wonderful sight is seen in heaven open, that is, in the holy
Church, whose most bright glory now most of all shall be made manifest to al men,
as before by a door open in heaven, the notable dignity and excellency of the
first Church, as it was in the Apostles days, and by and by after, chap. 4.1.
But this is more ample glory, that heaven is opened not by some little door,
but by a whole gate; ye whole walls, that I may so say, nothing letting but
that her full majesty now may be seen of men, as far as is granted on earth.

And behold a white horse: We may not suppose that Christ shall come forth in
any visible shape; these things are far from his last coming, as those
things which follow will manifest; but he will show forth openly and evidently
such a force in the administration of things, as this figure represents. The
whole description consists of four parts. In every one of which is to be
considered the preparation and name. In this first part the furnishing is a
white horse, the name faithful and true. The similitude of which things, with
that in chap. 6.2. has caused that some did think this to be the same vision,
by which error they confound all things. They differ much in times, and in
argument. That white horse belong to the first lists. But this to the last
goal. That former went forth by and by after John, when Traiane flourished,
and his next successors. This last is not seen but after the destruction of
Rome. There, the confused multitude of all the believers was respected. Here,
the conversion of the nation of the Jews only is entreated off. Yet herin
they agree, that the white horse in both places signifies Christ triumphing by
his truth; but the^ the Gentiles being subdued; now at length a stubburne
people being reconciled unto him. To which thing he carried a name fitted:
whereby he shows, that he will now at last manifest to the whole world how
faithful and true he is, in performing his promises; and that not any thing,
even the least shall be frustrate, which once he foreshewed by the Prophets,
concerning the restoring of this nation in the last times. Such a one therefore
shall Christ be, notable by these marks, when he shall begin the conversion of
this people. His promise shall seem to have bin forgotten through long delay;
which at length he shall perform, with most plentiful increase of new joy.

And who jugeth and fightest justly: So Theod. Beza translateth, a relative
being put between, as though these things together with the former, should
constitute the name it self: which in the rest is wont to be shorter: but the
sense is al one, seeing it is in likeweise, whither a man be counted such by his
name, or found to be of this sort in very deed. The word have this force
properly; and he judges and fights in righteousness: where the coniunctio^
copulative may be a causal, as though these words should render a reason, both
of the white horse, and also of the name; and should be added to the same in
stead of an interpretation. He sits upon a white horse, because he fights
righteously. His name is faithful and true, because he judges righteously.
Which words are spoken in respect of his own people, taken, as they seem, out
of Psalm. 96.10.13. where, to judge in truth and righteousness, signifies to
rule and moderate his people in framing and ordering their life according to
truth and righteousness, and that not only as touching their outward actions,
but also in respect of inward newness of the heart: which depends upon the
regeneration of the Spirit, whereby we are reformed after the Image of God, as
Calvin has written very well. These words therefore declare the effectual power
of calling, which Christ shall now bestow abounda^tly upon his; and moreover
safety from their enemies, with whom he will make war and render them a reward
meet for their deserts.

12 And his eyes: The second part of the description: where his eyes are as it
were a flame of fire, and on his head are many crowns: but a name unknown to
all men, but to himself alone. As touching his eyes, they are most sharp,
pearsing al things, which as flames of fire consume whatsoever lets the
sight, make lightsome the darkness it self, and set most hidden things in
the light. What ca^ hide it self from such eyes? Such an one shall Christ show
himself in drawing out his people into the light of truth, from the hidden
dens and darkness whersoever they lurked, so as this sharpnes of sight
shall be very admirable to the world. I will say to the North, says the Lord,
give, and to the South keep not back, bring my sons from far, and my
daughters from the ends of the earth, Isay 43.6. The crowns are many, because
of the many singular victories, which the Jews shall get, when first they shall
give their name to Christ, from those sundry nations, among which they live
dispersed, striving as much as they can against their conversion. But why is
his name unknown? that here we may know that great mystery to be, whereat Paul
cried out, O the deepnesse of the richesse, both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! how unsearcheable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out,
Romans 11.33. etc. There he speaks of this same thing, of the hardening of the
Jews for a time, and calling at length in their time: which whole matter he
concludes with an admiration of Gods wisdom, affirming that no wit of any
creature can comprehend the infiniteness of the mystery. So this vision
foreshewing in the calling of the Jews, a certain choice and separation of an
elect people from others, after the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in,
presents Christ likeweise in an unknown name, because no creature can by any
reason conceive the exceeding greatness of this judgment and mercy. Let us
therefore reverence this name, which because of the highness thereof, must
needs be hidden from every creature. Only let us observe the congruency of
things, that the conversion of the Jews does likeweise come from the
unsearcheable wisdom of God, as once the reiection of them and receaving of
the Genliles.

13 And he was clothed with a garment dipped in blood: Such has bin the
description of the Captain gathering together his people: now follows the
shape of him making war: which therefore he takes upon him, that in fighting
justly, he may make his no less secure from all outward fear of war, then
he makes them happy at home by judging justly and moderating al things most
conveniently. The figure of this is a bloody garment, and a name that word of
God. For after this conversion begun, and a happy increase of the name of
Christians for some years, then a huge and cruel war shall be raised up, such
as the like has not bin in any time. The Turk shall rage in the East. The Beast
and false Prophet in the West part: both of them shall endeavor to root out even
every footstep of the truth, as Daniel shows clearly chap. 11.44.45. and
12.1. and Ezechiel chap. 38. and 39. as far as belongs to the Turk. And as
it is mentioned at the end of this chapter, concerning the Beast and his
companion. Then shall Christ show himself to be seen in this form clothed
with a bloody cassocke, and wholly swimming with blood of the enemies. Which
time Isaiah seems to have respect unto, saying, Who is he that comes from
Edo^ with read garments, from Bozrah? Wherefore is thy apparel red, and thy
garments like him that treads in the wine press, chap. 63.1.2. For very good
reason now shall Christ be seen sprinkled with the blood of the enemies slain.
And then shall the Jews be such in deed, through their tender minds melting
into tears, as the Prophet in the chapters following describes that they are
to be hereafter. The name is fit for this time, that word of God, which the
world then shall find to be most true, al those things at length being
performed, which have bin delivered in the scriptures. Before time it almost
counted the word of God as a thing to be mocked at, as it does also in this
time, because it sees both the promises and punishments to be differteth so
long. Ye the citizens began to doubt of the truth thereof: from whence is that
complaint in Isaiah, the Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten
me, chap. 44.14. As though the promises were nothing else then great words
only, or vain lofty speeches which had come to nothing. Therefore Christ shall
declare now in truth, that the least title of it has not bin in vain. This
description agrees to the seventh vial, under which shall be heard that saying,
it is done, chap. 16.17. And the mystery of God is finished, chap. 10.7. to
which time is reserved the perfection of all things, and the greatest authority
of Gods word shall flourish, the most constant truth thereof being seen in every
thing.

14 And the hosts which are in heaven: The last part of the description: where
the preparation consists, partly in the soldiers, in this verse; partly, in
the weapons and instruments of war, ver, 15. But the name is King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, ver. 16. The army seems to be provided, not so much for
battle, as for triumph. For what are white horses to war? What fine white
linen and pure? A helmet and corselet were fitter. And so the thing is in
deed. A triumph is set forth, not a battle: for the enemies in the West and
East part being at length destroyed in that late foresaid war; a glorious
peace shall be restored to the Church, and which no tumultuous noise of troubles,
shall ever after interrupt. Then all the children of God shall keep a perpetual
triu^ph, al things being remooved for ever which might procure any trouble, as
shall be made more clear, from the things following.

Which are in heaven: The cityzens of the holy Church on earth: all of them
making one sheepfold, shall follow one shepherd Christ: they are clothed with
white and pure fine linen, for the same cause which we have spoken of at the
8. verse.

15 And out of his mouth went; The victory once gotten, shall be preserved for
ever: neither shall there be any fear of war to begin again, our Captain
being so furnished, that as he can, so he will much more restrain the subdued
enemies at his pleasure: for the sword coming out of his mouth, shall punish
them forthwith, as before he threatened to them of Pergamus, that he would fight
against them with the Spirit of his mouth, chap. 2.16. Whereby is signified,
that either the enemies shall be destroyed according to the judgment of the
sacred word, the punishments being taken of them, which the word has appointed
against them: or at the least shall be brought to that case, that will they, nil
they, they shall obey those laws, which the word shall prescribe. This latter
seems to agree better to this place, when al nations shall be obedient to the
Church, seeking and receiving from it laws and ordinances, whereby they may be
governed. These therefore shall be smitten after this manner. But if any yet
being stubburne, shall refuse to obey, he shall be subdued with a rod of iron; and
shall be bridled by a rigourous government; but if he shall continue in his
obstinacy, neither will suffer himselfs to be overcome and bowed by an ordinary
way, although many together shall conspire to the same wickedness of rebellion,
they shall be cast as clusters of grapes into the winepresse of the fierceness
of God, and shall he trodden in the same. Wherefore the enemies shall have no
power ever to rise up again: now of necessity the yoke must be borne of them
for ever. The Co^pl. and the K, B, read a sharp two edged sword does tread, in
the present, because punishment shall be no mor differred as before, but the
wicked shall be punished, presently to be trod under foot with great fury, as
grapes in the wine press, Isaiah 63. Lam. 1.15.

The wine press of the fierceness: Which punishment of the wicked shall be no
less pleasant to God, then the drinking of wine to the thirsty. That must
need, be done manfully, in which one is occupied with delight. Horrible
therefore shall be the punishment of the wicked, which by the greevousnes thereof
shall make amends abundantly, for the delights of all the former times: See
Deuteronomy. 28.63.

16 And he has upon his garment and upon his thigh: This name is written on
his garment, because it shall be manifest then to al men, that Christ is the
supreme King: which was not so evident to the world in former ages. The
Christian name has bin spread before now into al contries; but how miserably
did the Heathen Roman Emperors vex that first, when it began? Since that
time, by how sundry entreprises has the Pope of Rome endeavored to bring
destruction unto it? Neither yet at this time does he surcease from his former
practice; having now the Turk also a partner in the same trafick; although both
follow a diverse way of obtaining their desire. Doubtless since that Christ
has bin made known to us Gentiles, he has not seemed so much to reign, a to
serve a miserable service. Yet nevertheless he gave always some proof of his
Kingdom, even in the mids of these miseries, because he preserved his Church
against al men's wills, howsoever he yielded her to the lust of the enemies;
and to be over whelmed almost with all calamities and miseries. But now at
length the contrary shall be manifest to al men: Christ himself will take the
government into his hands, and will give the soveraigntie over the things on
earth to his Church; then shall be the time, when the stone being cut of the
mountain without hands, shall break in pieces the iron, the clay, the silver
and the gold: and shall obtain a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed, neither
shall be left to another people, Dan. 2.44.45. Which thing is made more
apparent from the name written on the thigh, as it were in the lowest parts of
the body, and even as though it were in the foot. For the scriptures are wont
to call all beneath the belly, the feet, Genesis 49.10. Isay. 7.20. Therefore he
has this name written in this part, not only because that which is lowest in
Christ, scarce reaching to his feet, is higher then the highest thing in me^,
Monarchs bearing the titles of Empire on their head, on their crowns, and
Diademes; but Christ carrying a loftier title on his thigh, then any Monarch
ever has obtained; not, I say, for this cause only, but chiefly because this
shall be the time, wherein his feet, that is, his Church, shall bear rule. Before
time they were fine Brass burning in a furnace, yet free from any hurt, chap.
1.15. But now after the fiery trial, they shall enjoy a most noble Kingdom.
Now Christ shall honor the place of his feet, Isay 60.13. This is that
Kingdom, which all the Prophets do praise with so great decking of words; of
which there shall be no end; but after that it has flourished a long time on
earth, it shall be translated from hence at length into heaven at the second
coming of Christ. So then these four names co^taine the whole state of the
Church from the calling of the Iswes unto the last end of al things. Al which
time may be distinguished into three parts, the first of which goes before the
battle with the Beast and the Dragon: whereunto the first two names with the
whole preparation, are applied. The second is bestowed in the battle it self,
signified by a third name. The third is all the other space from the victory
until Christ shall come, to which the fourth most mighty name agrees.

17 Then I saw a certain Angel stand in the Sun: Thus far the description
of the Captain: now of certain soldiers, who must fight with the Beast. These
ar mustered by the voice of an Herald of arms standing in the Sun: who
differreth from him that powered out his vial upon the Sun: for this, by
interpreting the Scriptures, shall bring a plague; that other shall provoke the
Saints to war by exhorting. Neither perhaps does he that powers out the
vial, stand in the very Sun, but set in an other place, shall sprinkle his
liquour upon it. This, sitting as it were in the charet of the Sun, has his
standing in the very light. But how, will thou say, can we conceave any such
thing yea by meditating upon it? I think light may be given to this Sun, from
the 12. chap. 1. where we heard that the woman was clothed with the Sun, that
is, shining round about with a most clear light of the Scriptures, with the
clearness whereof being adorned, as it were with a garment, she came forth
abroad among the people, and showed her self in the sight of the world. But
one may be said to stand in his clothing, as the wife standing at the right
hand of the King in gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45.10. Vherfore this Angel shall be some
cityze^ of that particular Church, which shall shine most clearly by the
approbatio^ of the very sacred truth, and shall be a natural daughter of the
woman clothed with the Sun. We know that there is not the same purity of al
particular Churches which profess Christ, but that one does take out more
dreggs than an other. But this Angel shall be a member of a most pure and chaste
congregation, which above others shall shine with this glorious apparel. This
is not one of the converted Jews, of whom he began to speak even now, but an
Angel of the West part, calling the Western men to war against the Beast,
and the false Prophet, the plagues of our world. And indeed, all the force of
this last war in the West, seems to be converted against that holy
congregation, which even now I said, did shine as the Sun. For which cause a
cityzen of it, before the rest, shall sound the alarm, and call together the
rest, not so much to the battle, as to the spoil. From which things in some
sort may be understood, what is that place Armagedon in the West part, whereof
we heard in chap. 16.16. To weet, such a particular holy congregation or city,
which shall be the place of this war. For this is har gbei qodhesch, the hill
of precious fruits, which God esteems deerer to him then al delights. And it
is like that after Rome is overthrown that the Pope will again place his
chair at Avenion (but I have no certenty concerning this thing, I follow only
conjecture,) but if he shall sit there, where shall he sooner and more gladly
streine to do his uttermost, than against the Genevean people of Savoy hardby;
a heart sore, thanks be to God, now for some years, which shall then also be
the totment of their eyes? And verily, far be it that my words should grieve
any man, the Sun of our world shines there and from thence; and that always
it may shine more, every godly man desires earnestly of God; neither let my
repeated admonition be superfluous. Hold that thou have, let no man take thy
crown. In the mean time our prayers shall not be wanting for thee, that the
Sun of righteousness may ever shine upon thee, and drive far away all
darkness.

Saying to all the fowls that did fly by the mids of heaven: It has bin
observed in chap. 8.13. and 14.6. that mesouranema signifies between heaven
and earth, not mesembrian midde day, which the Astronomers call the mids of
heaven, and that therefore the word belongs to them, who have escaped from
gross superstition through the acknowledging of the truth, and yet have not
attained that purity, meet for the inhabitants of heaven. The Angel of the
Sun calls all these to take part of the spoil, as being nourissons of the
same truth, howsoever it flourishes not among all with the like purity. From
which we understand, that although one or some few congregations shall practice
sincere godliness when this war shall be moved, yet that very many, and those
even of the reformed religion shall be found, which either never have attained a
full reformation, or by negligence and carelessness have fallen back to that
state, that they lack much of the holiness of a pure and undefiled spouse. And
who sees not, that mutation to come to pass every day more and more?
Obstinate me^ will not acknowledge this difference at this time, but they to
whom it is granted to measure every thing by the only rule of the truth, do
both see and bewail both many shamefully falling from heaven, and also others
as meteores, hanging yet in the clouds.

Come and gather your selves together: He calls them to a banker, and to
mirth. The most worthy destruction of the wicked men, is to God as a sumptuous
feast.

18 That ye may eat the flesh of things: It is like that the ten horns which
have hated and burnt the whore Rome, shall also hate the very Beast, once the
sweet heart of the whore. Therefore these Kings, who shall join their armies
with the Beast, are not in the number of those ten. Neither shall there be
only a denary number of Kings in the times of Antichrist, when as beside them
others shall be found, who do lend him their help. Which manner of dreams,
how vain they are, may be understood from those things which we have spoken
before. These things then being omitted, now the Angel being sure of the
victory, calls to the pray, and bids them to fly together, that they may
be filled with the spoils of the enemies. And because variety in feasts does
very much delight men, he proposes sundry kinds of dainty dishes, the flesh of
Kings, of High Captains etc. This supper shall be variable and very costly.
Ezechiel furnishes the like table, but with the flesh only of Eastern
enemies, chap. 39.17.18.

19 Afterward I saw the Beast: Such is the preparation of the Saints; there
follows of the wicked; and first those in the West part, with whom the first
conflict shall be. The chief Captains of these are the Beast, and the Kings.
For the Pope of Rome, after Rome is destroyed, shall have his seat in an other
place, for a few years, as at Avenion, the Popes city, or Bononie, or
elsewhere. But he shall not remain alive long time after, not abov five and
forty years at the most, as may be gathered by a diligent comparing of other
Scriptures. Neither indeed being spoiled of his principal Chair, shall he be
destitute of al aid of Kings, but some, to weet, of the earth, followers of
wicked superstition shall yet take his part; who al their hosts being gathered
and joined together against Christ and his Saints, shall begin this battle
to try their last chance. They will assemble to Armagedon that holy city, a hill
of precious fruits, whose Angel stands in the Sun, as in ver. 17. From
which it is manifest, that that preparation which the Spirit has described
together in chap. 16. and 14, etc. belongs to diverse enemies, whose war is
to be made asunder; first, of the Beast and false Prophet; afterward of the
Dragon.

20 But the Beast was taken: Hitherto the declaration of the sixth vial: that of
the last follows: which first teaches the destruction of the enemies, and in
the first place of the Beast and his armies. The Beast is taken, intraped as it
were, with snares upon a sudden; as wild Beasts, which unawares fall into the
netts. For so the word epiaste seems to note. And we know that the Lord does
rain down upon the wicked snares, as in Psalm. 11.6. by which their feet are
taken there, where least of al they feared. The false Prophet is taken together
with him: which two joined together, show that the Pope of Rome (for he shall
retain this name perhaps, after the city is destroyed,) shall at length utterly
perish, both in respect of the civil power whereby he is the Beast, and also of
the spiritual, whereby he is the False Prophet. The Spirit speaks as of two
distinct persons, because of that twofold wickedness whereby that man of sin is
famous: but when I say the Pope of Rome, I do not only mean that particular
man, who then shall sit in the Chair, but also the very state and order of
Popes, which now wholly shall come to naught; in such sort that no remainders
thereof shall be left. Only a certain hated memory shall continue, that his impiety
has bin the cause of the ruin of so many.

Who wrought miracles; Before there was mention of the false Prophet in chap.
16.13. But because a bare name was there only; that it might be unknown to no
man, whom he speaks of by this name, he describes the same here by certain
tokens, that all doubt may be taken away. Who, says he, wrought miracles,
whereby he deceaved them, which receive the Beasts mark, and worshipped his
Image. By which things he shows most plainly, that this False Prophet is that
second Beast, of which in chap. 13.13. etc. Therefore, let the Papists now see
to it, who will have Antichrist to reign three years and an half, before
Christ shall come to the last judgment; and he to be a singular person; whither
or no, they do not proclaim open war against the truth? All grant, that
either this second Beast, or that first, is Antichrist. Both which flourished
long before, that the dignity and majesty of Rome the whore, began to be
diminished. And also both shall remain for some few years, after the overthrow
thereof, as appears manifestly from this place. Should we limit all this time,
either with the space of three years, or with the bounds of one mortal man?
But concerning the time of Antichrist, the things that have bin spoken at chap.
17. are so certain and evident, that no man can now be in doubt.

And they were both cast alive: As Coral^, Dathan, and Abiran, the earth
opening it self were swallowed up alive into Hell. The destruction of the
Popedom shall be horrible. The Spirit puts a manifest difference, between his
punishment, and the rest of the multitude, which shall war for him. It were
better for him to perish by fire, as the whore perished, but a more greevous
example shall be showed in him.

Into a lake offyre: Into the second death, to weet, everlasting, in chap.
21.8. But how can the Papacy be cast into the fire? That which is proper to
men, is translated unto the state and condition of men, showing as before was
said, that not only men shall be punished with some greevous punishment, but
also that the thing it self shall be utterly taken away, never for to raise
again: even as they, who are cast to hell, must not expect any returning or
setting free. Certainly we may gather, and that not rashly, from this strange
and unacustomed taking of vengeance, that God will show by some visible sign,
how damnable and detestable he has always esteemed the Papacy. And this last
is that destruction, of which in chap. 17.18. shall go into destruction: a just
reward of the Antichristian tyranny.

21 And the rest were slain with the sword: Such then is the destruction of
the Prince of wickedness: now of his armies and soldiers. Of who^ there is a
differing punishment, not so horrible, at least in show: they shall be slain
with the sword of him that siteth on the horse: that is, by the word coming
out of his mouth, as though he should say, they shall undergo the punishments
threatened in the word against the disobedient, and such as resist the truth; as
in Jeremy: Behold I will make my words as fire in thy mouth, and this people as
wood, and it shall devour them, chap. 5.14. What singular thing the^ shall the
destruction of the Pope have? For he also has bin slain with this sword. That
is true indeed; but the word threatens diverse punishments, according to the
manner of the wickednesses: the most greevous, to the greatest; the lighter, to
the less. Peradventure because the ruin of the Papacy shall be more horrible
than we think, it is exempted from the common order: not because it is not
denounced in the word, but perhaps because it is less regarded of us, and that
we suspect it to be lighter then the event will show. Or, as we have declared
in ver. 15. it may be that these soldiers, after the overthrow received, shall
yield their vanquished forces to the truth, and subject their necks to her
yoke.

And all the fowls were filled with their flesh: The Victory being obtained
the fowls gather to the pray, and do fill themselves with the spoils. That
whole late Popish nation shall be subject afterward to the reformed Churh. Every
country being a nourrisson of the purer truth, shall have some part of the
regions, before time given up to superstition, made subject to them. Which
thing seems to be signified by the fowls satiated with the flesh of the
slain army. Such then is the end of the Romish Pope and Papacy, that remained
a few years after the city: yet at length so much the more miserable, because
she had such as did adorn her funeral with their tears, and performed the
last duties by weeping. But there shall be none left for the Pope, to bewail his
misery; but he shall die infamous, without mourners, or other funeral pomp.
Whereby at last is accomplished that prophetical parable of the ghests called to
the marriage, Mat. 22. Doubtless those good and evil sent for out of the high
ways, are the Gentiles, that embraced the calling, after that the Jews had
refused it. Among them, the man that had not a wedding garment, is the Church
of Rome, which despises the righteousness of faith, neither regards to be
clothed with the merit of Christ by imputation. The King coming in, and
beholding her clothed with her rags, but not with that garment which only he
approoveth, now at length bids his servants to bind her hand and foot, and
to cast her into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. For
Christ speaks not there of any one man, but collectively of a very great
multitude, as the sentence added in the end declares, that many are called but
few are chosen, ver. 14. From which at length we understand, that the bright
coming of the Lord, with which Paul foreshewed that the man of sin should be
abolished; 2 These. 2.8. is not his last coming to judgment, but that whereby
Christ shall take the Jews into the fellowship of his holy Church: at which
time his Kingdom shall flourish most gloriously, and shall exceed by infinite
degrees all the brightness of the ages past, as shall be made more evident from
the things following. After the Pope is destroyed, the Dragon shall be abolished,
and many other things accomplished on earth.

CHAP. 20.
AFTER I saw an Angel coming down from heaven, having the keye of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.

2 And he took the Dragon, that old serpent, which is the Divill, and Satan,
and he bound him a thousand years.

3 And cast him into the bottomless pit, which he shut up, and sealed upon
him, that he should deceive the nations no more, til the thousand years were
fulfilled: for after that he must be loosed for a little season.

4 And J saw seats, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given them, and
I saw the souls of them, which were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for
the word of God, and which did not worship the Beast, neither his Image,
neither had taken his mark upon their foreheads, or on their hands, and they
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

5 But the rest of the dead men lived not again, until the thousand years
wereful filled: this is the first resurrection.

6 Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: for on such
the second death has no power: but they shall be the Priests of God and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

7 And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison.

8 And shall go out to deceive the nations, which are in the four quarters of
the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, whose number is
as the sand of the sea.

9 And they went up into the plain of the earth, and they compassed the tents
of the Saints about, and the beloved city* but fire came down from God out of
heaven, and devoured them.

10 And the Divill that deceived them, was cast into a lake of fire and
brimston, where was both that Beast, and also that False Prophet, and they
shall be tormented day and night for ever more.

11 Then I saw a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from whose face
fled away both the earth and heaven, and their place was no more found.

12 And I saw the dead both great and small stand before God: and the books
were opened, and another book was opened which is the book of life, and the
dead were judged of those things, which were written in the books, according to
their works.

13 And the sea gave up the dead which were in her, and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man
according to their works.

14 And hell and death were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second
death.

15 And whosoever was not sound written in the book of life was cast into the
lake of fire.


The Analysis.
WE have spoken of the destruction of the Beast: the destruction of the
Dragon follows: whose history, seeing it is the conclusion of the whole
warrfare of the Church under the cross: first he repeateth briefly the things
before spoken: secondly by a new Prophecy, he declares the last ruin of him.
The repetition is framed according to three times: the first, in which the
Devil was taken, in the first verse. The second, how long he was bound, in the
second verse; the third, when and how long he should be loosed, in the end of
the third verse. And all these things briefly; which after are repeated more
largely, by mentioning therewithal the state of the Church, of what sort it
was in the mean time, through every of those periods. In the first, wherein the
Dragon was taken, the saints were beheaded, at the beginning of the fourth
verse. In the second, wherein the Divill or Dragon was bound, there was an
unlike condition of men: for the saints reigned a thousand years (which was
the time of the priso^ment of the Divill,) both in respect of the souls slain
in the former period, and also in respect of them that were on earth, who
strove with the Beast, neither did submit under his yoke by any means, in the
same verse, The other lived not again all that time, but being deceived by the
frauds and impostures of the Beast, lay as it were dead and buried in their
errors, in the fifth verse. The third period, which is of the Divill being
loosed, relates both the condition of the elect, and also the fury of the
Dragon raging again. Those thousand years being expired, the elect lived,
not a few, as in the second period, but they rose again in a far greater
multitude, the errors of the Beast being left, and themselves converted unto
true godliness. Which resurrection is called the first and blessed, because of
the Priestly and Kingly dignity, and long continuing of the reign with Christ,
in the sixth verse. The fury of the Dragon after a thousand years prisonment,
shall be revived, in the seventh verse. He shall muster soldiers known by name,
Gog and Magog, infinite in multitude, in the eight ver. He shall spoil all
far and near, and shall besiege the tents of the saints, in the beginning of
the ninth verse, and so far proceeds the repetition of the former ages. That
which does follow from thence, is to come, his attempt against the beloved
City, and utter overthrow both of the army, in the end of the ninth verse, and
also of himself, in the tenth verse. And thus far is the destruction of the
enemies; afterward the happiness of the Saints is handled, whereby the Church
shall shine having escaped all these calamities. Which felicity is declared two
ways, both by the gathering together of the saints, in the rest of this
chapter, and condition of them being gathered, in those that follow. The
gathering has a preparation, and execution. The preparation is of the Judge
fitting upon a great throne in the eleventh verse. The execution is partly
summarily toward them that are to be judged, where the form of judgment is
out of certain books, according to the works, verse twelve, and the manner of
standind before the judgment seat; the resurrection, in the thirteenth verse:
partly by name, upon death and hell, and those that were not found in the
book of life, in the fourteenth and fifteenth verse.

Scholions.
1 After J saw an Angel come down: How great pains the interpreters have taken
in this chapter, we may see it by their commentaries. Especially the Papists
torment themselves very much; to whom this is a labyrinth out of which they
cannot rid themselves, no more then of all the other things in this book, in
which they wander hither and thither, and err, neither can find any coming
out any where, as it must needs be where the truth is not for a guide. The
former exposition, the rehearsal of a great part of which is here made, will
make, I hope, all things easy and ready to us. First then, in repeating things
past, to the end that the things spoken of before here and there touching the
Dragon, being now proposed to be seen all at once, may the better be
understood, he speaks of his apprehension; which briefly shows by
consequent, that he was loosed before, and in that time made those sturres
which he is wont, when he has the raines loose. From which it may be gathered
easily, what was the condition of the primitive Church, as long as this
disturber might confou^de all things at his pleasure. But at length his fury
was bridled, and his power weakened by the Angel, a description of whom is here
made. Who this Angel is we have learned from the former things, to weet, that
it is Constantine the Great, who being borne the manchilde of the Church, and
making war for his mothers sake against the Tyrants, the Heathen Emperors,
the Dragon it self. He is said to come down from heaven, bringing unexpected
aid, in chap. 12.6.7. etc. So the Angel being to fight against the whore, and
to assail her unwares, was said to come down from heaven, in the eighteenth
chapter and first verse. He has the keye of the bottomless pit, power to open
the same, and shut up the Dragon, but not to cast forth the hellish smoke: in
which respect only the key was give^ to the Angel of the bottomless pit,
chap. 9.1. There is therefore a great difference between these two keys. The
great chain, are the foundations of the Christian liberty laid by him, by
which he held the Dragon bound as with chains by a long succession of time,
that he could not move himself to make any trouble. For now the way was
stopped up against those Heathen, to the chief sovereignty; or if they
attained to it by fraud, as Julian, yet they were so bound and tied with this
chain, that they could not exercise their former cruelty.

2 Who took the Dragon; Overcame him by open war, chap. 6.15. and 12.7 For
when those tyra^ts were overcome, the strength of the Dragon was taken away,
neither could he entreprise any such thing as he exercised before. The Heathen
Emperors are noted by the names of the very Devil, as also in chap. 12.9. the
articles being also added for the pre-eminence of the wickedness, because they
may by right be esteemed by his name, of whose poison, malitiousnes, and
wickedness, they have bin the ministers. Worthily does a man bear his name,
whose manners and disposition he takes upon him. This apprehension signifies
that whole first period, from the time of John and before, even unto
Constantine, the last part of it being put for the whole. For saying that now
the Dragon was taken, he would have it to be understood that before, he ran to
and fro, devising as much evil as he could, as we learned in the seals, at
chap. 6.

And hound him for a thousand years: He ordained that manner of ruling, which
being afterward extended to a thousand years, left no power to the open
enemies to reign over the Church, as in former time. And this is the second
period, in which the Dragon was bound, that is, the Heathen Emperors were
repressed unto the year 130. But I say this period to be of the Dragon,
because it is not that full period, which before the Spirit did set of the
whole Prophecy, to weet, of the trumpets. For this is of a longer time, and
exceeds that of the Dragon about two hundred threscore years and more. The
history of the Dragon has some thing peculiar to it self, neither is it
strictly to be astrained to that rule. The binding of him is more ancient, then
the blowing of the trumpets, done under the sixth seal, about the year 306, as
was said in chap. 6.12. and 12.7.8 9. But the trumpets gave their first sound
in the Nicene Council, chap. 8.7. and in their sixth sound, brought to the
Dragon a releasing from prison, chap. 9.15. Wherefore we now understand that
this second period is proper to the Dragon; agreeing with the trumpets, neither
in beginning nor end. The Jesuit Ribera measures the times for the most part
by the proper signification of the words, as the five months of the locusts;
three years and an half of the reign of Antichrist: yet nevertheless he
would have these thousand years to be taken indefinitely, for the whole space,
from the death of Christ, even unto the time of Antichrist, to which opinion,
at least as touching the beginning of the account, very many both of the old
and new writers do condescende. But why have they not considered, that the
Beast, which is the very Antichrist, reigned this whole thousand years, in
which the Dragon was bound. Therefore his imprisonnement was not to be ended at
the beginning of the reign of Antichrist, but this rather was to beginn
together with it. That I may not now speak any thing of that bar, which the
Spirit has put at chap. 4.1. I will show thee those things which must be done
hereafter: which forbids to look back to the time past, and warns that
all the following prophecy, consists in things to come, and latter then the
age of John. Further more the agreement of the whole Prophecy which we have
seen hitherto, ca^ not bear such a biginning to be made, as troubles all
things with confusion, which we cannot rid ourselves of. But shall we thing that
the Devil was bound, when he raged most cruelly by the first Heathen
Emperors? When may we say that he was loosed, if then he lay in prison, and in
the stocks? That which the Jesuit alleges out of the 12. chap. of John, Now
the Prince of this world shall be cast forth, belongs nothing to this cause,
for so much as this is to be understood of the spiritual power, the^ forthwith
to be utterly destroyed by the death of Christ: but the binding which the
Revelation speaks of, belongs to his tyranny over the bodies of the Saints,
as from the beginning of the fourth verse of this chapter it is manifest, where
the souls of the Saints reigning after the Dragon was cast into bonds,
pertain to them, who were beheaded by the same before his bonds, raging most
furiously. Which calamity, what other can it be, than that of the cruelty of
the Heathen Emperors? Wherefore neither the beginning nor end of these
thousand years is set down rightly by the Jesuit.

3 And he cast him into the bottomless pit. This bottomless pit is the earth,
as it is manifest from chap. 12.3. where it is said, when the dragon saw that
he was cast unto the earth, which yet is not so called after the custom of the
common speech, but to note out earthly men; who in name only ar counted
citizens of the Church. The woe also is denounced to the inhabitans of the
earth and sea, because the Devil is come down to them, as in the same place
verse 12. Now he must be conversant among these only, and his fury must be
exercised against these, as has bin declared in the said place.

And shut him up and sealed upon him: To weet, the door, or stone, or some
such thing, as they made the sepulcher sure, sealing the stone, Mat. 27.66. by
which is signified, that the Devil was committed to most sure custody, such as
he should not have so much leave as to look out of doors. Not because he
should be vacant from business altogether by the space of the whole thousand
years, (for he should cause huge sturres both by la^d and sea, as we learned
even now from chap. 12.12. and know to have come to pass in very truth, by
those things which are mentioned in chap. 8.12.) but because he should have no
power at al over the holy Church, against which he should undertake al his
attempts in vain. He cast out a flood after the woman, but he lost his labor.
For both the earth help her, and she fled into the wilderness, beyond the
chain wherewith the Dragon was bound, as in chap. 12.15. etc.

That he should deceive the Gentiles no more: The Gentiles are also the
citizens of the false Church, whose dwelling was in the exterior court, and in
the holy city, two and forty months, chap. 11.2. He speaks not of these
Gentiles now, but of them that were wholly repugnant to the name of Christ; such
as were those fierce tyrants of Rome, before Constantine. This sort of enemies
should entreprise nothing against the holy Church, by the space of those
years, because they should not know where it should be; yet in the mean time
some other cruel enemies should entreat the false Church most cruelly, chap.
12.17. etc.

For afterward he must be loosed for a little season: After those thousand
years are finished, the Devil was to be loosed again; wherein is set the
third time, falling upon the beginning of the sixth trumpet: when the most cruel
Turk, all fear of the Roman Empire being laid aside, which he saw to be
forsaken of the Western arms, and at home drowned with slouthfulnes, riot,
and dissentions, began an horrible tyranny also against the Church, and not
only the false, but also the true, which then after a long distance of time,
began to show it self, at least beholding a far off from the wilderness,
whither she had fled, although she differs her full return until some ages
after. The Divill being then loosed, granted not so much as one hour of rest
from war; but as soon as the truth began to come forth abroad, about the
year 130, straiteway he provoked the enemy, to vex the same by what means he
could. Therefore the Turk flies upon the dominions of the Empire, he passes
over into Europe, he increases his victories, he rooteth out the majesty of
the Roman name: he carries away all things with him as a swift running
stream: neither is there at this day almost found any hold so strong, that can
withstand his fury. But the time of this tyranny is but short, to weet, only
for an hour, a day, a month, a year, that is, about three hundred ninety
years, if we count the year by twelve months, and every month by thirty
days, after the account of two and forty months, and three days and an
half, chap. 11. If we follow the reckening of the Iulia^ years, the impious
kingdom shall not be prolonged beyond seven years more; then utterly to be
abolished, without leaving so much as the footsteps of his name after him, as
shall be said afterward.

4 Then I saw thrones; Hitherto the brief History of the Dragon: the same now
is handled somewhat more fully, there being added together also the state of
the Church, wherein it was in every of those times. The two first of which are
showed elegantly in the same words. For when after the Dragon is bound, the
thrones set are seen, and also the souls of them that were beheaded, sitting
upon them, and judgment given to them: by these is signified that the
primitive Church was miserably afflicted, before that mortal enemy was cast
into prison. Then was there no seat established for her, no judgment was given,
but she lay on the ground trod under foot, every moment spending the life of
many of her members for the truth; whereunto belongs the cry of the souls,
which desired vengeance of their most cruel enemies, chap. 6.10.11. Therefore
all that time from John even until the binding of the Devil by Constantine,
was a time for the hatched, for flaming fires, for the rack, and all manner of
torments, as is very well showed here. Again the same thrones, and judgment
given after that the Dragon was delivered to prison by Constantin, do show the
notable felicity of the second distance of time which the Church enjoyed having
obtained Emperors for her Defendours. For these thrones belong not to the
saints reigning in heaven, as the Jesuit will have it, intangling himself in
many absurdities; but they which dwell on earth, in a better estate, in regard
of the open enemy, then in former time. For why should the reign in heaven be
limited with a thousand years? Or why should they begin to reign after the
Dragon was bound, as if the reign in heaven were not perpetual? Moreover such
ar counted in this reign, who ar dead a thousand years ago, as in the next
verse: which can not be understood of the reign in heaven, in which, unless
the souls of them that die, fly forthwith, they shall never afterward come
thither. But more plainly of this matter at the next verse.

And they sat, (...), it may be put, and perhaps better transitvely, they did
set. So the order of construction runs easily, being reduced by the
accusative cases which follow, et animas, and the souls, et illos etc. and them
which worshipped not; in the same sense vidi thronos, I saw thrones, and they
did set on them, to whom judgment also was given; both the souls of them
which were beheaded, and also those which worshipped not the Beast etc. who all
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years: and judgment was given them:
they were dealt with according to their righteousness, themselves being set at
liberty, and their enemies suffering the punishments of their cruelty. Even as
on the other side ons judgment is said to be taken away, when a man is
oppressed with injuries, and the doers of them, go away scotfree as Job
complains, God lives who has despised my judgment etc. chap. 27 2, and
34.5. Or judgment to be given, may belong to the reign, as in the Psalmist, O
God give thy judgments to the King, and thy righteousness to the Kings son:
Let him judge thy people justly, and thy poor with equity, Psalm. 72.1.2. as
though he should say, the Church now is advanced to that dignity, whereby she
should give laws to others, which but lately was accustomed to receive them,
being most abject* and obscure, and of no estimation with the world.

And the souls of them that were beheaded. If ekathison they sat, be taken as
a verb neuter, then these words are to be referred to the verb eidon, and
vidi animas, and I saw the souls etc. These are the souls of the godly
Martyrs of the first period, who under the Heathen Emperors, laid down their
lives for Christ's sake; who now at length by means of Constantine, obtain
glory and honor. But how is this, will thou say, they not being on the earth?
Their souls were placed on thrones, when they who took away their lives
uniustly, were justly punished by Constantine, that is, when the tyrants were
killed, and condign punishment inflicted upon them for their cruelty. The just
man shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance of the wicked, and shall wash his
footsteppes in their blood, as the Psalmist describes. And again, a two edged
sword is in the hand of the Saints, to execute vengeance on the Heathen, which
honor shall be to all the Saints, Psalm. 149. It is a glorious thing for the
Saints, that their injuries are nor neglected, but ar at length reco^pensed
with just punishment. This is it which the souls desired earnestly, chap.
6.10. And these seats are that deliverance which they obtained a promise off in
the same place.

And which worshipped not the Beast; These also were placed, or sat in the
seats; which are men then living in the second period; whereupon he not only
mentions their souls, as even now of the Martyrs, which were in the age
past, but the whole man, saying those which worshipped not etc. From which we
must observe, seeing the godly are described by those marks, that they
worshipped not the Beast, neither suffered themselves to be noted with his
mark either in the forehead or on the hand, and that in the second period when
the Devil was bound, which took the beginning at Constantine himself, and
continued from thence by the space of a thousand years, that the Beast was all
this time. Otherweise there could have bin no praise of the Godly living in this
time, if there had bin no occasion and matter for them to get praise by.
Wherefore the Beast was bred together with Constantine, when the Dragon being
thrust out of heaven and going into prison gave his power and his throne and
great authority to the Beast, chap. 12.13. and 13.2. He could not suffer that
any truce should be granted to the Church, but when he saw his open fury to be
repressed, he ordained the Beast his Vicar in his room, being absent, by whose
endeavor at least, he might satisfy his hatred. Therefore the three years
reign of Antichrist is a trifling toy, a part whereof we see here manifestly to
extend unto a thousand years. Secondly, let the Papists consider, what a
vain forgerie that Antichrist is, whom they dream off. For there is no
Antichrist properly so called, and for excellency, whom the Spirit in this
Revelation teaches to us, besides that Beast of the thirteenth chapter. But
the Papists Antichrist is not this Beast, as not being to come, before these
thousand yeer^ of the binding of the Divill be finished. So the Jesuit
teaches that these thousand years are without doubt the whole time from the
death of Christ even to the time of Antichrist. But this Beast rules through
all the time in which the Devil lay bound. Therefore the are mere toys, which
the Jesuit obtrude to the world, miserably deceaving, as others, so much more
themseves: who are altogether careless of a present destruction, and quake at
some vain shadows to come. They rest, I know, in this matter upon the
authority of some Holy Fathers, to whom they do no less injury, then procure
danger to themselves. These being far from the event of things, spoke only by
conjecture, which to prefer before most certain events, is not only foolish,
but also greatly contrary to the minds of them, who every where confessing
their ignorance, provoked rather to search out the truth which the day should
teach, then to rest in their doubts, which even they themselves condemned of
ignorance. Wherefore they who will yet hold fast their known errors, are
deprived by the just judgment of God of all even common sense: that so in
flattering and handling themselves gently, they may throw themselves headlong
to eternal and unevitable destruction. Furthermore observe from this place,
that the two and forty months in chap. 11.2. and 13.5. are not to be nu^bred
after the common manner, seeing the Beast, to whom these months belong, was in
the view and eyes of men, the space of a thousand years, as it is manifest
from his adversaries, who should be altogether none, if he should not be at all.

And they lived and reigned Both the souls of the Martyrs, and those which
withstood the Beast, enjoyed a Kingdom with Christ this whole time, in which
the Dragon was bound. Not that any one continued his life so long, but because
there never wanted a succession of the godly, who embraced the truth,
notwithstanding the rage of Antichrist. To acknowledge the truth, is in very
deed to live and reign with Christ, even as on the contrary, either not to
know, or to despise the same, is in living, to be dead, and in the highest top
of reign, to be in a more vile estate, then the most abject slave. But he
makes mention of the reign of these years, not because when they were
finished the Saints should cease to reign, (for we see that the first
resurrection does follow by and by, which should make the former glory more
abundant,) but because the Church in these years chiefly, lying hid in the
wilderness, and in the secret of the temple, should seem to the world to have
perished utterly, chap. 11.1. and 12.14. he shows that the same reigned with
Christ all this most sorrowful time. Which doubt could not befall concerning
the saints in heaven, who we know, do enjoy a blessed time, as soon as they
are departed out of this valley of tears. This reign of most courageous
champions, was showed before by that holy army of an hundred forty four
thousand, who camped in Mount Sion, and followed the Lamb, whither soever he
went, chapter 14.1.2. whereof this verse is a rehearsal.

5 But the rest of the dead. Such then was the state of the Saints by the
space of a thousand years of the Dragons binding. Now in a few words is
signified the condition of the multitude in that space. These refused the
truth, and snorted a long night, not awaking those whole thousand years, that
the sunbeame of most wholesome doctrine might shine upon them. And this is that
Apostasy which Paul said should come, before the Lord should appear, 2 Thessalonians.
2.3. and which John expressed before by the whole earth wondering after the
Beast, chap. 13.3. and 17.8.

This is the first resurrection: The third period, whereby is taught in what
condition the Church should be by and by after those thousand years were
ended. More clear truth should now at length return to the world: and the
elect every where should assemble together to the appearing light of it. Which
earnest desire of theirs, is called the first resurrection, to weet, in respect
of the second, ver. 12. as there we shall see. A greater number now then before,
and with more vehement affections, should make have to the Gospel, as came to
pass at the end of those thousand years, to weet, at the year 130. when very
many, before dead in the Romish superstitions, wherewith they were overwhelmed,
opened their eyes at the rising of the truth, and so did rise unto life from
which of late they were strangers. Among these were numbered Marsilius Patavinus,
Johannes de Gauduno, John Wickliefe, and many other excellent men of sincere
godliness, and great learning for that time. By their labor others in great
number were recalled from their errors unto the truth, as it were from death to
life, as we said before in chap. 14.16. This wonderful conversion is called the
first resurrection, under the name whereof John repeateth, and together also
declares those former times. This is not therefore the resurrection at the last
judgment, as the Jesuit interprets, who forgetting himself in this verse,
extends now eve^ unto the day of judgment, the thousand years, whose end
lately he did set in the coming of Antichrist. What time then shall be left for
Antichrist, not beginning his reign before that the Dragon shall be let out of
prison? Shall the first entry into his Kingdom fall on the day of judgment? It
were in deed to be wished, for so neither should he accomplish that three
years and half space, which the Papists tell shall be so miserable, and bewail
so lamentably. Furthermore they which were lost before, do become blessed in
this resurrection; which thing shall not come to pass in the last. Moreover,
how is this the last, which is called the first, and a latter then which, there
is an other, ver. 12? How is the reign of a thousand years with Christ after
the last resurrection mentioned for great, which we know to be eternal, nor to
be limited with any revolution of years, ver. 6? Shall also Satan be loosed,
and shall that war of Gog and Magog be raised after the last resurrection? For
certain, this resurrection shall be after those thousand years be accomplished;
and this war shall be moved, after the same years be complet, ver. 7. The
Jesuit faineth a strange resurrection, after which such sturres shall be on
earth. But it is worthy to be observed with how great unsensiblenes he is
strike^. Here where he has Augustine going before him in a right opinion, he
rejects him. But at other times often, where by reason of obscurity of
things, he is manifestly deceived, he runs after him apace most swiftly. For
the Jesuits in seeing see not, being by the just judgment of God altogether
blinded.

6 O Blessed and holy is he: They are blessed who do embrace from their heart,
the truth restored again to the world. For this is to have part in the first
resurrection. As Christ says to Peter, thou shall have no part with me. John.
13.8. as though he should say; unless thou suffers these things to be done,
which I will have, thou art not indeed partaker of me. Therefore no man has
part in this resurrection, which either embraces the truth with a dissembling
heart, or has obtained some certain knowledge thereof; but only he in whose
heart it takes root, bringing forth fruit unto eternal life. For all that is
borne of God overcomes the world, 1 John, 5.4. and Christ loves his even to
the end, John 13.1. suffering none of them to be lost, John 17.12. For, who
shall ravish them out of his hands? John 10.28. Which most certain salvation of
the faithful, sealed up to them in their hearts by the Spirit, being unknowen to
the Jesuit, he finds this blessedness which the Spirit speaks off, no where
but in heaven. But he erreth, as his manner is. This blessedness is of the
life present, necessarily to be published chiefly at the new appearing again
of the light of the Ghospel, seeing it should come to pass, that they who
should join themselves to the truth, should both be stricken with the lightning
of excommunication of the Beast; and also should be condemned of the world as
most wicked men. Who would not tremble to be banished from the only holy
Catholic Church, as the Romish vaunteth her self to be, unless the Spirit
had confirmed those to be blessed and holy who should receive with a sincere
affection, the truth raising again^* and therewithal had taught that, that
Romish Church calling her self Catholic, by a true name is a most impudent
horlot? This resurrection is only of those, who forsaking the Romish
Synagogues, do become the true citizens of the reformed Churches: they which
still abide in the Popish corruptions, have no part in the first resurrection,
neither shall have any in the second, unless they repent.

He that has part: (...), melaq: A metaphore taken from portions, distributed
once by lot, to this end, that we might acknowledge Gods mercy and providence
in every one converted, without attributing any thing to chance and fortune.

On such the second death has no power: The second death is destruction in the
lake of fire burning with brimstone, before in chap. 19.20. But why does he
only exempt them from the second death? because the partakers of this
resurrection have not yet finished the first, to weet, the death of the body:
which being inflicted upon them by the Beast, yet shall they be altogether free
from the second, which ought to be a comfort to them in their sufferings.
Surely there is no need of this consolation in the last resurrection, where we
shall no longer live by faith, but shall behold the very inheritance hoped for.
Therefore this is the comfort of men warring on earth, which are sure of the
victory, but have not yet got the crown.

But they shall be the Priests of God and Christ: chap. 1.6. and 5.10. It is said
in the dative case Priests to God: but this explaneth the other. All the
faithful are Priests and Kings in Christ, that is partakers of these
dignities, and in some sort also endued of the faculty and power of them: but
here some greater thing seems to be spoken, after the manner of the Hebrews,
who attribute the name of God to those things which are most excellent in their
kind, as a Prince of God, etc. as was noted before. After which sort they seem
to be called Priests and Kings of God, for that which is, most excellent
Priests.

And they shall reign with him a thousand years: These thousand years do
begin where the former ended, to weet, in the year 130. In which is promised
a continuing of the truth by the space of a thousand years, (from that
restoring of it whereof we have spoken,) in these our nations of Europe, to
which also this first resurrection belongs. But whither then again it shall
cease, security possessing men, until Christ shall come as a thief in the
night, as it is foreshewed in the Ghospel, he to whom all things are known,
knows. We find nothing whereby to determine any certe^ty touching this matter.
Only we have seen three hundred years now to have passed since this first
resurrection: and that every day, thanks be to God, the truth grows mor in
use. We must also yet tarry some short space before that our brethren the Jews
shall come to the faith. But after that they are come, and Christ shall have
reigned some ages most gloriously on earth by his servants, in advancing his
Church to most high honor abov all Empire, then also the Nations shall embrace
true godliness according to that saying, And the Gentiles shall walk in the
light thereof, and the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto
it, and the glory and the honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it, see
chap. 21.24.26. For which cause it was promised to the Church of Philadelphia,
that she should be a pillar in the temple of God, and that she should go out
no more, chap. 3.12. that is, that it should have a firm and stable abiding in
the new glorious Church. Which Church of Philadelphia, we have showed in the
same place to be of the Gentiles. From which it is proved, that the truth shall
remain for a long time yet among the Gentiles. For this is the Kingdom of
Christ, when by the Scepter of his word he rules among any people. And this is
the most true reign of any people, when it is subject to the government of
Christ alone, and is ruled by his only disposition. Now at length we perceive
of what sort that millenarie reign is, of which we are a part, thanks be to
God; concerning which almost all the Fathers, Papias, Irenaeus, Justin,
Tertullian, Lactantius, and Augustine also in some part, spoke so many things
and so highly. Without doubt they would have this Kingdom to be spiritual,
whose unmeasurable pleasantnes they expressed by corporal things after the
manner of the Prophets. Yet nevertheless I will not deny that perhaps some
leaned too much in their opinions to the delights of the body: but was it to
this end to overfill themselves with them as men altogether lost in riots, and
given over to all dishonest pleasures? It cannot be that any such thing should
ever come into the mind of learned and holy men: but because they knew that
under this reign of Christ his Church should enjoy very great felicity also of
this life, they made mention of the abondance of such pleasures. Which we
shortly expect, when the Romish Antichrist and the Turk shall be utterly
abolished. Until this victory be gotten, the Church yet is in war, lives in
tents, and fights with many adversaries. But after this war is finished,
she shall keep a most joyful triumph, and shall rejoice with perpetual mirth.
So as they swerved not much from the truth, who commended the holy pleasures of
this reign: unless in this, that some supposed, that these things should be
after the last resurrection; wherein they greatly failed, when they added any
earthly thing, to the eternal happiness of the saints, which cannot be expressed
or declared, by any earthly thing which here we do enjoy. But let us observe
how greatly they are deceived, who almost do determine a certain year, and
day of the last judgment. The truth shall yet reign among the Gentiles for
seven hundred years: how long afterward among the Jews, no calculation does
declare, as far as I can find out: but this is in the power of God alone,
altogether uncerten and unknown to every creature, as Christ expressly teaches,
Mar. 13.32.

7 But when the thousand years are expired: Such then was the condition of the
godly, in the beginning and during the third period. Now he relates partly
what troubles Satan wrought being loosed; and partly what troubles he will yet
cause. First, he shows his loosing in this verse, (for he rages and is quiet
at the commandment of God,) which loosing was done after those thousand years
were accomplished. Not those whereof he spak last in the end of the former
verse, but those of which he made mention in the 2.3.4.5. verses: of the
beginning and end of which, we spoke at the second and third verses.

Satan shall be loosed out of his prison: The open enemy shall then again invade
the Church, as it came to pass in the rising of the Turks, as we showed at the
third verse.

8 And shall go out to deceive the nations: His first labor, being loosed,
shall be in preparing an army, in this verse: the endeavor whereof is afterward
propounded to be threefold, in the verse following. The huge army shall be
gathered, from many and sundry countries, as is showed by the sower corners of
the earth: South, North, East, West: In which four quarters, seeing the whole
compass of the earth is contained, least any should think that this Empire
does extend even as far and amply, he comprehends those four corners within
the limits and bo^ds of two nations, Gog and Magog; as though he should say,
think ye not that the whole earth shall minister soldiers to make this
wicked army; so much of the South, and other parts of the earth, as there are
Provinces in the possession of Gog and Magog, shall help to the preparing of
these hosts. Therefore this power of enemies shall consist chiefly of these two
sorts of people. But what nations they are, can not be unknown, the Captain
being known. To the finding out of whom, the time does lead, as by the hand.
For he rises up after the thousand years of the Devils imprisonment; which
time we have prooved both often, and in many words, to come out at the year
130. And what other Devil, open enemy of the Church, came there into the world,
than that terrible Turk, who far passed all the former in all cruelty? who
notably executes the fiercenes of the Devil, who knows that but a little
time remains for him of this loosing. Wherefore the Devil seems to rage
even visibly in the person of the Turk, whom he has ordained for his
Vice-Captaine. Therefore Gog and Magog are the nations that are subject to the
Empire of the Turk, or at least those that minister arms unto him, for to
perform his wicked entreprises. But yet so, as that Gog be the chief nations,
and proper to the dominion of the Turk; as we learn from Ezechiel, who draws
his Prophecy chiefly against Gog, chap. 38. and 39. But Magog are perhaps the
nations of an other jurisdiction: yet always at hand to help the Turk. For
Ezechiel inveigheth more lightly against him, as it were against a confederate,
rather the^ the chief author As touching Gog, a Reubenite is rehearsed by
this name, 1 Chronicles. 5.4. But who besides the name, has not likeness to this,
as is clear from these places of Ezechiel and the Revelation, in which only,
he now spoken off being excepted, mention is found of him. The most learned
Tremelius and Iunius do think, that this name came of Gyge, who killed
Candaules the Lydian, and reigned in his stead: from whence the lesser Asia was
called Gog; even as afterward Croesus enlarging the bounds of his Kingdom
unto Syria, a certain town nigh Libanus was called Gygarta, for that which is
Gog karta, that is, the City of Gog: for in the time that Ezechiel prophesied,
either Halyartes or Croesus, both the nephews of Gyge, reigned in Asia minor.
Neither is it a new thing that the country is should be signified by their
chief Princes: especially in the scriptures, which declare that every nation
took their names from hence at the first. Yet this perhaps has place, rather
in the first Princes, then in their successors, albeit that these also gave
names to the countreies. But it was sufficient for the Prophet to note the
nation by the name of her first stock, which at that time bare rule in the same
place, howsoever perhaps that country was not so called every where. These
things do make this sense very probable. Yet notwithstanding seeing Ezechiel,
with whom, this place (being wholly taken from thence) does well agree, makes
this Gog the chief Prince of Meshech and Tubal, in chap. 38.3. that is, of the
Capadocians and Iberians of Asia, as Josephus teaches lib. 1. chap. 6. of the
Antiq. Neither was any of the posterity of Gyge, no not Croesus who reigned
last and farthest, ever Prince of these countreies, whose dominion was limited
by the River Halys, as Herodote relates in Clio, there is perhaps an other
reason of this name. Which seems to be such, that Gog is not an usual name
of any nation, but a name made of Magog, that both it may note the great union
of both peoples, and also that Gog does spring from Magog. For Magog is the
chief name of one of the sons of Iaphet, who are reckoned to be Gomer, and
Magog, and Maday, and Javan, etc. Genesis 10.2. And Gog is made thereof by taking
away the first syllable, that we may know him to be a bra^ch of the same
stock. But the countries which Ezechiel attributes unto him, were not subject
at that time to any such Prince, but at length they were to be under the power
of some such, at which time that Prophecy should be performed: from which that
Gog going out with violence as from the lifts, should make his first assault
for the subduing of the other countries. As though he should say: behold I
come against thee, o people, having thine offspring from Magog: but who abidest
in the countries of Meshech and Tubal. By which he notes out most fitly the
Turks in their first original. For these are Scythians by birth, who dwelled
by the North side of the mount Caucase, as Zonaras writes in the 3. tom. ad
Constant. Pogonatum. Who after that they were called into Persia against the
Saracenes, at length forsaking the Persians, brought under their power the
Babylonians, and almost the whole East, Armenia, Iberia, Cappadocia. Therefore
the Scythian nation is the Turk, at length made Lord of Meshech and Tubal, of
the Cappadocians, and Iberians. In which places he was at quiet until the Devil
being loosed, about the 130. year did seduce this nation, and provoked them to
make open war to the Church. For Andronicus Palaeologus being Emperor, he
slew the Roman army in Paphlagonia, not leaving one alive: which gate being
opened unto him, he passed through, even unto Sangarium, and made all the
provinces from the sea Poncus and Galatia, even unto the sea of Lycia and
Caria, and to the river Eurymedon, to be of his jurisdiction* see Niceph. Greg.
lib. 5. Byzant. Hist. From hence was the beginning of al miseries; Ottoman
rising by and by after, by whom now for a long time has the calamity of our
world bin spread. So then was Gog seduced, Prince only of Meshech and Tubal,
when first he began to go on with rage, but to whom now all Asia the less,
Syria, Mesopotamia, Arabia, Judea, Palestina, Egypt, the Islands, Graecia,
Macedonia, Thracia, and c, obey. Al which Provinces, after this tyranny
increased, do com in that full largeness under the name of Gog in the Prophet.
But thou will say, what alliance has Gog with Magog, if we grant him to be a
Scythian by his stock? A most nigh, both of kindred and nature. For Magog is a
Scythian, and the Prince of that nation, as Josephus declares in his first
book and 5. chap. Magog, says he, was the author of the Magogites, named of
his name, which are called Scythians by the Greeks. But Sibyll describing his
countries, seems to prophecy another thing: woe woe be to thee o land of Gog
and Magog, compassed with the rivers of the Aethiopians. VVhither then is Magog
between the Rivers of Aethiopia? But we know that these Southern peoples are
bordering on the sea, and that this name agrees not to any nation nearer the
North then Egypt, which sometime is called Aethiopia, as Eustatius on
Dionysius declares. And without doubt this is that Aethiopia which Sibyll
means, which justly she attributed to Magog. For who knows not that
colonies of the Cereases Scithya^s were brought into Aegygt? where there is also
a town of their name? And also Ezechiel reckons the Persians, Aethiopians,
and Putei in the army of Gog, chap. 38 5. Therefore Sibyll describes not Magog
by his proper country, but by a colonie sent which she chiefly makes mention
off, because the calamity of Magog should most of all rest upon that part of
the earth. But let it be granted that Magog is a Scythian, how has the Devil
deceived him? In provoking him to join his battles with the Turks, and
together to attempt the destruction of Christians. When first by the streights
of the Caspian sea, new troops of Scythians had broken by force into the
nigher Asia, about the year 1250. Johannes Duca being Emperor at Nice, they
were troblesome to the Turks their kinsmen, who a few ages before came into
those countries, whom they drove out of the contreyes beyond Euphrates, into
those streights of Armenia the lesser, and Cappadocia, whereof we spoke even
now; so as they were constrained necessarily to crave peace of the Roman
Emperor, whereby they might resist the inrodes of the Scythians, pursuing them
at their backs. And this was the state of things, until the time limited came,
wherein the Devil should be loosed from his bonds. But then being let go out
of his prison, he brake off this strife between these two, and made one
agreement of their minds, for to abolish the Christian name. Since that time
the aid of the Scythians their countrymen has never bin wanting to the Turk;
in whose strength at this day he trusts greatly, as we see in the late
expeditions into Hungary, where he had great armies of the Tartarians, who ar
the natural Scythians, the offspring of Magog: Therefore the society of Gog and
Magog against the saints, is evident in these days: who^ not kindred and
affinity of a common stock, but only fraud and deceit of the Devil
associated. Such then is the army of the Turks and Scythians, both indeed of
the same original: but of both, these are called Gog, because they are
descendded from Magog, eve^ as a river from the fountain, although now they be
the princes of this warfarre, neither retain they any thing now of the
Scythians, because of their long sciourning in Asia, but only some footsteps
of the former name. But these partly newly come from Scythia, partly the
inhabitants at this day, but called into these cou^treyes, as necessity
requires, delight yet in the name of their first Prince. The number of this
army is almost infinite: for it is as the sand of the Sea, that is, exceeding
great and innumerable, being defined before to be of two thousand hundred
thousand, in chap. 9.16. in both places is signified an huge multitude. But
what Emperor but the Turk, goes to battle with so populous an army? Scarce
all the Christian armies joined together in any expedition, do equalize the
fourth part of it.

9. They went up therefore into the plame of the earth: In the former verse we
spak of a threfold e^devour of this mustered army: the first of which is this
going up into the plain of the earth; whereby is signified the same thing which
was expressed before by the third part of men killed, chap. 9.15. But this so
express mention of the latitude, declares that this tyranny shall overspred
much more in breadth then in length. For Egypt being subdued, and a great part
of Africa, and toward the North, even to the borders of the Tartarians; this
their Empire exte^deth no less it self from the South unto the Septemtrion,
yea far more, then was once belonging to the Empire of Rome. From the East to
the West, they have scarce attained any more then the third part. Moreover they
have had so easy and ready a conquest hitherto, that justly they may be said to
go up upon the breadth, who have brought under their power many countries,
rather by traveling over them, then wearying them with any long and doubtful
war.

And they compassed the tents of the Saints: The second endeavor is the
assaulting of the te^ts, in which the Saints dwell. Whose tent is our Europe;
which after the truth restored, the cruel Turk does hold besieged on the East
and South parth these three hundred years. For the Saints are yet in camp
under their tents, and shall not have an end of the warrefare till before that
the marriage be come: at the solemnization whereof, they shall cast off their
soldiers cassocke, and shall put on more joyful garments, meet for so great
mirth.

And the beloved City: The third endeavor, so far as which, has proceeded
the repetition of the former Prophecy. This third is altogether to come. For
howsoever the holy city was above granted to the Gentiles to be trodden under
foot a thousand two hundred three score days, chap. 11.2. and the same again
was renewed (after that time was past) in the CHVRCHES, which in these last
times are reformed according to the rule of the divine truth; yet it is not to
be doubted off, but that the beloved city is for excellency sake, that
multitude of the believing Jews, who now at length shall shortly be joined to
the company of the true believers in Christ. The judgment that follows, does
require it should be so, whereby the Turk endeavoring to conquer this city,
shall upon a sudden be overwhelmed. But where and when this siege shall happen,
may be gathered from those things which have bin spoken before. The place
shall be Hartsebhi, the mountain of beauty, the Oriental armagedon, the very
land of Judea. So Daniel chap. 11.45. and elegantly Ezechiell chap. 38.8. After
many days thou shall be visited. For in the latter years thou shall come into
the land that is come home safe from the sword, and is gathered out of many
peoples, thou shall invade the mountains of Israel, which have long bin wast:
with it being brought out of the peoples, all shall dwell safe. The time shall be
at the end of a thousand three hundred thirty five years, of which Daniel
speaks in chap. 12.12. when the hour, day, month, and year of the Turks
tyranny shall come out, to weet, at the year a thousand six hundred ninetith
more or less. But of these things now briefly, perhaps occasion shall be given
at an other time to declare them more at large.

But fire came down from God: The last destruction follows, and first, of the
army, in this verse; which God by some extraordinary way, shall destroy utterly.
For from heaven he shall power out his wrath upon the armies of the Turks; as
before chap. 16.21. and more largely in Ezechiel chap. 38.18.19. etc.

10 And the Divill that deceived them: The Emperor himself the Turk not only
in respect of his own person, but also of the whole state and succession of
his Empire. For there shall not be any more, either Emperor or name of Turk.
But the word Divil is used by a figurat if kind of speech of the principal
cause, for the instrumental: which is very significant in this place, showing
that not only this one enemy the Turk shall be destroyed, but that no open enemy
shall arise ever after. For the Devil, by whose labor they are raised up,
shall not be thrust into prison again for some time, but for ever he shall be
cast into the lake of fire, never to go out for to raise up any such new
troubles.

Where was also that Beast and that false Prophet: Therefore all ar in a like
condition, which are punished with the like punishment. The name of Christian
makes no difference between the Turk and the Roman Antichrist, unless
perhaps for to increase his punishment, for as much as he had a greater means
of truth and grace. But observe, that the Beast and the False Prophet were
already destroyed, as also their destruction has bin declared before, to whom
at length that Devil is added, a partaker of the same punishment.

And they shall be tormented: The vulgarlatine translation omitteth the
copulative conjunction, and joins the verb, shall be tormented, next with
Beast and False Prophet: but amiss, considering tha it is no less necessary
to understand that the common punishment of them all shall be eternal, then that
the punishment shall be one and the same.

11 Then I saw a great white throne: Thus far concerning the destruction of
the enemies; the happiness follows, which the Church shall enjoy after all
these storms are driven away. The first part of it is, the gathering together
of the Saints, in the rest of this chapter. Which gathering is represented by
the resurrection of the dead, and the judgment given touching them. For, by
the most learned men's leave, I do think that this resurrection, commonly
believed, so far as I see, of all men, to be that last resurrection of the
bodies of all men, who since the death of the first Adam do sleep in the
graves, pertains to no other thing, then to the full restoring of the Jewish
nation. Not that I desire to set a broach new opinions, and profer them to the
world, or because it delights me to go against the consent of al men, (I
hope that such proud and impudent rashness is far from me; and God is my
witness how I detest that itching desire of searching out and forging new
errors, through a loathing of ancient truth,) but only because the whole
order of things, and the merveilous consent of the rest of the scriptures do
compel me to follow this interpretation. Which thing I have thought good to
relate in a few words, that it may appear to all men by what means I am
brought into this opinion: that if they shall have any weight for the truth,
we may gain the knowledge of a thing not sufficiently known before: but if
they shall not be firm and sound, they may be thrust through by the censures of
the godly; and I my self at length may be freed from this error, of what sort
soever it be. First therefore, when I diligently weighed those things, which in
the next chapter following are rehearsed to be after this resurrection, I saw
that they agreed by no means to the heave^s properly so called, but to have
place only on earth. Of which sort are that this holy city comes down from
God out of heaven: that she is a spouse prepared only, and adorned for her
husband, not yet give^: that the hope of reward is put off unto the time to
come: ver. 7. that one of the seven Angels shows her to John, ver. 10. of
which sort of ministry, there shall be none in heaven. The very name also of
which Angel being but heard, seeing that he is one of those seven which are
appointed chief actours in the last plagues, chapter 15. may declare within what
bounds we are conversant. VVhither also shall the Apostles make the foundation of
the wall of the holy city in heaven, when Christ delivers up the Kingdom to
his Father? Or whither shall the Kings of the earth bring their glory to the
Church in heaven? Or shall any thing redound from hence to the health of the
nations? These things therefore, and many other of the like sort, considering
that they shall be after this resurrection, drove me to another interpretation,
and chiefly to that which the natural force of the words manifested. For I
remembered, that the calling of the Jews openly and often in the scriptures, is
called the resurrection of the dead, as in Paul, for if the casting away be the
reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving be but life from the dead?
that is, as Oecumenius says, among other interpretations, what shall the
receiving of them be, but tha^ we say, that he quickens them being dead in
sins which receives: to weet God. Well and agreably to the Apostles mind,
judging that the very receiving of the Jews should be life from the dead. Most
learned Theod. Beza so interprets, as if the Apostle should say after a
proverbial manner of speaking, that it shall come to pass, that when the Jews
shall come to the Gospel, the world shall be as it were revived, by an argument
of things compared. But I forbear to heap together interpretations. The very
words of the Apostle are plain enough of themselves. The second place is out
of Isay chap. 26.19. Thy dead men shall live again, my dead bodies shall rise
again: awake ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall cast out the dead. In the former chapters the Prophet has
foreshewed the desolation of the whole earth: severally of certain nations,
from the twelft chapter, and of al together in the chap. 24. But seeing this
renewing of the Jews which he speaks of, shall be after that Babylon is
overthrown, and the same such, as whereby the Lord will swallow up death into
victory, and wipe away tears from all faces, as chap. 25.8. it must needs be
that this full restoring is yet looked for to be fulfilled, and not to be
esteemed past in those smaller deliverances, which came to this people long
ago. Especially considering that there is a more express noting of the time in
those things which follow next, where the Lord says, that in that day he shall
visit Leviathan, that long and crooked SERIENT, and the DRAGON which is in the
Sea, in Isaiah chapter 27. ver. 1. by which words he signifies not the
Babylonian, (for he was far remooved from the sea^) but without all doubt the
Turk, whom likeweise our holy Apostle John agreably unto it, calls a SERPENT
and DRAGON. This, is worthyly called a long SERPENT, the bounds and limits of
his Empire being spread and extended so far abroad: and no less instly said
to be crooked, if an^ do consider well the Provinces of his Jurisdiction.

For we may consider the knob head to be in Greece, Macedonie, Thracia and the
other nations of Europe; his some what stretched out body to be in Asia the
less, called at this day Anatolie: afterward his belly bowed and going in
circuit by Syria and Phoenicia: as Dionysius writes most elegantly of the
Gulf Issicus: As a Dragon cruel in looks is wrapped about round creeping,
slow. Last of all his tail following with a long train through Egypt, and
the coast of Lybia, and gathering it self as it were into a circle. This
Serpent goes not with strait passes, but bowing himself into many crooked
circuits, thrusts forward his very body. Who is he that beholding this
Empire, not so much stretching it self in length, as going forward with a
crooked winding, may not perceive the lively image of the crooked serpent? It
is not my purpose to hunt after vain subtilties, but to bring only the truth,
as far as I see, that figure of the Serpent, which the Spirit has represented
to us. There is added the habitation of this serpent to be in the Sea, for
which cause he is called Leviathan or Whale. How wonderfully does this agree to
the Turk, who has fixed the seat of his Empire in the very mouth of the Sea
Pontus and Propontide; to weet Constantinople? Therefore when God shall call to
an account this Serpent and Leviathan, that is, when he shall utterly abolish
the Turkish name, then shall this resurrection be. For the Prophet joined
together these two things, saying, thy dead shall live again, and at that time
the Lord shall visit Leviathan with his most sharp sword: the next chapter
beginning by an opposition of the time, in which he will bestow that benefit,
which he mentioned in the end of the former. So John in this place next after
the destruction of the Turks, adds this resurrection. The third place is in
the 37. chap. of Ezechiel, where, what other thing are the dry bones, the
slain, and the graves, the^ the Jews afflicted and overwhelmed with all kind
of miseries and calamities? Who should have no greater ability to deliver
themselves from that ruin, than have the dead and buried to rise out of their
graves. And what other thing are the sinews, flesh, skin, Spirit, than a
future restoring at length? Which shall be no less acceptable an well come, as
almost is a new life of a sleep in the graves. Behold, says the Lord Jehovah,
I will open your graves, and draw you out of your sepulchers, my people, and
bring you back into the la^d of Israel: that you may know, that J am the
Lord, when I do open your graves, and bring you out of your sepulchers, o my
people, ver. 12.13. To what end should they be brought again into the land of
Israel after the last resurrection? our dwelling place shall then be in heaven,
not in earth. Moreover, that resurrection which Ezechiel speaks of, shall be by
degrees, and by little and little, ver. 8.9.10. But the general resurrection
shall be in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15.52. Furthermore
these bones are the whole house of Israel, ver. 11. and now shall be the uniting
together of Judah and Ephraim, which those two pieces of wood joined together
into one do declare. Which things belong properly to the Israelites, neither
also past, but to come, as that happiness shows, which is mentioned in the
end of the chapter, greater then any, that the days past can chaleng. But how
does that agree, that together with this resurrection, is conjoined the
co^quering of Gog and Magog, chap. 38. and 39? unles that here the resurrection
goes before; in John in this place, it follows, the cause whereof we will
show by and by. Neither do I doubt, but Daniel has meant the same thing by
those many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth awoking, some to
everlasting life, some to shame and perpetual contempt, chap. 12.23. For many
are not all: but this word seems to have bin used of set purpose, that a
difference might be set between the general and this resurrection. He
attributes also the chief honor to them that teach and justify others, not
so much for labors past in their life time, as for their present travel and
industry. For they that teach, says he, shall shine, not they which taught
long a go. None of which things, we know, shall be after the resurrection. For
brevity sake I will not examine, how that of Hosea 13, 14. belongs also to
this. Seeing therefore the scriptures do so freely use so expres a similitude
of the resurrection, to signify the restoring of the Jews, neither do we
find a thing of so great moment else where fully declared in this book; we
hope that we do no violence to the truth, if that we shall join this place
unto the meaning of other the like. But some man will say that we have made
mention of this calling in the former chapter: it is true, but that of the sixth
vial was but begun, not perfect and absolute, as that of the last vial shall
be, when all the enemies shall be destroyed. Which distinction of calling the
former words do manifest, when in that first, John was commanded to write,
blessed are they which are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb, chap.
19.9. VVherby it is taught that the first was not perfect, where need was of
such confirmation: the office whereof is to seal up a thing not yet
sufficiently known, and to come; which, all being called had bin superfluous.
But Daniel writes most plainly, who has distinguished both the callings by
their times. He sets the first at the end of a thousand two hundred ninety
days. The second at the end of a thousand three hundred and five. The
distance between both is of forty five days, that is of so many years, as in
an other place with Gods help we will show. Dan. 12.11.12. We shall see
likeweise in Ezechiel in the place before spoken off, that the dry bones being
covered with flesh and skin, did move themselves alike, and approach one to
an other. Moreover, after some time, during which they were destitute of
Spirit, at length being quickened by the same, do live a true life, and do
perform all those offices of life peculiar unto bodies endued with souls.
That approaching of the dry bones, is that first calling of the former chapter.
The coming to of the Spirit, giving to those bones perfect life, is the latter
calling, this resurrection to which nothing shall be wanting unto perfect
salvation. Both which, though Ezechiel comprehends in the same chapter, yet
he handles the more distinctly afterward. For first, before that war with
Gog and Magog, he mentions the resurrection, as also John that which was
begun in the former chapter: afterward when Gog was destroyed, he describes a
most glorious building of the temple in the 40. chapter etc. which is this
second and full resurrection. Therefore the first resurrection of the Jews, (of
the Jews I say, for the first resurrection of this chapter ver. 5. is of the
Gentiles, into which notwithstanding shall fall at length this first of the
Jews, that every way it may be the first,) shall be by and by after the
destruction of Rome. The second shall be strait after the Romish Pope and the
Turk be destroyed. This resurrection is a power to enter into the temple,
which the smooke did hinder to all until all the seven last plagues were
accomplished, ch, 15. the which is spent in destroing the Pope of Rome and the
Turk, as was spoken sufficiently before. If I seem to any, to weaken the
g^neral resurrection, by taking so notable a foundation from it, let him
understand that it takes no damage from hence. This place has yet left a
most strong ground to confirm the same. For the Spirit does not deceiv with a
fained similitude, but of which ought to be a most certain persuasion among
Christians. Otherweise certainly he had lost his labor, if he had brought any
thing lacking credit. Moreover he should have driven to defperation, in
propounding that which must not be done: for they would have thought, that even
so they had bin past hope: but using a tipe of a thing that should most
certe^ly come to pass in his time, he both makes the calling undoubted, and
also declares the manner, whereby at length the resurrection shall be
accomplished. And thus much of the true sense of this argument: now we will
prosecute the rest,

Then I saw a great white throne: The preparation of God the judge, setting his
people at liberty, taken from a similitude of the general resurrection. For the
power and mercy of God shall be no less clear in the molifying of men hardened
by so long a revolting, and in bestowing salvation upon them so past recovery,
then at length shall appear in raising out rot^en bodies out of the graves. The
throne therefore is white, most pure, most gracious, most comfortable, in the
very form having a demonstration of mercy. Great, to declare the most imperial
majesty of God, which now shall be made evident in this assembly of his people:
he sits also upon a throne, ready to judge, because there shall be no more any
delay of rewarding: the stay whereof before brought men into that opinion, as if
God regarded not the earth: there fled from the face of him that sits on the
throne, both earth and heaven: a great alteration of al things being made, both
the false Church plucked up by the roots, and also the true augmented with so
great fruitfulnes, that her former sorrowful face may seem to have fled away.

12 And J saw the dead both small and great: Such then was the judgment: now at
described those that shall be judged. These small and great ar Jews, who before
hated the faith, and were spent with such calamities, that they might seem to
differ nothing from the dead. Now al of them shall appear before God, every one
to undergo the judgment, either of life or death. For now it shall be made
manifest who ar elect, and who reprobate. They which yet shall resist the truth
obstinatly, shall be numbered among the last sheep. No remedy shall be used
afterward, whereby their stubburne minds may be subdued. But why says he small
and great? Whit her in the last resurrection, according to the manner whereof, al
things are here applied, shall every one appear in that stature, in which they
departed this life? For this cause some have affirmed too rashly, that every
one shall rise again in that tallness, in which Adam was created. Which
opinion, both resists evidently this place, and also takes away the truth of
the restored body, if there shall not be that just stature, in which they dyed.

And the books were opened: The form of judging, by books opened, which are
the consciences endued with the true light of Gods will, and with a lively
feeling of all their actions. These shall now openly manifest to all men, them
in whom there is a sincere mind given of God, and in whom lay hid hitherto the
seed of election.

Then an other book: Of Gods decree and election: these things ar spoken after
the manner of men, considering that it is our manner for the help of our
memory, to record in books things done, and in judgments to give sentence
according to the truth of them. Therefore election is no new thing, neither
does it depend on our pleasure, but is founded on the eternal decree of God.

And the dead were judged etc. After or according to those things which were
written in the books, as once in the return from Babylo^s captivity, they were
removed from their place and office, whose genealogy was not found. Nehem. 7,
61.64.65.

The Gospel is in truth savoury to no man, neither does any man give his name
to it from his heart, but he who is written in the book of life; and in the
book of his heart, has a writing answering the same word for word.

13 And the Sea gave up her dead: The way whereby they that are to be judged,
are presented before the judgment seat: to weet, the Jews were gathered from
all the corners of the earth: as in the general resurrection nothing shall
hinder, by what kind of death soever any has perished, but that a body shall be
restored to him. Yet notwithstanding when as the Sea signifies corrupt and
false doctrine, by this also is noted, that those Jews which live in Christian
countries, of which sort are very many in Spain, France, Germany, Italy, as
it were in the bosom and compass of the Popish sea, of which we have spoken
so many things before, shall open their eyes to acknowledge the truth, and shall
fly together at the light thereof.

Death ulso and hell gave up: A Synecdoche of the general; as though he should
say, and all that have dyed of any other death. It must needs be that the
karkeise be drowned in the sea, or be covered with earth, or rot in the air,
or be consumed of the fire, or devoured of beasts, or some like thing. As
touching the drowning, he said before, the sea; as touching the grave, now he
says hell: Death contains all the rest. But seeing death restores those
Jews, which live in the Christian lands, and are infected with the Romish
superstition, death and hell shall restore them that shall live among Turks and
Heathen, who are banished further off from salvation, and are conversant in the
inner parts of hell it self. For so are al those nations of whom the name of
Christ is either hated, or not heard. Nevertheless it makes no matter whither
a man perish by sea, or land, either among Christians, or among the enemies of
this name.

14 But hell and death: A special execution on death. Therefore as after the
general resurrection no death shall reign any more in the world, besides that
eternal, which shall always feed up, and not consume the wicked, so after the
Church shall be restored by that full calling of the Jews, death and the grave
shall reign no more in her, as of old while as scourges they always lay upon
the shoulders of the offenders, but only they shall serve to translate the
elect into the Kingdom of heaven, whereupon they shall loose their former
name. They are cast into a lake of f^re, not because either death or hell
sustain any person, but because that which is proper to men, is attributed to
them, as though he should say, there shall be no torment any more either of death
or hell, but in the lake of fire, where the reprobate dye for ever. But from
hence observe, that seeing hell is cast into the lake of fire, that is into hell
properly so caled, that it obtains an other proper signification, then that
which commonly is given to it in our mothers tongue. It is taken of many for
the place of the damned, but commonly it notes not any thing but the grave,
and the common state of the dead, as may be learned from this and other places
of this book.

15 And whosoever was not found: None shall be gathered into this Church, but he
that shall be of the elect. How excellent is this pre-eminence of the Church,
which shall not be defiled with any hypocrites and counterfeit Christians as
before time? How fair is this field, which shall abound with most fruitful
corn? without any tares and darnel? Whatsoever is found in this net may be
laid up in a safe vessel. Therefore it cannot be declared in words how amiable
this most glorious spouse shall be. It may come to pass that some may fall some
time through humane infirmity, but holy admonitions, and wholesome correction
shall bring them again to good thrift and repentance. But shall every one of the
Jews be such? Some shall not embrace the truth, as is manifest from Daniel,
many arising to shame and perpetual contempt, chap. 12.2. And we shall learn
from the chapter following that some dogs shall be excluded without this city.
But they which now shall refuse the truth, shall show forth a manifest token of
their reprobatio^, that the Church shall not be subject to be deceived any more.
Wherefore in this renewing the goodness and power of God shall be most famous
through the whole world. Which shall restore wretched men so wonderfully, and
make so singular choice of them, whom he will redeem. But see how the godly shall
receive comfort from hence. For whereas every most holy man might justly tremble
through conscience of their sins, against this fear we have here a notable
confirmation, that election by Christ sets us free from guilt.

CHAP. 21.
AFTER I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven, and the first
earth were passed away; and the sea was no more extant.

2 And J John saw the holy city the new Jerusalem come down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband.

3 And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, behold the tabernacle of
God is among men, and he will dwell with them, and they shallbe his people, and
God himself shall be with them, their God.

4 And God shall wipe all tears from their eyes: and death shall be no more,
neither neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain,
because the former things are past.

5 And he that sat upon the throne said, behold J make all things new. And he
said unto me write: for these words are true and faithful.

6 And he said unto me, it is done* J am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end: I will give to him that is a thirst of the well of the waters of life
freely.

7 He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my son.

8 But the fearful and unbeleeving, and abominable, and murderers, and whore
mongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in
the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

9 And there came to me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vials, full
of the seven last plagues, and he spoke unto me, saying, come I will show
thee the Lambs wife.

10 And he carried me away in the Spirit, in a great and high mountain, and
showed me that great city, that holy Jerusalem descending out of heaven from
God: having the glory of God.

11 And her brightness was like unto a stone most precious, as a Jasper stone
shining as Crystal.

12 It had beside a great wall and hie, having twelve gates, and at the gates
twelve Angels, and names written, which are the names of the twelve tribes of
the children of Israel

13 On the East part there were three gates: on the North side three gates: on
the Southside three gates: and on the Westside three gates.

14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, in which were the names of
the Lambs twelve Apostles.

15 And he that spoke with me, had a golden reed for to measure the city
withal, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.

16 And the city lay four square, whose length is as large as the breadth of
it: and the length, and the breadth, and the hight of it are equal

17 And he measured the wall thereof, a hundredth forty and four cubits, by the
measure of man, that is, of the Angel. And the building of it was of Jasper.

18 And the city was pure gold, like unto clear glass. And the foundations
of the wall of the city were garnished with all manner of precious stones.

19 The first foundation was of Jasper: the second of a Saphyr: the third a
Chalcedonie: the fourth an Emerande: the fifth a Sardonix 20 The sixth a Sardius:
the seventh a Chrysolite: the eight a Beryll: the ninth a Topaze: the tenth a
Chrysoprasus: the eleventh a Jacynth: the twelft an Amethyst. 21 And the twelve
gates were twelve Pearls, and every gate is of one Pearl, and the street of
the city is pure gold, as shining glass. 22 Neither saw I any temple therein:
for the Lord God almighty, and the Lamb are the temple of it. 23 And this city
has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory
of God does light it, and the Lamb is the light of it. 24 And the Nations
which are saved shall walk in the light of it: and the Kings of the earth shall
bring their glory and honor unto it.

25 And the gates of it shall not be shut by day: for there shall be no night
there.

26 And the glory and honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it.

27 And there shall enter into it no unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination or lies: but they which are written in the lambs book of life.


Analysis.
HITHERTO has bin the manner of gathering the Church; afterward is declared
what shall be the condition of it being gathered. Which is showed to be most
happy; first generally from the things seen; a new heaven and earth, ver. 1.
and the holy city ver. 2. and also from things heard, partly in common,
touching the presence of God with men ver. 3. Of the removing of calamities
ver. 4. and a new restoring of al things, ver. 5. partly in private concerning
the certainty of the Prophecy ver. 5. of the mystery now fulfilled, v. 6. and
the rewarding both of the godly, ver. 6.7. and also of the ungodly ver. 8. And
such is the general declaration. The particular relates the revealing cause,
an Angel ver. 9. and 10. And the thing revealed, universally, ver. 10.11. By
parts, in respect of the wall and city, and essential parts, as the form of
the wall ver. 12.13.14. The form of the city ver. 15.16.17 Afterward of the
common matter ver 18. Special of the wall ver. 19.20.21 Special of the city
ver. 21. The externe arguments by which the glory of this city is set forth, is
first, God himself, who is both the temple ver. 22. and the light of the city
ver. 23. Secondly, the Gentiles, which shall bring their glory to it ver. 24
both free from all fear and suspicion ver. 25. and also from any defiling by
contagion ver. 27. Thirdly a mervailous abundance of things necessary, and the
continuance of this glory in the chap. following.

Scholions.
1 After J saw a new heaven: The opinion of the resurrection from the end of
the former chapter, has moved very many to interpret al these things of the
Church as it shall be at length in heaven. But we have showed, that neither the
last resurrection is entreated of there, neithe does the Spirit describe here
to us the Angelical blessedness of the Saints after this life, but of them
yet conversing upon the earth, as the things which are mentioned do manifest
in their places.

Neither perhaps is it needful that the heavenly inheritance should be adorned
with words, which all know well enough to surmount any praises whatsoever, even
they also, in whose eyes the Church on earth is otherweise despised: but
concerning this, her estimation is less with mortal men then ought to be,
because she is a stranger: whereupon there may have bin a necessary reason to set
forth more largely the glory and dignity of it. The descriptron whereof
notwithstanding, makes a way to comprehend in mind that celestial
happiness. For if the magnificence of the spouse be so great on earth, of what
sort are those things, which God has prepared for his with himself? But the
mind is weakened at the thinking of this, let us therefore turn our eyes aside
to this earthly pleasantnes, greater indeed then all words can set forth, yet
more capable to our senses, and which within a few years shall be made clare to
the world. The interpretation of the new heaven and earth may be taken out of
that to the Hebrews chap. 12.26. whose voice then shook the earth; but now
has declared saying, yet once more will I shake not only the earth, but the
heaven: where to shake heaven and earth, by the interpretation of the Apostle
himself, is to abolish the old manner of worship and people. For heaven by
translation is the temple, and whole legal worship, whereof that temple was the
seat and place where it abode long, as Heb. 8.5. From whence to shake heaven,
is to abolish that worship. The earth are men, and more properly the
Israelites, a people to whom that legal worship did belong. Therefore to shake
the earth, is to shake the Israelites, and to remove them out of their place.
Neither has the common use of speaking through this book digressed any whit
from this signification of the words, where heaven is the more pure Church, the
earth, the degenerate citizens, as we have seen in their places. Even as God
therefore in the first coming of his son shook the heaven and the earth in
rejecting that old both worship and people, and ordaining and choosing a new,
so again when it shall please him to have mercy on the forsaken nation, and to
bestow upon it salvation by Christ, he shall darken the former glory of heaven
and earth, making the dignity and honor of his new people so famous, as if he
had created all things a new. Vherunto belongs that of Isaiah: For behold I
will create a new heaven, and a new earth, as thoug he should say, I will
appoint a most pure manner of worshipping me, and will take unto me a new
people, in whose assembly I will be honored, chap. 65.17. Of which sort is that
of the Apostle, If any be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things ar passed
away, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17.

For the first heaven and earth were passed away: Shall the Church then fail
utterly among the Gentiles? For heaven notes out more pure godlinesse^ as we
said even now. How this should be abolished, it may be doubtful because of
those things which we have mentioned before. As concerning the earth, it is
not so doubtful, considering that the Spirit has already taught sufficiently
that the Pope of Rome with his whole (falsely so called) Catholic flock,
shall be rooted out utterly before this day. As then touching the reformed
Church, shall the receiving of the Jews, cause the alienation of the Gentiles,
as before time the casting away of them, was the reconciling of the world? Romans
11.15. It may seem so in deed, especially considering that the Apostle
affirms in the same place, that a certain fullness of the Gentiles shall be
accomplished, as is like at the calling of the Jews ver. 25. but yet
notwithstanding in this very chapter, the Revelation teaches otherweise, to
weet, that the Gentiles, which shall be saved, shall walk in the light of it, and
the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor to the new Jerusalem,
ver. 24. Yea Paul in the place before said, plainly avoucheth, that the Church
shall be very flourishing among the Gentiles, when the Jews are called: For,
says he, if the casting away of the Jews, be the reconciling of the world,
what shall the reconciling be, but life from the dead? This is as if he should
say, what shall the receiving be, but as it were a general resurrection, whereby
they that are dead in sins among all nations, coming at length to the truth,
shall be made partakers of eternal life by faith in Christ? From which we
gather that the fullness of the Ge^tils is not a certain end of believing, at
the calling of the Jews, so that faith among the Gentiles afterward should
utterly perish, (eve^ as no more can be powered into a full vessel,) but a more
abundant access of all nations of the earth toward what part soever their
countries do extend, obeying the Kingdom of Christ, according to that
saying: the Lord shall be King over the whole earth: in that day shall there be
one Lord, and his name shall be one, Zach. 14.9. And the Lord will destroy in
this mountain the figure of this veil that is spread upon all nations, and the
cover wherewith all nations are covered. he will swallow up death it self into
victory, and the Lord Jehovah shall wipe away the tears from all faces, and will
take away the reproach of his people out of all the earth, Isaiah chap. 25.7.8.
For then they that dwell in the wilderness shall kneel before him, and his
enemies shall lick the dust. The Kings of the Ocean sea and of the Islands
shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring gifts: Finally,
all Kings shall worship him, and all nations shall serve him, Psalm. 72.9.10.11.
How then in this celebrating shall the new heaven pass away, that is, the more
pure Church among the Gentiles? Must we distinguish concerning the Ge^tils,
whereof some are yet strangers from Christ, othersome are named Christians now
by the space of many ages, as we of Europe first of all? Shall they come to the
Church, as the Prophecies even now al^^adged declare, and many others agreeing
with them? Shall these depart and fall away, as the vision seems to show,
which these words do set forth? The first heaven, says he, passed away. What
other heaven is then among (...), according to the sense of this Prophecy, then
among us of Europe for the most part? Certainly the promise made to the Church
of Philadelphia increases the suspicion, to weet that it should be a pillar in
the temple of God, never to be cast forth, chap. 3, 12. Why is this attributed
as proper and peculiar to it, if all the rest enjoy the same benefit alike? It
seems therefore, that as once the unfruitful fig tree was cut up, and the ill
husbanded vineyard being taken from the old farmers was let out to other, Luke
13.6. Mat. 21.41. So the Church now a long time evil entreated among them of
Europe, do purpose to trusse up bag and baggage, and to forsake them at
length, who have long since forsaken the purity and love of it. What though now
it be called heaven?, the heaven themselves are impure in the eyes of our God,
Job. 15, 15. And the more in deed at this time our heaven, which rather
enjoys such nam in respect of the Popish infernal gulf, tha^ for any
heave^ly clearenesse of his own. But that seems to be repugnant to this
calamity of Europe, that after the first resurrection, there are a thousand
years of reign with Christ, chap. 20.6. that is, there shall be among those
nations, to who^ this resurrection has befallen, a continuance of the truth by
the space of so many years from the beginning of the restoration thereof. But
we know that this was proper to our countries. But it may be answered, that
perhaps this reign shall be such as was that of the thousand years before that
resurrection, when the Devil was bound, chap. 20.4. when the Kingdom was of a
few elect, in whose heart was the love of the only salvation-bringing truth,
howsoever the Antichristian impiety savoured better to all the rest of the
multitude. Certainly other scriptures seem to lean more this way, threatening
that al religion shall be so defiled, with so many corruptions, that fearce any
wholesome footstep of it shall remain entire. And who is so ignorant of
things, that has not just causes enough to fear much, especially when he
sees the word of God to be despised every where, new errors to spring up
daily, old to be brought back again from hell, al godliness to be converted
into gain and ambition? Many indeed are the arguments that the glory of God
will depart from us shortly, as once from the temple at Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.3.
Unless peradventure some comfort arises from hence, that this departure of
the first heaven and earth may be understood not of the utter decay of the
truth among the Europeans, but of such a renewing among the Jews, in
comparison of the excellency whereof, whatsoever was excellent before, may be
said to have passed and vanished away; when the light of the moon shall be as
the light of the sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold, as the light of
seven days, and the Sun shall blush when the Lord shall reign in Sion: as
we have heard out of Isaiah; or finally unless it has some weight, that the
Spirit here speaks so exquisitely, not saying the former heaven and former
earth were passed away, but the first heaven and the first earth, as though
these words respected not the Gentiles at all, but only the legal worship,
which rightly one may call the first heaven, ordained at the first of God
himself. But the Christian people of the Gentiles, was neither the first people
of God, neither were the rites observed by them, the first ordinances delivered
from heaven. As though the words should give this sense at last, albeit this
people of the Jews all the time of their reiection, thirsted after their old
ceremonies and worship, and boasted openly that they should have at length free
leave to use their ancient custom, (which we know they vaunt of even in these
days,) yet in this restoring, they shall conform themselves wholly to the
will of God in such sort, that willingly renouncing their old ordinances,
which then they shall acknowledge to have received an end in Christ, they shall
make manifest to all men, that the first heaven and earth, which they looked
for in vain were passed away for ever. This last seems to be of no small
force, to show that the reason of the order of the first heaven and earth
should not be between the Ge^tils and Jews, but only among the Legal and
Christian Jews. The care that I have has made me to search out all corners
to my power; now let the judgment be in the power of the Christian reader,
which of these is the beast.

And there shall be no more sea: The sea is degenerat and corrupt doctrine, which
shall have no place among this new people, whose glassie sea shall be like
Crystal, most pure, most clear, void of al saltness, and muddy grossness,
as is that in chapter 4.6. Which also is said in respect of the Jews
themselves, and those errors which in these days they deffend so obstinately;
there is not a comparison of the Gentiles with the Jews handled in this place.
The Gentile sea, that I may so say, and thath grosser was consumed already,
when the Popish nation was destroyed: the purer sea of the reformed Church is
of glass, chap. 15.2. and shall not be abolished. The Jews even hitherto have
their own sea, most gross, most foul with many forged tales touching the
Messiah, the legal worship, the righteousness of the law, and many other points
of salvation: al which shall now be so dried up, that not a drop of the former
sea shall remain.

2 And I John saw the holy City; In such weise then was seen the new heaven
and earth: now the holy city is exhibited, which is so called for excellency
sake. The Church also of the Gentiles is that new, and heavenly Jerusalem, as
in the Apostle; but ye are come to mount Sion, and to the City of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, Heb.
12. and Gal. 4 But our Jerusalem being deformed with many errors and
contentions shall cause that this most pure shall appear altogether new. Aretas,
the Compl. and the Kings Bible do omit the name John, and reed thus, and I
saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem.

Coming down from God: The^fore this Jerusalem shall have her seat on earth,
the heavenly shall never come down, but shall remain fixed in heaven, where
Christ sits in glory at the right hand of the Father; I go, says he, to
prepare a place for you, and when J shall have gone, and prepared a place for
you, I will come again, and take you unto my self, that where I shall be, there
you may be also, John 14.3. And again, Father J will that those which thou
have given me, be with me, where I am, John 17.24. We shall be caught up in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the atre, and so shall be with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. And to what end should Jerusalem come down from heaven, which
by and by after the general resurrection all the elect shall be in the heavens?
Peradventure, will thou say, it might come down, that John might see it. If it
had come down for this cause, John should rather have been caught up into
heaven to behold it, then that she should be let down to the earth. He was
commanded before to come up into heaven, where through the door opened, he saw
the form of the militant Church, chap. 4. how much more now should he have
gone up, that he might behold the same triumphing? Therefore these words do
manifestly distinguish the new Jerusalem pilgrim, from the inlandish. Albeit
that be called also heavenly, because in very truth it is such, both by birth,
and also by the right of the inheritance; as Paul says, For that Jerusalem
which is from above, Gal. 4.26. It comes down therefore from God, because his
singular power and mercy shall appear in building up this new city. The
increase of the whole building shall be so swift, and the glory and dignity so
great, that all with one consent shall acknowledge the hand of God, and shall
declare him to be the only artificer.

Trimmed as a bride: To be presented to her husband: not yet hitherto given by
a marriage accomplished. After the last resurrection the marriage shall be
accomplished, it shall not be a preparing for time to come. This bride was
adorned with pure fine linen, and the Iustifications of the Saints, chap.
19.7.8. But observe that the city seen ere while, is now called the bride, and
more plainly after ver. 9. Come, says the Angel. I will show thee the bride
the Lambs wife. Therefore this city is the whole multitude of the faithful,
the most sweet and straight communion of all which among themselves, the Spirit
declares very well by such a form of city. The members of the body are used
sometime to the same end, but the similitude of a city setreth before our eyes
a certain more lively image There is a greater variety of things in a city,
and a further difference of duties, which yet are joined together and contained
with the same law, and respect one chief good of all: This therefore notably
represents how the faithful most differing in function, office, and course
of life, do grow unto one Holy body.

3 And I heard a great voice from heaven saying etc. He comes to that part of
the glory which is declared by the things heard. The Tabernacle properly
belonged to the Jews, and old worship: from whence here it signifies the
whole divine worship of that people, to which before the tabernacle was
peculiar. Together also it shows, that the manifestatio^ of Gods glory, shall
not yet be perfect, such as the Saints shall enjoy after the last judgment. But
howsoever it shall be far more abundant, then never before, yet men shall see
God as through a glass, and riddle, not face to face: they shall know in part
only, not as they are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. A tabernacle is fit for the Church
being in pilgrimage, not for that which has gotten a firm seat in her own
country.

And he shall dwell with them: and they shall be his people: Then God himself
shall take upon him the protection of the Saints, according to the form of the
covenant, Genesis 17.1. then the Saints shall submit themselves willingly to be
governed of God. So Jeremy from whence these things are taken, expounds them;
I will put my law in their mind, and write it in their hearts, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people, chap. 31.32. etc.

4 And God shall wipe: So is the presence of God: now follows that which
concerns the remooving of the calamities. The truth shall not be made to sorrow
again, nor be oppressed with the tyranny, either of the Beast or Dragon, or
any such like plague, but now being victour and conqueror of all enemies;
shall flourish. He borrows these words out of Isay chap. 25.8. that we may
know of what times the Spirit speaks. Isaiah in the same place speaks of
the felicity of the Christian Church of the Jews on earth: as is evident from
that vengeance, which God will take in his time on the Moabites, ver. 10. For
the hand of the Lord shall rest in this mount, and Moab shall be threshed under
him, even as straw is threshed for dunging. He joins together both the
singular goodness of God toward the Israelites, and the final destruction of
the Moabites. And the Spirit using that Prophecy in this place show, that it
is not accomplished of old, but that at lenght it shall be fulfilled when this
restoring of the Jews shall come. So John and Isaiah give light one to another.

And death shall be no more: The greevousnesse of punishments shall cease; in
which sense Isaiah says: he will swallow up death into victory: chap. 25.8.
and Hoseah, I will redeem them from the power of the grave, I will deliver
them from death: O death I will be thy death, O grave, I will be thy destruction,
repentance is hidden from mine eyes, chap. 13.14. Which place Paul applies to
the last resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.55. as also the Spirit has showed by the same
this renewing, chap. 20.12. And so indeed shall be the full overthrowing of death,
when the bodies shall rise again. But in the mean time in the felicity of the
new people, there shall be seen a pattern of the great weakening of the sam. Not
because the separation of the souls and bodies shall the^ cease, whereby the
saints are translated into the Kingdom of heaven; but because the sting of
death being quite taken away, it shall not serve to the scourging of the Church
any more.

Neither sorrow, neither crying, neither labor: These things declare how far
death shall be taken away, to weet, in regard of punishment, not of departing
unto eternal life So also the ministers and sumners of it shall be taken away.
For what right have the servants, where their master has no authority? Most
happy bride, which shall then be freed from such disturbers. A visible image of
the blessed reign in heaven, shall be now with men on earth,

For the first things are past: Peradventure having respect to the first
condition of the Jews troubleous times and full of misery: because of Gods
wrath provoked by their own often rebellio^s: as though he should say, there
shall be no more place afterward for this stubburnesse: and therefore neither
shall God be so angry as in former times.

5 And he that sat upon the throne said: The certenty of this renewing and
happiness is confirmed by an other testimony of great authority: It is of him
that sits on the throne, that is, the most high and eternal God himself,
who openly testifyeth, that he will make all things new, that is, that he will
so restore the doctrine, worship, people, and whole administration of things,
that men may worthily count them new.

And he said unto me, write: John comes now to those things which were
spoken to him particularly. In that he is commanded to write, it is as if it
had bin said, this is determined and resolved with God, and as it were
registered in statute books, so as it cannot be altered: or do thou put it into
common writtings, that the faithful may have to show, how they may call upon
me for right, see the chapter 19, at the 9. verse. The writing which is
commanded is, that these words are true and faithful, to be performed at
length in their time, though the world minds nothing less.

6 And he said to me it is done: The second thing which was said to John in
private, concerning the Mystery accomplished, which shall have an end in the
restoring of the Jews. Which consummation is part of the seventh vial, the
proper of which is, to finish the Mystery of God, as in the 16. chap. and 17.
verse. For this it is done, is the same that is there. If this were after, it
could not rightly have bin said there, it is done, to which some thing even
then should be left, which had not yet obtained his end. Wherefore seeing that
there some things are said to be done after the mystery finished which belong
to this earthly life, it follows that neither that former it is done is after
the last judgment, as has bin observed in the 16. chapter 21. ver. neither
this second is to be referred to any other thing but to this present life.
Aretas and Montanus do read otherweise, And he said unto me, J am made Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the end. The Complutent edition and the Kings
Bible do read thus, And he said unto mee' it is done, J am alpha and Omega.
But Aretas and Montanus do wrongfully omit it is done, seeing this belongs to
the explication of the seventh vial, the chief point whereof concern the
finishing of the mystery, which is not accomplished in destroying the enemies,
of whom only mention was made in the 16. chapter, and 17. verse etc. but in
that last choice accomplished: to which it is done is attributed for this
cause, namely by reason that it is the last end of all Prophecies.

I am Alpha and Omega: I am the same, who both in the beginning have decreed al
these things to be done, and also now at length have put an end to the same.

J will give to him that is a thirst: This is the reward of the godly, who are
said to be thirsty, that is fervently desiring those things, as are all they
who have a taste of heavenly good things. Blessed, says Christ are they, which
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, Mat. 5.6. But
then especially shall the Jews thirst, who shall satisfy themselves with no
desire, whereby they may perceive a more full sweetness of Christ. Yet
nevertheless even to these which shall burn with an exceeding great desire
shallbe given of the well of water of life freely, that is, not for any merit
of their desire (though among all the gifts give^ to men it excels,) but of
the free grace of God.

A notable place against the blasphemous doctrine of the Papists touching
merit. The Jesuit labors to shift it off, making the same sense of it, as
of that of the Rom, 8.18. The sufferings of this time are not worthy of the
glory to come, which shall be revealed in us: by which words, says he, our good
deserts are not compared with the future blessedness, but the sufferings, that
is, the labors which we suffer for Gods sake: as though he should say, our
sorrows cannot be compared with the joys of the blessed: although the
endurings of griefs, in as much as they come from grace, are worthy doubtless
of eternal life. Consider the fraud of the Jesuit, who having nothing to
answer to this place, flies to an other, from whence some show of an answer
might be taken. But that I may not now examine that of the Romans, why tells
he us of sorrows and af lictions not to be compared with the joys of the
blessed, of which nothing at al is spoken in this place? Here tears, death,
sorrow, crying, all labor is banished away, before in ver. 4. so as nothing is
more unmeet as to dream of such a comparison. For in these words it is showed
that not only the sorrows of this life are inferior to the joys of the
blessed, but also that the thirst, hunger, and most fervent desire of
godliness, than which nothing can be of greater esteem in a man, do not
obtain life by their merit, but by the mere grace and mercy of God. Neither
is that of the fained Ambrose less frivolous, and also of Thomas, and Rupert,
who will have the word freely therefore to be said, because although eternal
life be due to the merits of the righteous condignly, yet the merits themselves
could not have bin merits without grace, which was given freely. For if they
would rather have spoken with the Holy Ghost, then from their own perverse
brains, they would never have said, that any grace is given to men, by whose
help they might do works worthy of eternal life, when here it is said
expressly, that the reward of the most excellent works is alto gither freely
bestowed, and not condignly.

7 He that overcomes shall inherit all things: For none shall attain to this
happiness, but he which shall behave himself valiantly in that battle, with
the Dragon, of which in the former chapter. Ye therefore o Jews, show your
selves men; It shall be a terrible war, if ever at any other time, Dan. 12.1.
Yet notwithstanding fear not, neither fainte in your minds. The victory is
sure, and after the victory eternal joy.

8 But to the fearful and unbeleeving; The reward of the wicked; which first
are called fearful, fearing them which kill the body; and denying Christ
before me^, Mat. 10.28.33. desiring to save their life, but in very truth
loosing it, Mat. 16.25. Of which sort peradventure there shall be some, in
respect of the greatness of the danger, when the Turk the Dragon shall threaten
most cruel destruction to them that profess Christ. Unbelievers are they,
which shall refuse the truth openly. For every one shall not be converted; but
it seems that some by the just judgment of God shall remain in their former
stubburnesse, as we have observed before out of Daniel. Abominable, are men of
desperate naughtiness, and impudently wicked, whom al me^ every where detest.
Aretas and Montanus do read before abominable, the word sinners, as also the
Co^plutent edition and the Kings Bible. But these sinners are alone with
abominable; men notably wicked and desperate. But why is there mention of
Idolaters, when all the Jews generally do hate Idols. It may be that some have
turned away to the Romish impiety, although this be a rare thing: joint also
that Rome before this time shall be destroyed. Therefore these things may be
understood of the Gentiles, as also al other kinds of sins which have bin
reckoned hitherto, who cleaving to their Idols shall have no part in this holy
city; of which in the mean time all the godly shall be freedenizens, whersoever
they shall live. Liars also are excluded, that is, such as rejoice in lying, as
hypocrites, dissemblers, and they who make some show of religion, having no
taste thereof n their heart. Observe how with those horrible sins he mixeth some
lesser, in the common opinion: that no man should deceive himself, by
supposing that if he refrain himself from those greater, he may follow the
smaller without danger of punishment. But the thing is nothing so, he that
continues in the least without repentance, must know that a place is prepared
for him in the lake of fire: hither shall be thrust all this company, and they who
are of the same condition. Not because all the wicked shall descend presently at
that time into hell: but because they shall be convinced and condemned by the
sentence of the holy Church, which is as if God should pronounce it from
heaven, and should strait way draw the condemned unto torment.

9 Then came to me one of the seven Angels: Hitherto the general
declaration; the particular follows. And first by whose help this thing is
to be manifested: this is one of the seven Angels, of which we heard in the
chap. 15. and as it seems the last, who was to pour out his vial into the
air. From which it is evident that this new Jerusalem is within that time,
wherein the vials are powered out: for which cause there is so exact a repeating
of his office, that he is one of those seven Angels, which have those seven
vials, full of the seven last plagues, least any in wandering rashly should
pass over the bounds that are set.

Come I will show thee the bride: Did not John see it before, ver. 2. But there
through a window and somewhat confusedly, but now more distinctly and clearly.
The first show of the new descending Jerusalem shall seem fair; but after
that it shall have abode on earth somewhile, then it shall be seen far more
noble. For we gather from the former things, that these words do show the
event; as also that, which the Angel inviteth for to behold: whence we learn,
from the analogy of those things, which have bin said before, that some holy
man by published writing shall manifest to all the faithful the most divine
majesty and celestial glory of this Church. But we see these things yet a far
off and darkly, the day at length shall make this thing most clear.

10 And he took me up by the Spirit into a great and hie mountain: He entreh
into the description of the city, more fully then before: yet notwithstansting
shorter in these two verses. Therefore that John might thoroughly know the
bride, he is taken up into a hie and lofty mountain. The first condemnation of
the whore was seen in the wilderness, chap. 17.3. but the glory of the bride
shall be revealed in a hie mountain, in the eyes and light of the whole world.
This mountain seems to be that which Isaiah speaks of; In the last times
the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be set in the top of other
mountains, and exalted above the hills, that all nations may flow unto it,
chap. 2.2. VVorthily is this mountain called great and hie, which is set in
the highest top and height of other mountains. Therefore whatsoever excels
in dignity on earth, the excellency of this Church shall pass it. In this
mountain shall be seen the beauty of this city; as if her cityzens dwelling
within the walls should pereeive most plainly her reverend and divine
worthiness, which cannot be so manifest to them that dwell farther off in remote
countries. And many John's, that is, godly and holy men, leaving their places
of abode shall flee unto this mountain, not that being superstitious they may
visit holy places, but that face to face they may behold the glory of the Lord;
and enjoy being present the gladness of the saints. For can any thing be more
longed for, then to be conversant with them, which shall worship Christ most
purely and most holily according to his ordinance alone and with most fervent
affections? It shall be certainly an excellent pattern of our fellowship with the
holy Angels. But it is sufficient to touch these things in a word, least I may
seem to some men to delight my self with a sweet dream. But let us observe,
that if these things should be spoken of the saints country after the last
judgment, no Olypus would be high enough to show it manifestly.

11 And he showed me that great city: This city is great and most full of
citizens: hitherto it has bin always contained within a small number of men;
now first of al called great, her bounds being enlarged, and increased with a
full multitude. It shall be far more glorious in this respect, seeing that the
more common good surmounteth it self. But beside these she is holy, and
comes down out of heaven from God. Of which things we have seen before, This
is a new thing, that she is adorned with the glory of God, that is, that she
has the presence of God manifested in her by a certain glorious beauty, as it
is declared in those things that follow. To this end the temple before was
filled with smoke, after the old manner of appearing in the tabernacle and
temple, but now there shall be an other way. God shall give a more clear show of
his majesty, then ever before this time, either with the Jews, or Christian
Gentiles. Moreover also it has a light which is like to a stone most precious
etc. What is this light? Not any brightness with which the city shines by her
own purity, (although of it self it shall be most beautiful,) but a light which
is conveyed into it from an other. For so Phoster signifies, to weet, such a
thing as sends forth light from it self, as the Sun. Moon, Stars,
candle, torch and the like. Therefore the Grecians translate these wrds of Genesis
1, 16. tous duo Phosteras tous megalous, those two great lights: And also Paul,
Phainesthe hos Phosteres, shine ye as stars, Phil. 2.15. Therefore the
Phoster of the city is that which gives light to the city, the which light
she draws from an other, and has it not naturally. From whence then is it
ministered? From the very glory of God, for these things depend on the next
before going, as though he should say; I saw the City having the glory of God,
which glory of God being the light of it, was like a stone most precious, etc.
which interpretation is affoarded by the 23 verse after, where the office of
lighting the city is given to the glory of GOD.

But why is this light like to a stone most precious, and not rather like to
the Sun, or Stars? Because perhaps the light of the Sun does burn, and
blinds the eyes, rather more agreeable with an overthwart looking upon it,
then a direct. The shinning of the stone is altogether harmless, very much
grateful and pleasant; ye the more that one looks upon it, the more agreeable
it is; in which respect it represents most excellently the pleasantness of
the divine knowledge.

For the nature of this, is to recreate and cherish the fainting soul, even
with the only sight of her beauty; but yet much more, if any with a serious
contemplation, does fix the eyes of his mind upon her. The light and glorious
brightness of al other thing, as of the Moon and of the Stars, is
overwhelmed by the bright-shining beams of a greater light.

The brightness of a stone compares with the sun, neither is diminished,
but increased by the beam thereof; even as there is not any glory so great that
can darken the glorious majesty of God. The things which are lightsome with us,
as torches, lamps, candles, always stand in need of some matter, wherewith
fire is kept burning, otherweise they would be turned by and by into
darkness: the sparkling brightness of a stone is naturaly engendered in it,
which has no need of any outward help, but shines always by his own flame,
so as it represents before our eyes the eternal light of the most High God,
in this respect also. But the Kind of stone is also expressed. For it is like a
Jasper stone clear as Crystal. The Jasper is a most noble Jewel, both for
antiquity and for variety. The likeness to clear shining Crystal, describes
a certain kind of it, which shines through most purely, darkened with no
color. Therefore the Jasper like Crystal, is that kind of Jasper which is
commonly called Aerizula, resembling the most clear air. Here it notes the
most excellent glory of God shining in this city, which no spot of earthly
filthiness do make dark, as it is wont to come to pass, where any humane
invention is patched to Gods ordinances.

12 It had beside a wall: Now he expounds the matter particularly, and first
the things which belong to the form of the wall, which is great and hie; that
is, long, broad, and hie, firm on every part. The description whereof had bin
superfluous, if it should belong to the heavenly city to be expected after the
last judgment: which al know well enough to be set free from al danger. But the
celestial Jerusalem on earth which we have seen tossed with very many storms,
from her first beginning even unto this day, has had need of this defense and
fortification of walls; least any should fear the same thing touching this
city, which he knows to have happened to the same in former times. But this
form hitherto belongs to the whole wall. The parts are the gates and
foundations. The gates ar notable for their number: the watch, the names
written upon them in this verse; then for their most commodious situation in
the thirteenth verse, which al ar so described, that they may declare a most
ready way into this city, which no impediment shall hinder. Hereunto first of all the twelve gates have respect, that an entrance be prepared for every tribe
apart, to to the end that it may be more free and ready. For the same purpose
are the twelve Angels being the watch, who do wait at the gates to open them,
and to let in the comers in without delay. What other thing also mean the
names written, then to teach, how every one should go on directly, and not
loose any time about seeking an entrance.

13 On the East part there were three gates. The situation of the gates is most
commodious; not all for one quarter, but equal for every one; that a way might
be opened on every side: and every one might go in directly without being
hindered by any crooked turning about. Ezechiel ha^dling the same matter notes
every gate by name: but he begins at the North, on which side he sets the
gates of Reuben, Judah, and Levi. On the East side of Joseph, Benjamin and Dan.
On the South of Simeon, Jssachar, Zebulon. On the West of Gad, Asher,
Naphthaly, chap. 48.30. and c, The Jews in the East and North part shall first
stir up themselves, and make have to go into this holy city, as has bin
showed before chap. 16.12 by Euphrates dried, that the way of the Kings of the
East might be prepared. And as Daniel teaches, speaking of the journey
undertaken into this city. But rumors says he, shall trouble him from the East
and from the North. That is, when the Eastern and Northern Jews are raised
up, the Turk shall be greatly troubled, after he has received news of that
thing. Therefore because the first journey shall be undertaken from these
countries, the gates of them are put first; and those without difference, John
attributing the first place to them in the East part, Ezechiel to them in the
North, because both shall prepare themselves equally to this expedition. The
Southern Jews shall follow these, our in the West shall be last.

14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations: Thus far the gates: the
foundations are described both by the number and also by the names. In number
they are twelve, which are laid under the wall: the wall I say, not the city,
for they are the foundations of ministry, not of salvation. There is one only
foundation hereof, Jesus Christ-alone: Other foundation ca^ no man lay beside
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. The Apostles may be
called the foundations of ministry, yet not the principal, but instrumental,
of which they are not the authors, but the first stones. For the foundation is
not laid of it self, but of the master builder. Christ laid these first in
the bottom of the wall, in which respect they are called foundations. So Ezra
is called the foundation of the coming up out of Babylon, because he was the
Prince of that second company, which came up togi, there with him, Ezra 7.9. But
how are there twelve foundations of one wal-wherof there is wont to be but one?
To weet, because any one stone is not laid through the whole length and
breadth, but there are twelve laid equally, one by an other long ways and
broad, the same order bein still renewed, until the building be brought to his
full perfection. No one Apostle is here for a foundation; but al in equal place
and office do lie in the bottom. That unhappy and wicked boasting shall be
far from hence: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, that is, (as they will
have it who never saw this wall, neither have they any safegarde from thence,)
upon this the Peter I will build my Church: this madness of building up the
wall upon such one foundation only, has greatly troubled the Church of the
Gentiles, and at length will make her wholly destitute of al wall.

In which were the names of tht Lambs twelve Apostles: So as nevertheless
that by these names ar understood not only those twelve, which were conversant
with Christ on earth, but all the faithful Pastors, which shall execute the like
office in the Church. They were so called before, chap. 18.20. For there is a
most straight communion of the faithful, by reason whereof the proper names of
some are applied to others; but especially to them who beside the common bond,
have also an other fellowship of office. But if the Apostles be the
foundations, this is not that eternal city in the heavens. For Christ then
shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, and God shall be all in all, 1 Cor.
15.24. Neither shall the Saints have any ministry of teaching there, 1 Cor.
15.8. Therefore this wall belongs to the Church being a stranger on earth, not
unto that reigning in heaven.

15 Moreover he that spoke with me: Hitherto the form of the wall, from the
continued quantity: there follows of the city; the form whereof he
delivers, both the continued, and the severed, together; and first
universally as touching the minister, and instrument, and the things to be
measured, in this verse. The Minister is the same which spoke with John, the
seventh Angel of those to whom were given the vials, ver. 9. Whose labor
bids us to seek this city, before the last judgment. And some excellent
man seems to be noted by this Angel; who as a second Zorobabel, Ezra, or
Nehemiah: shall appoint, from God, this most excellent policy, and shall
describe most exactly every part of the holy city. The measure is a golden
reed, showing that the description of the whole frame shallbe far most
precious. The thing to be measured is the city, gates, wall, that is, the whole
building. No part shall be neglected, but every one, both most diligently
assigned, and most wisely builded. In the Jerusalem of the Gentiles, when the
Beast began to appear, the temple only was measured, the description of the
city was forbidden, and also of the outward court; but this Angel will measure
both the city and gates and walls, and shall recall the whole government of the
Church unto the exact rule of Gods will.

16 And the city lay four squarre: Now he shows the form of the city, such
as the continued kind of it gives. It is four squarre, and so great in length
as in breadth. This city therefore shall be most stable, so prepared against al
alteration, that her foundation be always stable. There is an other
consideration of this, then was of our Jerusalem, which lay hid among us
Gentiles for a thousand two hundred threescore years: which had also a
fouresquare figure, but of unequal sides, as we have showed at the seven
chapter, having in length twelve times a thousand, but in breadth only twelve
thousand. Of both which consisted that whole number of an hundredth and four
and forty thousand of them that were sealed. For there was some multitude of
the godly at that time in lenght of continuance: but the Church did flourish in
no breadth and present abundance in any age, by all that intervalle. But in
this city it shall come to pass otherweise It shall be made famous no less for
the great multitude of the faithful, through every present age, as for a most
happy propagation of a long time.

And he measured the city with a reed twelve thousand furlongs: Such then is
the form of the continued quantity: now follows of that which is severed:
and first of the city, whose dimension is about twelve thousand furlongs:
which, it is doubtful, whither they belong to the whole plat of ground, or
only to the compass. There is nothing, that can be determined certainly and
distinctly touching this thing. If we say the first, it is a huge city, every
side of which shall be an hundred and nine furlongs, and more, lacking a very
little of the old Babylon, which contained a hundred and twenty furlongs in
every side, as Herodotus in Clio shows. But if the compass alone receives
this measure, there was never any city to be compared with this in greatness,
every side whereof shall be three thousand furlongs in lenght, and the whole plat
of ground nine times ten hundred thousand. The Complutent edition, whom
Montanus and Plantins Bible follow, read these things otherweise, thus, about
twelve furlongs of twelve thousand, that is as I suppose, about twelve times
twelve thousand furlongs, as if the whole largeness were so many furlongs, as
many as were sealed of every tribe, chapter 7. to weet, an hundred forty and four
thousand furlongs. Which agreement causes to doubt that this reading is the
truer, both because it declares the great similitude of this and the old
Church of the Ge^tils, and also because it retains the proportion of the wall,
in ver. following. By this mean the city is made of the mutual increase of the
cityzens and ministers, as the wall of the number of the ministers multiplied in
it self: for 12 tims 12 thousand, of which that multiplying signifies the
ministers, this to be multiplied, the citizens, do make this number; whose side
shall be of 379 furlo^gs and above. But here it may be asked, why John makes
this city much larger the^ Ezech. seeing it is the same in both. For he
rehearses the measure of each side 4500 cubits, chapter 48.30, that is 12 furlongs
only and some what more:

John which reading soever we follow, whether we esteem the measure of the
circuit, or the plat of ground, assigned a far greater magnitude. Ezechiel
was a minister of the Law, John of the Gospel: from whence arises a difference
of amplenesse according to the allowed portion of light, which always was
greater, the nigher men approached to the times of Christ. Wherefore the Temple
of Solomon was built with la^ger dimensions, then the Tabernacle: and the
Temple of Ezechiel, with far greater than that of Solomon: but this ciry of
John with a great deal larger than of Ezechiel. For after Christ's coming
there came a very great light, according to which increase of knowledge, there
is used an answerable magnificence of the building.

And the length, and breadth, and height of it are equal: Even now we said,
that the length is continuance of time: the breadth the present face of every
time, which shall be no less fair and beautiful, then that glory of
continuation. Now first mention is made of height: which serves to betoke^ and
excellent glory of this city, to be extolled by the speech and praises of al
men. Things are set on high by commendations; whereby, as it is much used in
common speech, they are lifted up to heaven. Therefore this city shall be no less
famous among al, then durable in time, and always flourishing in a great
multitude of citizens. For this city is solid, not superficiary,
proportionable, and four squarre on every part, which consists of al her
measures, and al of them equal. It is perfect every way, to which nothing can
be added. The former wanted solidity, whose breadth moreover was so narrow, that
it could scarce be seen. What marveile therefore, if they were shaken with every
tempest? This more firm shall stand with so great strength on every side, that
it cannot fear any storms

17 And he measured the wall of it: Such then is the form of the city. The
quantity of the wall a part is of an hundred forty four cubits. From whence
is this number? From the number of the Apostles, multiplied in it self: for
twelve times twelve do make this number. Wherefore the Apostles, and the
Ministere of the word who are propagated from them, shall compass the holy city
round about, and shall keep it safe from al invasion of the enemy, and from all the fraud and deceit of Heretics. But this measuring is only the height;
that of the length may be known well enough being showed by the measure of the
city: which the wall compassing the same does exceed, because of the territories.

The measure of a man, which is of the Angel: As though he should say Though
the Ministers shall make this description with their cubite, yet they shall do
nothing at their own pleasure, but as the Angels of God, shall respect Gods will
in all things, and shall follow the same most happilye having the Spirit for
their guide; but what should the measure of a man do in heaven? observe
therefore what city he describes unto us.

18 And the building of the wall was: Thus far of the form: now he speaks
of the matter; and first jointly of the matter of the wall, and together of the
city. The frame of the wall is of Jasper. This stone both lies in the
foundation, and is used chiefly in the rest of the building: perhaps because
endomesis in greek, is the stuffing of the wall, filling up the space between
the fronts; that it may signify, the frame to be no less precious within then
without: the stopping which the word notes, seems to signify some such
thing: or rather seeing procumation is also a pile or dam laid for to repel and
break the waves, the building is chiefly made of Jasper, because those
teachers, which are signified by this gemme, shall endure the chief violence,
and first assault of the adversaries, being in stead of a fortress to the rest.

But the city it self was pure gold: The matter in sum of the city, is pure
gold, which the fire consumes not, but makes it more bright; neither wears
away with use, neither is defiled by the rust, neither is overcome, either by
the juices of salt or vinegar, which do overcome other things. Pliny gives
those praises to gold. Why should not this city be perpetual, which is made of
matter so invincible, and is free from all corruption? But beside it is like to
clear glass, that is, not loathsome to look on by the deformity of any
filth, even in the most secret corner. So wholly clear it shines through, that
in it and through it, every one may behold the most favorable face of God.
For hereunto tends this shining clearenesse, that God himself may be
considered and seen through it, whom as strangers on earth, we behold through a
glass, and riddle, 1 Cor. 13.12. Therefore this city is not, (as at this day
Rome the whore,) gilded with gold wholly without, and within full of
filthiness, and al manner of corruption: but it has exceeding great purity
and holiness joined with very great dignity, and majesty. Which merchandise,
the more rare it is, the more glorious it shall at length be.

19 20 And the foundation of the wall of the city: He comes to declare the
foundations of the wall one after an other: in describing whereof he rests not
in the very lowest ground sellings; but teaches that the matter of the whole
frame is far most precious: as altogether consisting of most noble pearls,
neither is it any thing inferior to that most divine form, of which we heard
before. I am not ignorant how greatly the Interpreters labor in applying every
one of these to the ancient Apostles; which difficulty this so exquisite order
increases, considering that there is not any certain order of the Apostles
kept, either in the Ghospels, or in the Acts; but sometime one Apostle,
sometime another, is reckened first; from whence it becomes altogether
uncertain, what stone may be answerable to which. But it seems that the Holy
Ghost intends another thing in this place; not purposing to describe unto us
the first twelve Apostles, but the future teachers of the Jews Church: who
carry the names of the Apostles, whom they shall succeed both in office and
fellowship of rewards, as before in the 14. verse, and in chap, 18.20. All
faithful teachers are the Apostles offspring, as also the former verse taught,
which made the greatness of the wall, of the number of twelve multiplied in it
self. It is certain that the excellency of gifts, by which the teachers do
excel abov the rest, are signified here by most precious earthly things; by
which more over it is taught, both in what reckening they are with God, and
also in what estimation they ought to be with men. And it is no less certain
that every one of these excellent virtues shined forth in the old Apostles long
time past; but I think that the order belongs properly to the future
Teachers, which if we shall apply to those ancient ones, perhaps we shall err
greatly by attributing to every each one, that which is unfit. Wherefore
resting as much as in us lay, in the proper drift of this place, beside that
excellency, which is common to all the pearls, we think that so exact a
reckening does perteine to the order, in which at length these new preachers of
the Gospel shall arise; that even as the situation of the gates showed the
order of the countries, in which the Jews shall be converted to the truth: so
this manner of stones so set in order, may signify the rising of the teachers
in what order they shall rise up from every place. Although there is this
difference between the people and the teachers, that the people assemble by
troops in every side of the city, and therefore shall have three gates opened
to them on every side; the Teachers being fewer, shall not gather together by
multitudes, but shall be numbered man by man according to the state of the places
where God shall rise them up. Yet we may not think that these shall be but twelve,
but that there shall be perhaps so many chief, to whom the other multitude
shall be wholly like. Let us see therefore where these Gemmes grow, and of what
sort they are, that in some measure we may conjecture of the original and
disposition of those excellent men, whom the divine bounteousnes will give
within these few years.

The first foundation is a Jasper, a divine stone, often representing, (as we
have seen) the Image of God himself; worthily occupying the first place,
because he that shall begin the first restoring of the Jews, as an other
Moses shall come most near to God himself, by a singular excellency of gifts.
The beginnings are most hard, and require men very greatly furnished. It is a
Scythian and Persian Gemme, of a celestial brightness, in which respect a certain
kind of it is called Borea and Aerizusa, the beauty whereof can more easily be
admired than declared: it has a pleasantnesseful of variety, which the most
sharp eyed can not distinguish. It may therefore represent a mixed riches of
gifts, wherein a manifold excellency is seen, yet it cannot be diserned, which
most of all excels, in which respect it figureth the Godhead as in chap.
9.3. in that so mixed fairness should signify in some measure that
incomprehensible depth. The Saphyre glistereth with golden points, in great
account among the Medes, which shows a certain and distinct kind of
delectablenesse, such as shall be in the next teachers after the first, whom the
excellency of some singular gift shall make famous. A Chalcedonie, is of a
simple color, like to a Carbuncle, shining with a fiery brightness: it is a
Northern Jewel; found about the narrow sea of Chalcedon beaond Chrysopolis,
night to the rocks called Symplegades, from whence it has the name; this
betokens zeal and fervency. The most noble Emeraude grows in Scythia, it
is of a most pleasant green, neither does any thing more delight the eyes. But
seeing here inward graces are more regarded, then outward, this greenness is a
most divine knowledge of things, upon which the mind desires to fasten the
eyes before all things: It is set after the Chalcedone, that knowledge may
accompany zeal.

The fifth foundation is a Sardonix, which is an Indian Jewel, shining like the
nail of a man set upon flesh: it shows a certain kind of humanity, having
whiteness mixed with redness.

The Sardius is found in Sardes, it is wholly red with bloody color: it may
betoken a certain severity, profitably joined with the Sardonix, least perhaps
gentleness should be despised without this companion. And these sixth first
stones are belonging to the East and North: which do show a happy increase of
Teachers from these regions: which we see how it agrees with the former
things, when the first people shall be revived out of these same countries.

The seventh foundation is a Chrysolite, which shines through with a golden
color: It is a Jewel full of dignity and majesty. AETHIOPIA brings forth the
same. PLINIVS affirms that the Beryll is found in INDIA: DIONYSIVS in his
book entitled Perieg, says that it grows also in the land of BABYLON, of a
sky and water color, as the same describes, the sky colored stone of the
wet Beryll, which grows in the field of Babylon. The watery color belongs
to lenity and humility; as is the water it self, which easily gives place to
every thing; a most fit companion of the majesty of the Chrysolite, that it may
contain it within measure. The ninth foundation is a Topaze; which with Pliny
is a green Jewel, it is found among the Troglodites, which dwell by the red
sea. Dionysius says that it is found in india, or the stone of the bright
Topaze shining with a sky color, writing of India. But it is not of a simple
and pure greennes, but yellowish and glistering like gold. From whence
Eustachius attributes unto it a golden color, chrusoeides, yellow, says he,
sends forth a golden color, which he borrowed out of Strabo, in who^ are
many things touching this stone, in his 16. book. Some from hence conjecture,
that it took the name from the Hebrew word Pazaz, as though at the first it
had bin to Paz, or in greek to Pazion, and at length by the ignorance of the
printers to have grown together, and made one word topazion. The Chrysopr^sus
also, as the name shows, does resemble a certain kind of Gold, but as it
were be smeared with the juice of leekes. The eleventh and twelfth foundation
is the Iacynth and Amethyst, both of a purple color, but the first shining
more brightly, the second of a a more wanne and weak color, as Dionysius
shows, and the sweet Amethyst shining as asaied purple: India and Aethiopia
do afford these two. Therefore these last six belong to the East and South.
Our West part, as it seems, shall minister citizens, even as other countries,
but shall give few, or no Jewels, for the building up of the wall. It may be
that God will so set forth his power the more, in raising up teachers from those
places, which are most repugnant to his truth. The four last gemmes are like
gold and purple, which colors are of a very great price and dignity: which the
Spirit seems to have put in the last places for a certain purpose, and that
by a course twice doubled: as though he would teach by the same thing, that
those teachers shall never be loathed, but shall always flourish in very great
authority. At the first the truth is wont to be acceptable, and the ministers
of it are judged worthy of al honor; but in time the good will of men waxes
cold, and the^ the authority of the teachers decays, after that men begin
to be full. But here no such thing shall come to pass. The end shall be
answerable to the beginning. The dispensers of the word shall be no less
honorable, after the truth through many ages has waxed old, then when at the
first it began. And for this cause, I thick, was so great a plenty of golden
and purple color put to the last place. I know that other do seek out an
agreement of other properties in these stones; but seeing authors vary
greatly about this, what is the proper force of every one, neither is the thing
as yet sufficiently cleared: I had rather follow things that are plain and of a
known signification; and also the congruency of the Prophecy, then loose my
labor in doubtful things. So therefore that which Daniell has comprehends
briefly in one word, they that instruct shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that justify many shallbe as the stars for ever and ever,
chap. 12.3. the same we have here declared peculiarly and more at large by
sundry kinds of Jewels.

21 And the twelve gates are: Hitherto has bin the matter of the walls: The
gates are made of pearls, which signify Christ, who is the way and door to
life: if any shall enter in by him, he shallbe saved, and he shall go in and
out, and find pasture, John 10.9. But how notably do the pearls represente
the Son of God conceived in the womb of the virgin? which are not bred of
any earthly copulation, but inge^dred of a celestial dew, as of a husband. For
they report that the shell fishes at a certain time of the year, with a
certain gaping, after that they have drunk up a dewing from heaven, do
conceive, and become great with young, and the more that they have bin tossed
with great tempests, after the dew received, the more noble fruit do they
bring forth: so the Holy Ghost came upon Mary, and the power of the most high
overshadowed her; and Christ scarce brought forth into the light, was sought
for to be put to death, and by an horrible storm was driven into Egypt. After
the same manner the first entrance into this city shall be very laborious, but of
so much the more abundant praise and account, after they have entered. There
are twelve gates, but every one of one pearl, because there is but one Christ,
and but one only name given under heaven, by which we must be saved, Act. 4.12.

And the street of the city was pure gold: In the last place he adds the
matter of the city: which before, he said was gold: but there he made mention
of the whole city in general; here in special of the streets. These are the
publik ways, wherein the citizens do meet, if one have ought to do with an
other. Even as therefore the ways of man are the actions, in which man is
occupied: so the streets of the city, are those public offices of life and
buyings and sellings, in which the citizens do take pains. The Spirit says
that al these things shall be holy, pure, clean, precious. For the place of
assembling, where these businesses are handled, is pure gold, and shining
through, as before ver. 18. How holy and unblameable shall this city be, where
the common life, then which nothing is wont to be more foul and polluted,
shall be free from al filth of wickedness? Righteousness now, as a river shall run
through the streets, and godliness shall shine in all affairs.

22 Neither saw I any Temple in her: Hitherto we have seen the inward and
essential glory of the city, as far as is given us, who do not behold from a
hie mountain, but a far off from a low and pressed down valley: where hills
and trees do much hinder our eyes, that we cannot yet see the thing clearly.
Yet it delights me, as once Daniell to open his window twards Jerusalem, so
to look from far off into this holy city, whose cloudie, and blackish tops
to behold a far off, it much recreateth my soul. Now the Spirit teaches how
great dignity shall come from things outward. First God the Father and the
Lamb his Son in stead of a Temple, that is, then shall the worship be most
simple and most pure, darkened with no legal ceremonies, which once God
ordained, until the time of reformation, much less with any humane inventions,
but such as shall exhibit Gods presence most simply and familiarly. How then
does this agree with Ezechiel, who in eight whole chapters from the fourtieth
to the end of the Prophecy, speaking of this very time, describes so exactly
the temple, the city, and whole legal worship? Very well: for that whole
description tends to that end, not to teach that the old ceremonies are to
be restored, but that at lenght they being wholly abolished, Christ shall be
worshipped most purely and exactly according to his own ordinances alone. For
what other thing mean the new measurings of the walls, gates porches, and the
whole building, the new distribution of the holy land, and the new portions
given to the tribes, Priests, Levites, Prince, then an abrogation of Moses and
all the legal ceremonies? But that time was not otherweise capable of any
spiritual worship, then under those shadows. John speaks plainly to
Christians, al coverings being removed, as on whom the noone Sun of truth
shines, and all things are naked and open. And indeed he opens most
significantly in one word that long and obscure description in Ezechiel, saying
that that temple so magnifically and gloriously prepared, is in truth none at
all: not as though the Prophet had uttered so many words vainly, but to show
that we must not stick in the bark of the lettre, but that the kernel of the
Spirit is to be found out. Let the Jews hear, neither let them expect a
renewed temple, as hitherto they do, amiss and obstinately, but let them with
minds and hearts aspire in that right way, which shall need no temple. Let them
look for the omnipotent God and the Lamb to dwell among them, in comparison of
which glory, whatsoever can be built of men shall be vile.

23 Neither has this city any need of the Sun or Moon; For in very deed the
Moon shallbe ashamed, and the very Sun shall blush, when the Lord of hosts
shall reign in mount Sion, and Jerusalem, and shall be glorious before his
ancients, Isaiah 24.23. And why may it not be ashamed of her former
darkness, when the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and
the light of the Sun seven fold as the light of seven days, Isay 30.23.
Which things are not spoken to that end, as though there should be no use
then of the Scriptures; but because all shall so understand Gods will, as if
they had no need to learn wisdom from books. Full, says the Prophet, shall
this land be of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters covering the channel
of the Sea, Isay 11.9. Neither shall they any more teach every man his
friend, and every man his brother, saying, know ye the Lord, for they shall
all know me, from the least of them even to the greatest of them, says the
Lord: that J do forgive their inquity, and remember their sin no more, Ier.
31.34. From hence let us observe that that Church is most glorious, in which the
sun of righteousness shines with most open face, covered with no clouds of
ceremonies; therefore let them see in how great error they are, whom bring in a
pompous show of ceremonies, to procure authority to religion with the people.
Furthermore let us note to what times John applies the sentences of the
Prophets, that we may know the things are yet to come, which we interpret
commonly to be past, and not only in the heavenly country, whose happiness
needs the words of no man, but here in earth in that restoring whereof we have
spoken.

And the Lamb is the light thereof: Therefore this light, the most bright of all
godly times, shall not yet be perfect, as it shall be after this life, but a candle
only in respect of that; least peradventure we should rest in our journey, as
if we had come to the last end.

24 And the Gentiles that shall be saved. The second outward argument is glory
from the Gentiles. Before time the Jews have always found the Gentiles most
hateful, who left no means unattempted to do them hurt; now contrariweise
there shall be no cause to fear that they will do them any harm; yea rather why
should they not expect all good at their hands, who shall apply al their forces
to the advancing of them. But these Gentiles are not al generally, but are
limited with a certain kind, which, says he, shall be saved: which word is
inserted for an exposition. The place is taken out of Isaiah, 60.3. where it is
thus, and the Gentiles shall walk to thy light, which John draws to the
elect, by putting in of one word, least any should think it was spoken of every
one generally. And see how John translate that se^te^ce they shall walk to thy
light, thus, they shall walk in the light of it, the sentence being well
expressed. For to walk at the light, is not to come only to the light, which
one may do and depart again by and by, being at once both seen and despised;
but to walk after or according to the light, as to walk at the feet, is
alone with, to follow and serve one, 1 Samuel 25.42. Neither-hath this, place in
the heavens, that the people should walk at the light of the Church, when
Prophecyings shall be abolished, and tongues shall cease, and God shall be all in
all, 1 Cor. 13.8. and 15.28. But it may be doubtful how it can have place on
earth. For shall this difference remain, of some people which are saved, and of
other that are lost, in this most happy government of the Church? It seems
indeed that there shall be many, which yet still shall contemn the truth
obstinately: for the day of the Lord shall come cas a share upon all that dwell
on the face of the earth, Luke 21, 35. But the children of the Church are not
in darkness, that that day should take them as a thief in the night, 1 Thessalonians.
5.4. Moreover it was said before that the hail of a tale^t weight of the last
vial, shall drive men to blasphemy, chap. 16.21. Nevertheless those despisers
shall be of so feeble strength, that will they, nil the, they shall be compelled to
yield their necks. The Complut. edition and the Kings bible do omit these
words which are saved: and so does Aretas and the vulgar Latin: neither do
they read, in the light of it, but by the light.

And the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory unto it: Then the Kings
borderers on the Ocean, and of the Yles shall bring a present; the Kings of
Sheba and Seba shall bring a gift; finally all Kings shall worship him, and all
nations shall serve him, Psalm. 72.10.11. And Isay, The labor of Egypt, and
merchandise of Aethiopia, and of the Sabean Princes shall come unto thee, and
they shall be thine, and shall follow thee, they shall come in chains, and
shall fall down before thee, and shall make supplications unto thee, saying;
only the strong God is in thee, there is none besides, no where else is God,
chap. 45.14. Again, Kings shall be thy nurcing fathers, and their Queens shall be
thy nurces, they shall worship thee with their faces toward the earth, and
shall lick the dust of thy feet, chap. 49.23. For then shall be given unto Christ
a dominion, and glory, and Kingdom, that all people, nations and tongues
should serve him, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, which passes not
away, and his Kingdom a Kingdom which shall not be destroyed. Dan. 7.14. It
shall not also be from the purpose to add here in what words the Sybille has
described this same thing, that at least, we may help tthe Jesuit, if he
will, who in expounding the same, is clean out of the way: thus therefore she
Prophesied in the 3. book of the oracles of Sibyll.

And then the world by woman's hands shall ruled be and obey:
But when the widow over all the world shall bear the sway:
And cast into the sea the gold and silver with disdayn,
And cast the brass of brittle men and yrn' into the Mayn;
Then shall the wordly elements all desolate remayn.
Sibyll prophecieth that after the death of Antichrist, which we have had set
forth in the former chapters, the soveraigntie of things through the whole
world, shall be in the power of a woman. But what manner of one? Is it such a one
as we properly so call? Nothing less. This woman is the Church, the spouse of
Christ: which she calls a widow, not because she is a widow by the death of
her husband, as this word is wont to signif usually, but because she is on
earth, far from him. For she is also a widow, which after marriage dwells
not together with her husband, for what cause soever it be. Or she may be
called a widow, because before her restoring she sat a widow so long, as in
Hosea: Sit still for my sake many days, neither be married to any other. For
the children of Is^ael shall remain many days without a King, and without a
Prince, and without an offering, and withtout an Image, and without an Ephod,
and without Teraphim, afterward they shall return etc. chapter 3.3.4.5. So Isayas,
So that he shall say in his heart, who has gotten me these, seeing I have bin
baren and a desolate captive, and a wanderer too and fro etc. chap 49.21. This
then is that widow, which after she has governed for a time, at length shall
deliver all her subjects to be translated in to heaven, whither at length they
shall go, when this whole world is destroyed with fire. Seeing therefore that
these things are so, those are not to be understood of the future state after
the resurrection. For what Kings shall then bring their glory thither? Unless
peradventure, as the Jesuit writes ridiculously, by building and enriching
temples, by sending predicatours into sundry countries, and by restreining the
nations that are enemies to the faith. Did the man dream waking when he wrote
these things, that he would have any such thing to be desired in the future
state? But I will not vex the man, being as it seems, sick of an ague.

25 And the gates of it shall not be shut: All danger shall be so far away, that
no fear thereof shall trouble them. There shall be no enemy that shall invade, but
the gates shallbe open always to receive new strangers, who in great companies
shall flow thither continually, Isay 60.11. Blessed is that city, which shall
enjoy so happy, so glorious, and secure peace.

For then shall be no night there: These words are somewhat otherweise then in
Isaiah, who speaks thus, and they shall open thy gates continually, neither
day nor night shall they be shut etc. that is, they shall be open always. There is
the same sense of this place, but the mention of the night being omitted, as
unprosperous and wholly unmeete for the happiness of this city; as though he
should say, the gates shall never be shut, for they are not wont to be shut in
the day time, neither shall it be needful to add, nor in the night, because there
shall be no night there.

26 And glory shall be brought: We spoke of this matter at the 24. verse, but the
repetition is not in vain, which teaches that the Gentiles shall have this
continual desire to enrich and store this city. Not because they shall give
themselves to the gathering of riches, or to ambition; but because their good
will shall be most grateful, who shall always wish very well unto it. Or as the
words do sound, and they shall bring the glory and honor of the Gentiles unto
it, that is, the Jews themselves, as though now he would show how much they
should do by their own strength, when he has showed sufficiently what should
come to them by the benefit of others. Whereby not only they shall be advanced,
but also shall be augmented with great glory by their own riches.

27 There shall not enter into it any thing that defiles: This glory shall
remain no less pure and undefiled, than secure and without fear of enemies.
For the most part it comes to pass that the rivers flowing beiond the
banks, do carry with them very much durty filth, whereby the whole water
becomes foul: so for just cause it might peradventure be feared, that in this
very populous assembly of the Gentiles, many wicked men shall assemble together,
by whose contagion the most clear purity at length should be defiled. But the
Spirit bids them to be secure as touching this point: God will provide, that
no filthy and impure thing shall enter in whereby the flower of so great dignity,
may be distained never so little.

But they which are written in the book: ei me, unless they which are written.
But the elect are not among the unclean, who through Christ have no spot,
wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27. Therefore ei me is not to be translated
as an exceptive by nisi unless, but as a discretive by sed but, as Theodore
Beza has noted. Unless perhaps there be a respect to the former time, as Paul
concerning the elect, and such were ye every one: but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.11. as though he should say, no unclean person shall
enter into the city, unless they which are written in the book of life, who
before their caling were unclean, but being sanctified by faith in Christ,
cease to be so.

CHAP. 22.
AFTER he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal
proceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb.

2 In the mids of the street thereof, and an the one and other side of the
river was the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruit, and gave fruit
every month, and her leaves are for the health of the nations.

3 And there shall be no more curse against any man: but the throne of God and of
the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him.

4 And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads.

5 And there shallbe no night there, neither have they any need of the light of
a candle, nor of the light of the Sun: for the Lord God gives them light:
and they shall reign for evermore.

6 Then he said unto me, these words are faithful and true: and the Lord God
of the Holy Prophets sent his Angel, to show to his servants the things which
must shortly be fulfilled.

7 Behold I come quickly. Blessed is he that keeps the words of the prophecy
of this book.

8 And J John am he, which have heard and seen these things. And when I had
heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel, which
showed me these things.

9 But he said unto me, see thou do it not, for J am thy fellow servant, and
of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the words of this book.
Worship God.

10 After he said unto me seal not the words of the prophecy of this book:
for the time is at hand.

11 He that hurts, let him hurt still: and he that is filthy, let him be
filthy still: and he that is just, let him be justified still: and he that is
holy, let him be holy still.

12 And behold I come quickly: and my reward is with me, to render to every
one as his work shall be.

13 J am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last.

14 Blessed are they that do his commandments: that they may have right to
the tree of life, and may enter by the gates into the city.

15 But without shall be dogs, and enchanters, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes lies.

16 J Jesus sent my Angel to testify these things unto you in the Churches. J
am the root and that generation of David, that bright and morning star.

17 And the Spirit and the bride say come: and he that hears, says come, and
let him that thirsts come: and let him that will, receive of the water of
life freely.

18 For I testify there withal unto every one that hears the words of the
prophecy of this book if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues, that are written in this book.

19 And if any man shall take away of the words of the book of this prophecy,
God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city,
and from those things which are written in this book.

20 He which testifyeth these things, says, ye I come quickly. Amen. Even so
come Lord Jesus.

21 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you al. Amen.


The Analysis.
THVS far the two first outward arguments, whereby the glory of this city is
set forth, the two last follow, the abundance of things necessary, and
continuance. The first handles two things, which comprehend all other plenty;
the most pure water proceeding out of the throne ver. 1. and the tree of life,
ver. 2. whose fruit is described, and how many foulde it is, partly in the
kind, for thete are twelve fruits; partly in the time, bearing every month:
and how profitable, which appears from thence, that also the leaves are for
the health of the Gentiles, ver. 2. and thus much of the abou^dance: the
continuance is declared by remooving of the corrupting causes, ver. 3. and by
setting down of the preserving causes, ver. 3.4, 5. And hitherto has bin a
prophetical narration, both of special things, and also of common things to the
whole Church. There follows the conclusion of all the Revelation and of the
Epistle: partly consisting in a confirmation; partly in a salutation. The
confirmation first takes in hand a recounting and collecting of things before
spoken, that being put as in a pattern under one view, they might have greater
force for credit. And this recounting is continued even to the eighteen verse;
relating the author of the Revelation, ver. 6. the happiness of the keppers
ver. 7. the ministers ver. 8.9. a publishing commanded, whereby there should be a
free examination ver. 10. with an answer of a secret objection ver. 11. the
upright nature of the revealer. ver. 12. eternal ver. 13. the thing revealed
ver. 14.15. the plain testimony of Jesus ver. 16. and lastly the desire of the
Spirit and bride ver. 17. Every one of which apart is of great weight to
establish the authority of this Prophecy, but al together are very much
greater. Next John of his own part adds some new thing, when he utters
certain destruction to them which shall corrupt this prophecy never so little
ver. 18.19. then testifying his most earnest desire of a speedy finishing ver.
20. The salutation lastly concludes the whole Epistle with a prayer ver. 21.

Scholions.
1 Afterward he showed me: That wholesome fruit does more declare the
excellent glory of this city, which not only the citizens, but also forreiners
do receive. Whereunto also apperteine this river and tree, of the which both,
they drink, and also are fed unto life, both which the Angel shows to
John. For he says, he showed me. But who is he that showed? That seve^th
Angel, which manifested the city to him in the former chapter, ver. 9.10. and
therefore neither as yet are we come to the heavenly blessedness of the saints
after the last resurrection, when we shall not use Angels, or any other masters.
But as touching the water, it is not some little fountain, but a river: neither
corrupted and troubled as Nilus, but flowing with most pure waters as Kidron
and Gallirrhoe making glad the city of God, Psalm 46.5. Furthermore it is a
river of water of life, not only because of the continuance, for it runs
always with new waters, as is the water of a fountain or spring, which also
in the Scriptures is called living, but because it brings life to the
drinkers John 4.14. The river is shining as Crystal, far exceeding the
clearnes of the fountains. Lastly it proceeds out of the throne of God and
of the Lamb, which it has for chief fountains, and to which again as a
companion it does lead, or rather being a forerunner, goes before, as a
streeme to the sea. In Ezechiel the same flood issues out of the temple and
altar, chap. 47.1. But in this new Jerusalem there is no temple, as has bin
spoken in chap. 21.22. and therefore the throne of God is set in the place
thereof. Whether it runs; here is no mention, but the Prophets plentifully
teach it, namely toward the East, from the South side of the altar, first
toward Galily, and into the plain: then the waters come to the Sea, and by
emptying themselves into the same sea, the waters thereof are healed, Ezech.
47.1.8. So in Joel there shall issue forth a fountain from the house of the
Lord and shall water the valley of Shittim, chap. 3.18. That is, the plain of
Moab; where the Israelites committed whordome with the Moabitish women, Numb.
25.1. Zachary also, There shall be, says he, in that day waters of life going
forth out of Jerusalem, part of them to the East sea, and part of them to the
uttermost sea, which shall be both in somer and winter, chap. 14.8. This river is
the most fruitful doctrine of Christ, which shall flow forth toward the
East, because the people watered with the moisture hereof shall grow, and at
last true life shall budde forth. For every living creature that creeps,
whersoever these rivers come, shall live, and there shall be a very great
multitude of fishes, for by the coming of these waters thither, they are cured
and live, whersoever this river comes, Ezech. 47.9. For this Prophet and John
speak of the same things and times, of the state and condition of the Church
in earth, as those things which in so many places we have observed, can
plentifully prove.

2 In the mids of the market of it: tes plateias autes, in the mids of the
streets of it, where the whole multitude of citizens is conversant. For this
fountain is not shut up, but the free power thereof is open to every one that
possesses the city. In this place springs up and flourishes the tree of
life. Ezechiel mentions many trees, Behold, says he, on the river side I saw
many trees, on this side and on that side: the Greeks do translate the Hebrewe
words gnets rab, thus, dendra polla many trees. Tremelius turns it great
trees. But not so much the multitude, as the number, is respected, as by the 12
verse is manifest; where, that ere while in the seventh verse he calls gnets
rab, here he says, col gnets, pan xulon brosimon all trees of fruit for meat,
as if first he respected the variety more then the multitude. John seems to
speak collectively of one for many, as appears by the words entuthen ka^
entuthen, on this side, and on that side, that is, of both sides of the river;
which fittes not to one tree, unless on this side and on that side be turned
with tou potamou, of the river, and not with xulon Zoes, as follows; In the
midst of the market thereof, and of the flowing streeme, on this side and on
that side, was the tree of life; as if the tree were in the mids, which the
river being divided into two parts, compassed on both sides. And so it is one
tree, whereof there is a more manifest allusion to the tree of life, Genesis 3.1.
and of which he has made mention before, in chap. 2.7. to him that over
comes I will give to eat of that tree of life, which is in the midst of the
paradise of God. John saw this tree to be one, because there is one common
food of life for all the elect, 1 Cor. 10.3.4. But Ezechiel saw more, to
signify the most fruitful plenty of this one tree. This tree is Christ, who is
to his as well meat, as drink, a most costly meat of al things, which are
necessary to salvation.

Bearing twelve fruits; Not one fruit twelve times, but twelve diverse fruits;
that this one tree may be instead of all those, which Ezechiel mentions.
Christ does impart himself with so great variety to his elect, that they are
never glutted. Whereto also seem to appertain those so diverse kinds of
offerings, which once were offered with the sacrifices: some of which were raw,
some sodden, some dry, some with liquor, certain baked, certain fried,
certain also roasted, Lev. 2. so does Christ provide against our lothsomenes,
who in fruit being the same meat, does in taste yeilde himself so sondrie and
manifoulde. Every month bringing forth fruit; word for word in the greek is by
every one month. This meat never fail, but grows daily new. There needs not
here, that in harvest it be laid up for an other year, but there shall be a
continual spring and harvest, always with some ripe fruits, and some other
budding: as the orange tree; which forthwith as the first apples by reason of
their ripenes fall off, afterward it bud des with new apples. But were the
trees so created in the beginning, as that if sin had never entered, which
has brought thorns, thistles, sweat of the brows, and painfulnes of living,
they should continually flourish and be laden with fruits? This allusion
seems to point out such a thing. And it may be Christ would not have cursed
the fig tree, because it wanted fruit, when the time of figs was not,
unless by his first nature it ought to have them at all times, Mar. 11.13. but
I dare not meddle any whit at all to determine of this matter; neither would I
willingly busy my self with this sort of questions, except perhaps that I
might bring light to a dark place.

And his leaves for the health of the nations; Not because they shall be fed
with the leaves, but because they shall be covered with the wholesome shadow
thereof; or because their wounds shall be cured, through a certain power of
medicine, wherewith the leaves shall be endued. For from hence drops that
baulme, whereby all wounds are healed, the which no other virtue of surgerie
can heal. The which things may not be applied to the last estate of the
blessed, where there shall be no difference of nations, and of other people,
neither shall there be any place for curing of wounds, when every one shall be as
an Angel of God.

3 Neither any curse shall be against any: The fourth reason is of the
continuance, which hence he proves, because there shall be nothing, whereby this
happiness might be corrupted or defiled. We know that the ungodly and wicked
bring the judgment of God, on those cities, in which they sojourne: there
shall be none of such vileness, against whom the sword of the curse shall be drawn
out, and as rotten members shall be cut off from the rest of the body: not
because then discipline shall altogether cease (the which shall greatly flourish,
as we have seen in the former chapter,) or as though no citizen shall ever fall,
but because there shall be so great watchfulnes of the Pastors in recalling the
wandering sheep, that God shall not need to manifest his wrath from heaven,
even as he is wont, where discipline is contemned, and not regarded; Montanus
reads corruptely catathema, seeing that the Prophet Zachary from whence this
place is taken has hherem lo jehi gnod, the curse shall be no more, chap. 14.11.

But the seat of God, and of the Lamhe: It apperteines to continuance, that God
from thence will not translate his throne some other where. Therefore at length
we have found, where steadfastly he will abide for all the time that shall remain.
In time past he forsook the ancient Jerusalem: and Rome shall in vain boast
that she shall never be a widow, as chapter 18.7. but he has chosen this
mountain Zion, in which he will dwell for ever. But that we may not think that
this is to be attributed to any holiness of the, place, he adioineth, and his
servants shall serve him, as if he should say: men shall not through lothsomenes
loath the truth, as at first, but they shall with exceeding fervency cleave unto
it, they shall forever be the holy and faith full servants of God. This godliness
of men causes, that God abides in some place, and not any necessity of a
certain place: which often we see was changed, as men themselves were changed.

4 And they shall see his face: They shall enjoy a clearer sight the^ ever
heretofore: yet far from that which at length being blessed, they shall enjoy
in the heavens: but so great shall be the simplicity and purity of the worship,
that God shall seem to be most familiarly conversant with them, as it were
face to face. He also openly shall challenge them to himself, marking then ^ith
his own name; yea not men alone, but also it shall be written on the horses
belles, Holiness to Jehova, as are the pottes of the house of Jehovah, as the
bolles before the altar, Zachar. 14.20. he will undertake their patronage, and
defense of all their things, even of the least.

5 And there shall be no night: They shall not be afflicted as in the former ages,
neither shall they need light co^forts, of the light and the lik things, which
before they were wont to use, but they shall receive of God himself exceeding
joye: neither shall they care for or seek other means to ease their griefs,
Isay 60.19.20. But how says he, they shall not need the light, when above he
said, the Lamb shall be their light? chap. 21.2. here he denies not altogether
that they shall not need the light, but only no other but the Lamb.

Because the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and
ever. There shall appear greater kindness of God, than can be attributed to any
means. For so great shall be the increase of knowledge, that men shall seem to
be made wise, not so much by hearing of the word, as by divine inspiration. The
like shall be of all other gifts, whose excellency shall far exceed all means,
which they might use in getting them. In the end of the verse there is set
down in plain words, what is the sum of these 3. verses: to weet, that this
kingdom of Saints shall be eternal; which shallbe begun in the earth, neither
shall it ever be interruptep, but shallbe finally translated into heaven.

6 Then he said to me: Hitherto has bin the prophetical narration: now there
follows a conclusion of the Epistle, the shutting up of the whole Revelation,
which in few words mentions certain chief heads, whereby every one may
confirm and strengthen himself of the credit and authority of this Prophecy.
It is a most profitable conclusion, and full of heavenly majesty. The Spirit
knew how this Revelation should not be regarded of men, and certain should
call into question the credit thereof, beyond his wonted manner, he labour^th
in a few more words, to take away all this doubt. But who is this Angel which
now talks with John? An other as it seems, than he who in the beginning of
the chapter showed the river of the water of life, or that manifested the city.
For thi^ is the seventh Angel, that is, of those to whom the business was
committed of administering the seven last plagues, chap. 21.9. whose charge was
certain and contained in the limits of a certain part, not endued with
power of the whole Revelation. But this confirmation is common to the whole
book, and therefore seems to be of that Angel which was sent in the
beginning, that manifested these things to John. Next also it is likely, that
here are not again words uttered by the voice of the sam^ ngell, but they are
related of John under the person of the Angel, of whom first he had received
them. Certainly the conjunction of things without any copulatives, or any
necessary coherence between themselves, seems to approve of such an account.
Which meaning if we follow, the words are not to be translated, then he said to
me, which declare the time of a new speech begun after the sight of the
city, but and he said to me, as though he should say; seeing that now I have
fully delivered to you al things, which are revealed to me, that shall be, now
there remains nothing, but that with sure faith ye embrace the same: which
that you may the more easily do, bethink ye how holily and religiouslly the
Angel has confirmed the same to me, those words are faithful and true.
Wherefore this confirmation of the Angel apperteineth not only to those things
which went next before, of the new Jerusalem, although the demonstrative
proouune be so used often, but likewise to the whole book: as also that
threatening, which follows ver. 18.19. universally challenges credit to the
whole Prophecy, and not for the authority of some certain part of it. These
things are repeated out of the 19 chap. ver. 9. and by the words of John
speaking, which the Angel had before spoken, they are applied to approve the
whole Revelation.

And the Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angel. Neither did the Angel
of his own accord utter, these words are faithful and true, but by the
commandment and authority of God the sander. The same God which inspired the
ancient Prophets, that they might most certainly forespeake of things to come,
he sent this Angel, which might reveal those things to John for the use of
the Church. These things are repeated out of the 1. chap. 1 ver. which
Revelation he signified, when he sent by his Angel to his servant John. But
thou may observe that this latter member of the verse is so inferred, that
it may clearly show that these now are not the words of the Angel speaking,
but of John repeating the arguments of this Prophecy delivered from heaven.

7 Behold I come quickly; The testimony of Jesus concerning the speedy
execution of these things, fetched out of the 11. chapter, which must shortly
be done: and again, the time is near ver. 3. The event of things next past,
should give credit to things that follow: and therefore he makes mention of a
speedy execution: as if he should say, take every one of you, for every of your
ages a pledge, and as it were a fuerty of things to come, by the present
things, which thou shall see to come to pass. These things assure you that the
things to come are no less certain. But we who now for a thousand and five
hundred years, to weet, from John, have seen the consent of the event and
Prophecy, may not any more doubt of these few other things which as yet
remain. See how these things are heaped up together, as but now we said,
without any bands of speech, as for the most part it is done in numbering of
things.

Blessed is he that keeps: A confirmation of the happiness of them which keep
this Prophecy, which nothing can bestow on man, but the truth in spired from
heaven, as before in chap. 1.3. from whence these are fetched.

8 And J John: A confirmation from the Ministers. It is a most sure prophecy,
whose Minister the Angel was, and of so great majesty, that John the Apostle
thought to worship him, and of that holiness that he forbad the worship
offered. John tells what first befell chap. 19.10. he falls not down
again into the worship forbidden him.

But he said to me: in the greek it is, and he says to me, for he said to
me, or has said, as well the interpreters do translate it: he relates not a
new, but a thing past But we must mark that which he spoke before, and of thy
brethren which have the testimony of Jesus: chap. 19.10. here it is uttered in
other words, and of thy brethren the Prophets. and of them which keep the
words of this book. Therefore to keep the words of this book is to have the
testimony of Jesus.

Seal not: The publishing of a commandment, whereby there should be free power
to every one to examine, and, by the success to judge of the Prophecy. John
might not have it for himself alone, but should offer it to the trial of a
public examination, as forthwith from the beginning he was bidden: That which
thou see write in a book, and send it to the seven Churches, chap. 1.11. And
again, write these things which thou have seen, and which are, and which
shall be: that is, hide it not from others, but publish it. But if the public
publishing of it be only respected, how was Daniell commanded to shut up his
words, and to seal the book, who also brought into open view his Prophecy?
Therefore this prohibition of not sealing, includes some other thing; namely,
that things to come are in such sort set down, that men by the events present
and near at hand, might be led as by the hand, fully to understa^d the same
Prophecy: which chanced otherweise to Daniell, who was not manifest to every
age, for he lightly touching things interlaced, is chiefly employed in things
that should lastly come to paste, and therefore should expect the appointed
time, before which it was not to be unfolded: which partly is to be understood
of those more difficult visions; partly of the people of the Jews, whom that
Prophecy does chiefly respect. That which follows confirms this
interpretation, for the time is at hand: as if he should say, shut not up
this Prophecy, because the time near at hand shall reveal it: but Daniels was
sealed up, for the event far to comme, caused, that for a great time it
should lie hidden. Therefore these words have the same force, as the former,
Behold I come quickly.

11 He that hurts let him hurt still: A preventing of a secret doubt, whereby
the minds of the weak might be weakened; for they see that the ungodly go
forward in their ungodlines, and their punishment for many ages is differred.
Therefore they might demand, how he would come quickly, who so long forbeareth
the wicked? He then meets with it, and warns that no man take this in ill
part, but mind that the ungodly will continue in their wickedness, and the
righteous will follow after righteousness: but that there are certain bounds set
them, beiond which they cannot go: neither must they wonder that a certain
increase of wickedness is permitted for a determined time, for the greater
condemnation of the ungodly: but they are to leave those men and to turn their
eyes to the elect, whose constant study of godliness ought to strenghten our
wavering minds against all stiffenes of the reprobate. Therefore these are not
the words of one exhorting, but of one conforting, and admonishing, that by
those sca^dales our expectation be not diminished, seeing that there shallbe
such a state of things, even to the last end.

And he that is just shall be justified still: Let him be employed in those
works whereby he may prove both to himself, and others that he is just: but he
does not so much exhort, as show the perseverance of the saints, which being
planted in Gods house, bring forth more planteous fruits in their old age.

12 And behold I come quickly: But it was repeated before in the seventh verse:
but again it is now pressed, as an excellent remedy against the offense of the
extreme hardness of the reprobate, as if he should say; as often as the
wickedness of men does stir up the mind, be think ye that shortly shall be
the coming of the Lord. He has promised it, that cannot deceive: nor measure
you not the delay by your own sense, but believe steadfastly that that which he
has promised, shall not be so long differed. Ye consider that the Lord is
present in those same things, which are daily done: see that he now forthwith
hasteneth his promises, that ye may not complain of his overmuch delay, or may
think that those things which have bin foretold shall not come to pass.
Therefore these things do very well accord with the former, nor by any means
are they to be referred to an other place: albe it if this coupling togithe
were not, we ought not to be much troubled about the consequence. The
rehearsal made, which we have spoken off, may contain in one full sentence
diverse things and sundry persons, without any light of bands and transitions.

And my reward is with me: These words belong to the same comfort, and set
before our eyes Christ the rewarder, against the offense both of the felicity
of the wicked, and also those troubles, which in the mean time the saints do
find. God is just, neither can it be, but that it shall go well at length with
the good, and ill with the wicked, as has bin declared in this same book in
express words, chap. 13.10. and 14.13.

13 I am Alpha and Omega; They are the words of Christ, but not speaking in this
place in his own person, but rehearsed by John. They confirm the Prophecy from
the eternity of Christ, or rather from his power, as before we have
interpreted: How should we not credit him so well in pronouncing of things to
come as past* who is eternal, or who has given beginning to al things, and at
his pleasure ca^ reduce them to nothing? chap 1.8.

14 Blessed are they etc. These things belong to the authority of Christ
testifying, to who^ whosoever obey, is blessed. He has power over the tree of
life, the liberty whereof he gives to them that obey him, chapter 2.7. and of this,
ver. 2. Moreover he gives a right to enter into the city by the gates, by
which alone the way is open, seeing the wall is so hie, that there is not any
hope ever to climb over, chap. 21.17.

15 But without shall be dogs: Men of doggish impude^cy and virulency, who
always bark at every good things; it shall be a grea felicity to be delivered
from their society. Concerning the troop of the excluded, see chapter 21.8.

16 I Jesus etc. A confirmation from a manifest testimony of Jesus himself,
not spoken here by his own voice, but by John's, repeated from chapter 1.1. Christ
speaks never in this book in his own person, without some signification of
his most great majesty, whereby he may testify his presence.

That bright etc. The morning star is most clear, and shows the day
following at her back: so Christ in this life shines most brightly to the
faithful being also a pledge to the^ of a greater light shortly to coe^. But
morover he shines to them by the first fruits of the truth, of which he will
giv them shortly a full abu^nda^ce. This praise is taken from chapter 2.28. see mor
there.

17 But the Spirit etc. A confirmation from the desire of the sanctified, to
whom nothing is so dear as to see these things accomplished, whereof hope is
given in this book. For as the souls under the altar cried with a loud voice
desiring deliverance chapter 6.10. so the faithful through hope of the future
marriage leap for joy, and greatly desire that day to be shortened, chapter 19.7.
For the word Spirit signifies here every faithful, in whom the Spirit
dwells: the word bride, the whole Church and company of the faithful. The
godly al of the^, both severally and jointly desire the same by prayers.

And he that hears says come: As though he should say, this is not only the
desire of the Church present, but also of it proceeding from day to day even
unto the last end. Every of the elect, at the first knowledge of these things,
shall be inflamed with the same desire with their ancetours.

And let him that thirsts come: Neither do these things serve only to
inflame, but also to satisfy the minds: which is the peculiar property of Gods
word. And that nothing may be wanting to certenty, thou must understand that
this Prophecy does give hope of salvation to men, not by expectation of a due
reward, but by the grace and mercy of God alone. It publishes a free salvation
only, as all the rest of the sacred scriptures, not due to our deserts. A
notable rule of the heavenly truth.

18 19 For I testify together: Hitherto the rehearsing of the former
testimonies and arguments, which were used here and there in this precedent
book. Now John adds a certain new one, but of the same divine authority
with the former; to wit, that this Prophecy is most true and unviolable, which
it is not lawful to violate either by adding or taking away even the least
thing without extreme punishment. Which being proper only to the word which
comes down from heaven, this Revelatio^ must needs be put into the same
degree, Deuteronomy. 4.10. and 12 32.

20 He that etc. Christ himself, who is called that witness, both in respect
of the Gospel, which he has brought into the world and also of this Prophecy
which is grounded on his authority only. In conclusion the whole matter is
sealed up both by his testimony repeated, and John's pryer.

21 The grace etc. The usual form of concluding Epistles, such as is this
whole Prophecy sent to the 7 Churches by the commandment of Christ himself,
chap. 1.11. Come L. Jesus. Glory and praise be to God for ever, Ame^.

I give thee thanks Almighty and everlasting God, because thou have lead me,
blind and unskilful man of no reputation, of no judgment, of no wit, by thy
only mercy, for Christ's sake, through this unbeaten wilderness, have made me
to view many secret corners, and have given me a safe journey by the dens of
the Dragon and wild beasts. Even so o Father, for such is thy good pleasure.
Thou chusest the unnoble and base men of the world, and have founded strength
from the mouth of babes and sucklings, that no flesh should rejoice. How
inco^prehensible is thy wisdom? how admirable thy truth? How just and holy at
al thy ways? Who shall not fear thee? I would gladly tell thy praises, but my
tongue does lack words, and the words a mind. Whither soever my mind shall
turn it self, it is swallowed up of thy infiniteness. If it shall ascend into
heaven thou art hyer: if it shall consider thy works, thou art greater: if it
does meditate on thy holiness, thou art purer then the very Sun. O wonderful
deepnes and unmeasurable bottomless pit, how do thou compass us about on
every side, and art comprehended no where? What mortal sight cannot be
overwhelmed with this so infinite brightness? Therefore my sight turns from
the light that no man can come unto, that it may consider thee through the
cloud of the creatures. Chiefly it delights much to behold thy most pleasant
face in thy Son. But as in this glass thou art most visible, so art thou
most admirable, so far surpassing our understanding, as thou do abasse thy
self near to our sense. Thou art great o Lord abov all that can be either said,
or thought; grant that we may revere^ce thy exceeding greatness, which the world
co^teineth not; that we may fear thy presence, which the eyes see not; that we
may adore thy majesty, in comparison of which the universal creature beneath is
nothing: that we may embrace thy goodness wherewith thou followest us most
unworthy men. Accomplish at length thy great mystery, and let the world
acknowledge thy long delay to have bin for thy only mercy, not of
forgetfulness or neglect of thy promise. Destroy the Romish Beast, and the
Constantinopolitan Dragon, build up thy new Jerusalem, wherein Christ shall
reign, and the saints shall bear rule together with him, to enjoy for a time a
blessed reign on earth; and most happy and eternal with thee in heavens. Hear
o Father to whom no thought of the mind is unknown. Be thou present, who art no
where absent: but hear the prayers, before whom thou have gone before, by thy
decree. Then will we bring forth our harpes, and sing praises to thee,
celebrating thee the one three God, the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, to
whom be all honor, praise, and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

