THE third part of THE TRVE-WATCH or The Call of ye Lord to awake all sorts to
meet him speedely with entreaty of peace, and to turn unto him by true
repentance: showing what causes we have forthwith to betake orselu's to
watching and prayer.

Taken out of ye vision of Ezekiel Chap: 9. BY IO: BRINSIEY. The sec^und
edition.

Imprinted at LONDON for Thomas Pauier 1623.



THE THIRD PART OF THE TRVE VVATCH, Containing the call of the Lord, to awake
all sorts to meet him with entreaty of peace, and to turn unto him by true
repentance: showing what causes we have forthwith to betake our selves to
Watching and Prayer.

Taken out of the Vision of EZEKIEL, Chap. 9.

By JOHN BRINSLEY.

IER. 36. 2. Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words that
I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and against all the
Nations, from the day I spoke unto thee, from the days of Josiah even unto
this day.

VERSE 7. It may be they will present their supplication before the Lord, and
will return every one from his evil way, for great is the anger and the fury
that the Lord has pronounced against this people.

HAB. 2. 2. Write the vision and make it plain upon tables, that he may run
that reads it.

EZEKIEL. 18. 30. Return and cause others to return away from all, etc.
Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions: so iniquity shall
not be your ruin.

VERSE 32. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the
Lord God: Wherefore turn Or others.
your selves and live you.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for THOMAS PAVIER, and are to be sold at his
shop in Ivy lane. 1622.

The sum of the whole Book.
1. How the Lord did long forewarne his people of Judah, calling them to
repentance, sundry ways, before he brought upon them the seventie years
captivity in Babylon. And withal the p^incipall abominations which provoked
him to this heavy judgment.

2. The woeful miseries which all sorts endured in that Captivity, when no
warnings would prevail to bring them to unfeigned repentance: and more
specially the plagues which came upon the wicked and impenitent.

3. Particular application hereof unto our selves, and of the manifold
forewarnings which we have received, chiefly from Babylon, above all in the
powder treason: showing evidently that the Lord is angry with us for our
sins, and what use we are to make, as of all our forewarnings, so chiefly of
that Powder Treason.

4. How to appease the Lord, so as to prevent the like judgments and all other
plagues; and ever to ^emaine a most happy people unto the coming of Jesus
Christ. Also how very one of us may attain to true Christian boldness to be
always ready to appear before his Majesty.

See the more particular contents of the several Chapters and heads after.

A Commendatorie Epistle.
THis Author (Christian Reader) having desired first my censure, now sundry
years ago, and since my joint testimony, touching this work, that by the
mouth or two or three witnesses, God might make it more effectual, for
accomplishing all the good his heart desires; I could no way justly deny the
same: seeing as the ends, which it propounds and wholly aims at, are only
to help to further the way to our unfeigned repentance, for the general
happiness of us all, yea even of every soul; and that our glory may be
continued to us, and to our posterity; so he has long traveled in the same,
and used all holy means of trial and examination, that there might be nothing
in it, but that which is necessary to these ends, and which might stand before
the Lords Tribunal. For the Author himself, though I have known him from my
childhood, being borne near unto him, brought up in the same Grammar School,
and after, in the same College in Cambridge, and ever since been most
familiarly acquainted with him, and therefore could speak more in this case
then I take to be convenient, yet I may wholly spare that pains; seeing his
own faithful and happy labors have so long ago commended him, and made him
and his holy affection for the good of all, so well known to the Church of
God. As first, the first part of this True watch, the Rule of Life, so much
approved of all religious Christians, to whose hands it has come, that it has
now the ninth time seen the Press, and gone through the trial, See the
Preface before it to the Christian Reader.
Wherein he has set out to the view of all, the holiness and integrity of
that way of life, which we all jointly profess (according to Gods sacred word,
and the good Laws of our Christian Commonweal) to the justifying of our
Church against the Separatists, to be the true Church of Jesus Christ, and that
whosoever so walks shall undoubtedly find eternal life, and in the mean
while all heavenly boldness, peace and joy. And not only against them, but
also against the superstitious and clamorous Papists, who herein slander our
Religion, affirming it to be a religion of carnal liberty, theirs of
holiness, ours full of divisions and uncertaintie, theirs of perfect unity,
thereby to draw our people to a dislike of the eternal truth of our blessed
God, and to a liking of that popish way, which is nothing but mere
superstition in outward shows of devotion, according to men's inventions, and
such as God never commanded, or required; nay such as God has most expressly
forbidden, as tending to utter perdition, both of souls and bodies. So
secondly, the second part of this True watch, the Rule of Prayer, in which he
has manifested his holy desire and unfeigned love to the Church of God and his
native Country, for a perfect peace and unity, with all happiness in the
same, and has so labored to trace out the most sure and plain way, following
the direction of our blessed Savior, as that whosoever striveth so to watch
and pray, shall undoubtedly be amongst them that are as the Chariots and
horsemen of Israel, and help to save the Island. And in the third place in his
School labors, for the benefit of our children and posterity, he has fully
witnessed his longing desire of the perpetual flourishing of this our Church
and Nation; concerning which travel, (to omit all other) Dr. Hali
Commendatorie Preface. The Jesuits have won much of their reputation, and
stolen many hearts with their diligence: in this kind we may outstrip them if
we want not to our selves. Behold here, not feet, but wings offered to us;
neither are these directions of mere spec^lation, but such as for the most
part, to the knowledge of my self, and many abler judges, have been and are
daily answered in his experience and practice, with more then usual success
What remains therefore, but that the thankful acceptance of men, and his
effectual labors should mutually reflect upon each other, that he may be
encouraged by the one, and they by the other bene^ited, etc.
that one testimony of the learned Doctor Hall, that worthy Deane of
Worcester, in his Commendatorie Preface before his book, called Ludus
Literarius, or the Grammar School, dedicated to Prince Henry and Duke
Charles, (speaking out of his own experience and of sundry other learned many
years ago) may fully suffice. And much more now of late, that more then
ordinary witness by that learned The Preface of Mr. Butlours Rhetoric, by
I. M. to the Reader.
Mr. Butlour of Oxford in his fourth Edition of his Rhetoric, who in stead of
the commendations of many other of principal note, which especially in Oxford
are wont to be prefixed before any work of special worth as that is; takes
only the testimony of this Author, in a place or two in his Grammar-Schoole,
and sets it before his book, instead of many; there commending him for that
work, as having by it deserved worthily of all good learning. Therefore seeing
in all his labors his good affection toward the Church of God, our dread
Sovereign, with all his royal Progeny and dominions, does clearly appear,
Si in Authoris ope^isve laudem (studiose lector) multorum hic, pro more,
suffragia requiras; instar multorum sit hoc vnum literati illius, and ob
exquisitam docend^ methodum, de bonis l^t^ru optime merit^, magistri Iohannis
Brinflei: cujus in suo Lud^ literario, or the Grammar School, cap. 16. hac
sunt verba, etc.
seeking only the wealth of all, and to unite all hearts, as unto the Lord of
heaven, so to our Sovereign Lord and King, and to his royal seed for our
happiness for ever, with what thankful acceptance are all his labors to be
received? And this above all the former, wherein he now only strives to help
to awaken us out of our deepest security, in the midst of our extremest
peril, and necessity; and when the times call us to watch and pray, yea to
fast and pray, if ever heretofore. First I say to rise up and watch, that we
may pray. To pray for the distressed state of all the poor Churches, and our
brethren abroad, who mourn and wring their hands by reason of their slaveries,
butcheries, manifold fears and miseries, both of their souls and bodies:
above all for them of Bohemia and the Palatinate, the very chief of them a
principal part of our selves; and withal for our brethren of France now in
great tribulation for the profession of Christ's Gospel; taking their case to
heart as feeling members, little knowing how soon it may be our own, and ever
fearing that terrible curse from the Angel of the Lord; Ier. 5. 23.
Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel) curse the inhabitants thereof, because they
came not out to help the Lord against the mighty. Secondly to watch and pray,
yea to mourn and cry for the fearful viols of the Lords wrath (in all
likelihood) so nearly ready to be powered down upon our own heads, unless we
speedily meet the Lord in unfeigned repentance. If in the year 88. all sorts so
generally feared it; when yet at our general humiliation in fasting and prayer
by public commandment, and our promising amendment, God heard our cries,
deferred the execution of his wrath upon us; and contrarily fought for us from
heaven, arming the winds and waters for his Church amongst us, how much more
may we justly fear it now. If then (I say) all jointly confessed, that if God
had so dealt with us, as he threatened, we had most righteously deserved it, for
all our heinous abominations, and for that no other means could prevail with
us; and if in our several acknowledgements, prayers and thanksgivings upon
sundry occasions since, we have again and again confessed as much, how much
more truly may we now at this present? Seeing the Lord has granted us since
not one year more alone, to see if we would meet him truly with entreaty of
peace, and unfeigned submission, but ten, yea thrice ten year and more, and
also used all means to reclaim us, both by abundant fatherly corrections, and
in his long patience and commiseration given us our third most dreadful
admonition, at the powder treason, never to be forgotten, when he even plucked
us out of the furnace; and now that our sins are, in stead of repenting, ten
times more increased through all those means (in the judgment of all who
rightly consider of them:) how can we expect any longer mercy? What can we
look for now in that we see men so generally (chiefly most of our Gallants) to
make but a mock of sin, yea of all Gods admonitions at home and abroad,
hating all true piety, and scorning it under most odious names? Or how can we
think truly that our land is purged of any of our abominations, but stands
presently guilty of them all, having now filled up our measure, seeing we
commit most of those fearful abominations so often confessed, with an higher
hand then ever heretofore? Or how can we imagine that our land is out of
danger, seeing many amongst us begin to dote again upon the bloody Romish
Idolatry; and that now our enemies are so increased in Malice, Pride, and
Multitude, and so many of the infernal Locusts feared to be in the midst
amongst us. My desire therefore is, that as this labor has been undertaken
for the saving of us all, from such a vengeance, as upon these grounds we have
just cause to fear, and for our perpetual happiness, and must needs for that
cause concern us all, that every one would take notice of it, and consider
seriously of every point, as God gives him opportunity; especially they who
have leisure (and spend many hours, yea many days and years, either wickedly
or at least vainly, which will bring them nothing but sorrow in the end) to
help hereby to turn away the wrath, or at least to save their own souls.
The work is large (I grant) but too large thou can not think it, seeing the
Author of it desires to make all plain to the capacity of the simplest, and
truly to awake every soul, and for that I know not of any point in it which
does not directly tend hereunto, or can well be made shorter without hurt to
the whole; chiefly the general good considered; that every sinner that repents
not, turning from his evil way, must die. And therefore doubtless no man
shall have just cause to repent him of his labor spent in hearing or reading
of it, but if God give him an heart by the right applying of it to help to
appease the wrath, or at least to turn, and to seek to cause others to turn,
he shall have cause to bless the God of heaven for it; which that every one
may do, and that we may all instantly set our selves to seek his face and
favor, I humbly entreat his heavenly Majesty to grant, and rest

Thine in Christ Jesus, Edward Elton B. in D. and Pastor of S. Mary Magdalens
Barmondsey near London.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
FOr those who would read this book with comfort, and reap the blessing
desired by it, in obtaining mercy and favor from the Lord for themselves and
the whole land, my humble request is, that they would first correct these
faults noted after; then read and weigh these Contents in the beginning both
general and particular; whereby they may see the sum and drift of all; and
have as it were a plain view of the whole in their heads: afterward to read
the prayer in the end which is according to the same, that they may better
conceive and make a right use thereof; and then to read the whole in order, if
their leisure and opportunity serve, or at least such parts of it, as they
shall think most necessary; and especially the last chapter, which most
nearly concerns every soul. That considering all, as before Christ's
judgment seat, like as I have endeavored to do, and so striving jointly in
faith and love for our selves and all other the poor afflicted Churches of
Christ; the Lord may fulfill all our holy desires, turn away all evils from
us and them, and make us to continue a flourishing Church and a happy Nation
to the coming of the Lord Jesus in the clouds.

Remember, 1. The danger we stand in, because of the Lords displeasure for our
sin. 2. The means how we may yet pacify and prevent the same, if we be not
wanting to our selves. 3. That we are all to be helpers hereunto. 4. The
comfort and happiness of the true helpers, whatsoever come to pass: with the
misery of the rest.
are the brief and scope of all.

Esa. 65. 24. Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking
I will hear.

Hos. 12. 4. He had power over the Angel and prevailed, he wept and prayed
unto him.

In wrestling and weeping is our victory.

I. B.

Errors to be corrected thus.
PReface Page 1. l. 5. marg. write, hying on us. p. 5. l. 36. thus. p. 9. l.
14. as was said. p. 15. l. 19. to our good. In the Contents, b. 3. l. 2. too
indifferently. l. 4. The light esteem of the great etc. c. 2. l. 5. put out
sometime. l. 12. through ignorant. In the vision, p. 1. l. 1. marg. Al: In the
book, p. 1. l. 32. should endure. p. 44. l. 25. worst. p. 45. l. 8. marg.
able. p. 65. l. 28. grandfather. p 79. l. 4. and is. l. 6. Apo. 2. l. 23.
showed. p. 111. l. 23. disgrace. p. 114. l. 8. humbled. p. 123. l. 22. seduced
brethren. p. 127. l. 18. portraid out p. 244. marg. l. 1. Luc. 10. 13. p. 264.
l. 10. enough. l. 36. of her torment. p. 304 l. 7. marg. uncutablenesse. p. 370.
l. 27. witness. p. 375. put out Italian. p. 377. marg. l. 16. Mat. 7. p. 389
l. 9. Tetrastylon. p. 398 marg. l. 1. A question. p. 433. l. 25. the holy
Prophet. p. 468. l. 13. Together with the helps herein contained and the
reading. p. 514. l. 26 in many places. p. 515. l. 5. many. p. 516. l. 17. put
out, the number of. p. 517. l. 17. put out, (...). p. 535. for their carkases,
write they. p. 543. l. 2. all that fear.

A TABLE OF THE chief things contained in each Chapter through out the whole
book in order, either handled more at large, or briefly pointed at.
CHAP. I.
THe resolution and opening of the vision in the 9. chapter of Ezekiel. page 1
CHAP. II.
Directions to make a right use of this forewarning to our selves, with Rules
to be observed to this end. p. 5, 6 The sins of the wicked, are in some sort
the sins of us all. p. 8 Heinous and impudent sinners help to draw down
Gods vengeance. p. 8 Every soul that turns not to God, seeking withal to
cause others to turn, must perish. p. 9
CHAP. III.
God not wont to bring any not able judgment on his Church, but to foreshew it
first, and then to bring it when no repentance has followed to prevent. p. 10
Reasons of the Lords forewarnings of his Church. p. 14 Application hereof to
our selves, how the Lord has forewarned us. p. 15, 16, 17, etc.
CHAP. IIII.
The withdrawing the lively tokens of Gods presence a sign of his departure
and of vengeance at hand. p. 26. and 31 God being well pleased with his people
is wont to witness his presence by some apparent sign. p. 27 Signs of the
Lords presence in the days of the Gospel, whereby to judge of our estate. p.
28, 29, etc. Signs of his withdrawing himself p. 31
CHAP. V.
The Lord makes sundry removes of his glory from his Church before he depart
from it, to show his unwillingnesse to depart. p. 35 36 The outward glory of
the Lord in his Church wherein it consists. p. 37 Abundance of sanctified
knowledge a special part thereof. p. 37 Holiness and unity make Gods people
glorious in the eyes of their enemies. p. 38 The Lords glorious protection of
his people, a principal outward sign of his presence. p. 40* 41, etc.
Application of the removal of Gods glory, first to Judah before the
Captivity. p. 42 Secondly to our selves. p. 43 The true practice of
Christianity more reproachful to many then to live in any sin. p. 48 How
welcome the Lords messengers are unto many. p. 49 Our unity much departed. p.
49 Fruits of our dissentions. p. 50 Countenance to the true lovers of the
Gospel much gone. p. 50 Our protection often endangered to be removed. p. 50, 51
All our glory ready to mount up at once in the powder furnace, a fearful
forewarning unless we repent. p. 52* 53 God may justly leave us into the
enemies hand, for suffering Pop^rie so to revive and grow up, after he had
given us so just occasion to seek to root it out utterly. p. 52, 53
CHAP. VI.
God will not spare Jerusalem if it rebel against him. p. 59 No privileges
can secure a people from Gods judgments if they increase in their iniquity.
p. 58, 59 Privileges wherein we secure our selves. p* 59, 60, 66 (...)
privileges. p. 59, 60, 61 Judah in the beginning of her miseries not inferior
to us in prerogatives to secure her. p. 67 The Gospel contemned can be no
freedom no not from a temporal scourge. p. 69 We cannot be more secured that
our land is purged of the Idolatry of former days, and the blood of Gods
servants, then Jerusalem in Iosiahs days. p. 70, 214 God purposing to remain
with us, must needs deal as a kind Father to bring us to obedience. p. 71
CHAP. VII.
The Lord has ever a special care of his in the greatest destructions, and
marketh them before the judgment come. p. 73 Why the Lord often lets his feel
the smart with the rest in general destructions. p. 79 What the marking
profits Gods servants suffering with the rest. p. 80 State of the godly whom
God takes away at such times. p. 82 State of the wicked in such calamities. p.
82 What the mark was wherewith the godly were marked. p. 84
CHAP. VIII.
The godly mourn for the sins of the wicked amongst whom they live. p. 85
The godly wont not only to mourn, but to cry for the abominations of the
wicked, according to their calling. p. 89 Reasons why the godly so mourn and
cry for all the abominations. p. 90 For one notorious sinner unpunished, all
the place is in danger of Gods wrath, and much more for many. p. 91, 92, 93
Comfort to true mourners, though the Lord should execute his judgment for the
sins of the wicked. p. 96 State of all contemners of Gods merciful
forewarnings. p. 100 Just cause of fear for the small number of true mourners.
p. 102
CHAP. IX.
The enemies by which the Lord threatens or afflicts his Church are his
soldiers. p. 104, 105 Application to our selves to behold the Lords enemies.
p. 109 All of them are fearful denuntiations of vengeance until we repent,
and why. p. 111, 112 Joining hands with Gods enemies, is a calling them in to
avenge his qu^rrell. p. 112, 113 How righteous with God to bring in the enemy
to be avenged, and the day of the spend-thrifts. p. 113 We cannot be assured to
be delivered from them till we abhor their ways. p. 113 Our enemies humbled
by our unfeigned repentance. p. 114 What we should do seeing the Lords armies
approaching. p. 115
CHAP. X.
The mourners marked, then comes the vengeance. p. 117 Our comfort in the
remainder of the mourners, and the preservation of the Lords Anointed. p. 119,
120 The account we are to make of the mourners. p. 121 It is for the godly that
the Gospel with our blessings continue. p. 122
CHAP. XI.
The charge to the destroyers to destroy without pity, and why. p. 124, 125
Causes in general provoking the Lord to so fierce a wrath, the heinousness of
the abominations, and that no means would serve. p. 125 The abominations
committed by all sorts. p. 125, 126 The Prophets to be read to behold the sins
which brought the vengeance. p. 127 In the abominations of Judah we may see our
own sins and estate portraied. p. 127 Little hope of any such search to be
made by us in these days of security. The authors endeavor thereupon to help
herein for the good of all. p. 128, 129 God has ordain^d the faithful
discovery of the iniquity as a last and principal means to turn away a
judgment. p. 130, 147
CHAP. XI. Section 2.
Cautions in reading these abominations. p. 132, 133 How their sins were
increased. p. 132 The principal sins specially mentioned after Hezekiahs
reformation for which this judgment is chiefly denounced. p. 134 The same
punishment or a beavier must needs belong to us, if we be guilty of the same
or the like sins. p. 136
CHAP. XI. Section 3.
The vengeance must begin at the Sanctuary, because from thence chiefly all
the wickedness proceeded. p. 137, 168, 169
CHAP. XI. Abomination 1.
The horrible wickedness of the Priests and Prophets generally angring the
Lord and hastening the Captivity. p. 138, 139 What holiness the Lord required
of the Priests and Prophets. p. 138
Abomination 2.
The blindness of the Priests and Prophets hastening the Captivity. p. 141
The Priests and Prophets ought to be Seers and watchmen. p. 141 Blind and
senseless men not giving warning of Gods judgments termed dumb dogs. p. 143
The blindness and sleeping of the shepherds calls for the beasts of the forest
upon their flocks. p. 145
Abomination 3.
Flattery of the Priests and Prophets hardening the people to destruction. p.
146, 148, etc. The faithfulness required in Gods watchmen and messengers. p.
146 Dawbers must look for a storm to cause their work to fall on them and
all who trust in it. p. 151
Abomination 4.
Preaching men's devices in stead of Gods word hastening the Captivity. p. 152,
153, etc. Gods ministers ought to preach his word sincerely and faithfully. p.
152, 153. and p. 156 All inventions of (...) but vain and foolish in regard of
Gods word, and to seek out such things is to seek out causes of desolation.
p. 154 Preaching men's devices, the high way to cause men to forget Gods word.
p. 155 The power of Gods word sincerely handled. p. 157 Good Arts and learning,
grations helps, though set in place of Gods word they bring a plague. p. 158
They that preach their own devices, steal his word from his people, and bring
no good to them. p. 159 State of such teachers when their consciences shall be
awaked. p. 160
Abomination 5.
Want of compassion in the Priests and Prophets hastening the Captivity. p.
160 Gods faithful ministers full of compassion toward their people. 161
Pastors without due regard of their flocks are butchers and wolves to their
flocks. p. 162 Pastors without commiseration of their flocks the greatest
enemies to Gods faithful messengers and servants. p. 163 When the watchman is
the snare of a fowler, he is then hatred in the house of his God. p. 166 Gods
terrible and most just denuntiation against all careless Pastors and Idol
shepherds for his flock, especially for his faithful servants. p. 167
Application to our selves. p. 169
Abomination 6.
The sin of the people in approving the wicked Priests hastening the
Captivity. p. 170, 172 The means which the Lord had provided that his people
should not be deceived by false Prophets. p. 171 The Lord cannot but be avenged
for approving of false prophets. p. 172 The severitie of the Lords most
righteous judgment, fitting a sinful people with Preachers to their hearts.
p. 173, 174 How God will answer hypocrites coming to inquire of him. p. 17^
Deceivers and deceived punished alike. p. 176 Antichrists delusions follow the
contempt of the Gospel. p. 176 Why God sends false teachers and seducers. p.
177 How God punished in the Gentiles the abusing of the very light of nature.
p. 178 How the people coming to the Prophets with a desire to know the truth,
yet may be notably deceived. p. 179 How the Prophets themselves may be justly
deceived and so deceive. p. 179, 181 How fearful it is after a man has
received his resolute answer from God, to go upon carnal respects to enquire
the second time. p. 181 The punishment of the false Prophet and of him who
asks of him alike. p. 183
Abomination 7.
The sins of the people against Gods faithful Prophets sent to them in
mercy, to bring them to repentance. p. 184 The duties and affections of Gods
people toward his faithful messengers. p. 184 The people grieving the
Prophets by an extreme dullness and untowardnesse to learn Gods word,
hastening the Captivity. p. 186 The word of the Lord is in vain to a
rebellious people. p. 188 They that cast away Gods word have no wisdom. p. 188
How God punishes the not profiting by his word with more blockishnesse. p. 189
The just judgment of God, to cause (...) servants, to learn by his enemies.
p. 189 Application to our selves. p. 190
Abomination 8.
Refusing to hear Gods faithful servants, more (...), hastening the
Captivity. p. 191 The Lords complaint for this sin, and how it must be (...)
in a book for the last day. p. 192 The just vengeance for this sin. p. 194,
195 For the contempt of Gods servants, he makes their tongues cleave to the
roof of their mouths. p. 194
Abomination 9.
Mocking and abusing Gods true Prophets and all the godly, hastening the
Captivity. p. 196 The custom of false Prophets to harden men in the contempt
of Gods threatenings. p. 197 God will make unbeleevers know the truth of his
word by feeling it. p. 197 The word in the mouths of Gods messengers shall be
as a fire to consume all wicked gainesaiers. p. 198
Abomination 10.
Discouraging Gods true Prophets by threatenings, hastening the Captivity. p.
198 Vengeance for this sin. p. 199
Abomination 11.
Slandering and falsely accusing Gods messengers, hastening the Captivity. p.
200 Incensing the Magistrates against Gods faithful messengers haste^ing the
Captivity. p. 200 Ordinary with Gods true Prophets to be railed upon. p. 201
Abomination 12.
Secret conspiracies against Gods true Prophets and servants to take away their
lives or credit, hastening the Captivity. p. 202 The Lord in due time
reveals the most secret plots against his servants. p. 203 The depth of
Satan to smite Gods messengers with the tongue, that none may be warned by
their preaching to escape Gods vengeance. p. 203 Ieremies familiars watch for
his halting. p. 203 How fearful it is, against conscience to practice
mischief against Gods servants. p. 204
Abomination 13.
Striking and imprisoning Gods servants, hastening the Captivity. p. 206
Pashur the Priest attempts to smite and imprison Jeremy, hastening the
Captivity. p. 207 The Princes by means of the Priests are against Jeremy,
and labor the king to put him to death. p. 207 Zedekiah, against his
conscience leaves Jeremy into the hands of the Rulers. p. 207 Cause of all
Ieremies troubles. p. 208
Abomination 14.
Shedding the blood of the Prophets and other of Gods servants, hastening the
Captivity. p. 209 What that blood was which brought the Captivity. p. 209 How
the cry of the blood of Gods servants ascends into heaven. p. 211 Vengeance for
abusing the house and servants of the Lord. p. 211 How good it had been for
Judah to have been awaked at the admonition of the true Prophets. p. 212 How
necessary to stop such evils in the beginning. p. 21^ Those who were so vilely
accounted of, were the dearest, servants of God and chief means to stay his
wrath so long. p. 213 Of all other sins God can least endure the wronging of
his messengers and dearest servants. p. 213 From the disgracing of Gods
servants all impiety flows. p. 214 What wisdom it is to prevent all
indig^^^ies against Gods messengers. p. 214 Our nation as fearfully defiled
with the blood of Gods servants in the days of Queen Mary, as Jerusalem in
the time of Manasses. p. 214 Apparent signs that our Land is not yet purged of
that blood. p. 214 God calls upon us to search out this sin if we will escape
his search, and the search of the bloody enemy. p. 215
Abomination 15.
The unfruitfulnesse of the Lords vineyard laying it waste. p. 216 What God had
done for Judah, to make her fruitful, and so for us, and our Covenant
thereupon. p. 216 The Lords complaint against his vineyard in Judah, and how it
concerns us. p. 217 Scarce any true godliness, viz: men truly sincere to be
found among them before the Captivity. p. 218 What the Church is to do in
times desperately evil. p. 218 The Lords righteous vengeance for the
unfruitfulnesse of his vineyard. p. 219 Application to us, with the Lords
appeal for it to every ones conscience. p. 219 The Papists principal argument
and loud exclamations against us for our unfruitfulnesse. p. 220 Complaints of
the dressers of the vineyard for it. p. 222 Sighs of the poor witnessing it.
p. 222 Unfruitfulness of the Ministry. p. 222 How we may justly lament for
our negligence, and time misspent. p. 223 The Magistrates fruit. p. 224 The
accusation of the conscience in the careless Magistrate. p. 224 The private
man's fruit. p. 225 Mr. Bradfords complaint for his own unfruitfulnesse to be
well noted of all. p. 226 Each of us to acknowledge particularly our
unfruitfulnesse. p. 227
Abomination 16.
Corruptions crept into all places and callings that almost all was become as
dross, hastening the Captivity. p. 230 Only a few reserved in every calling.
p. 231 Vengeance proportional to be melted together in the midst of Jerusalem.
p. 23^ Application to try whether we have no need of such a melting. 232 How
near we were to the furnace. p. 232 England could not have filled the furnace.
p. 233 The furnace proclaimed to all people that we are corrupt, and what God
is about to do unless we repent. p. 233 Our corruptions instanced in the cry
of many sins. p. 234 The truth hereof as of the rest to be inquired of
amongst the most conscionable and painful Ministers. p. 234 This should never
pass out of our hearts, how near we have been unto the melting. p. 235
Abomination 17.
Hypocrisy angring the Lord, hastening the Captivity. p. 235 Their Covenant
concerning the sincerity of Gods worship. p. 236 Wherein their hypocrisy
chiefly consisted. p. 236 The outward service without the inward, is a
weariness unto the Lord, so the Ceremony without the Moral commandment. p.
237 To trust in outward observations, is to trust in lying words. p. 237
Hypocrisy in observing the traditions of men more then Gods commandments. p.
238 Hypocrisy in serving God by the commandments of men, and not of any
conscience to God. p. 238 Hypocrisy causes the Lord to loath all our service,
and to take away his Religion. p. 238 Application for our hypocrisy, in
performing a bare outward service. p. 239 Hypocrisy in retaining still the
dregs of Popery. p. 239 Many of our people do all principally for the
commandments of men, as ready to receive any other religion. p. 240 How few of
whom we may justly hope that they are soundly religious. p. 240 If so, how can
we look to escape Ierusalems vengeance or a heavier. p. 240 The sins of the
chief men of all sorts from whom wickedness descended to all the rest, and
the means how. p. 241 The Lord will require all his sheep of the pastors, and
why. p. 242
Abomination 18.
Covenant of the Magistrates and Rulers. p. 242 Magistrates ought to be as God
in his place. p. 242 Magistrates ought to be fathers to all under them. p. 243
Magistrates ought to be most temperate, and fearing God. p. 243 Magistrates as
lights and patterns to the rest. p. 244 Their great men in stead of being as
God, were most rebellious against God. p. 244 In stead of fathers lions. p. 244
The Lord compares cruel Rulers to Butchers and Cooks. p. 245 Their great men
gave themselves over to all licentiousness. p. 246 Instead of being lights,
they became most vile ensamples. p. 246 Their vengeance proportional on them.
p. 247 Application in all humble reverence, how near the vengeance was to us
in each particular. p. 248 What the Popish conspirators pretended in blowing up
the Parliament house. p. 249 Great men are to remember the honor laid upon
them, and the end why God has done it. p. 250 Nehemiahs ensample to be set
before the face of all worthy Rulers. p. 252
Abomination 19.
Taking up the evil fashions of other countries, hastening the Captivity. p.
253 Gods people to observe the manners prescribed by him. p. 253 They might not
conform themselves to Gods enemies, but were to destroy every thing that might
teach them their manners. p. 253 They took up the odious fashions of other
Countries, and this was a chief cause why the Lord did forsake them. p. 254,
255 They fell to dote upon the guises of the Babylonians, whom God had ordained
to be their scourge. p. 255 Vengeance for this to be cast off, as they had cast
off the Lord for these. p. 256 All to be carried into Babylon, on which they had
so doated, where they should execute Gods vengeance on them. p. 256 The Lord
sanctified the Babylonians for his ghuests against the time of this sacrifice,
when he would visit all who delighted in these vanities. p. 257 Application to
examine our odious fashions of diverse sorts, as charging with healths, whorish
plays, and the like. p. 257, 258 Private reading Scriptures left off by such.
p. 259 Filthy and scurrilous Pamphlets received in place. p. 260 Babylonish
policy by corrupting our manners, first, to overthrow our Religion. p. 260
Having prevailed with the greater, they make sure account of the rest. p. 260
The device of old Balaam, as the surest stratageme, worthy our best
consideration. p. 261 There is no sorcerie against Israel abiding in obedience.
p. 262 Application of the History of Balaams stratageme to our selves. p. 264
A mystery whereby to bring Italy into England, and so to obtain their
purposes. p. 264 A just lamentation for that no warning will serve but we must
do at after them, and be weary of the Lord. p. 264, 265
Abomination 20.
Oppression of the poor, hastening the Captivity. p. 265 Our covenant with
the Lord for justice and mercy to the poor. p. 265 A pattern for great men in
Job. p. 265 Their transgression, that instead thereof they were most cruel
extortioners and oppressors. p. 266, 267 The Lord compares extortioners to
Apothecaries and Millers. 268 They joined house to house, till there was no
place for the poor. p. 269 Vengeance proportional. p. 269
Abomination 21.
Oppression by engrossing and inhancing the prizes of things to swallow up the
poor, hastening the Captivity. p. 270 What God requires of rich men in time
of dearth. p. 270 The rich were become as cormorants to the poor. p. 270 The
Lord will never forget this sin, it makes the land to tremble. p. 271
Application to unsatiable corne-mungers. p. 272 Gods warning forgotten in the
levellers insurrection. p. 273
Abomination 22.
Oppression to raise their houses, hastening the Captivity. p. 274 To build by
oppression, is to consult shame to their houses. p. 275
Abomination 23.
Oppression to support their pride hastening the Captivity. p. 275 The attire
of gracious women, what it ought to be. p. 276 Their women helped to flea the
poor to support their pride. p. 276 They minded nothing but pride when God
threatened them most. p. 276 The plagues which all such bring on themselves and
theirs. p. 277 A glass for proud women to view themselves in. p. 278 What this
would work rightly practiced. p. 278 Our pride though exceeding theirs so as
cannot be expressed, yet must one day be set in open view, before the faces of
all who do not repent. p. 279 Vengeance proportional for this sin. p. 279
This sin, and the sighs of the poor for it, cry continually for vengeance
to be taken on such a monster. p. 280
Abomination 24.
Pride in sumptuous buildings, causing oppression, hastening the Captivity. p.
280 A glass for them who build their houses by oppression. p. 281 The
unmercifulness of ambitious builders. p. 282 The way for great men to prosper.
p. 282 The case of all oppressors, how they live, and what they provide for
their children. p. 283 Application. p. 284
Abomination 25.
Oppression to maintain riot and excess, hastening the Captivity. p. 284
What the Lord requires for all his mercies chiefly of rich men. p. 284 How they
requited the Lord and used his benefits, never thinking of the work of the
Lord. p. 285, 286 A glass for all given over to their pleasures. p. 286 Men
given over to pleasures forget the affliction of Joseph. p. 287 The seers given
up to wine and good fellowship can see nothing amiss till the vengeance of God
come. p. 287 The fruits of excess and idleness. p. 288 They became to be
impudent in uncleanness, to show their filthiness openly like the Sodomites.
p. 288 Men giving themselves over to carnal pleasures have no knowledge. p.
288 Such prepare captivity temporal, or eternal, or both. p. 288 Hunger and
thirst remain for all belly-gods. p. 289 Neither Gentry nor greatness will
save from Gods vengeance, hell gapes for such. p. 289 The proudest must be
brought down to the depth of hell, and go captives with the first. p. 289 God
abhorres the excellency and haughtiness of all such, and the palace^ where
their sins are most practiced. p. 290 Desperation the portion of all proud
belly-gods when Gods vengeance comes. p. 290 God must needs visit for such
things and his soul be avengedon such a nation. p. 290 Application to every
conscience. p. 291
Abomination 26.
Insatiable covetousness causing oppression hastening the Captivity. p. 291
The study and covetousness of the Lords people. p. 291 All before the
Captivity generally given to covetousness. p. 292 The fruit of covetousness
in the Prophets to speak only to please. p. 292 The manner of healing with
fair words as the Prophets did before the Captivity. p. 292, 293 Covetous men
can see nothing but for their own advantage. p. 293 Vengeance proportional.
p. 293 The wretched estate of all covetous Prophets. p. 294 The difference of
the preaching of the true Prophets and the covetous worldlings. p. 295 The
power of the true Prophets showed forth chiefly in the time of abounding of all
iniquity and approaching of judgment. p. 295 A perpetual night came upon the
false Prophets at the Captivity. p. 296 Covetousness, dumbness, blindness,
sleeping, go together in the false Prophets. p. 296 Just vengeance on all for
their unsatiable greediness: p. 296 Application to all sorts of spoylers of the
poor. p. 297 Application to those who oppress to make themselves great. p.
297 Application to the haughty, on whose garments is found the blood of the
poor. p. 297 Application to sumptuous builders oppressing. p. 298 Application
to them that oppress to pamper themselves, saucing all their dainties with the
blood of the poor. p. 299 Application to the mighty ingrossers, whose houses
are filled with the spoils of the poor. p. 299 Application to all who have
set up the world in their hearts to worship. p. 300 How to be beautiful and
glorious indeed. p. 301 How to set our nests on high and to build them for
eternity. p. 301 How to give our selves to all delights and to be prodigal
therein. p. 302 How to hoord up and ingrosse. p. 302 How to covet a holy
covetousness. p. 303
Abomination 27.
The general Apostasy of Judah hastening the Captivity, that they were ever
starting away and departing from the Lord. p. 304, 305 Their zeal in the
beginning of the days of Ezekiah and Josiah against Idolatry and for reforming
religion, and how soon it was gone. 305, 306
Abomination 28.
Falling from their forwardness in Religion to all profaneness, hastening the
Captivity. p. 307 The sum of Gods Covenant with them to magnify and obey his
word. p. 307 They cast away the word of the Lord, in regard of making any
conscience of it. p. 308 The plague which is upon them that cast away Gods word
to set up their own imaginations; they shall see they have had no wisdom. 309
The Lord will reject all them that reject his word, as reprobate silver is
rejected. p. 310 All they forsake the Covenant, who do not obey it, though
they seem in word to embrace it. p. 310 Application to all sorts whose hearts
tell them they are such. p. 311
Abomination 29.
Scorning the word of the Lord and all true profession hastening the
Captivity. p. 314 How precious Gods word ought to be to his people. p. 314
They loathed Gods word, and counted it a burden. p. 314, 315 They made the word
matter enough of the vilest reproach to every one truly professing it. p. 315
The fearful extremities that Gods servants are often driven to, through the
hatred which they endure for the word. p. 316, 317 The very scorns and taunts
against Gods word and servants shall be one day a heavy burden to every
scorner. p. 318 God will visit every scorner and his house, and reward them
with an everlasting shame. p. 318, 319 Application of this sin and denunciation
to our selves. p. 319, 320 Scorning Gods word and faithful messengers cannot
escape unpupunished. p. 321
Abomination 30.
Pollution of the Lords Sabbaths hastening the Captivity. p. 322 Covenant for
the Sabbath. p. 322 He is a blessed man that endeavors truly to keep the
Sabbath, and to such a one only the Covenant and promises belong. p. 322 They
despised and polluted Gods Sabbath, and how. p. 323 They put no difference
between the holy and profane. p. 323 Their Priests hid their eyes from Gods
Sabbath. p. 324 The Lord complains that he is profaned by them that willingly
suffer his holy things to be polluted. p. 324 The Lord charge them with
carrying and recarying upon the Sabbath. p. 325 The commandment for the Sabbath
belongs as well to us as to them. p. 325 The Lords anger and message sent unto
them for this sin, chiefly to their King and Rulers. p. 325 The cvill
ensample of our forefathers is no example for us, but rather increases the
wrath. p. 326, 344 The Lords gracious promise to the reformation of the
Sabbath, VIZ. continuance of their Kings, dignity and prosperity. p. 326 All
desiring the establishing of the throne of the Lords Anointed, and prosperity
of their nation, to look to it. p. 326 What good friends they are to Prince,
State, Church and Commonwealth, who call into question the time of the Sabbath.
p. 327 Vengeance for pollution of the Sabbath, viz, kindling a fire in the
gates of Jerusalem, and their 70. years Captivity. p. 327 The feeling of such
a plague (as was toward us) but one day, would make us most willingly to
stoop unto the Lord. p. 328 Nehemiah after the Captivity acknowledges Gods
righteous vengeance in it for polluting the Sabbath, and labors thereon the
redress of that sin. p. 328 All the sins which rulers might redress are
accounted their sins. 328 Former examples of Gods vengeance should warn us. p.
329 In Nehemiah is the lively picture of a worthy ruler who had seen the
miseries of a Captivity for sin. p. 329 Three ensamples in Nehemiah never to
be forgotten of tenderhearted and worthy governors. p. 329 1 Nehemiah looks
forthwith to the particular state and miseries of the people, to be more
affected therewith. p. 330 2. His willing and compassionate hearing of the
cries and grievances of the poor. p. 330 The happy way to redress the evils
of Gods people. p. 330 How good governors may prevail when they wish nothing
to be done, but what themselves do first. p. 331 3. Nehemiah himself sees
the reformation of the evils, especially of the Sabbath. p. 332 Application to
our selves concerning the Sabbath. p. 332, 333 To remember here the consuming
fire wherewith the Lord threatened us. p. 334 Our land made well-ne^re as a
desolate widow. p. 334 We are they on whom God now complains, for despising
his holy things as he then did upon Judah. p. 335 For putting no difference
between the holy and profane. p. 336 Our sin in admitting all indifferently
to the table of the Lord. p. 337 This sin enough to bring Gods plagues upon the
whole land. p. 338 The (...) that great censure of Excommunication. p. 338
Hiding our eyes from Gods Sabbath from seeing the most weighty duties of the
Sabbath to perform them. p. 339 To consider whether we be not they who have
thought the Sabbath overlong. p. 341 Sabbath profaned by carrying and recarying.
p. 342 Our pretended necessities cannot excuse us more then them. p. 342
Reserving journies ordinary for the Sabbath. p. 342 Concourse to plays and
the vileness of them. p. 343 The inevitable danger to frequenters of plays.
p. 343 Fr^quenting Tavernes and Alehouses where nothing is more common then
scorning all piety upon the Sabbath. p. 344 God has only warned us hitherto.
p. 344 The speech turned to all who have the chief charge of the house of the
Lord and his Sabbath. p. 345
Abomination 31.
Sundry degrees of their profaneness angring the Lord and hastening the
Captivity. p. 346 Opposing themselves against all power of religion and
godliness, when they gloried in his outward ceremonial worship. p. 346 They
bent their tongues and works against the Lord, and against all true piety and
conscience of his ways, using all devices to put out all fear of his name. p.
347 They spoke good of evil, evil of good, glorying in their most shameful
sins. p. 347 They justified and loved the wicked, condemned and hated the
good. p. 348 They sought to cast all shame on the godly. p. 348 Thence they
proceeded to spoiling and all violence. p. 348 They used to make shows of
religion when they were as Sodom. 349 They would make shows of seeking God in
fasting, and lean on the Lord even then when they were so vile. p. 349 The
vengeance for their outrageous profaneness, viz. the spoiling them by the
Caldean, which they should not believe till it came, who should d^ale with them
accordingly, as they had done with the Lord and his people. p. 350 Application
to us to search our sin before (...) to search us. p. 351 Our swaggerers in
each place walk usually in the steps of their profaneness, especially against
the Lord and his servants. p. 351 These the only good fellows, men of renown,
as before the flood. p. 353 The speech turned to these, if but to save some of
them. p. 353 The terrible anger of God upon all profane despisers of the
Gospel, not to believe any judgment toward us, though never so plainly
denounced and manifested, nor toward themselves. p. 354, 355 The case of
profane persons in the day of Gods vengeance. p. 355 Their case in the day of
death and of the last judgment. p. 356 Their happiness who can take the time
of mercy. p. 357
Abomination 32.
The Idolatry of Judah hastening the Captivity. p. 357 Their Covenant with
God to have worshipped him only according to his word, without retaining the
least show or occasion of Idolatry. p. 358 He had enjoined them to make open
protestation against all Idolatry even in the very enemies land. p. 358 There
was in them notwithstanding a very general inclination to run a whoring after
Idols. p. 359 Hezekiah and Josiah raised up to destroy and deface Idolatry. p.
359 The zeal of the people in destroying Idolatry in Ezekiahs days, and Gods
admirable favor to Ezekiah and Judah thereupon. p. 359 Their relaps to
Idolatry with Manasseh falling to be worse then the heathen. p. 359 Manasseh
led captive for this; his repentance and destroying Idolatry again. p. 359
Josiah raised up to work a through reformation, and with a most strange
detestation of Idolatry in the hearts of the people. p. 360 Josiah solemnly
renues the Covenant with the Lord, to worship him only according to his will,
and compels all to stand to it, so by all means convincing them before the
Captivity. p. 360 The Lord sent them more Prophets, and with more power before
the Captivity then ever in former time. p. 360 Idolatry was usually one sin
whereof they did ever warn the people. p. 361 Idolatry practiced secretly in
all Iosiahs days. p. 361 The remnant of Baall, with the Chemarims and those
who swear by the Lord and Malcom still remaining in his days. p. 361 Idolaters
compared to shameless strumpets sending for their lovers, viz. Priests to
teach them the worship of their Idols. p. 362 The Rulers fell to most horrible
Idolatry in secret, hard before the Captivity, as the Lord shows Ezekiel. p.
362 The outward form of Gods religion may seem to have continued even unto
their very last desolation, without any public Idolatry. p. 362 A public
fast proclaimed by Iehoiakim hard before the Captivity, but not performed as
it ought. p. 363 Vengeance denounced for this sin of Idolatry, To cause them
to run into the holes to hide them and to curse their Gods. p. 363 The Lord
threatens to raise their lovers against them, who should use them as strumpets
for this, and cause their fornications to cease. p. 364 To plague them from
Egypt and Babylon. p. 364 The Covenant ours as well as theirs. p. 364 The Lord
as much detests Idolatry now as then. p. 364 The Lord has raised up sundry
of his worthy servants to destroy Idolatry as well with us as with them. p.
365 The Lord may complain of us herein as much as upon Judah. p. 365 In this
sin we seem far to exceed them in the days of Josiah. p. 366, 367 Yet the
vengeance came on them presently after the death of Josiah, and principally for
this sin amongst others. p. 366 Certain points to be seriously thought of by
all the favorers of Popery amongst us, and by all who stand in suspense. p.
367 1. The occasion and manner of casting Popery out of our land, p. 367 2.
The blood of so many learned and most holy Martyrs, as Cranmer, etc. witnessing
against it. p. 367 Answer concerning their pretended Martyrs. p. 369 3. So many
worthy Preachers in each part of our land convincing all ever since then. p.
369 4. So many learned writers unanswerable confuting it and every piece of it.
p. 369 5. The discovery of their Index Expurgatorius for their wicked dealing
against the Gospel, and for upholding Popery. p. 370 6. So many discoveries
of their unnatural cruelties, the fruits of their religion, and for the
supporting thereof. p. 370 The chief of them made trumpetters of the
abomination of their religion. p. 370 Our Saviors argument most strong against
that religion, to prove it to be a principal religion of Satan under a show
of holiness, especially the Iesuited Papists religion. p. 371 7. Their
religion teaches these things, witness those evidences which follow in the
end of this Abomination, viz. p. 371
Abomination 32.
This alone sufficient to cause all not utterly given up to fly out of
Babylon. p. 372 8. Miraculous deliverances and preservations of our Princes,
religion, and us all, at the Spanish invasion, the death of Queen Elizabeth,
and so wonderfully bringing in the Lords Anointed amongst us, and at the
gunpowder treason. p. 372 9. The wonderful bringing the Gospel again after
Queen Mary, with the admirable preservation of the Lady Elizabeth. p. 372 10.
The wonderful continuance of the Gospel since, notwithstanding so innumerable
stratagems against it. p. 372 These as infallible arguments of Gods favor and
love toward us, as theirs were toward Judea, and ought as much to knit our
hearts to the Lord and his truth, and to a detestation of that bloody
Religion. p. 373 Our happiness if we have hearts to meditate of these things.
p. 373, 374 To think what it is to take the mark of the Beast, chiefly after
these convictions. p. 373 11. The relenting of most hearts for the present, in
sundry discoveries of their wickedness. p. 373 12. Exhortation to think of
these things, and to compare our way of life with theirs, whether is more
equal, and whether is more agreeable to the word of the Lord. p. 374 To read
the French massacre, and the Spanish Inquisition. p. 375 What they long for who
seek to bring in Popery again. p. 375 Answer to the vain persuasion of our
professed Papists, concerning their own safety, if God should leave us into
the hand of the enemy. p. 375 All the rich should be made Hugonotes as in
Paris, at the French massacre. p. 375 What they may look for, who look to be
enriched by such a day. p. 375 Warning to all, who foreseeing these evils, do
not their uttermost endeavors to turn them away. p. 376 God speaks to each as
Mordecay to Hester. p. 376 Three necessary questions. 1. How so many have and
do daily fall to Popery notwithstanding all these things. 2. How to be
resolved of the truth. 3. How to be kept from backesliding from the truth. p.
376 For answer to the first, to consider, 1. Who they have been that have
fallen. p. 377 2. Reasons why such have and do so fall in Gods justice. p. 378
All are contemners of the truth, who never so received the love of it, as by
all holy means to search the knowledge of it and to obey it. p. 379 The
reasons why some of Gods dear servants have and may fall for a time. p. 381
God may thus leave up his own for a time, but he will fetch them again at
least by strong hand, if they be his elect indeed. p. 382 Answer to the second
question, viz. How those who stand in doubt, may be resolved which is the
Religion of the Lord. p. 382 Answer to the third Question, viz. How to be kept
from declining to Popery, and from falling from the Lord. p. 385 For those
with whom no other means can prevail to cause them to be afraid of Popery:
First, to consider as before Christ of the former reasons. p. 385 2. To ponder
our Saviors reason against the malicious jews, John 8. 44. to prove they were
of the devil: and so one reason against Popery fetched directly from it. p.
385, 386 A Syllogism demonstrating plainly, that Popery, especially the
Iesuited Papists Religion is in a special manner of the devil, teaching lying
and murder for the supporting of it. p. 386 Proof of the Proposition. p. 386
Proof of the Assumption, That Popery teaches lying and murdering for the
supporting and advancing of it. p. 386 Helps and preservatives which God has
provided for those who would be kept from Popery, the scourge that follows
the contempt of the Gospel. As p. 387 1. Notable confutations of Popery to
keep us. p. 388 2. Notable discoveries of the bloody cruelties and vileness
of Popery, and contrarily, The perpetual witnesses of the truth which we
profess. p. 388. 3. Special helps for sanctification, whereby to be kept
from declining from God, and so from this scourge. p. 389 4. Helps for prayer,
because we cannot be kept except we pray; nor stand in these evil days
without the special sustaining hand of our God. p. 390 5. Helps for fasting
to humble us and to make our prayers more powerful and effectual that we may
be kept. p. 390
Abomination 33.
Atheism of Judah, angring the Lord to the uttermost, and bringing the
Captivity. p. 390 The day of vengeance wished by desperate scoffing Atheists.
p. 391 What a day that will be when it comes. p. 392 Atheists scoffing at the
threatenings of the Prophets. p. 392 This sin cannot be purged till they die.
p. 392 All were at a covenant with death and hell. p. 392 Atheists of all
others most timorous when the vengeance comes. p. 393
Abomination 34.
Divisions of Judah, angring the Lord, and bringing the Captivity. p. 394
Their divisions flowing from all their abominations, and chiefly from the
Apostasy so generally. p. 394 All were given to covetousness and spreading
nets. p. 395 No man could trust other. p. 395 The greater spoiling the poorer.
p. 395 All against the true Prophets, and against all that feared the Lord, and
why. p. 395 Their own familiars waiting to have matter against them. p. 396
Not one left with Gods faithful servants to be seen to stand for them. p. 396
The Church had none to look to but to the Lord. p. 397 The number of the godly
exceeding small at that time amongst them, as the grapes after the vintage. p.
397 How the Church comforts her self against the insulting of the enemy. p.
397 A question answered, viz. In so many divisions to whom to join. p 398,
399. Application to our own souls concerning our divisions, and the rest of
the heads herein. p. 399
CHAP. XII.
The means whereby the Lord had striven with them, to bring them to
repentance, that he might spare them and how in stead of repenting, their sin
was increased by them all. p. 400 Means by calling them by his word, and how
he had thereby stri^^n with them in all sorts. p. 401, 402 How he had called
them by the continual voice of his mercies. p. 402 How he had called them by
the voice of his rods both bodily and spiritual. p. 403 The Lord weary with
smiting, enforced to give them up to their own hearts lust, and to this
induration. p. 404 The highest step of their induration, that they were given
over to scoff at the Lords warnings, whereby he called them to repentance. p.
405 This sin could not be purged. p. 405 Some causes of their induration, and
why they profited not by all the means which the Lord used. p. 406 Why the
Lord would spare them no longer, after he had used all these means to reclaim
them. p. 407 Application to our selves. p. 408
CHAP. XIII.
The severitie of the Lords vengeance when no other means could serve. p. 410
The Lamentations of Jeremy written to set out this misery. p. 411 Their
carnal confidence in Josiah seems one cause to have provoked the Lord to
take him away; after whose death began their miseries immediately. p. 412 The
woeful miseries which at that time they endured. As p. 412 1. Famine in the
most lamentable kinds. p. 412 2. Destruction by the sword. p. 413 3. The
desolations of the Temple. p. 414 4. The final desolation that came upon them.
p. 414 5. The shame cast upon the Lord and his people. p. 414 6. The people
that escaped carried captives. p. 415 The miseries of their Captivity. p. 415
7. In their Captivity the Church acknowledges all this justly come upon her
for rebelling against the word of the Lord. p. 415 Despising Gods word, and
misusing his messengers, caused that (...) could be no more remedy. p. 416
Application why the Lord should not execute as heavy a judgment upon us, as
on Judah. p. 416 How near we have been unto it, and how often. p. 416 The
mourning of the Lord for his people before this execution. p. 417 The Lords
expostulation after a sort mourning over us, for our foolish impenitency and
unkindnesse. p. 417 The changing of our danger into such a joyful day. p. 419
Our unthankefulnesse in forgetting our wonderful deliverances and mercies. p.
420 The Lords expostulation further urged bemoaning our unkindnesse and
wilfulness. p. 421 Whether the Lord may not justly thus speak unto us,
especially having so many ready to receive our most bloody enemies into our
bosoms. p. 421, 422, 424 Our answer to the Lords expostulation taken away. p.
424 Application to all notorious sinners, who are the men that hale on the
vengeance of the Lord. p. 425 Warning to all obstinate sinners howsoever the
Lord deal with us at the cries of his servants. p. 427 Their miserable state
at death, most at Christ's appearing. p. 427 How each may come to the certain
knowledge of the truth hereof, viz. by inquiring of his own heart awaked. p.
428
CHAP. XIIII.
How Gods faithful servants are wont to be affected seeing his anger kindled
against his people. p. 430 How they are wont in such cases to use all means to
pacify his Majesty. p. 431 The means which they have been wont to use to
this end. p. 431 1. Gods faithful servants have been wont to entreat the Lord
in secret, to pacify him thereby toward his people. p. 433 2. They have been
wont to forewarne Gods people of their sins, and his vengeance coming on
them for the same. p. 434 3. Gods servants have been wont to direct his people
to the means whereby he may be pacified. p. 436 The principal means public
humiliations. p. 436. Examples hereof. p. 436, etc. The example of Iehosophat
is to be beholden of all religious rulers, who would see the like experience of
the Lords presence and mercy toward them, and therefore set down at large.
p. 438 The way to overthrow and daunt the enemies of the Church. p. 439 Our
own practice and experience. p. 441 Reason hereof. All having provoked the
Lord, all must seek to pacify him by humbling themselves. p. 442 The office
of forewarning and calling to fasting belongs to Gods Ministers. p. 443, 446
The supreme Magistrates to appoint public fasts in such cases, and to see them
practiced by all, and give ensample hereof. p. 443 The Ministers to call upon
the Magistrate to this end, and to warn all the people. p. 444 Otherwise, the
blood of every soul must be required at their hands. p. 444 A general
president for all posterity. p. 446 The Lord then calls to fasting when his
vengeance is coming for the abominations increased. p 446 2. Gods Ministers
are to labor that the humiliation of his people may be unfeigned and
availeable; and to set before their faces the means hereof. p. 447 Fasts
performed hypocritically, more increase the vengeance. p. 447 Nature of
hypocritical fasting. p. 447 The outward humiliation avails nothing without
the inward, and without the other parts of a true fast. p. 448 The true
humiliation must be both outward and inward. p. 448 The outward humiliation,
and wherein it is. p. 448, 449 Exercises of Religion to be adjoined to the
outward humiliation. p. 449 The public humiliation must be in a great
assembly. p. 450 The people are to be warned hereof, and called on to prepare
themselves p. 450 Means to be used in these assemblies for working sound
humiliation with faith and repentance. p. 450, 451 The inward humiliation, and
wherein it is. p. 452 Time of the continuance of such solemn humiliations. p.
453 Things to be done after our humiliation, as reforming all the abominati^ns.
p. 454 The fruit and happy success of such humiliations. p. 455 Particular
experiences of the power and fruit of such like humil^ations in Gods servants
privately. 456 If God be so easily entreated sometimes by one of his poor
servants only, how much more at the cries of so many of his children at once.
p. 457 Till the time that the means be used for appeasing Gods Majesty, we
can never have any comfortable hope of escaping a more terrible judgment. p.
457 Public humiliations failing, Gods messengers are to stir up his own
servants to seek him privately. p. 457 What manner of men they are who must be
called on to seek God privately, when the public means fail, viz. meek
ones, and who have wrought his judgments. p. 458 These in all ages have been
the only men in favor, and preservers of the rest. p. 458 In such desperate
cas^s all are to entreat the meek ones to cry unto the Lord for them. p 459
The Lord seeks such to stand in the breach, and when he finds none, viz. very
few in respect of that they ought, then comes the vengeance. p. 459 The godly
in such times must labor to be more righteous, and so more meek, that their
prayers may more prevail, and so must seek the Lord privately, as Moses,
Nehemiah, and Daniel. p. 459, 460 The manner h^w to importune the Lord. p. 460
The godly shall thus help either to pacify the Lord for all the people, or be
hid themselves. p. 461 The cry of the Prophet Zephany to the faithful is ever
to sound in all our ears when all other means fail. p. 461, 462 1. Complaint
of the weak Christian for his unabilitie, thus to seek the Lord privat^ly:
answered. p. 462 To follow the example of Daniel in our private fasts. p. 462
We are to be provoked to this duty by these holy men, viz. Daniel, Neh^mi^^^,
etc. the acceptance and success which God gave them. p. 463 The second
complaint of the weak Christian of unabilitie to confess our sins, and beg
the things which concern our peace, answered; and so how to seek God thus
privately. p. 464 The fruit and blessing of this labor. p. 466 Gods messengers
are not only to be careful to save and pull a people from Gods wrath, but also
to keep them from coming under it again. p. 468 The means to preserve a
people from backesliding, and to keep them ever under Gods favor. p. 469 The
causes of the evils being removed, so will also the evils flowing from them. p.
470 The fountains of obedience and grace to be heedfully looked to, to be kept
pure. p. 471 The happy estate of a people, living under a holy Ministry,
countenanced by a godly Magistracy, and contrarily, the miserable estate of
people destitute thereof. p. 471 Experience of both amongst our selves. p. 473
The schools of good learning to be regarded above all things for a perpetual
supply and succession of such Magistrates and Ministers. p. 473 The best
means of learning to be sought out, established, and strictly put in practice
in them. p. 474 A last duty of the faithful messengers of God to comfort and
confirm the hearts of all the godly living amongst the wicked in such times.
p. 474 The Prophets never to leave importuning the Lord, all other means and
hopes failing. p. 475 Application to all who succeed in the place of the
Prophets, to try whether we find at this day the same affections in us which
they had. p. 475, 476 Our sins as great as theirs all circumstances
considered, and Gods anger accordingly. p. 475 Our wonted humiliations in
pestilence, dearth, and other signs of Gods anger. p. 476 What we have done
lately for our so many and (...) of Gods anger kindled against us. p. 477 Why
God has so tried many of his faith full servants by (...) and the like
extremities and temptations. p. 477, 478 The doleful harvest, An. 1609. p. 478
The Lords complaint and threatening against us for our sens^esnesse and not
harkening to his call, neither by his word, judgments, nor mercies. p. 481 If
God by such things called Judah to fasting and prayer, then he has and does so
to us. p. 481 He needs no other witnesses but our own consciences. p. 482
CHAP. XV.
The sin of Gods people may be so great, that he will not spare them, no not
at the prayers of his dearest servants, though their presence and prayers may
wonderfully prevail, p. 484, 485, etc. Quest. Whether the Lord will not ever
spare his people upon a general humiliation and repentance rightly performed
answered. p. 486, 487 How public fasts may be made uneffectuall to save, viz.
when men turn not from their evil way, or are not soundly humbled. p 488 We
have no one example to the contrary in Gods book, but all witnessing
hereunto, that Gods people humbling themselves and turning from their sins,
God will turn from his fierce wrath. p. 489 The Lord proclaims his mercy
herein to all the world. p. 489 The servants of God humbling themselves though
severally and at the same time, may much prevail, as in the days of Hester.
p. 490 If one Moses may do so much, much more so many. p. 490 Objection
answered concerning the fear of the Lords decree come forth, and then too late
to seek. p. 490 So long as the Lord gives a people hearts to use the right
means to pacify him, so long there is great hope that he will be appeased. p.
491 Objection answered concerning David who feels the temporal scourges,
notwithstanding his unfeigned repentance. p. 491 The Lord has been wont to
inflict some lesser judgment when the humiliation has not been unfeigned,
though he have saved his people from the greater, and why. p. 492 When the time
is that the Lord will not spare his people any longer, no not at the private
prayers of his dearest servants. p. 493 Three principal signs hereof. 1. When
a land is full of blood. 2. When it is full of declining and perverseness. 3.
When it is overgone with Atheism. p. 494 For the first, what that blood was
whereby their land was so d^filed that God would not spare them. p. 494, etc.
The second maine sin for which God would not spare them; their general all
perverseness and defection increased without hope of returning. p. 499 Neither
word, judgments, nor mercies would do them any more good. p. 500 There was
also amongst them a mavelous corruption of judgment, both in misjudging of
the good ways of God, and also in wresting of judgment. p. 500 Perverseness
in judgment cause of their perverseness in manners. p. 501 Their last and
principal sin a senseless Atheism growing upon all, that they did not
acknowledge God in his judgments as they had been wont. p. 501 Reasons why
the Lord cannot spare when these sins come to this height as theirs were. p.
502 Application to our selves, whether we be come to this height of sin, and
have these tokens thereof. p. 504 God has manifested his love as much to our
nation as to any other, and that he is most unwilling thiu to enter into
judgment with us. p. 504, 505 He spread^th out to us both his white and his
black tent together. p. 50^ To try what we can answer the Lord if he charge
these things on us, as first that our land is full of blood. p. 505 The cry of
violence and oppression goes up to heaven for the cruelty of Landlords,
Usurers, and men void of commiseration. p. 506 The like cry amongst us as was
in the days of Nehemiah. p. 506 The cry of the poor in dearths. p. 507 The
holy law of God for the care to be had for all the poor of the land. p. 509 We
must sometime lend, looking for nothing again. p. 509 How the Lord will bless
such a care for the poor; and contrarily. p. 510 Vumercifulnesse cries loud
for vengeance, and will bring judgment without mercy. p. 510 The general cry
of the poor that they and theirs must be brought to perpetual beggary. p. 511
The husbandman cannot pay his rent but by selling his corn at high prizes, and
according to the same must usually all other commodities be, that the poor
must live in misery. p. 512 What we are growing to hereby. p. 512 The cause of
all our unmercifulness and spoiling commonly, viz. to maintain those sins
of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16. 49. p. 513 Our land defiled with the blood of Gods
servants in Queen Mary's days. p. 513 Deadly malice against all who make
conscience to walk in the ways of God, by all those who have chosen to live
in their own evil ways. p. 514 The advice that a man's wisest friends will
give, to any noted for prof^ssion, rather to put up all wrongs, then in most
places to seek redress. p. 515 Our land full of the blood of souls. p. 515
What our state must needs be herein through the multitude of ignorant and
unconscionable Ministers. p. 516 Multitudes destroyed by evil ensamples, and
through the general neglect of superiors for the souls committed to them. p.
517 Application of the second cause why the Lord could not spare them, viz.
That they fell away more and more. p. 517 The word in many places become
unfruitful and without power. p. 518. Gods mercies have made us so insolent,
as to say we will not hear. p. 518 Gods judgments have made us to fall away
more and more, especially since our deliverance from our so long feared day. p.
518 Pestilence, famine, and wild beasts next forerunners of the sword. p. 519
All Gods strokes so multiplied to make us to seek him, have made us more
senseless, and to walk more stubbornly against him. p. 520 This of all other a
most infallible for erunner of vengeance, when men wax uncurably worse by
smiting. p. 520 The manner of the Lords proceeding in judgment against Israel,
before her Captivity, is recorded for a president to us. p. 520 Application to
our selves of Gods manner of proceeding with us in judgments. p. 521 We almost
overthrown as Sodom, being as a firebr and plucked out of the burning. p. 521
God threatens us with whatsoever he has denounced, seeing we amend not. p.
522 God threatens to smite us seven times more, to bring one plague in the end
seven times greater then any of the former, unless we repent. p. 522 God
having showed such tokens of his love and compassion toward us will be
magnified accordingly. p. 522 The third sign of Gods anger, and for which he
threatens he cannot spare, to wit, Atheism, and how it declares it self
openly amongst us. p. 523 If we had been rightly persuaded that all our
judgments had been sent by the Lord for our sin, we had repented long ago
in sackcloth and ashes. p. 523 Our timorousness to manifest our love to the
Lord, and our hatred of sin. p. 524 Our general leaving off to mourn for
all our sins and tokens of Gods wrath, or to tremble before him. p. 524
Whence come these men^^^ned but from some spice of close Atheism, that we
think at least, that God is not so angry against sin or so regards it. p.
524 Cause of our drowsy professing in many, for that iniquity has ^^gotten
the upper hand, that it seems unpossible that ever piety should look up
again, therefore best to frame our selves to the time. p. 525
CHAP. XVI.
What brings true boldness to appear before the Lord. p. 526 The assurance
and safety of the mourners, before the destruction come, being sure marked by
our Savior, repeated again for our further comfort. p. 526 To be put in mind
ever to bear his mark in our foreheads; that so we may always have boldness
before him. p. 527 The boldness of the marking Angel appearing again before
the Lord, and giving up his Commission. p. 527 This only can bring boldness to
appear before the Lord, when we can say, Lord I have done as thou have
commanded me. p. 528 Our obedience is chiefly in our willingness and unfeigned
endeavor, mourning for our wants, and this does our God accept. p. 528 Two
notable ensamples of boldness hereupon, to appear before the Lord. p. 529,
530 Reasons why they only who have done as the Lord has commanded can be bold
to appear before him. p. 531 When all nations shall tremble and shrike, they
alone shall lift up their heads for joy, because of that their happiest day. p.
532 The contrary horror of all who have not done as the Lord has commanded
them, whenever their consciences shall be truly awaked, more specially at
death, most at the dreadful judgment. p. 532, 533 Reasons of their horror.
p. 533 State of them then, who have neglected their callings, and that which
has been commanded them. p. 534 How fearful the condition of all those men
is who have not gained with their talents, nor increased them, and more of
those who have used them against the Lord, and for Satan. p. 534 Their case of
all other most fearful to whom most has been committed. p. 535 How their
horror shall be increased. p. 535 No impenitent sinner can possibly look to
stand before the Lord. p. 535 Application to all who have neglected to do as
the Lord has commanded them. p. 536 Application to the chief to put them in
remembrance, as their answer must be the greatest for their place and charge.
p. 536 The Magistrates Commission, and what the Lord will call for at his
hards. p. 537 The Judges commission. p. 538 The Ministers commission. p. 538
The account of each Governor of a family for every soul within his gates. p.
539 The account of every one to whom he has committed any talent. p. 539 How
the Lord will reply to all sorts beginning to excuse themselves, until their
mouths be stopped. p. 540 How he will reply to all for employing their talents
by trying their advantage. p. 542 Objection of the weak Christian, viz. who
can be able to appear before the Lord? p. 543 Every one who has unfainedly
striven hereunto, shall be able to stand before the Lord, and reasons of it. p.
544 Object. 2. The cry of all sorts of sinners whose consciences shall be
awaked when they shall bethink themselves of this appearing. p. 545 The Lords
answer to all such. p. 545 What the Lord commands the poor sinner in the first
place. p. 546 The endeavor of Satan to drive all such poor sinners to
endless despair. p. 547 How to comfort the poor humbled sinner against
Satan's assaults and temptations. p. 547 The second terror of Satan, that the
time of mercy is past. p. 549 The time is never too late whilst the Lord calls
us to repent, if we can obey. p. 549 General comfort; never repentant sinner
but found mercy. p. 550 The Lord still stretches out his hands to all to come
to him. p. 550 The terrible voice of the Lord to all despisers of mercy now
offered. p. 551 The Lord will one day bring all that belong unto him, to say,
Lord I will do as thou command; at least he will bring them by strong hand.
p. 552 God purposes their destruction whom he suffers to go on perpetually
in their impenitencie. p. 553 Application to us all in general, what security
we have to escape the vengeance so long threatened from Babylon, until we do
as God commands. p. 553 The Lords reply to us if we answer that we have
repented and therefore shall have peace. p. 554, 555 God threatens us as
sensibly from Rome as he did them from Babylon. p. 556 Conclusion of all, how
to try the certainty hereof, and when we may have security and boldness. p.
557 Comfort to all the meek who can say that they have truly endeavored to do
as the Lord has commanded them: These only have the promises. p. 557 The Lord
has given most comfortable answers against each fear of his servants in such
cases. p. 558 Against the fear of being left into the enemies hand. p. 558 The
second fear for the wrongs and provocations of the enemies, answered. p. 559
Our third fear, for that we are but poor worms, and nothing in regard of our
enemies which are the mighty men of the earth. p. 560 The fourth fear of Gods
people, for the miseries we may come into in the mean time amongst our
enemies, answered. p. 561 A fifth answer of the Lord against the fear of want
of necessary comforts. p. 562 A sixth comfort against fear of fainting in the
long continuance of the troubles of the Church. p. 563 The seventh, the Lords
answer to the faithful soul mourning for fear of the dangers of the Church.
p. 565 What every faithful servant of God should do for the Church and this
nation, that would never see (...) feel their miseries* p. 565 All to hearken
what the Lord calls and cries for at our hands, moaning our estate. p. 566
What he will do for us, and against our enemies, if we will yet hearken unto
him. p. 567 A holy prayer according to the Contents of the book. p. 569
TO ALL ESTATES AND DEGREES, WHO truly tender their own Souls, the Church of
God, and their native COUNTRY.
IT is now many years (Christian Reader) since by reading those holy Prophets
which lived next before the Captivity of Judah, Occasion of this watch, fear
of Gods judgments lying upon us.
who denounced the same to be ready to come upon Gods people for their sins,
and by considering and comparing the same with the times wherein we live, I
have ever feared the life plague or a heavier to be hanging over this our
sinful Nation. This fear has not bin without just cause, as eu^nts have
declared.
Neither have I feared without just cause: for how near indeed such a
judgment has bin unto us, and how the same threatenings have bin ready to be
verified upon us, Our later d^ngers and deliverances still the greatest.
the world is witness, even all they who have but only heard the report of
our dangers, and of our wonderful and even miraculous deliverances. And ever
the later perils and preseruations have bin the more wonderful; The duty of
all Gods faithful Ministers to be ever giving warning.
as that one of the Powder furnace was above all that ever former age heard of.
In the due meditation and regard whereof, I have taken it to be my duty, and
of all the faithful Ministers of Christ, to follow the example of Noah, and of
all those faithful Prophets, (...). 3. 17, 18. and 18. 30.
in giving warning aforehand, (keeping within the limits and compass of our
calling) to help to open the eyes of all, to foresee, Iam. 2. 14.
and to cause all to tremble for the anger of the Lord, also to contend with
all our power to turn every soul from his evil way: Ior. 23. 22.
that so his wrath may be appeased, Iam 4 17. and 5. 19, 20.
and we delivered from the dreadful execution of his heauiest vengeance. 2
Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11.
Hereupon in my former fear amongst other causes I was chiefly emboldned (and
that not long before the time of that bloody Powder Treason, A chief occasion
of the first part of this watch, as the title of it declares.
as the Lord had so directed it) to endeavor to set down truly, and after to
publish to all, the first part of this watch, viz: The rule of life, containing
the covenant which we have all entered into with our God. To the end to help to
keep all his people from the general declining from that his blessed covenant
to profanesse and iniquity, and from the outrageous wickedness of the rest,
that we also might all learn to watch to be preserved in the evil day. So of
the second part, The Rule of Prayer, to stir us all up to watching and prayer,
as our sins and dangers still increased.
And since then likewise the second part of the same watch, viz: The rule of
prayer, to awaken us the better, and to stir up all the Lords faithful
servants the more speedily and instantly to betake our selves wholly to
watching and prayer, not only to be accounted worthy to escape the evils
approaching, but also that each of us may still help to preserve the Island;
like as our most compassionate Father has in the riches of his mercy
vouchsafed to accept us until this day. The time of y^ coming forth of the
second part.
And this likewise he in his wisdom directed to come forth at the very
instant, yea in the midst of the last apparent danger, which we in our parts
were in, The dreadfulnesse of those tunes to many, howsoeuernow forgotten.
for the insurrection about enclosures: which howsoever it might seem nothing
or small to them who dwelt far from it; yet to us who expected the approaching
of the rebels every hour, and heard how the hearts of the people were
generally bent, it was no less terrible than any of the former, but so much
more fearful, the nearer it was. Now therefore in the third place: The cause
of this third part, our sins increasing.
forasmuch as all men may behold all kind of wickedness and impiety still
increasing fearfully without hope of redress, so that unless we will put out
our own eyes, we must see the judgment of God hasting faster upon us, and
being at the very door, I have taken it my bounden duty, and my best service
that I could do and possibly perform, to his heavenly Majesty, his Church,
and my Country, to add this third part: to the end to set before the faces of
every one of us, the heynousnesse of our sins in every degree, and so the
equity of the Lords proceeding against us: that we may all be enforced to
justify his Majesty, though he come to execute whatsoever he has so often
threatened, when no kind of forewarning can do us any good. And also to try if
yet at length he will vouchsafe to recall us again to his covenant, and put
new life into us, to meet him falling upon our faces in fasting and prayer, to
pacify his wrath, and that each of us may begin to put that in practice which
was intended and sought in the two former parts, that is, to watch and pray
continually, not in words any longer, but in deed and truth; for the
preservation and lasting welfare of us and our posterity.

That the heauiest judgment must needs be feared to be so much the nearer, The
heauiest judgment justly feared to be hard at y^ doors.
as the anger of the most High is more kindled against us, no man can doubt:
and that his wrath is incensed to the uttermost, is most apparent to all, whose
eyes he has opened, or who do but believe his heavenly word: for that in
stead of having any of our grievous abominations (which we may behold set
before our faces in the Treatise following, even by the Prophets themselves,
and forwhich he has so often threatened us,) yet unfeignedly repented of, we
have indeed increased them many times more. All of us having solemnly entered
into covenant with our God; have caused him to threaten to take away his covenant
by our transgression.
The covenant of our God, which the whole land professes, and each of us in our
Baptism have solemnly entered into, we have most grievously transgressed. And
this many of us have done with so high a hand, as that we have caused that his
heavenly Gospel to be blasphemed, enforcing him to threaten to take his
covenant, with all his blessings from us: yea, to leave us to be made a prey
and a spoil unto our enemies, which thirst after our blood continually. This
confessed by all Anno 1588.
This all confessed, when they so despightfully and proudly came against us, as
being ready to swallow us up quick, and each of us then acknowledged, that his
wrath was most justly kindled against us for the same: so as if he should then
have cast us off utterly, for ever being his people, or a nation any more, that
yet we had most righteously deserved it. And in all our dangers Anno 1602. 1603.
This we have in like manner many a time since acknowledged, in all our dangers
and plagues which we have had upon us plague after plague, as those ten plagues
of Egypt. More especially in the grievous dearths, and chiefly in that most
poisoned plague of pestilence, as the sundry confessions of sins, then made
and still extant, do and shall ever bear witness. But above all other times,
when we were all ready to be consumed in the hot fiery furnace at once: yea
this we ordinarily and daily every one confessed, whilst we lived in imminent
danger every hour, before the Lord so miracul^^sly and graciously set up his
Anointed over us. (...) every one then.
Every one then could say, Our sins are so ^heynous, as that we must needs
have some terrible vengeance without speedy repentance. This wrath therefore
we must needs acknowledge to be far greater now than ever heretofore: Gods
wrath must needs be greater now than ever before.
not only for that in stead of repenting, our sins are so grown up in every
kind, but also because we are now so generally, and so much further off from
repentance, or any purpose of amendment, yea of so much as of any sense of our
sins, or fear of any judgment to be toward us for the same, than ever we
were in former time, notwithstanding all the means which he has so long used
to awaken us, This can be no way appeased, but by taking away our sins the
cause of it, and turning again to his Covenant.
and to bring us to repentance. How then can this fire of the Lords anger be
ever quenched, we delivered from the violence thereof, that we should not be
consumed of it, but only by seeking out the principal causes of it, to wit,
our maine transgressions against the covenant of our God, by which he has bin
so provoked, and also by confessing and acknowledging them, and turning back
jointly to the humble obedience of that his most holy Covenant again: Israel
cannot stand before their enemies, Examples.
until Achans sacrilege be found out and punished; Josh. 7. 10.
neither can the dearth be stayed in the days of David, 2 S^m. 21. 1. 14. 24.
until the causes of it be found out, and the Lord pacified by taking away the
iniquity. Nor yet can the storm upon the Seas be quieted, Ion^ 1. 15.
so long as Jonah lies asleep in his sin. How much loss now, when so many
Achan^ be in every corner, and Jonah asleep every where in the eyes of all? As
it is with a particular man, As it is for ^ particular man, so for a whole
Nation.
so is it with a whole Nation. That like as there must be first a searching out
of his sin, with confession of it, and turning again unto the Lord, before
his anger can be appeased, so must it be for a whole Nation (so far as we can
justly conceive) before any sound assurance can be given that his wrath is
turned away. This seems every where most evident through all the book of God.

How Popery is grown up again, The increase of Pope^ie and all profanenosse,
notorious to all.
the late proclamation for preventing it, and the fury of that bloody
Religion, and for the preservation of his Royal Majesty, and his Seed, set
forth upon the occasion of the cruel murder of the French King, does
sufficiently witness. And likewise the general urging the Oath of Allegiance
enforced thereupon: besides so many lamentable experiments, and our ouer-iust
fears for their trecheries expected each hour. How Atheism also, with all
kind of outrageous iniquity, and scorning at all true piety, do ouerflow in
every place, above all former times, Some sins heinous heretofore, now through
custom and commonnesse, become as no sins.
no man can deny. Indeed some sins have bin odious heretofore, and
especially when they began first to spring up, and were cried out of, as which
all the godly feared, that they would presently bring the vengeance of God upon
us all, which now through long custom and commonnesse are made no sins: as
that beastly valor of pouring down wine and strong drink, and our glorying
in it; pride with all monstrous excess therein, oppression, deriding and
hating all true godliness, and the power of religion. Though all of them, and
many like, are in a higher degree in the Land, and practiced with a far
higher hand now, No sin truly repented of.
than ever heretofore. Or if any one abomination be taken away and gone, who
can say that it has bin generally repented of* or left of any conscience, o^
for fear of the Lord and awe of his word? And therefore if he be the same holy
God, still hating sin as much as ever he did, and who will never clear the
guilty, how should it be but (though our own hearts, and all the world do
slatter us, telling us that we shall have peace) yet as our sins are (...)
increased and our abominations gone up to heaven, As our sins are m^ltiplied,
so his wrath.
so his wrath and ^^ousie must needs smoke against us, (...) 34 7.
and his curses and plagues be multiplied upon us until he has put out our
name from under heaven; De^. 18. 19, 20.
unless we meet him speedily and appease his wrath by our humble and unfeigned
turning unto him. But these crying sins can never be taken away, The cr^ing
sins cannot be taken away, unless y^ causes of them be first repented of.
unless also even the other sins of the Land be likewise repented of. I
mean those from which these proceed, and for which men are so generally given
up unto these monstrous iniquities. For these outrageous enormities are the
heauiest punishments of other sins, and ordinarily the immediate forerunners
of the greatest temporal judgment. We cannot repent until we know both the
maine prouocations, and each our own sins, with the iudg^ments belonging to
them.
Neither can we ever have any assurance to be preserved from that extremest
vengeance, until we return more generally in our hearts, from all our evil
ways unto the Conenant of our God: neither yet ever repent nor turn from
them, unless we see both generally the most heinous prouocations of the Land
angring his Majesty, and each of us our own several sins particularly, with
his judgments belonging thereunto. Therefore since that our most pitiful
father has, God has ordained the discovery of our iniquity to turn away
our captivity.
in the riches of his endless compassion, ordained the discovery of the
iniquity, and of the certain approaching of his judgment to turn away the
vengeance, and that by turning his people from their evil way; and so he
complains of the Prophets, that they had not discovered their iniquity to
turn away their captivity, Ierem. 23. 22.
and says plainly of them, And his Prophets standing in his counsel to turn
us from our evil way.
That if they had stood in his counsel, and declared his words to his people,
they should have turned them from their evil ways, and from the wickedness
of their inventions. I have therefore as I say, taken this as my chiefest
service, This is y^ bounden duty of all his messengers and their chief
service.
that ever I could perform unto his heavenly Majesty, his Church and people
of this our Nation, even to help to search out our sin, by his holy word,
and to set our iniquities before our faces, with his most righteous judgments
due unto us for the same, and ready ever to break in upon us like the raging
seas, thereby to help amongst others to bring us to repentance. And the rather
for that, howsoever every one of us will acknowledge that we must first turn
away from our sins unto him, before he will turn to us from his fierce wrath,
and also that we must search and find out our iniquities, and see the danger
which we stand in for them, before we can turn^ from them, ^ yet long
experience has confirmed this, that we being lulled so fast asleep in our
security thorough our long prosperity, Because we will never search out our
sins of our selves.
can never search out our sin of our selves, unless they be set plainly
before our faces, and we awaked and rowzed by his most terrible denuntiations
for the same. If David himself such a worthy Prophet, David must have Nathan
to awaken him.
a man of a most tender conscience (as is evident by all his Psalms) and his
watering his bed with his tears) yet being become secure in his sin, 2 Samuel*
12.
must have Nathan to awake him, by setting his sin plainly before his face,
before that he can see the vileness of it to repent so of it as to find mercy
(though his sin was so gross and palpable, and Gods wrath lying upon him so
heavily in a spiritual manner, and also his vengeance ready to be executed in
most fearful sort.) How much more then have we need of some Boanarges,
sons of thunder, to awaken us, being a sinful and hard-hearted people and
dead in our iniquities. And if those to whom he has not only spoken once and
twice, but also smitten with sickness upon their beds, that their souls draw
to the grave, Job 33. 23.
and their life to the buriers, had need of a messenger, an interpreter, one
of a thousand to declare unto them their righteousness, Men smitten with
sickness drawing near to the buriers, must have an interpreter one of a
thousand.
to set their sins before their eyes, and wh^re they may find the true
righteousness, before they can say they have sinned, and repent to find mercy:
How much more we our selves? when most of us who have bin chief in this
provocation are in health and prosperity, and in no misfortune like other
folk, but rather fed in all pleasure, as against the day of slaughter. And to
conclude this point, They who had crucified our Savior.
we see how those three thousand, that crucified our Lord and Savior, could
not yet see their bloody sin, notwithstanding all which they had formerly heard
and seen in our Savior, and also the dreadful signs at his passion, until
that Peter particularly laid open their wickedness, applying it unto them
directly that they were the men, and then only are they pricked at their
hearts, and cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Now I say, if none of
these, no not they whose sin was so intolerable, and who had bin so
manifestly convinced, can search out their sins of themselves, to be so
soundly humbled, as to turn and seek to pacify the Lords wrath; how much
less hope is there of us, a nation so settled upon our lees, and so hardened by
our abusing the long patience and forbearance of our most tender father? who
having bin in so many dangers, and yet still delivered from them all, do think
that it shall be so with us ever, and that now there can be no more danger
toward us. We therefore had more need of many such as Nathan, We are they y^
have need of Nathan if ever any.
to set our sin most lively before our faces, and after to tell us directly,
That we are they with whom God is now angry, and that above all the people of
the earth, as he has known us above all other Nations, like as we shall see
in the sequel. Amos 3. ^.
We have need not of that one messenger, that one of a thousand alone, Of all
Gods faithful messengers.
but of all the faithful messengers and men of God, by their preaching, and
all holy means, to show us our unrighteousness: and of Peter, Of Peter.
to give us to know for a surety, That we are the men who have crucified the
Lord Jesus. Acts 2. 36.
Yea we have need of Jonah, Of Jonah.
to proclaim unto us, Yet forty days and England shall be destroyed for her
sin. Jonah 1. 2.
And finally, when preaching will not serve to awake us, we have need of
Jeremy or Baruck to write the sins of us all, Of Jeremy or Baruch to write
our sins, when all other means fail.
with the plagues which God has praepared and denounced against us for the
same; That every one even running by may read them, as written in capital
letters upon tables: to try if yet at length by this means, Ier. 36. 2. 3.
we may see the greatness of the anger that is kindled against us, and so repent
and return every one from his evil way, that he may forgive our iniquity and
sin, and deliver us from the imminent, and all like future plagues.

To this very end, We may here se^ our sins and judgment set before us in the
sins of Judah. by the Lord himself.
that we may behold the Lord himself discovering unto us our iniquities, and
so may have ^o more pretense nor cloakes for our sins, nor yet surmize the
least partiality, here we may all see (and that in the very sins of Judah, for
which God brought upon them that terrible captivity) the Lord himself and not
men, setting before our faces both our sins in general, and the
transgressions of each of us, as in particular, and how we have thereby deserved
such a judgment. These I have labored to set out more fully, and to apply
them more particularly unto us, because of the degrees acknowledged by all to
be necessary unto sound repentance in every one, who looks to get full
assurance of Gods mercy. These labored in more ^pecially, because of the
degrees in true repentance
As first a true search, sight and sense of his sin and Gods anger for it. 2.
Humble confession of it. 3. Grief of heart with detestation of the same. 4.
Crying for pardon. 5. A lowly offering our selves to his Maeiestie to w^lke
with him all our days. 6. A faithful performance of our vows. For this cause
have I bent my chief study to help somewhat hereunto, that all these parts
of true repentance may be wrought in us, and the same made unfeigned. And to
this end I have prepared first (as (...)) and sent before, The Covenant sent
before acknowledged by the learned.
the Covenant of our God with us, in the first part of this watch: that it
might be thoroughly tried, like as it has bin approved for many years, by
sundry learned professors of the Gospel, even by all to whom it has come, so
far forth as I know, to be that truth of God, wherein we all agree: and the
sum of that which the Lord requires of us generally, without which we cannot
be established, and of every one particularly, if we will be saved. The
branches of the Covenant, set here before our sins.
In this part I have likewise set the several branches of the same Covenant
before sundry of our heinous sins, that by comparing them together, we may
more lively behold our transgressions and provocations. Yea I have striuen
through the whole to help, That we may all see and turn to the Covenant of the
Lord.
that every one of us might return to that his blessed Covenant, for the
happiness of us all, and of every particular soul, and to save us both from
the temporal and eternal vengeance. 1. For y^ whole Nation.
And first in regard of the whole Nation, because we all stand continually in
danger of that anger of God to be powered out upon us, which had formerly almost
overwhelmed us all, and for ought we can imagine, must needs overtake us in the
end, unless we more generally repent and turn unto his Majesty. No policy
can secure us, but our more general turning.
No policy of man nor humane means can ever secure us from the fury of
Babylon, and that he should not suffer them to execute their malice upon us,
and leave them to be executioners of his plagues so often and so nearly
accomplished, Ier. 18. 7.
but this our more general turning. All that ever they have done or do intend
are nothing but the Lordsthreatnings, denouncing by them to pluck us up, to
root us out, and destroy us; as we shall see at large in this vision of
Ezechiel. All their malice and mischievous devises are the Lords denuntiations
against us.
They are only Gods axe, his soldiers, his executioners, though themselves
know not so much. It is true indeed, he may defer his plagues, or lessen
them, at the prayers of his faithful servants, as he has done many a day and
saved us in the imminent perils; Isai. 106, 15.
but there is nothing (so far as we can perceive out of the word of the Lord to
give us any security) that can cause him to repent of that great plague, From
which nothing can cause him to turn but our turning to him.
and destruction, which he seems to have denounced so plainly and directly
from Heaven against our Realm and Nation, so to turn it away, but only our
turning from our wickedness. We may all behold our pr^sent estate in the 18 of
Jeremy, Ier. 18. 5.
written as in great letters for every one to read, and that so plainly, as
none can pretend ignorance, but it must of necessity convince every conscience
in all the Land; for to us it is directed, both to us all in general, and to
every soul particularly. At the 5th verse of that Chapter, verse. 5.
first he sends Jeremy to the Potters house, that there he might see the
Potter break the pots in his hand at his pleasure. Then the word came unto the
Prophet at that very instant, saying,

O house of Israel, cannot I do with you, as this Potter, says the Lord?
Behold as the clay is in the Pottershand, so are ye in my hand, oh house of
Israel. And after he adds these words, verse. 7. I will speak sodeinly against
a Nation to pluck it up, and to root it out, and destroy it. verse. 8. But if
this Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I
will repent of the plague which I thought to bring upon them. verse. 9. And I
will speak sodeinly concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom, to build it
up, and to plant it. verse. 10. But if it do evil in my sight, and hear not my
voice, I will repent of the good which I thought to do for them. verse. 11.
Speak now therefore unto the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
saying, Thus says the Lord, Behold I prepare a plague for you, and purpose a
thing against you. Return now therefore every one from his evil way, and make
your ways and your works good.

To apply this to our selves: Application.
Did not the Lord show this unto us much more visibly than he did unto Jeremy;
Our destruction showed and accomplished in effect.
That we were all as the clay in his hand, that he had not only power to dash
us in pieces, but had in effect done it already; save that he did (as it were)
create and form us again of such a sudden, Our deliverance as a new creation.
that we did all wonder at it; and all Nations shall have cause to wonder to
the end of the world.

How many ways, How many ways, yea how sensibly and suddenly God has spoken
unto us may appear in this whole work.
yea how sensibly and suddenly God has spoken unto us all, (both proclayming
by most infallible tokens, that his anger is kindled against us to the
uttermost, and that he is ready to power out upon us the full viols of his
vengeance: and also on the other side declaring in all his long forbearance and
admirable d^liuerances, how unwilling he is to proceed to the execution, if
any other means might reclaim us) will evidently appear to every one, who
with any conscience or due consideration shall read that which follows in
this vision. Nothing can secure us so as to give us comfort, but turning to y^
Lords Covenant.
And for that other maine point, That nothing else can truly secure us from the
execution, so as to give us true comfort, but our turning to the Lords
Covenant; ask of all the book of God of all the places containing promises
and theeatnings to whole Nations; whether all the promises be not made unto our
turning and obedient walking in his Covenant: and all the threatenings after
this manner; Leuit. 26. 3, 23, 24.
That if we walk more stubbornely against him, he will increase his vengeance
accordingly, That all holy means are to be used thereto.
and plague us yet seven times more. So that all holy means are to be used to
help to recall us to the true obedience of that his holy Covenant, that each
may renew the oath of our obedience to Jesus Christ, for the happiness of the
whole and of every soul. Every soul who will not return must die.
For God will have us all to know, That whatsoever soul will not return to
his Covenant must dye; it must die eternally. Yea though we live not in a
wilful rejecting of all the Covenant, Ezec. 8. 10, 11.
but in any one abomination wittingly: on rary to the same; and much more doing
it presumptuously that is, both wittingly and willingly, being warned and
convinced thereof, as the word is most direct. Yea if we do not turn, Yea all
who seek not to c^use others to tu^ne.
and seek to cause others to turn, chiefly all those committed to our charge,
we must dye. Only that man is a just man, who does justice, and endeavors to
walk in all Gods statutes, Iam 2. 10.
and to deal truly, turning and seeking to cause others to turn, Gal. 2. 10.
that man only shall live. Never any soul shall have any assurance to escape
Gods vengeance, Number. 15. 30, 31.
or have true boldness to appear before the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.
but only such a man. Ezech. 18. 30.
Ask of the holy Scriptures, Ezech. 18. 9.
whether this be not the tenor of them all: Who it is who^ God accounts a just
man, which shall live.
whether any other be a living member of Christ, or have any part in his blood*
or in that redemption wrought by him.

But above all, All obstinate sinners help to draw down vengeance upon the
whole land, beside the destroying of their own souls.
this is yet more dreadful, that whosoever they be, that live in a wilful
breach of any part of the Covenant of God, and chiefly those who wallow in any
one of those abominations which brought this captivity of Judah, do not only
destroy their own souls, without unfeigned repentance, but also do help (so
much as one man's sin can do) to draw down the vengeance of God upon the
whole Land to the ruinating both of Church and Commonwealth that bred them.
Every of our blasphemers, drunkards, whoremongers, Idolaters, profane
Sabaoth-breakers, despisers of the word of the Lord, with all other notorious
sinners, have their hands therein. The Lord from heaven cries to us all to
turn, speaking,
Therefore the Lord from heaven speaks unto us all, and cries loud unto us to
turn unto him, that we may escape his vengeance, He has here in this vision
set such a glass before our faces, as wherein we may behold our selves most
lively, both our present and future estate, what he threatens to do unto us.
3. To his vineyard.
Oh tho^ the vineyard of the Lord, he shows unto thee that for thy
unfruitfulness he is about to make thee waste! You who are the fruitless
branches behold your condition, either you must bring forth fruit speedily, or
else be cut down and thrown into the everlasting fire. 2* To all drawing
near to God with lips alone.
You who draw near unto God with your lips in an outward profession, but your,
hearts are so far from him, that by your lines you give occ^^ to his enemies to
blaspheme his name; he shows you here the i^dgement that he has prepared for
you. 3. To oppressors.
Open your eyes, you cruel oppressors, you that flea the poor and needy, and
behold here what the Lord is providing for you, and what a destruction you are
pulling upon your own heads. 4. To all given up to all excess in pride and
belly-cheere.
You who spend all your time in pride, belly cheer, and all excess of riot,
with abundance of idleness, never regarding to strengthen the hands of the
poor and needy, but still to weaken them by plucking from them violently, see
whether you are rushing forward, bethink your selves before it be too late. 5.
All casting away the word of the Lord.
You who cast away the word of the Lord, scorning and hating to be reformed by
it, here the Lord forewarnes you what he is bringing upon you. You that pollute
his Sabaoths after the manner of the Gentiles, 6. Polluters o^ the Sabaoths.
to you he himself speaks, that if you will not observe his rest, he will
make the land to rest when it lies desolate, and no man to pass through it.
Leuit. 26. 34.
Or that at the least your selves shall be thrust forth from his eternal rest
into the place of horror and crying, where you shall never have rest day nor
night.

All you who are outrageous in your courses, 7. Outrageous in their courses and
evil fashions.
and make the evil fashions of all Countries about you, even of the enemies of
Christ's Gospel and murderers of his Saints, to be your glory, you may here
behold how you call in continually these wicked enemies to avenge the Lords
quarrel, and to be the executioners of his most righteous judgments upon you.
8. All turning back to the Idolatry of former times.
Oh you that are turning back or hastening apace to the vile Idolatry of
former days, which sometimes very children abhorred in seeing the abomination
of it: and all you who would so feign be in Babel again, you may here take a
view of the terrible vengeance of God upon your selves in such extreme
blindness, and how you are drawing in the bloody Babylonian upon your selves,
and posterity, and even the whole Land, so far as you are able, with as ill or
a worse captivity than ever came upon Judah; which how nearly you had
effected, your own hearts are witnesses. Here you may see how that one day
alone of Babels cruelty, one of their powder furnace days, shall be enough
for you, at least when you shall nish to stand a far off for fear of her
torment: whereof you are sure to have your parts, if you will needs be
partakers of her sins. 9. All challenging the Lord by their profanesse and
Atheism.
And you that by your intolerable profaneness and Atheism do seem after a
sort to challenge the Lord to his face, to dare him, if he be a God, to show
himself, and to hasten his vengeance, and so make your selves merry with
scoffing at all who fear his name, you may in this hear the Lord himself
telling you, as from heaven, that you are the men, for whose cause he cannot
spare, for whom he can have no more pity, and that he will make you
especially to feel whether he be a God, a just and terrible God or no. All of
us may see y^ Lord setting before us the means with he used to reclaim us and
spare us.
Here finally we may all see the Lord himself setting before us both our
general and particular estate, with the means which he has used to reclaim
and spare us, the terror of his anger and plagues when no other means will
serve. And lastly* the way how yet we may be delivered, and not only be set
free out of the danger, And how yet we may escape.
but also remain a glorious Nation until his second coming, and how every
one may escape his vengeance.

Through out have I striuen to show my love and earnest desire, Here is no more
but an endeavor to save all,
not only to the whole, but also to save every soul from these plague: Yet
have I not endeavored any more herein than the Angel for Lot in laboring to
pull us out of the destruction remaining for the impenitent; nor any more than
Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, with other the Prophets and faithful men of Judah,
did before the Captivity, in seeking to turn away that calamity and all
other their miseries from them; within the bounds of the word, and within the
compass of the calling of every Man of God, as God offers opportunity and
holy means.
nor going past the bounds of the word of the Lord delivered by those Prophets:
Nor yet any more at all, than I take to be the duty of every faithful
Minister and Man of God, so far as the Lord shall offer him opportunity, to
seek to preserve all from Gods wrath, and to pluck every soul out of the
fire of his vengeance. And this by showing all sorts their sins, to bring
them to repentance thereby, by haling and drawing to get every Lot out of
Sodom, before the destruction come. Ezekiel. 18. 30, 32.


If any one shall be offended for the discovery of his sin amongst the
general, The offending of them who are asleep in the midst of this peril not
to be regard^d.
without the knowledge and sight whereof he cannot be saved, and that only
because he would still live in it; or would not be awaked, his displeasure
therein is no more to be regarded, than if one in an heavy sleep, in the midst
of an house all on fire about him, now ready to fall upon his head, to burn
him to ashes: whom God shall enable to pull forth any such, when he shall awake
them and cause them to see their danger wherein they were, and their gracious
deliverance, then will they magnify his great name, They plucked forth will
magnify God for us.
that those did so adventure themselves for them, and esteem such above all
other of the earth. And as for the displeasure of men, better is it ten
thousand times to have all the world offended with us, for our laboring in
love and duty in our place to save, and pull men from under Gods wrath, and
forth of the very pit of hell, so much as he shall vouchsafe us mercy, than to
have the Lord angry with us, Better to have all men offended with us, than the
Lord.
for being unfaithful in that which has been committed unto us, and for
neglecting to save his people from destruction. Oh what extreme foolishnes is
it to fear man, Foolishness to fear men.
whose breath is in his nostrils, and whose heart is in the Lords hand, to
turn as the boats in the waters, and to incline as pleases him, who cannot
move a finger at us but by his permission, nor do any more than he will turn to
(...) good; and not to fear him, Not to regard the horror of Gods anger, on
Moses Exo. 4. 24.
who if he be angry with us never so little, all our days are gone! Who would
have killed Moses for omitting the circumcising of his child; who brought the
tempest on the sea, and would not suffer it to cease, until that Jonah was
thrown into it, Jonah 1. 13.
because he provided for his own peace, with neglect, or at least through
fear of performance of that duty enjoined him, which was to go to Niniue, to
preach unto them, That within forty days Niniue should be destroyed.
Threatened against Jeremy 1. 17.
Who finally threatens Jeremy to destroy him, before the people, if he fear
their faces: and will certainly whip his dearest servants* unto his work, if
they begin to loyter We therefore, Therefore Gods messengers had need to look
to themselves* to help to save all. To cause all to see his mercy in sparing us.
who are Gods messengers, had need to look unto it, to endeavor so far as we
may, keeping within our limits, to pull all sorts of sinners with violence out
of the fire; and to strive to set their sins before their faces in their
native colors. And the rather that so all of us seeing the heynousnesse of our
own sins, and of the sins of our Land, may come to some more due
consideration of the infiniteness we did not understand them, I take and hold
it to be necessary still to try further all holy means: Eccles. 12. 1.
we know not which the Lord will bless. Surely for the greatest part, the most
plain is the most profitable.

But if it shall be objected, The applications so plain to drive us unto
Christ.
that the applications to the particular kinds of sins and sinners are over
plain, and come too near the quick. I answer again, Blessed man is he who
can find them to come near to his own corruption and sin. Act: 2. 36, 37.
Is not this the only way to drive us to behold the true brazen serpent, Numb:
21. 9.
when we feel our selves stung at our hearts? John 3. 14, 15.
Can ever any wretched sinner cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall I do, that
I may be saved, until he have his soul thus pierced? Or can any fornicator,
adulterer, blasphemer, or any other notorious sinner, find the sovereign
comfort which is in Christ's blood, but only such a one? Yet this I say unto
every soul, If any thing seem to pierce which is not Gods word, or it
misapplied, it is no more to be feared than a dart of stubble.
that if any thing do seem to pierce, which is not the word of the Lord, or
is any way misapplied, that it is not any more to be feared than darts of
stubble. But so far as it is his blessed word, and following necessarily out of
the same, it will one day certainly wound us, and better here, whilst we may
have our wounds cured again, by applying that sovereign remedy of the blood
of the Son of God, than to be smitten through with it, when all hope of cure is
past, and so to have our hearts galling us and vexing us eternally.

I therefore here do also humbly beg of all the worthy and faithful servants
of the Lord, The Authors humble desire to have this brought to the trial, and
so to more perfection, as all other his labo^^s.
as I have in my former labors, to help me to bring every piece of this work
to the trial, for the full assurance of every soul, who is desirous to see
his evil way, and would escape the day of the Lords wrath, or who would seek
to help to pacify his wrath kindled against us. If there be in it any one
sentence, which is not either the word of the Lord, or not arising out of it,
and agreeable thereto, that it may be reformed; or if it bewray the least
partial affection in leaning to any side, but to the Lord, and to his manifest
truth agreed upon by us all, who soundly profess Christ's Gospel; or the least
false testimony. Our most holy and blessed God, infinite in wisdom and power,
needs not our lie to bring any of his to repentance, God needs not our lie to
bring his to repentance. Job 13. 7, 8, 9, 10.
nor for setting forth of his glory. No, no, his own word is enough, and shall
be found abundantly sufficient to save all his elect, to destroy all his
enemies, to deliver his Church, to get himself the victory. I dare not
wittingly affirm one untruth, no, not against the bloody enemy, nor against
Satan himself, no, nor yet wrong any creature under heaven: far be it from
me to give the Accuser that advantage. How then may I do it for the cause of
the Lord, who abhors the very least iniquity, and with whom no evil can
dwell.

Moreover since all this, The work tends to the renewing of our Covenant for
the happiness of us and of our posterity.
wholly tends to help toward the making and establishing our peace with our
God, by seeking to recall us all unto his obedience, that we may every one
renew our vow and covenant with him, for the wealth of us and our posterity, I
have strictly kept my self within the limits of the first part of this Watch,
which conteyneth the Sum of the Covenant of our God: Limited within the
bounds of the Watch, wherein we all agree.
wherein we all agree in outward profession, and unto which whosoever returns
unfeignedly to walk in the sincere obedience of it, shall undoubtedly have
eternal life: like as every impenitent transgressor against it, For the breach
whereof each impenitent person stands condemned by the general verdit of all
the Churches of Christ. The desire of the Author to be a faithful witness.
is certainly condemned by the general verdict of all the true Churches of
Christ.

In all this work I have and do instantly desire of the Lord, that I may be a
faithful and true witness, both for his heavenly Majesty, and for his
people; and also, that I may show in every part, a right demonstration of an
unfeigned love to the Church of Christ, and toward my Nation, even to every
soul, for the saving of each from the wrath to come; and withal that I may
preserve the honor due to all in authority, chiefly to the highest, to bind
all hearts to their superiors, each to others, and all of us to Jesus Christ,
That he may ever remain our Captain, Protector, King and Savior, even he who
will one day manifest all the secrets of the hearts of men, who have bin with
him, and who against him: who will come quickly, and reward every one as their
works shall be. Amen, Ap^c. 22. 20.
even so, come Lord Jesus.

CONTENTS OF THE several Chapters, particularly as they arise out of the
Vision, Ezechiel 9.
1. THe Vision given to Ezechiel, Verse. 1.
with the occasion and opening of it. 2. Certain directions to be observed in
our reading hereof, to teach us to make right use of the Vision to our selves.
3. The Lord is not wont to bring any terrible judgment on his Church, verse. 1.
but ever before hand to give some evident warning. That he never warned
without cause or in vain: and what just matter we have for all our manifold
and gracious forewarnings to betake our selves to watching and prayer. 4. The
withdrawing of the Lords glorious presence from his Church, verse. 3.
is both an evident sign of his displeasure, and a manifest threatening of his
departure: And what causes we have thereupon to watch and to pray to pacify
the Lord, so to hold him still amongst us. 5. How the Lord is most unwilling to
depart from his Church, verse. 3.
so long as there is any other remedy; manifested in his often threatening to
depart before he go; and of the outward tokens both of his glorious presence
in his Church, and of his departure from it: And what causes we have in respect
thereof to watch and pray continually. 6. No privileges can do a people any
good, verse. 4.
if they grow in their iniquity, but the mo their mercies have bin, the
greater is their sin, and the heavier shall their judgment be, when it
comes: what cause we have thence to watch and to pray for the fearful
increase of the transgressions amongst us. 7. The marking of the mourners. 4.
That is, how Gods own people are marked, in the midst of the greatest
confusions, before the destruction come. And so what cause every one has to
watch and to pray that he may be so marked. 8. The property of the godly
living amongst the wicked in a sinful age, 4.
is, to mourn and cry for all the abominations and tokens of Gods anger. Also
what cause all Gods servants have to watch and pray for the fewness of such,
and that each of us may be found of that little number. 9. The enemies by which
the Lord threatens or afflicts his Church, v. 2. and 5.
are his soldiers; and thereupon what cause we have to give our selves to
watching and prayer, because of the increase of them in number, pride and
malice. 10. The mourners being once marked and made sure, v. 5.
then comes the vengeance; for the destroyers follow at the heels of the
marking Angel. What need we had therefore to watch and pray, because we know
not whether this work be not already accomplished, or how near it is. 11. The
principal abominations for which the godly so mourned, v. 4. and 6.
and which moved the Lord to so severe a vengeance; first in general, after
more particularly. And therein what causes we have to watch and pray both to be
kept pure^ from them, and to obtain pardon and redress of them, or at least
that we may escape the plagues due unto them. 12. The means which the Lord had
used to bring them to repentance, v. 4.
that he might spare them, and how their sin was increased thereby. Also the
cause why the means could do them no good. And what need we have thereupon
to watch and pray continually. 13. The severity of the Lords vengeance, v. 5,
6, 7.
and the miseries which all sorts endured in that captivity, when no other
means could serve to reclaim them. And thence what need we have all to watch
and pray continually to turn away the like, and also to be thankful for all
our former deliverances, from as great calamities so near unto us. 14. How
Gods true messengers and all his faithful servants are wont to be affected
when they perceive the Lords anger to be kindled, v. 8.
and his judgments ready to rush upon his people. Also the means, which in
this their holy affection they use, to prevent the evils, and to pacify his
Majesty. And herein likewise what cause we have to watch and pray for the want
of these affections, and for the general neglect of the state of the people,
and of pacifying the Lords wrath. 15. The sins of a people may be so heinous,
verse 9, 10.
as that the Lord will not be pacified at the prayers of his dearest servants.
Also when that time is, and what cause we have thereupon to watch and pray
continually. 16. The true obedience of Gods faithful messengers and servants
will bring them boldness to appear before him, verse. 11.
and this alone when they are able to say, in a good conscience, Lord I have
done as thou have commanded me. And what great cause all of us have to watch
and pray continually, that we may be alvvayes able to say so; to have boldness
evermore hereby, whatsoever come to pass.
THE VISION given to EZECHIEL before the great Captivity of IVDAH, set down
in the ninth Chapter of Ezechiel; with the occasion and opening thereof.
1. HE cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying; All the visitations
of the City draw near.
Cause them that have charge over the City to draw near, even every man with
his destroying weapon in his hand.

2. And behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which lies
toward the North, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand; and one man
among them was clothed with linen, with a writers inkehorne by his side, and
they went in and stood beside the brazen Altar.

3. And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the Cherub whereupon he
was, to the threshold of the house; and he called to the man clothed with
linen, which had the writers inkehorne by his side.

4. And the Lord said unto him, Go through the middst of the City, through the
midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and
that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.

5. And to the others he said in my hearing, Go ye after him through the
City, and smite, let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity.

6. Slay utterly old and young, both maids and little children and women, but
come not near any man upon whom is the mark, and begin at my Sanctuary; then
they began at the ancient men which were before the house.

7. And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the Courts with the
slain: go ye forth, and they went forth, and slew in the City.

8. And it came to pass, while they were slaying them, and I was left, that I
fell upon my face, and cried and said, Ah Lord God, will thou destroy all the
residue of Israel in the pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem?

9. Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the house of Israel is exceeding
great, and the land is full of blood, and the City full of perverseness: for
they say, the Lord has forsaken the earth, and the Lord sees not.

10. And as for me also, mine eyes shall not spare, neither will I have pity,
but I will recompense their way upon their head.

11. And behold, the man clothed with linen, which had the inkehorne by his
side, reported the matter saying, I have done as thou have commanded me.


CHAPTER I.
The resolution and opening of the Chapter.

BEfore the last and most grievous Captivity of Judah and the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Babylonians, Occasion of the Vision.
the Lord used all ordinary means to bring the people to repentance, The
Lords using all means to spare his people.
that he might spare them, because he pitied them, being his own chosen people
and peculiar inheritance. Amongst other, Chiefly by his Prophets.
he stirred up diverse of his faithful servants the Prophets, as Isay, Jeremy,
Micah, Zephanie, Ezechiel, and others; some of them long before the same;
others of them he continued unto the very day, still by them fore-warning and
calling them to repentance.

To these Prophets he revealed both the particular iniquities, To whom he
revealed their sins and plagues.
whereby he was so provoked, and also the special judgments and plagues which
he had prepared for them, unless they repented. That they might lift up their
voices as trumpets, To awake and bring them to repentance.
declaring these things unto them; at least hereby to awaken them to move them
to turn and seek unto him, before his wrath was wholly powered out upon them.

This Chapter is part of a vision revealed to Ezechiel concerning the
destruction of Jerusalem, This Chapter a part of ye vision. The sum whereof
is a forewarning of the destruction of Jerusalem.
now hard at hand, contained in the four Chapters together, to wit, in the 8.
9. 10. 11. And it consists of four parts, according to the number of the
Chapters. First, in the 8 Chapter is showed the wickedness of those, Parts of
the vision*
who still remained in Jerusalem. Secondly, In the ninth Chapter the slaughter
and destruction is declared, 1. Wickedness of the people. cap: 8.
which the Lord would bring upon all in the City, except those which were
marked. Thirdly, 2. Their destruction. cap. 9.
In the 10 Chapter is set down a vision of the fire of Gods vengeance, which
was thrown upon the City, 3. Famine and pestilence forerunning cap. 10
to consume many of them with pestilence and famine before the taking of the
City, and also in burning both the City and the Temple, when the glory of the
Lord was departed from it. Fourthly, 4. The miseries of those who should escape
and go into Captivity. chap. 11.
In the 11 Chapter is fore-shewed the most grievous persecution, which should
follow all those, who should escape the sword, and that fire of Gods vengeance,
the pestilence and famine, and so the miseries which they shall endure:
whereunto are annexed the promises of the Gospel, for the comfort of Gods
servants.

Now in the 8 Chapter, Sum of this ninth Chapter. A denunciatio^ that the
Lord will be avenged presently, and the manner of the execution. v. 1, 2. to 8.
the Lord having showed unto the Prophet some secret abominations, and that in
the Temple it self, whereby his anger was inflamed to the present execution of
his vengeance; in this he declares that he will be avenged forthwith, and the
manner of his proceeding. The Chapter divides it self into five parts. 1. The
Lords denuntiation of this most grievous visitation now at hand. Division of
this Chapter. verse: 8.
2. The manner of the Lords proceeding in two Commissions: The first for the
marking and making sure of all the godly before the destruction come. 9.
The second for the destruction of all the rest. 10.
3. How the Prophet was affected with this grievous denuntiation, and how he
entreats the Lord for Jerusalem. 4. The answer and resolution which the Lord
gives unto the Prophet, That he will not spare, and why. 5. The return of that
Angel whom God had sent to mark the faithful, giving up his answer for the
execution of his commission.

In the manner of the denuntiation of this so terrible a destruction is set
out, An opening of the several parts of the Chapter.
First, how the Lord himself did denounce it, crying with a loud voice in the
ears of the Prophet, both to assure him of the certainty of it, and also to
stir him up to a more due consideration of the dreadfulnes of the same. v: 1.
How the Lord himself denounces it. Showing also the neernesse of the
execution.
Secondly, the Lord shows unto him the neereness of the execution thereof,
saying, Cause them that have charge over the City to draw near; meaning the
enemies, whom he had appointed to be executioners of his wrath upon it, every
one armed with a weapon in his hand, as being ready to destroy it.

For the manner of the execution of this slaughter, v: 2. The manner of the
execution.
it is also set forth, First, by declaring how many they were who came to
destroy, that is, six men, representing the chief Captains of the Caldeans,
or the Angels appointed for conducting the Army. And these six are according
to the number of the chief gates of Jerusalem. In the number of the
Executioners.
To signify that the enemies should come in so great multitude and so
mightily, that they should besiege the City on every side, so as none should
escape out; and should rush upon them so furiously in every street, that they
should fill all with the slain, and cause the channels to flow with blood. From
whence they came.
Secondly, it is set forth, by showing from whence these six came, which was
from the way of the upper gate looking toward the North; signifying thereby,
that these enemies should come from Caldea or Babylon, which was northward from
Jerusalem. How they were prepared.
Thirdly, by declaring how they were prepared: every one in arms with his
weapon in his hand, Whither they came: viz. to the Temple for the pollution of
it.
as ready to destroy. Fourthly, by setting down whither these six came; which
was to the great brazen Altar in the Temple. To show thereby that God sent
these destroyers chiefly for the pollution of his holy things, The Angel of
the Covenant sent amongst them for marking the Elect.
his sacred worship and religion. Fifthly, how amongst these destroyers, the
Lord sends one special Angel for the marking and preservation of his
faithful ones in the City: to wit, the Angel of the Covenant, the only
Author of the preservation and salvation of his servants. Exodus 28 42, 43.
Levit: 16. 4.
And he appears clothed with linen, attired like to the High Priest, prepared
to make an atonement; with an inkehorne also by his side, as ready to mark all
his elect.

In the third verse is showed, Where the Lord appears.
how and where the Lord appeared to give his commissions, both to the
destroyers, and to the saving Angel.

1. The glory of the Lord appears, removes from the Cherubins, where he had
promised to dwell for ever, and stands upon the threshold of the door of the
Temple, as now departing from them.

Afterward is set down verse. 4, 5, and 6. How he gave two Co^missions.
how the Lord gave two strait commissions or charges: The first is to the
saving Angel for his faithful ones: 1. To the saving Angel for the Elect and
faithful ones.
The second to the destroyers concerning all the rest.

In the first commission to the saving Angel, is plainly expressed, To set a
mark upon them.
1. what his charge or commission was, namely, to go through the midst of the
City, even through the midst of Jerusalem, and to set a mark upon the
foreheads of sundry to be known from the rest in the destruction. 2. who they
are that must be marked. That is, And how they are described.
the godly abhorring all abominations of the wicked: who are also described by
two properties. First, that they mourn and sigh in themselves. Secondly, that
they cry out for all the abominations of the time wherein they lived. 3. Why
they are marked; that when the destroyers came, they might not touch any of
them.

In the second commission to the destroyers, The second Commission to the
destroyers to destroy all unmarked without pity. Not to touch the marked.
is contained, 1. The sum of their commission: To follow hard after the
saving Angel, and to smite all whom they found unmarked, without any respect
of old or young, maids or children. 2. To take careful heed, that they
touched not any upon whom the mark was.

3. Where they should begin to destroy. And that was at the Sanctuary, To
begin at the Sanctuary.
at the wicked Priests and Levites, which ministered there, as being the causes
of the sins of the rest.

4. How they should proceed in the slaughter: from the Sanctuary to defile the
whole Temple; How to proceed.
to fill the Courts with the slain of them, who living so wickedly, had yet a
vain confidence in the Temple of the Lord, thinking that the Temple could
shelter them from his vengeance. The speedy execution of their Commission.
5. The speedy execution of their commission, that as they were commanded, so
they began at the Ancients which were before the House, destroying them first,
and then the rest, until they had made a final dispatch through the whole
City. And this is continued unto verse. 8.

Verse. 8. In the third place is set down how the Prophet was affected with
this terrible vision of this slaughter of Gods people, 3. How the Prophet was
affected here^uth.
though himself should escape amongst them who were marked: That he fell upon
his face, crying unto the Lord, and making humble intercession for them; That
the Lord would spare them, being but a poor remainder of the people of Israel,
left after so many destructions.

Verse. 9, 10. To which there follows in the fourth place, 4. The answer and
resolution of the Lord.
the answer and full resolution of the Lord, thereby to stay the servent
prayer, and importunacie of the Prophet; and also to manifest his own justice,
in that his most righteous proceeding. That he would not be entreated, and why.
That he would not be entreated for them any longer; partly, because their land
was full of blood, by their cruel oppressions of all sorts; and partly, for
that the City where justice should have bin had, for releeving the oppressed,
was now become full of corrupt judgment, and of all perverseness, falling
away more and more without hope of returning. But principally, for that they
were generally become Atheists, shamelesly saying in their lives, The Lord saw
them not, it was no matter how they lived, and making but a scoff at all the
Lords messengers and warnings; therefore his eye should not spare them, neither
would he have any more pity of them.

Verse. 11. In the last verse is set down the return of the answer and
commission of the marking Angel: The return of the commission of the marking
Angel.
That he had done according to his commission; marked and made safe all the
godly, that mourned for all the abominations; and so had fully prepared and
made the way to the present execution of this final destruction.

CHAP. II.
Certain directions to be observed in reading hereof, to teach us to make our
right use of this vision and forewarning to our selves.

AS this vision was first given by the Spirit of God unto Jerusalem, to warn
them of the neerenesse and greatness of this destruction, which came unto them
for our ensample: The vision is written to admonish us.
so is it written to admonish us upon whom the ends of the world are come. And
is therefore our vision to awaken us, And is our vision at this day.
and to fore-warne us at this day, setting before our faces, what causes we
have to watch and pray continually to prevent the like judgments, To stir us
up to watch and pray.
and by all means to seek to pacify the Lords wrath, before it be thus
powered out upon us; and also to help to stir us up hereunto. For the better
understanding whereof, and the more fruitful applying of it to our selves, to
move us to unfeigned repentance, Rules to be observed in reading this vision.
and speedy seeking the Lord, we must carefully observe these rules and
directions following.

To receive it as a message sent us from ye Lord.
or an ordinary discourse, but as to a divine message and gracious
fore-warning sent from the Lord of heaven and earth in the riches of his mercy
to every one of us, both high and low, rich and poor, to admonish us to meet
him presently with entreaty of peace.

To look wholly at the Lord in it. 2 Cor. 2. 4.
but wholly at him who sends it, and to hearken to his lively voice, speaking
unto us herein, and to the evidence and demonstration of his Spirit applying it
unto us.

To remember with whom we have to deal herein.
before whom all the wicked of the world shall one day be speechless;
howsoever they are now most bold and witty in excusing all their sins, and in
speaking against every one who shall admonish them. And to this end to set our
selves as in his presence, at whose appearing all the proudest of the earth
(who dare now outface his Majesty) shall in the guil^inesse of their
consciences, creep into the holes of the rocks, ^sa: 2. 19.
and wish the hills and mountains to fall upon them, Rev: 6. 15, 16.
to hide them from his face. And withal to remember, that we must certainly
appear before him, and then be sure to answer for all our contempts and not
profiting by his fore-warnings.

To show our reverence to the Lord in receiving this message, as Josiah did. 2
King. 23. 19.
so far forth as it is his express word, or agreeable thereunto, and belonging
to us, as that worthy pattern of true godliness, that holy Josiah, though a
King, did receive the discovery of the abominations of Judah, and the
threatenings of the Lord; whose heart melted, so that he powered out tears at
the same. And also so to humble our selves, To humble our selves and to turn
and cause others to turn.
turning to the Lords Covenant, and doing our endeavor to cause others to
turn, as he did at the Lords message sent unto him, (though by so weak
means) (as might seem) but by a woman, 2 King. 23. 1, 2, 3, 4.
to wit, Huldah the Prophetess) because he knew it to be the word and message
of the Lord. Ezekiel* 18. 30.
And that not only to so much as shall be pleasing unto us, but even to that
part of it, that shall most directly touch us. As indeed it shall be most happy
for that man who shall so receive it, and shall so humble himself before his
divine Majesty. Therefore we are every one to be so affected, the Lords High
Priest, To be affected as old Eli was at the message of young Samuel. 1 Samuel 3.
17, 18.
as was old Ely who disdeyned not to receive a most grievous and dreadful
message by the hand of young Samuel, a boy brought up under him; but charget^
him in the name of the Lord, to tell him every word which the Lord had spoke
unto him, not to hide a word from him. And afterward having heard it, in stead
of being offended, he says, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.
Yea, we shall most truly declare our homage and obedience to the word of the
Lord, And David at the voice of Nathan* 2 Samuel 12. 13.
by submitting our selves wholly unto him, and each acknowledging our particular
sins, as David did at the admonition of Nathan. That thereupon we may each
receive that comfortable answer, That we may receive the like comfortable
answer.
The Lord has put away thy sin. And that we may all thus help to pacify
him, that he may not proceed to his heavy resolution; howsoever he shall humble
us, for the manifold dishonours, which we have done to him by all our sins, and
for causing his enemies to blaspheme his great name and Gospel, which he has
vouchsafed us the profession and liberty of, above most other people of the
earth.

Each to apply every part as spoken to our selves particularly.
for even the sin of the Atheist, Idolater, Drunkard, and so of every wicked
man, may be said in some sort to be the sin of each of us; and we are all
liable to the punishments thereof, Since the sins of the wicked are in some sort
the sins of us all.
even those of us, that think our selves most innocent and free from them. As
the sin of Achan As Achans of Israel.
is counted the sin of all Israel; for so does the Lord tell Joshua plainly,
Iosu 7. 11, 12.
when he punished them all; That Israel had sinned, they had taken of the
excommunicate thing, they had done that which Achan did. Even so the sins of
all the notoriously wicked are the sins of us all, See (...) upon Iosu. 7. 25.
confirmed out of Austin.
chiefly their open abominations. All of us are guilty and endangered by the
same, if at the hearing and seeing them, If we have not mourned for them,
we have not mourned, as we should, for the dishonor done to the Lord, and his
anger kindled thereby. Or if we have not cried for pardon, Cried for pardon,
and sought to turn away the vengeance, yea and done our utmost endeavor each
of us in our places and callings, to stop them, And sought to stop the course
of sin.
and the course of sin reigning amongst us. None of us can justify our
selves, but God might for this very sin depart from us, as he threatens
Ioshuah for Achans sacrilege, Joshua 7. 12.
and might leave us to be wrapped in the same judgment.

Each of our heinous sins hinder our prayers and help to draw down vengeance.
but also, in steed thereof, help to draw down the anger of God, not only
upon our selves, but upon the whole Land: more specially and principally the
notorious and outrageous sins of our most horrible transgressors, Chiefly of
all impudent sinners.
as of blasphemers, scorners of God and of his truth, oppressors, Isa. 5. 18.
drunkards, filthy persons, and all impudent sinners, who hale on the vengeance
of God, as it were with cart ropes. That it is his infinite mercy, that it has
bin kept off hitherto. And therefore howsoever such men* may imagine and boast
of themselves to be friends to their country, Such are enemies to Christ,
seeking to drive him out and set up Satan,
yet in truth they will be found the principal enemies: first to Jesus Christ,
doing as much as lies in them, thereby to drive him out, and to set up Satan
in his room; and do not only murder their own souls without repentance,
but also as much as such sins can, to betray the Lords Anointed, his Church,
and their native Country, And do betray all to y^ enemy. As in the Captivity.
with all our happiness, into the hands of the bloody enemy. Because for the
sins of these principally, Gods vengeance comes upon his people, as here in
this lamentable captivity may plainly be seen. And therefore each of us are
to find out our own particular sins, Therefore each to find out our
particular sins, and to reform our selves.
and in the reading and hearing hereof, to say, This is my sin, which the
Lord reproves and threatens us all for, and me especially by name. So each of
us are to begin to reform our selves, or else we shall never be able to judge
of the sins of others: Else we can neither judge of y^ danger, nor help to
pacify the wrath.
much less have a right feeling of them, so as to be helpers to pacify the
wrath by our prayers, and to turn away the like plague from our selves.

7. Every one of us are to resolve with our selves, 7. Each to resolve to do
whatsoever God bids us. Every soul y^ seeks not to cause others to turn to
the Covenant as well as himself, must perish.
that whatsoever the Lord shall say unto us, we will do it, as the people made
profession to the Prophet Jeremy to do, if they had had hearts to have
performed it accordingly, and each to cast away our dearest sins, rather than
they shall beat back our prayers, and much more help to pull down vengeance
upon us. Because of that which God threatens, that every soul who turns not
to all his Covenant, (so far as he shall manifest it to his conscience, Ez^ch.
18. 20, 26, 30, 31, 32.
to be his Covenant,) and that seeks not also with all his power to cause
others to turn shall perish. Deuteronomy. 29. 19. to 25.
That same sin wherein any one continues shall be his destruction; Happy man
who has grace to learn this lesson, and forthwith to practice it.
and the endangering of all so far as lies in him. And this may serve for the
general directions in reading this vision, to make right use of it to our
selves, for pacifying the wrath.

Now to the Vision.

CHAP. III.
The Lord is not wont to bring any terrible judgment upon his Church, but
usually ever aforehand, to give warning thereof, neither at any time to wa^ne
in vain. And what cause we have for our manifold forewarnings to give our
selves to watching and prayer.

He cried in mine ears with a loud voice, Verse. 1.
saying: Cause them that have charge over the City to draw near, [or, the
visitations of the City draw near etc.] To come to the words of the vision.
The Lord so plainly foreshewing this dreadful captivity, not only here in
this Vision, but also so many other ways, and denouncing it by his Prophets so
long before it came, declaring also the causes of it, shows in the first
place.

That he has not been wont to bring any notable judgments upon a people, God
has not been wont to bring any notable judgeme^t on his Church, but to
foreshew it first, and then to bring it when no repentance has followed to
prevent.
especially upon his Church, or where his Church has been, but he has ever
used to make the same manifestly known before, at least to his own faithful
servants amongst them, and after as he foreshewed it, so to bring it to pass,
unless his anger has been some way pacified.

This we may see in sundry of the most fearful destructions that ever he
brought upon the world, mentioned in his book; In all which he has left this
carefully recorded, because he would have all his people to be well acquainted
with it.

As first before the destruction of the old world, As first before the
destruction of the old world.
besides the plain evidence of Gods vengeance at hand, being apparent and
almost visible in the strange increase of the iniqvity, many of them being
become Giants, to set themselves impudently to fight against his Majesty, Genesis
6. 4.
and against all godliness contrary to the light of their own consciences,
Gen: 5. 11, 12.
and for that all flesh had corrupted their ways; so as the earth was
corrupted and filled with cruelty: he also warned them himself in a special
manner, Gen: 6. 3, 13.
by the making of the Arc, and by the preaching of Noah. 1 Pet: 3. 20.
And this he did by the space of an hundred and twenty years before; Hebr:
11. 7.
which time he gave them to repent, striving with them by his Spirit, chiefly
in the Ministry of Noah, to bring them to amendment.

Secondly, 2. The captivity of the ten Tribes.
before the Captivity of the ten Tribes; which were carried away by Salmanasar
into Assyria, (from whence they never returned) besides many other threatenings,
2 King: 17. 3, 6.
dangers, wars, overthrowes and plagues: he also forewarned them long by
sundry of his holy Prophets, as Ahiah, Iehu, Eliah, Michaj^, Elisha; but more
specially, 2 King: 17. 14, 15, 16.
but even hard before, by Obadiah, Hosea, Amos, Joel, Jonah, and others. By all
whom he foreshewed that judgment evidently unto them, though they would not
obey, but hardened their necks, and were worse and worse, until the vengeance
carried them away.

Thirdly, before this lamentable captivity of Judah, 3. Before this Captivity.
besides this vision and many others, he forewarned them likewise, by sundry of
his most worthy servants the Prophets, raised up extraordinarily and sent unto
them, crying unto them early and late, Prophet after Prophet, and that, for a
long time together. But most plainly by the space of threescore years and
more by Esaias, Zeph: 3. 1, 2, 3, 5.
Jeremy, 2 Chronicles: 36. 15, 16, 17.
Mica, Ezechiel, Zephanie, and others, still proclayming this terrible
desolation. Although they likewise mocked his servants, misused his messengers,
growing daily worse and worse, until there was no remedy.

Fourthly, 4. Before ye last and utter subversion of the Jewish nation.
before that last and utter subversion of the Jewish nation, he forewarned them
sundry ways, but in a more special manner: First, by the preaching of John
the Baptist, Matthew: 3. 10.
threatening them, That the axe was then laid to the root of the trees.
Afterward by our Savior himself over and over most evidently, Matthew. 21. 33,
44 and 24. 23, 24.
setting down in plain terms, the manner of their destruction, and the
grievousnesse of it. Luc: 19. 41. and 20. 9.
And to omit all other admonitions by the Disciples of our Savior and his
Apostles, Ios^phus in his story records, Josephus de bello Iudaico.
That besides many terrible signs from heaven and earth, strange lights in the
nights, a dreadful blazing star over the Temple, fearful sights of
chariots and horsemen of fire, and an Army marching toward Jerusalem; a
hydeous voice was also heard in the Temple, at one of the Feasts, saying, Let
us go out of the Temple, and depart hence. There was moreover in a time of
their greatest peace and plenty four years before their war began, one of
the ruder and meaner sort, whose name was Jesus, the son of Hanani, who being
come forth of the country to Jerusalem at the Feast of the Tabernacles, and
going into the Temple, began of a sudden to cry out with a loud voice in this
manner, A voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four
winds a voice against Jerusalem, a voice against the Temple, a voice against
the bridegroom and the bride, a voice against all this people. This he
continued day and night going through all the streets of the City. And although
he was rated and cruelly beaten, yet he never gave over, going up and down the
City thus: woe to Jerusalem and the San^tuarie thereof woe, woe to Jerusalem.
And thus he cried out, especially on their feast days, and that for seven
years and five months together, neither was he ever thought to be hoarse or
weary; but went thus up and down, being taken as a mad man, until in the time
of the siege going about upon the wall, and crying out louder than ever before,
woe, woe to the City, to the Temple, and people: and at last having added this
voice, woe also to me, he was smitten upon the head with a stone, shot out of
an engine, that he dyed. And last of all, when they had suffered most grievous
miseries by bloody dissensions amongst themselves, murdering one another, and
by most pitiful famine, as ever was before, that they were enforced to eat
such things as their souls did abhor, and which bred a most terrible
pestilence amongst them, immediately before the taking and sacking of the
City, and putting them to the sword, a voice was heard among the Christians,
Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 3.
which spoke to them thus, Go forth to Pella, which so soon as the Christians
had done, the enemy brake in upon them, and slaughtered the rest with a most
lamentable destruction.

Fifthly, before the last and final destruction to come upon the world by fire,
Before the final destruction the signs are plainly foretold.
the Lord has foretold sundry signs and tokens which shall come to pass,
that none can plead ignorance, or have any more excuse.

Thus the Lord has bin wont to deal with the wickedest places of all other,
This the Lord has done to the wickedst places where any of his servants have
bin.
especially if any of his own dear servants have bin amongst them. As before
the destruction of Sodom, because his servant Lot was there, he will do
nothing until he has revealed it to his faithful servant Abraham, Gen: 18. 7.
Lots uncle, that he may entreat for them. Gen: 19. 14.
Afterward, he makes it known to Lot himself, who forewarnes his sons in
law and daughters to have gotten them all forth of the burning, if it had bin
possible.

This he did to Ninivie that proud City before he would destroy it; Yea to the
Infidels themselves in co^miseration as to Ninive.
for he pitying the great multitude of poor ignorant and simple people, which
were amongst them, in the bowels of his compassion, he sends his servant Jonah
first to proclaim through their City; Ion: 4. 10.
Yet forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed.

And to conclude this point: And even to Babylon, that his own people may get
out from her.
as he forewarned Babylon and other the cruel enemies of his Church of their
destructions; so he has as plainly proclaimed his vengeance to come upon the
spiritual Babylon, (which now holding so great a part of his Church in
captivity, R^v. 18. 2, 3, 4.
strives to captivate all the rest) that all his own people may by all means
get out of her, and the rest be left utterly inexcusable.

This may sufficiently manifest his truth to every conscience, He will not do
any thing but he will first reveal it to his servants.
that we may boldly conclude this point with the Prophet Amos, Amos 3. 7.
That the Lord will do nothing in his Church, in bringing in any destruction or
terrible plague, but he will first reveal it to his servants the Prophets. He
will make his own faithful ones to foresee it by one means or other, so far
as shall be for his glory and their good. The reasons of it also are most
clear why he will do it.

1. For his chosen sake among them; Reasons hereof.
that he may show his love to his, 1. For his own peoples sake.
and the care that he has for them in the greatest confusions: To show his
care for them.
to the end that they may gather themselves unto him before, and prepare to be
accounted worthy to be hid by him, That they may prepare to meet him.
or else delivered; or certainly some way find comfort in the evil day. That
hereby their love and care may better appear unto the world, Seek to save
others.
in their seeking by all means to save and pull others from the vengeance to
come. More specially, that their faith and obedience may be seen to all, how
they believe and fear the Lord and the tokens of his wrath. And that they may
set themselves to become suitors unto the Lord for the rest, as Abraham, Moses,
Jeremy, and others; that so he may either spare all at their supplications;
and that thereby the world may take notice in what high favor such are with
his Majesty, (even all they who make conscience to walk in his Covenant, and
endeavor to be righteous in their generations) when he spares so sinful a
people at their prayers; or at least that their prayers may return into their
own bosoms.

Secondly, 2. For the cause of the wicked. Though they willingly blind their
own eyes.
the Lord does use to manifest his judgments aforehand even unto the wicked,
as we heard, and for their causes also: howsoever they for the most part use
all devises to flatter and harden themselves: yea, to lull themselves asleep
in their security, and to blind their own eyes, left they should see the
judgments of God coming upon them; and so still persuade themselves that
there shall be no such matter. And this he does also to declare the riches of
his mercy toward the most wretched sinners, To declare the riches of his
mercy, if they will turn.
and how unwilling he is to take vengeance, so long as there is any other
remedy, or if they will turn unto him in any time. This is most apparent in
the Lords infinite compassion in sparing Ninivie that proud City, Ier: 17. 7,
8. As (...) Ninivie.
after Jonah had proclaimed, Yet forty days and Ninivie shall be destroyed.
And also in reproving Jonah for his impatience, saying, Thou have had pity on
the gourd, Ion: 4. 9, 10,
for which thou labouredst not, neither madedst it to grow, which came up in a
night and withered in a night: 11, 12.
and should not I spare Ninivie that great City, wherein are six score
thousand persons, which cannot discern between their right hand and their
left, and also much cat^le? And hereupon it was that God spared it at that
time, though after, when having forgotten that great deliverance, they fell
into their old sins, he took vengeance for all, as may appear by the Prophet
Nahum; N^h: 3.
executing most severely, whatsoever he had formerly threatened. He deals thus
moreover with the very wickedest, that every mouth may be stopped, That all may
be enforced to acknowledge him righteous.
and all the world compelled to acknowledge his judgments to be most
righteous, thus to justify him therein, when no admonition at all will serve.

So we see, Conclusion.
how he has set down this point most clearly, and also the reasons of it,
and that he has not bin wont to give any such warnings in vain, or without
most dreadful execution of his wrath, where his warnings have not bin regarded.

Now then to apply this point to our selves: Application to our selves.
we are first wisely to inquire, whether the Lord has not likewise forewarned
us, and that most plainly, of some terrible judgments toward this our Nation.
That if we find it so, To try whether the Lord have not warned us of some such
a judgment.
we may then all know for certain, that it is full time to look to our selves,
and to betake us all forthwith to such a course, as whereby we may either
altogether appease his anger, or at least in some sort mitigate and assuage it.
To come to our very consciences: Must we not all be enforced to acknowledge and
say with the Prophet Amos, Amos 3. 8.
The lion has roared, who shall not then be afraid? The Lord God has spoken,
who can but prophecy? Has not the lion roared upon us sundry times, The Lion
has roared upon us.
as being ready to crush our bones in sunder, or to devour us at once: but
principally within our fresh memory, when the proud enemy came against us in
their Navy invincible? 1. By the proud Armado.
And more also when that long threatened day came, 2. The long threatened day.
whereof the insolent enemy had so much triumphed, and for fear whereof the
whole Land had trembled for so many years together. 3. The Babylonish furnace.
But most of all in that more than Babylonish and unnatural furnace; that
hellish cruelty, from which we were so marveilously delivered in a moment,
before we felt or so much as feared any such thing at all. To omit the
insurrection by the rude multitude, 4. The insurrection about throwing down
enclosures.
about the throwing down of the enclosures, the danger whereof, all who are
wise-hearted did manifestly see, if any bloody enemy had set it on foot, to
have bin a Leader unto them; which issue, all near unto them, did very greatly
fear, had not the Lord so graciously prevented that peril in an instant, and
quenched that fire, when the flame was now ready to have brust forth so high,
that getting above our heads, it would have bin hard to overcome it, without
much blood to have quenched it.

And to pass over in silence all other the treasonable devises against that
our worthy Deborah, 5. Treasonable practices against our late Queen.
both before her coming to the Crown and after, that almost never year was
without some new plot, though continuing constant with our God, they were never
able to touch one hair of her head: And since against our Josiah.
and since also against our Josiah, the breath of our nostrills (of whom we
have gloried as Judah of Josiah, that under his shadow we should be preserved
(...) amongst our cruellest enemies, as we have bin until this day, thorough
the endless mercy of our God) had they not almost taken him in their nets, to
have made him and all his a perpetual prey; if the watchful eye of our
gracious God, had not wonderfully preserved and delivered them. But to leave
all these: Has not the Lord moreover thundered out vengeance by his heavenly
word in the mouths of all his faithful servants thorough the whole Land, 6.
Vengeance thundered out by the mouths of all Gods servants.
for the abounding of iniquity, and that for many years together? Has he not
besides spoken unto us from heaven, as he did to Jerusalem, 7. Threatened by the
Lord from heaven from y^ fiery tent.
seeming to have enclosed us all in that dreadful tent, spread directly over
all our heads, and compassing us in round on every side (which was so terrible
to behold, with pillars of horrible darkness, pillars of fire and pillars of
blood) about some twelvemoneth before the powder-furnace? At the beholding of
with most fearful sight, all whose hearts were not utterly sensles, could not
but tremble, for fear of the Lords dreadful anger: for mine own self I
remember it well, and hope I shall never forget it. Did he not also for a long
time together, heretofore, By strange lights and flashings in the heavens.
send most strange lights and flashings in the heavens, and even at that very
instant of that threatened powder-destruction in a terrible manner. Which
howsoever they are taken now that they were but ordinary matters, thorough the
long continuance of them, and his forbearance of us, as the like forewarnings
were unto Jerusalem, and have bin to other places, which he has destroyed for
their sins; How terrible they were to us at the first, our own hearts can
bear witness.
yet let this be seriously thought of, how we generally stood then affected
with them: whether since the time that the Lord has begun in a most special
manner to threaten destruction unto us from Rome, they have not been far
more usual, till of very late years, and much more dreadful than formerly.
Let us but call to mind, how fearful these sights were unto us, when they
began in our remembrance, to be so seen in this our Nation. Most, who are of
any years, must needs remember the time, Our Chronicles have recorded them.
with the terror upon men's hearts, that was thereupon. Besides that, our
Chronicles have specially recorded those first most dreadful apparitions of
them, as of things not known before in our Nation, Ann. Eliz: 17.
or at least very rarely, November: 14.
or that the former were nothing in comparison of these. When such strange
impressions of fire and smoke were seen in the air, and the heavens from all
parts seemed to burn over our heads, as the history does mention.
Theprodigious star. Eliz: 15.
We cannot have forgotten that wonderful star, which appeared about two
years before these began, November: 18.
continuing for almost six months together; which, as it was found by the
learned, was in place celestial far above the Moon; otherwise than ever any
Comet has bin seen, or can naturally appear. So wonderful was it, as the
learned did affirm, that the like was not read of to have bin since the
beginning of the world. And therefore it was then accounted of amongst the
learned, to have bin of signification, not natural but divine, as sent from
God to warn the world of some strange work. Let us but call these things to
mind, and withal the perpetual danger that the Church of God and our Nation
have bin in, in a more special manner from Rome, since about that time, or not
much before, together with all our judgments and great deliverances since; and
then think whether they may not justly seem to foretell, that the Lord has
yet some greater work to work. Howsoever, this cannot. hurt us to be warned
by them, and to make better use of them, than Jerusalem did, Act^ 2. 19, 20.
^ith they are undoubted forerunners of the great and notable day of the Lord.
And to pass over all other former tokens, Eliz: 17. Nov: 6.
(as the two great tides recorded to have bin one within an hour after the
other, The dreadful threatenings of the Seas.
and in the same month, when these grievous flashings so appeared; the
dreadful earthquakes, at that time, since, and the like:) has not the Lord
since then, caused the seas to roar and rush in upon us, as ready and
threatening to have overwhelmed us all at once? At the very tidings whereof,
Acknowledged by all to be an evidence of y^ Lords anger.
and of the cry and scritching of all near unto them, and the perishing of so
many; what heart was so flintie, which either did not power ou^ tears, or at
least quake and tremble at that terrible approaching of the vengeance of the
Lord? Has he not also spoken unto us since then, even in the year next after,
by so many strange and sudden overflowings of the less rivers in the midst of
the Land? The insolent overflowing of the less rivers.
as if seas and floods and all had offered their service unto the Lord to
execute his fierce wrath and most just judgment in overflowing and purging
such a sinful Land, and to have swept away all of a sudden. Yea and this many
times when no such thing was feared at all, and in such places where never
fear of waters had bin heard of before. And yet to proceed: The sword of the
destroying Angel drawn out so long together.
Has he not proclaimed his vengeance in every part of our Land, by his
undaunted Heralt, the consuming pestilence, so many years together, year
after year, as this Nation hardly ever knew before? What place is there
against which the sword of the destroying Angel has not bin shaken and
stretched out in most fearful manner, as ready to be avenged presently? Can
there be a more visible messenger of the Lords anger? Is it not one of the
four chief plagues of God sent for the sins of a people, Ezekiel: 14. 19, 21.
Ezekiel: 5. 17.
by which he threatens to destroy, and a principal sore-runner of the most
dreadful, even of the bloody sword of the enemy? And has not that sword of
the blood-thirstie enemy been drawn often upon us? The sword of the bloody
enemy devouring about us.
Has it not consumed and devoured about us, and made most grievous slaughters
and desolations, as it were, before our faces, and at our very doors, for many
years together heretofore? First, in the Low Countries; after in Ireland,
laying it in many places as a desolate wilderness; when in the mean time our
selves have bin free at home; though all was principally aimed at us. And at
length set to our very hearts.
And did not the Lord after all these, in that desperate rebellion and treason
unmatchable, set the sword to the hearts of us all? Yea, did he not in that so
extreme and deadly winter following soon after (some prints whereof remain
unto this day) proclaim and denounce to the consciences of all men, that he
has a controversy with our Land? when he began with the fowls of the air,
The deadly winter threatening all creatu^es.
smiting the fish in the rivers, with very many of the creatures, and destroyed
the most sweet and pleasant flowers and herbs which grew upon the earth,
wherein we took chief delight; so as they are hardly yet repaired again;
threatening withal the utter famishing of the cattle, as if he had determined
to destroy all things from off the earth? Did he not also by reason of the
same, afterward cause amongst us a greater dearth of all victuals and other
things, The grievous dearth of all things following upon it so long.
than ever in any man's remembrance; all sorts of things being considered
together, and the continuance thereof so long, whereby so many of our poor
were brought into so extreme poverty.

And howsoever he in pity looking upon the poor, Though the Lord st^yed some
of these for a season, yet what is that to us so long as our sins remain.
restored bread unto them (having both increased the corn upon the ground, and
after by that lamentable rain in the beginning of the harvest, when the corn
was ready to be brought into the barn, made it so as it could not be kept in
long or hoarded up by cormorants, and unfit to be transported) yet did not the
dearth of all other victuals grow grievously for a long time together? Yea, and
albeit, for a little time after this, he withdrew some of the former tokens of
his fierce wrath, and turned the dearth into plenty again, yet what was that
so long as our sins not only remained, but were and are daily multiplied, so
that the cry of them goes up to heaven? Did not the Lord send his people
Quayles to satisfy their lust, Israel smitten with the flesh between their
teeth.
and yet for their grudgings and tempting of him, smit them while the flesh was
between their teeth? And did he not in like manner amongst us that year,
through that unseasonable rain leave an evident print of his displeasure upon
all or the chief kind of grain, The prints of Gods displeasure left on every
piece of bread with us after plenty sent.
to be remembered almost in every piece of bread? Yea, that we may not deceive
our selves in regard of any prosperity since; Did not the Lord after those so
prodigious fore-warnings given to Jerusalem, before her last utter desolating,
(as the history reports) grant a most prosperous time for sundry years
together, Jerusalem had diverse years prosperity before her last desolation.
like as also before the first beginning of this Captivity, as tho there had
bin now no more danger to be feared, nor that he was angry any longer; insomuch
as by their prosperity, See the Centuri^s.
they arose to a far greater height of all outrageous impiety; yet in the
midst of their jollitie and greatest security, so soon as ever they had
filled up the measure of their iniquity, vengeance came upon them without any
more pity.

But has he left us without further testimonies of his anger since? God has
not left us without witness, since then for many years together every year
some new warning.
What year has there bin, wherein we have not either sensibly felt the smart
of his displeasure, and that sometimes again and again, or bin in extreme
peril thereof, although we have bin usually plucked from the danger in an
instant; as we were from that hideous furnace: so that we have had commonly for
many years together, every year some one or mo new warning, to see if yet any
thing would do us good. And to come to later years, The grievous snow.
which are still as it were before our faces: what monument makes mention of
such a snow ever in this our Nation, so dreadful and lying so long, as therein
threatening utterly the perishing both of man and beast? The long scorching
drought.
And since the long drought in the summer, wherein the heavens were made as
iron, and the earth as brass in many parts, that it could not yield her
increase; whereby the poor dumb beasts so mourned and perished for lack of
pasture, and for the extreme scorching of the weather mixed withal? Finally,
such a dearth and scarsitie of fodder and other nourishment to save the poor
beasts alive, The dearth and scarsity of fodder. with the difficulty to
preserve the Cattle alive.
as neither our age, nor our fathers have known before. And what our own
estate had bin even for bread, the staff of man's life, (had not the Lord from
foreign Countries so graciously fed us, like as he has done sundry years)
all of us in our parts did easily see, The famishme^t since for bread, if God
had not supplied from other countries
when notwithstanding all our supplies, so many of the poor were so pinched
and distracted, to provide bread to save their lives. Finally, who is so
senseles, or whose heart is so flintie, that mourns not to hear still of so
many, who have bin able heretofore to releeve themselves and families in good
sort, by keeping a Cow or two to give them milk, The u^^er undoing of so many
poor.
(the principal relief of themselves and their poor little ones,) then
enforced to kill or sell them for very little, through lack of food, and the
money spent, or having lost them through hunger, shall never be able (as is
feared) to buy them a Cow again, to the very breaking of their hearts? Who
can deny this heavy hand of God amongst us?

Therefore to draw-towards the shutting up of this point; The Prophets
threatening vengeance every where.
what faithful messenger of God in all the Land, in consideration of these
things and the like, and of all our most heinous and crying sins, has not (as
it were) prophesied, plainly foretelling some more notable judgment, that
must needs follow after all these, if we did not repent thereby? And shall this
word in their mouths be vain; Shall he threaten and shall he not do it? God
striving with us by his spirit, as with the old world by the Ministry of Noah.
In what corner of our Land has he not striven by his Spirit, at one time or
other, by the Ministry of some of his faithful servants, which, all about
them might hear of, to have brought us to amendment? whereby all sorts have
bin convinced as well as the old world by the ministry of Noah. Who has bin
so void of all sense of sin, All convinced, wondering that he should forbear
us considering our sins.
that has not perceived the very earth to be corrupted with our abominations,
and that has not wondered that God should bear with us any longer, being so
many ways evicted: especially in such striving by so many for Popery; more for
popish Atheism, and most for profaneness, and all licentiousness, against
the most shining light of the glorious Gospel of Christ? Or who has bin so
deaf, that he has not heard of and trembled for the loud cries of the
merciless oppressors, of pride, and irreligious contempt of God amongst us,
knowing that the cry of them must needs have gone up to heaven, as will
plainly appear after? Yea, what simple man has not at one time or other (in
seeing our intolerable pride, and pitiless oppressions) cried out that some
terrible plague must needs come upon this Nation, And as plainly p^esaging
some terrible judgment.
saying thus in himself, as that poor wretch did in Jerusalem, Woe, woe, woe
to our sinful Nation? Has not many a poor soul bin of Lots mind, to remove
their abode, though to their great loss, Many of Lots mind.
for the wickedness of the places where they have dwelt, to live in such
Congregations where they might see some fear of the Lord? I speak not of
those who have made a separation from the Communion of Saints; but of such as
mourning for that rent, amongst other our heinous sins, do yet continue with
us in the true Church of Christ, as lively members thereof, and do rejoice in
all the tokens of Gods presence still with us. As namely, in all those his
ordinances and means of salvation, which through his mercy we graciously
enjoy; with our holy and joint profession of all the ways of life; as also, in
many worthy Teachers and faithful servants of God of all sorts, with his
heavenly protection and great deliverances of us all until this day; and his
chastising us so fatherly from time to time, that he may spare us, yea pulling
us continually out of the imminent danger, as we shall see more after. And that
I may speak as in the presence of Gods majesty, and appealing in reverence
and love to every soul: Has not he himself in steed of Jonah manifested this
unto us all from heaven, The Lord himself in stead of Jonah manifesting the
neerenesse of d^struction unto us.
to cause all to acknowledge it, and to leave all more without excuse, unless
we repent, that he threatened us, Not yet forty days, and England shall be
made a desolation, (like as in those dangers when he brought the destruction so
near unto us) nor yet 20. days, nor yet ten days; no, nor yet three days,
but even one day, and my fierce wrath shall be ready to be powered out upon you,
to make you an astonishment and an hissing to all Nations for your sins? For
what other thing did the threatening of destruction, so nearly to be executed,
signify, but even as to Ninivie? Surely, I am not able to conceive; I submit
it to the judgment and conscience of all the godly learned, and that Powder
vaut shall ever bear witness. Staid till this day at the instance of his
son to see if we will turn at length.
Notwithstanding, has he not once again, and even until this very day,
called back that most severe denunciation, and in his fatherly commiseration
and infinite pity spared us, as he spared that sinful City; though we have
not repented, no, not as they, in our abundant means. This he has done partly
for his faithful ones amongst us, and partly at the instant entreaty of the
dressers of his Vineyard, who have obtained of him, to spare us yet one year
longer, to see, if we will bring forth meet fruit in any time, and if no time,
nor warning will serve, then to cut us down.

Now we in steed of amending (by all these fore-warnings, We growing far worse
for all means, vengeance must needs be hard at hand.
with all the admirable deliverances and blessings which this Land does enjoy)
waxing every day much worse, and the cry of our sins, with the malice and
number of our bloody enemies being daily increased, how can we think but that
his vengeance must needs be at the doors; either that any peace can possibly
be, so much as hoped for from him, And our hearts considering it cannot but
tremble in an expectation of vengeance.
so long as our heinous sins still remain heaped up every day more and more?
What heart therefore having any fear of the Lord (considering how his anger
must needs be kindled, and remembering that implacable hatred of the
blood-thirstie enemies, but waiting their day) does not tremble in a certain
expectation of some imminent and far more dreadful vengeance, than ever we
felt in former times, unless our hearts be some way stirred up to pacify his
heavenly Majesty by turning unto him to prevent the same. Conclusion.


And therefore to conclude this point: All these former considerations
proclaim that our visitation draws near.
All these things being laid together, and set as it were in one view before
our faces, principally, that above all other signs the Lord has given us,
that our third so terrible and infallible an admonition, in the hellish
powder-furnace, since none of his warnings shall be in vain, who can deny, but
that he daily cries in the ears of every one of us with a loud voice, as he
cried to Ezechiel, Thy visitation, oh England draws near. Therefore repent,
watch and pray, lest I come upon thee of a sudden, and make thee as Jerusalem;
because no warning will serve, neither will thou know the time of thy
visitation, nor be awaked out of thy deep security. But of this more fully
hereafter, when we shall come to see the sins of our Land, written by the
Lord himself in the abominations of Judah before her Captivity, and that in
such capital letters, that he that runns by may read them. And how we do
justify rebellious Judah, living in these days of the shining light of the
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, under such a shelter as the Lords Anointed,
and also under so good laws commanding obedience thereunto; whereby our sins
must needs be far more heinous and inexcusable than theirs, or than ever
they were in former time.

And this may serve for a first cause, which we have to watch and pray: because
the Lord cries so loud unto us all, That our visitation draws near, and that
he will come on us suddenly, unless we repent speedily.

CHAP. IIII.
The withdrawing of the Lords glorious presence from his Church, is both an
evident sign of his displeasure, and amanifest threatening of his departure.
And what cause we have thereupon to watch and to pray to pacify his Majesty,
and to hold him still amongst us.

Verse. 3. And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the Cherub
whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house.
A Second principal point which the Lord would have us all to observe to this
purpose is out of this third verse. The glory remoouing from the Cherub to the
threshold of the Temple shows God ready to depart unless they repent.
In which he revealed to the Prophet how the visitation of the City or the
executioners of the vengeance determined upon it did draw near; this is given
as an evident token thereof: That the glorious presence of the Lord, named the
glory of God, the God of Israel was gone from the Cherub that is from that
place in the Temple, where the Lord had promised to dwell for ever, and from
whence he was wont to show his presence most sensibly (for from thence he used
to give answers) and now it stood on the threshold of the Temple, as ready to
depart and utterly to leave that house and his people for their sins. In this
therefore God would have all men to take notice.

That it is a most certain sign of his purpose to leave a people, The
withdrawing the lively tokens of Gods presence, a sign of his departure and of
vengeance at hand
and of his vengeance hard at hand, when he begins to withdraw the most lively
and sensible tokens of his presence from those places where he was wont to
dwell and show himself most familiarly. As here for example, Although the
Temple remain with the Arc and mercy feate, from whence he was wont to speak
immediately, from between the Cherubims; yet the glory is removed: the signs
are there still but not the lively presence as had been in former time, which
was indeed the true glory.

For further confirmation of this point: God well pleased with his people wont
to witness his presence by some apparent sign. As in the Journey toward
Canaan.
This we may observe in the book of God. That when he has been well pleased
with his people, and purposed to remain with them, he then has been wont
ordinarily to show his presence and that (under the law) by some such visible
or audible signs, as whereby al might behold and hear him, or at least
perceive him some way. As in all the iourny toward Canaan, Exodus 33. 3.
he went uisibly before them in the pillar of fire, and the pillar of the
cloud. But when they had angered him by the golden calfe, he threatens that he
would not go with them, that is, he would not go before them in that visible
manner, as he had been wont, to bring them to the land flowing with milk and
honey, because they were a stiffenecked people. Moses urges the Lord so to go
before the^. For that it was the chief toke^ of his favor.
He would send his Angel with them, but in his own glorious presence he would
not go before them as in former time, whereupon Moses is importunate with him,
that he would never carry them thence, if his presence went not with them. And
that it could not be known otherwise, that he and his people had found favor
in his sight, but when he went visibly with them. Thus Moses never leaves him,
until he has prevailed, that he will go with them as he was wont.

The same we may see in the days of Joshua, Secondly in the days of Iesuah
because of Achans sin.
where the Lord having withdrawn his lively pre^ence, and suffered his people
to be overthrown before the men of Ai; Ios. 7. 6.
Joshua falls upon his face before the Arc; fasting and mourning and after a
sort expostulating with his Majesty, Verse. 12.
for that he would suffer his great name to be dishonored. Whereupon God
tells him plainly that he had indeed withdrawn himself from them, because
they were execrable for Achans sin, neither would he be with them any more,
unless they destroyed the excommunicate from amongst them.

So likewise when he was angry with Saul, 3 When he will cast of Saul he will
show him no sign of his presence, n^r answer him any way.
that he would cast him off, he does not only take his good spirit of wisdom
and government from him, and sends an evil spirit upon him to disquiet, and to
vex him, but moreover when he asked council of him in his extremity, he
answers him not, neither by dreams nor by Vrim, 1 Samuel 16. 14.
nor yet by the Prophets. Saul had the Priests with the Vrim before the Arc, 2 Samuel 28. 6.
from whence the Glory was wont to appear from the Cherubims: but the glory
was remooved, the Lord gave him no answer any more from thence.

The like might be showed still in the story further, as we shall see after in
the particulars, but this may suffice for the present to manifest this point.

To return therefore to our selves: we are first to inquire what are the most
evident signs of Gods glorious The signs of the Lords presence in the days
of the Gospel, where by to judge of our estate.
and hereby we are to judge of our estate, and whether in regard hereof we
have not just cause to fear the Lords departure, without speedy repentance,
and all to give our selves to watch and pray.

Like as the word sincerely preached and the Sacraments administered according
to our Saviors institution are the most infallible marks of the true visible
Churches of Christ, amongst which he has promised his presence, so long as
these are duly observed, maintained and reverenced; so we may mark also through
the book of God, four most lively evidences, of his glorious presence in his
Church amongst his people.

One whereof is more inward, felt chiefly in the souls and consciences of men,
Four principally.
to wit, the Spirit of the Lord accompanying the word, and the powerful
operation thereof in men's hearts, The first inward viz: the spirit of God.
in and by the same word, to cause all men to acknowledge the Lord to be there.

The other three are more outward and apparent to the view of the world, The
other three outward.
although they be nothing but the fruits and effects of the same spirit. The
first of which three, Abundance of sanctyfied knowledge.
is, when the Lord gives to his people abundance of saving and sanctifying
knowledge of his heavenly word. The second when together with this knowledge,
he works in them true holiness of life and conversation and obedience to the
same word: and withal peace Holiness with peace and unity


The third is in protection, when he declares himself 3. Protection.
in shielding and protecting them and overthrowing all the plots of the
enemies, or casting a fear upon the enemy, that they dare not rise up against
his Church and chosen flock.

For the first of these which is more inward, The spirit and the word going
together are the tenor of the Lords covenant
viz: The Spirit of the Lord, speaking and working powerfully in the word. It
is not the word alone, nor the Spirit alone, but the word and Spirit going
together. The Spirit accompanying the word, and speaking to the hearts and
consciences of men, out of the mouths of his servants. This is the Tenor and
the very substance of Gods covenant with his Church, for the infallible
demonstration of his presence in it and with it. And I will make this my
covenant with them (says the Lord to his Church) My spirit which is upon thee,
Isay. 59. 11.
and my word which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy
seed, from henceforth for ever.

To make this more plain;

As in the time of the law, As the answers from the Arc then.
not the Arc alone, nor the mercy seat covered with the Cherubims, but the
answers from the Arc given immediately from God, were were the undoubted
evidences of his most glorious presence amongst them, So the spirit speaking to
men's souls now For example when it is Powerful in converting and drawing men
after it.
so this must needs be acknowledged of all: That not the Gospel alone, nor the
bare ministry thereof, but the powerful working of the spirit thereby,
speaking to every man's soul and conscience is the most evident demonstration
of the same glorious presence in the days of the Gospel. As for example, when
the word is lively and mighty in operation, powerful in converting men's souls
and drawing the people of God after it. H^b, 4 12.
This is the true presence and arm of the Lord. As at Pen^ecost.
As it was when the Holy Ghost was sent down appearing in form of cloven
tongues like fire, to show the heavenly fire, that should accompany the word
and inflame the hearts of the elect: like as it then wrought wonderfully upon
the consciences of the hearers, and that very work was an infallible witness
of the presence of the Lord, so is it now according to the manner of the
working and measure thereof. When by the same spirit some are pricked at their
hearts with remorse for their sins and made to cry out; luke 24. 31.
Men and brethren, what shall we do? When men's har^es burn at the hearing of
it.
as those who were so pricked at the hearts at Peter's sermon. When other have
their hearts burning within them, as the two Disciples going toward Emaus, at
the opening and applying of the Scriptures unto them. When as others are
smitten down to the earth in the sense of their own vileness and the Majesty
of Jesus Christ, Acts: 9. 4 5.
as persecuting Saul who was made thereby a preaching Paul: Others smitten
down at the voice of Christ.
And when others are compelled to confess. That they never heard men speak
so, as those who came of purpose being sent by the Pharisees, Ioh. 7. 46.
to catch our Savior. Or as the poor simple man who coming in and hearing
the word so Preached, 1 Cor. 14. 24. 25.
is made thereby to fall upon his face, and enforced to acknowledge, That God
is in these men of a truth: when others also shall receive such a strong
assurance of the truth of God taught unto them, 1 l^h. 2. 27.
being indeed his very word, H^br. 11. 35.
as they cannot be drawn away from it, by any violence or fear, Gal. 1. 8.
no, nor yet by any persuasions, though an Angel should come from heaven and
teach them otherwise.

And to conclude this point, When the blind see, deaf hear, dead raised up by
it.
This must needs be confessed of all to be the most clear and invincible
testimony of his most gracious and glorious presence and of his spirit powered
plentifully upon his Church, luk 4. 18.
when by the power of the word, Matthew: 16. 17.
the blind eyes are opened, the deaf hear, Ioh: 1. 12, 13.
the stony hearts are bruised, the dead in sin are raised to a new and holy
life: Acts 16. 14. and 2. 37.
for this is not a a work of flesh and blood, but of the Spirit of the Lord
only. This a principal part of the visible presence in the Primitive Church.
This was a principal part of that lively presence, whereby he was so
wonderful, and after a sort visible in the primitive Church, when the same day
were added to the Church about three thousand souls by the preaching of Peter
and the other Apostles; Acts 2. 16, 17.
and after, when the Church increased so admirably. And by this he has
promised to be with his faithful ones, Matthew: 28. 20.
teaching his truth sincerely unto the end of the world. And of the promise to
be with his to the end of the world.
This finally is the full accomplishment of that promise; To power down his
Spirit upon his people in the days of the Gospel, when he would gather his
Church in any place, as we may see through all the History of the Acts. And
even as it was then, so is it now according to the measure of grace; whereby he
sends down his holy Spirit upon any Congregation. And in some Congregations
under faithful Ministeries, all these, (blessed be God) are apparent, thus
graciously manifesting his presence thereby. And therefore the more generally
that this operation appears in Preachers and people, the more visibly does the
glory of the Lord show it self, and the more security may such a people have
for the certainty of the Lords presence continued amongst them. Every man may
discern and know it hereby.

But contrarily, The contrary a token of Gods departure, and of judgments
approaching.
this is as evident a sign of Gods departure from a people, and of some heavy
judgment hasting upon them, when either the preaching shall become generally
cold and fruitless (except in some small remnant, Es^: 6. 9, 10, 11.
which evermore the Lord does reserve in his Church) or though it be powerfully
preached by some few, When the word shall be without power. When ^en ^ecome
rather worse by it.
yet men shall become generally more obstinate, blind, hard-hearted, and
without feeling, given up to follow their lusts with greediness, when by it
they shall have their hearts as hard as the nether millstone, or the Smithes
stithie, that the oftener they are smitten, the harder they are. And further
also this is so palpable, that it may be felt, when men shall come to this
height of profaneness, that hearing the most excellent Prophets of God, they
shall hear them only as those who have pleasant voices, Only hearing not
doing.
listening to their words, but not doing any thing in effect, which they teach,
as the people heard the Prophet Ezechiel. Ezec: 33 31, 32.
Thus it went with them very generally before this Captivity, Thus before this
Captivity.
according as the Lord had bidden the Prophet Isaiah to denounce, Isai: 6. 9,
10, 11.
threescore years and more before it came; that by hearing they should hear
and not understand, and seeing they should see and not perceive, but have their
hearts made more fat, least they should convert and be healed. And ever the
nearer the vengeance approached, Ever more sensible the nearer the vengeance.
the more apparent this judgment was, as appears in the Prophets, until
their Land was laid desolate, like as the Lord had threatened them before.
Matthew: 13. 14.
So was it also before that last utter desolation of that Nation of the Jews:
Marc: 4. 12.
whereupon we may observe this, Luc: 8. 10.
that no one Scripture is oftener alleged by our Savior, Ioh: 12. 40.
and by Paul, and cited by all the Evangelists, Acts 28. 26.
than that of Isaiah is against them; Rom: 11. 8.
to show how that was fulfilled in their obstinacy, which was so long before
denounced by the Prophet, Ioh: 12. 39.
and that the fulfilling of it, was a clear evidence, Whence this sentence so
often beaten on by our Savior, and the Prophet.
that the Lord intended their ejection and subversion. Thus says our Savior
plainly, Therefore could they not believe, because Esaias says again, He
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see
with their eyes, The most dreadful sign of the Lords departure, when he shall
begin to pluck away them that stand ^n the breach.
nor understand with their hearts, and should be converted and I should heal
them.

But of all other this is the most dreadful sign of the Lords removing from
any place, when he shall begin to take those his servants away, or to cause
their tongues to cleave to the roofes of their mouths, by whom he was wont to
speak ordinarily in this powerful manner, and to whom he usually gave this
testimony in the consciences (...): 3. 25, 26, 27.
of them that heard them. That the Lord spoke in them indeed: when he shall
pluck away those whom formerly he kept, Exodus: 32. 10.
as Moses in the breach to stay his vengeance, what does he else but say, Let
me alone that I may destroy them at once. Psalm: 106. 23.
Thus he dealt with the most faithful Prophets before the Captivity, Ezec 22.
30, 31.
shutting up Jeremy in prison, Ier: 36. 5. and 37. 38. Ezec: 3. 25.
letting Ezechiel be in bonds, afterward removing him from them. Or when the
Prophets in steed of miting at sin, with the mighty arm of the spirit of the
Lord, viz: his own word powerfully preached, shall begin to smite with the
weak arm of flesh, 2 Cor: 10. 4.
namely, the enticing words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor: 2. 1, 4.
and with the ostentation of humane learning and eloquence, Or when the
Prophets shall smite with the weak arm of flesh.
and this as shouldering forth the pure word of the Lord sincerely preached, as
being too weak and mean. The more sensible this judgment grows in any
Church, the more is the glory of the Lord removed to the very threshold; the
more also is his utter departure to be feared, and the final leaving of such a
people without unfeyned and speedy seeking to pacify him.

Now to return to our selves, and hereby also to discern of our estate; To
consider whether the Gospel has y^ same powerful operation as formerly.
Let us all who ever have had any true feeling of this working of the Spirit of
the Lord in us, and whose consciences are not utterly feared, or who have used
to observe the manner of Gods working in his Church, enter into a due
consideration hereof. Let us examine this between the Lord and our own
consciences, whether the preaching of the Gospel have still that operation
amongst us, which sometimes it has had to convert men's souls, to draw
multitudes after it in the love of it self, unless it be happily to hear
some man of fame, or for his rare and singular gifts, or for some like
by-respects. And whether this power of it be not fearfully abated, Except in
some few places, and removing.
except in some very few places; and those for most part, where formerly it
has not bin, as in some rude countries toward the Northern parts, whither it
is daily observed to remove, as ready to take the farewell, when it has
gathered forth Gods chosen of them, and convinced the rest. And whether Satan,
Antichrist, and this evil world, with the pleasures and pomp of it, do not
draw men wonderfully from Jesus Christ, to follow after them: whether
multitudes rush not violently to all licentious profaneness, in steed of the
zealous profession of the Gospel of Christ: others to Popery and superstition
again, which was so far rooted out of our Land, and by the most abhorred, and
this after the time that God has more discovered the abomination of that
bloody religion, than ever heretofore. Let us but call to mind, Whether the
Lord speak so sensibly to men's souls as heretofore.
how it has bin formerly with us, in those places where God was wont to speak
unto us by his messengers, and how it is now for most part: whether in many
places, where the Ark of God still remains, I mean the Word and Sacraments,
whether, I say, the glorious and lively voice of the Spirit, that piercing of
our hearts, that burning in our souls, with those unspeakeable comforts which
we were wont to find therein, be not decayed exceedingly? whether it be not
with all who are fallen to fashion themselves to the extreme licentiousness
and looseness of the time; Whether it be not with all the licentious, as with
Saul, that God speaks to them no more.
even as it was with Saul, That the Lord speaks to them no more, tho they have
happily the same Preachers, and the book of the Law, and hear the curses
against their sins, yet they neither feel nor fear them any more? whether
that lively presence which did shake their hearts, be not utterly gone? That
men be not generally more void of feeling and fear.
yea, whether we do not see this generally, that men are every where more void
of all feeling of sin, and of the fear of any judgment, whereby that
spiritual judgment does daily seize upon us most evidently? That by hearing
the threatenings against us, we hear but understand no more; Nor any more moved
as formerly.
and seeing the signs and tokens of his wrath for our sins, we see them
indeed, but we are moved no longer with them; but as they, Hearing hear not,
and seeing see not.
so we have our hearts more fat, our ears more deaf, and our eyes still more
blinded? And if we shall find it thus, That these and all other signs
mentioned, are in great measure come upon us, let us answer unfaynedly, whether
the Lord does not sensibly threaten and proclaim to depart and leave us
altogether, Whether God do not hereby threaten his departure, and it be not
full time to seek him.
unless we repent; having thus far already withdrawn himself from us. And to
conclude this point, whether it be not full time to seek to pacify and stay
him amongst us, if we be not weary of his abode with us, and of our happiness
thereby.

But of this more in the next Chapter, where we shall have cause to inquire of
the outward tokens of the Lords glorious presence, and what a removal he has
made thereof, as likewise we see that he has of this inward. Thus much
therefore shall suffice to have spoken of this second cause, which we have all
to watch and pray, yea, even to weep and cry after him, to return unto us
again, in showing amongst us the power of his Spirit, as ever in former time,
and to abide with us for ever, that he never leave us to our bloody enemies.

CHAP. V.
How the Lord is most unwilling to depart from his Church, so long as there is
any other remedy, which he manifests in his often threatening to take his
leave, before he go indeed. And of the outward tokens both of his glorious
presence in his Church, and of his departure from it. And what cause we have
thereupon to watch and pray continually.

ANd the Glory of the God of Israel was removed, The Lord makes sundry removes
before he depart; all which were tokens and forerunners of his departure.
etc. A third point specially to be observed is this: That the Glory of God
removed not once only, but five several times in this vision, before it
departed; and that it removed not all at once, but so often, going away by
degrees, and that most sensibly. By which he would cause the Prophet most
clearly to behold his holiness and justice; that he must needs depart from
them for their iniquities, wherewith they grieved him; and that he was now
taking his farewell: and yet withal also to see his mercy and tender
compassion, and how he was (as we may so speak) most unwilling to depart and
leave his people to so many miseries; even Jerusalem his own City to such a
desolation, if any remedy would have bin found. This he makes known unto
them, to see if it would work to stir them up to seek to retain his presence
amongst them.

For the evident manifestation hereof, The first remove. Chap. 9. 3.
First, the Glory removes from the Cherub, and stands upon the threshold, as
ready to depart. Secondly, it removes higher, and stands over the door of the
house. Thirdly, it removing from above the door, and standing again upon the
Cherubims, the Cherubims mounted upward from the earth toward heaven, as ready
to take their flight, and leave the Temple altogether. Fourthly, after this,
the Glory removes to the midst of the City; thereby seeming to warn the City
of the Lords departure. Lastly, from thence it removes out of the City unto
the Mount of Olives, as utterly taking leave of them, and giving them a last
farewell, until their Captivity was accomplished, and his anger appeased.
These were the removes.

Here we are all again to inquire yet more carefully, Whether he has not made
as many sensible removes amongst us outwardly.
whether he has not made as many and as sensible removes of his glory amongst
us of this our Nation, and thereby given us as many plain evidences of his
departure; not now in a vision, but so as all men must needs see and confess
it: and also whether withal he has not as clearly and tenderly manifested
(as I may so say) his unwillingnesse to depart from us, if any thing can serve
to reform us. This is a point of most serious consideration, and such a one,
as it were an exceeding mercy of the Lord, and a token of his gracious purpose
toward us, if he would but vouchsafe us hearts generally to consider of aright,
as in his presence and as we must all know it one day.

To the end we may conceive it the better, we are first to consider wherein the
glory of the Lord appears outwardly in his Church so as it may be beholden of
all round about it, even of the very enemies. As for the former evidence it
being more inward, is to be perceived chiefly of the inward man, the soul and
conscience, when God so speaks unto them.

This outward Glory consists in three things principally, The outward glory
consists in three things.
as was said, whereby not only the Lord himself is magnified amongst his own
people, yea to be seen and acknowledged of others, but also by which he makes
his people to be glorious in the eyes of others, and to be honored and feared
of their enemies.

The first is, First in abundance of heavenly and sanctified knowledge.
when he bestows upon his people such abundance of heavenly and sanctified
knowledge of his word with an hungring after the same, as that the earth
seems to be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, like the waters that cover
the Sea, Esa. 2. 2, 3.
as the Prophet Esaias speaks. This he promises to do in his Church when he
will show his glory in it, in the days of the Gospel. At what time the Church
being exalted as upon the topps of the mountains, there shall be such a hungring
and thirsting after the word of the Lord that men shall incite and provoke one
another, saying, Come, let us go up to the house of the Lord, for he will
teach us his ways and we will walk in his paths. Where he thus puts his
laws into the minds of his people, at least in a vehement desire of it. That
they all seem to know him from the least to the greatest of them; this is a
visible token of Gods covenant with such a people and the pardon of their
sins, Ier. 31. 33, 34.
that he is their God and this is his glory upon them. 2 In holiness of l^fe
accompanying it.


A second visible token is this, when this knowledge is accompanied with
obedience and holiness of life, when he thus writes his law in their hearts,
Ezech: 36. 23. 24. 25. 26.
creating in them new hearts and new spirits. Thus the Lord promises to be
sanctified in his own people before the eyes of their enemies, when he shall
cleanse them from all their filthy sins, as with pure water; when he puts his
spirit so upon them, as to cause them to walk in his statutes, to keep his
judgments and to do them: when he puts his fear so generally into their
hearts, as to cause them not to depart from him. Chiefly when he gives peace
and unity, one heart and one way.
Then he makes this covenant for himself, that he will not depart from them.
And chiefly when together heerewith, he gives peace and unity amongst them,
that they have one heart and one way. Ier. 32. 39. 40.
That the Lamb may lodge with the Wolf without danger; Isai. 11. 6.
the poor harmless Christian, with them who have been by nature as bloody
as Wolves; when the little child may lead the Lion, even a child bringing the
word of the Lord may persuade and lead them, who were otherwise as proud and
fierce as Lions. And when the sucking child may play upon the hole of the
Aspe; when the poor servants of the Lord, who are for harmelesnesse as little
children, may be without peril in the presence of them, who were sometimes as
venomous as the Aspe and the Viper. When they shall feed and communicate
together cheerfully and lovingly in the word and Sacraments, Holy unity the
mark whereby all may know Christ Disci^ples
and in all the religion and service of the Lord, and none to hurt in all the
mountain of the Lords holiness, within the bounds and limits of his Church.
By this all must needs see, Ioh: 13. 53.
that such are indeed the Disciples of Christ, when they love one another. And
when in regard hereof, the feet of them who bring the glad tidings of peace, to
wit, of all the faithful preachers of the Gospel, publishing life and
salvation and working this obedience and love, Holiness and unity make Gods
people glorious in the eyes of their enemies.
are beautiful, when their coming among a people is most acceptable, as of
the messengers of the Lord of hosts.

Now both these are such evident demonstrations of the glory of the Lord upon a
people, that they make them amongst whom they are conspicuous, and eminent to
be a glorious people, and cause them to be had in honor, and to be feared of
all nations round about them.

This Moses shows plainly in Deuteronomy. 4. Deuteronomy. 4. 5. 6. 7. etc.
Where he thus speaks to the people of Israel: Behold, I have taught you
ordinances and laws, as the Lord my God commanded me, that you should do
even so, in the Land whether you go to possess it. Keep them therefore and
do them; for this is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the people,
which shall hear al these ordinances, and shall say, Only this people is wise
and of understanding and a great nation: for what nation is so great, unto whom
the Gods comes so near unto them, as our God is near to us in all that we
call unto him for.

The Lord himself also has bidden all his people to glory in this, The Lords
people bidden to glory in these.
That they know and fear him, not in their wisdom, strength, or riches;
declaring all the glory of these earthly things to be nothing to that, I^r. 9.
23. 24.
and all the true outward glory of a people to consist in their holiness and
peace among themselves, and in the right knowledge and sincere profession of
his heavenly word. As the kingdom of heaven, which is inwardly felt, in every
one of Gods Servants, Romans 14. 17.
is in righteousness, peace and heavenly joy: The kingdom of heaven in
holiness peace and joy.
so when these abound amongst any people there is the kingdom of heaven truly
begun, and Christ reigning visibly. Such were those worthy congregations
mentioned in the Acts, Christ visibly reigns in such congregations.
and those to which Paul writ his Epistles; and such are all Churches which are
like unto them at this day. And even as these things also do more abound and
are more apparent among them; so are they still more glorious, and Christ more
evidently holding up his scepter there. Thus much for the two first parts of
the outward glory.

The third principal thing, 3. The Third principal outward sign is his
glorious protection of his people.
whereby the Lord is wont to declare his glory in his Church so brightly, as
that it may be beholden of all about, is in the protection and defense thereof.
And this is more visible also, when he does miraculously deliver it, plaguing
and overthrowing all the enemies, with all their wicked devises, which they
plot against his people.

To omit the careful protection of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, As 1. of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
with all theirs, in all places wheresoever they went; the smiting of their
enemies, and that herein stood a chief part of their honor: Genesis 20. 16. 26.
9, 10, 11, 12. and 27. 42. and 28. 29, 31. and 24. 32.
was not this that glory whereby he did so grace his Church in Egypt, when he
sheltered his people, and made them to grow, notwithstanding the cruel
oppressions of their enemies? when they were as the bush in the midst of the
fire that yet consumed not? 2. Church in Egypt.
And secondly, when he plagued the Egyptians, and still kept his people safe in
the midst of all those miraculous judgments.

Thirdly, 3. Going before them, and protecting them in all the way toward
Canaan.
when he went before them out of Egypt and through the wilderness toward
Canaan, in the pillar of fire and of the cloud, so conducting them that the
enemies could not come at them, neither by day nor night. In regard whereof, he
being angry with them for the golden calfe, Exodus 33 3, 4.
had threatened that he would not go up with them, because they were a
stiff-necked people: as they sorrowed and wept for this, so Moses in
particular says, verse. 15.
If thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence. And wherein, says he,
shall it be known that I and thy people have found favor in thy sight? This
the most clear testimony of Gods presence.
Shall it not be when thou go up with us? So I and thy people shall have
pre-eminence before all the people of the earth: for which importunity of his
the Lord condescended thus still to continue his happy presence in that
apparent manner.

Fourthly, 4. In miraculous keeping their land.
the Lord declared this his glorious presence in the miraculous keeping of
their land, that no enemy should invade it, nor so much as once dare to
attempt the same, or think of any such matter; no, not then when all their men
went up generally thrice in the year at their solemn feasts to Jerusalem from
all the parts of their land, and none left at home to keep their frontiers
from invasion, or houses from spoiling, but a few poor women and children.
This continued so long as they were careful to know and obey him.
As he had promised this unto them, so he faithfully performed it, so long as
they continued to know and fear him. So long as they made any conscience to
retain those two former parts of his glory in knowledge and obedience, Exodus
23. 21, 22.
so long also continued this their gracious preservation: yea, so long as they
would but humble themselves under his hand at those his threatenings and at the
shaking of his rods against them, Psalm: 107.
promising amendment, and would then believe and obey his Prophets, so long
abode this glory with them.

This the Lord wrought moreover in such strange deliverances of them from all
that did offer to assail them, 5. In their wonderful deliverances and
overthrowes of their enemies.
and in such great overthrowes of their proud enemies, as never were heard of
before in any nation. As in their delivery in the sea, As in the sea.
with the overthrow of the proud Egyptian: many a time in the wilderness: The
wilderness.
in setting them also in Canaan by Iosuah; Setting them in Canaan.
no man being able to resist them, so long as they obeyed him. So likewise in
the days of the Judges, In the days of the Judges.
though they provoked him by their rebellions, yet ever usually when they
sought him again, humbling themselves, he showed himself their deliverer,
Ios: 10. 13.
fighting for them both from heaven and earth, with hail and thunder, and all
his hosts, causing the very Sun to stand still until the people avenged
themselves upon their enemies.

And yet more specially in their famous victories in the days of Samuel
against the Philistims. Of Samuel.
In Iehosaphats of Iehosaphat.
victory against the Ammonites, 2 Chronicles: 20. 21, 23.
the Moabites, and them of mount Seir, causing their enemies to turn their
swords upon themselves, and every one to fall upon another. But above all, 2
Chr: 32. 20, 21.
in that wonderful deliverance of Jerusalem in the days of Ezekiah, Ezekiah
in the overthrow of Senacherib.
and that notable overthrow of that proud and blasphemous Senacherib, and his
huge Army; when the Ang^ll of the Lord slew an hundred and foures^ore thousand
of the enemies in one night: upon which considerations, and the like, in former
times, the Holy Ghost faith, that God is well known in Judah, By (...) Gods
name was great in Israel.
his name is great in Israel. All the world talked of his name and feared.
Because as his Tabernacle was there, so there he brake the arrows and the
bow. There he showed his puissance and his power, Psalm: 76. 1, 2, 3, 4. 12.
restrayning the rage of the enemies, and turning it unto his praise, and so
there made himself terrible to the Kings of the earth.

To conclude this point likewise. A principal part of the glory foretold to be
on y^ Churches in y^ days of the Gospel.
This is a principal part of that glory of the Church in the earth, which is
so foretold by the Prophet Esaias to be in the Churches of God, in the
flourishing estate thereof, in the days of the Gospel. That when the Lord
should wash away the filthiness of his people by his word and Spirit, he would
create upon every place of Mount Sion, Esai: 4. 4, 5, 6.
and upon the assemblies thereof, a cloud and a smoke by day, and the shining
of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory should be a defense: and a
covering should be for a shadow in the day from the heat, and a place of
refuge, and a covert from the storm and from the rain. In which words, all
these parts of the Lords glory upon his Church are comprised, evidently
foretelling, that as he would adorn and glorify his Church then with
abundance of knowledge and holiness; so his protection should shelter it from
all danger, as the coverings did the Tabernacle. These the glory of the
Primitive Church. So at this day.
And this indeed was the glory of the Primitive Church, according as it was
spoken of by Esaias. Yea, every wicked man, whose conscience is not utterly
scared, when he comes into any such a Congregation, where these three shine
bright, is enforced to acknowledge such a place to be a glorious and blessed
place, and God to be there; until that men have by their disobedience to the
word, and by their maliciousness, put out the eye of their soul and
conscience altogether.

To apply all this. Application.
And first to this people of Judah: If we mark well, First to Judah. How God
had withdrawn the outward glory to foreshew his departure.
we may clearly see how God had wonderfully withdrawn from them that outward
glory which formerly they had enjoyed, and had also showed them evident tokens
of his departure in every one of these respects, before he went away utterly.
And first for holy knowledge, 1. All holy knowledge decayed.
when they daily waxed more blind and senseless by all the pains of their
Teachers, and all other their forewarnings, Isai: 6. 10.
so that they were worse therein then the ox and the ass, Isai: 1. 2.
as the Prophet Esaias complained many years before. 2 Holiness gone.
Secondly, for holiness of life, the abominations following will evidently
demonstrate, 2 Chro: 36. 15, 16.
for reverence of the Lords messengers, in that they misused them until there
was no remedy. So for peace and unity, So peace and unity departed.
when Ephraim was against Manasseh, Manasses against Ephraim, and both against
Judah: when all the godly, Is^i: 9. 21.
who followed the true Prophets, and cleaued only to the word and the covenant
of the Lord, were generally hated, made as signs and wonders, like as the
Prophets were whose word they obeyed. Isai: 8. 18.
And lastly for protection, 3 Protection often almost gone.
when as the glory was almost gone in Ezechias days, when he himself and
Jerusalem were in that danger by Senecharib: and clean gone by Manasses, at
what time he was carried away captive into Babylon. Afterward also was Josiah
their shelter cut down by the enemy, Lost utterly in Josiah.
which was the next and most manifest forerunner of the final departure and of
their glory. So they had after this, overthrow after overthrow, until this
plague was utterly come upon them, and their glory also departed without hope
of recovery, till Gods anger was fully accomplished upon them. Thus we have
seen this point at large, Glory departed till Gods anger accomplished.
wherein the outward glory of the Church consists, and how all this was fully
verified amongst them, according to the vision: That God had indeed made all
these removals of their glory before his final departure.

But now let us in the second place, Application to our selves.
return home, from Judah, unto our selves, and lay it near unto our hearts,
considering well, first, whether the Lord have not begun as sensible removals
of all this glory, Whether God threaten not us by as sensible removals.
even amongst our selves, in every one of these kinds, sundry ways and at
sundry times, proceeding by degrees. And whether he do not thereby threaten
manifestly, that he is purposed utterly to remove, and to take away all his
glory and his gracious presence from us, and to leave us to the will of our
enemies, to be made a reproach and a shame when he is departed from us, unless
we prevent and retain him, by our speedy amendment.

To begin and apply in order, 1. Removing so generally our delight in his word.
as in the presence of the Lord. Where is that delight of ours in most places,
that we were wont to take in his word, our inciting and encouraging one
another; Come, let us go up to the house of the Lord: our talking of it, and
our rejoicing in it, as of our chief glory? Do we not in steed hereof wax
weary of it very generally, hearing it commonly for a fashion, or for
satisfying of the law, or some like respect? Are we not grown to this pass,
Growing to be ashamed of talking of it.
for the most part, to be ashamed of talking or reasoning of it? Yea, what is
more common, than in steed hereof, to discourage one another from being forward
in following after it, and those holy assemblies of his people, where he has
promised his presence for ever? Are not our people in steed hereof, set rather
to flock to all kinds of vanities, Flocking to all vanities.
and places of the worse resort, to dishonor and provoke the Lord; even to
those places, where is open profession of all impiety, and schools of all
lewdness and ungratiousnesse? Let the ordinary frequenting of so many profane
and lascivious plays fitter for Sodom, than the Church of God, be witness.

Where is that holy, 2. Our sound knowledge of the word in many places.
sound, and powerful knowledge of God amongst the people become, which in
regard of the long and quiet time of the Gospel, that through the riches of the
Lords mercy we have enjoyed, should have grown to ripeness, Amongst the
people.
that which was wont so to abound amongst us in many goodly Congregations,
whereby the Popish sort were ashamed of themselves for their ignorance:
specially (as was said) that love which has bin so declared in hungring after
the word, in delighting in it as our felicity. Nay, what is become, for most
part, of that singular commendation for readiness in the Scriptures, and
soundness of judgment in the word of the Lord, Amongst most of our Gentry,
having most means,
wherein many of our Gentry and cheifer sort in many places did sometimes
excel; for which they were much to be commended; and indeed it was their duty
far so to excel: for they of all other, have the most means, for all good
helps and leisure, to get the knowledge of the Lord; and most bound thereto.
and also are most bound thereunto, Prove: 17. 16.
for the abundance of Gods blessings, which they enjoy principally to that end,
to buy wisdom, as Solomon says? All formerly to silence the proudest Papist
Whereas heretofore many of them were able to put to silence the proudest
Papists amongst us, in displaying the abominations of Popery, and in
maintayning the Gospel of Christ, committed unto us in trust to that end, is
it not to be feared, (our swaggering courses considered, and our general
neglect of religion) that we are in the greatest part by far, become unable to
maintain the one, Now suffering the Popish sort to insult over us.
or to confute the other, or so much as to speak with any lively feeling of
the truth of the Lord, or yet as having any sound love of the one, or dislike
of the other. And how should it be otherwise, when we for most part give over
our selves wholly to our pleasures with all licentiousness, Chiefly through
living in pleasure.
or to follow after the honors and riches of the world; and which is yet far
worse, and more to be feared, (as an evident forerunner of vengeance) when we
are so generally ashamed to be noted, for being forward or zealous, in the
profession of the Gospel of Christ? On the other side, are not many of the
Popish sort grown to be exceeding cunning in the mystery of Antichrists
iniquity, Popish sort grown cunning in their mystery.
and the depths of Satan, whereby they deceive themselves, and others, (for
that is all the glory that can justly be given them) seeing in the first
principles of the knowledge of our blessed God, out of his heavenly word, they
are commonly known to be far more ignorant, Though more ignorant than our
children in the first principles of Christ.
than our little children, which are but catechized in the faith of Christ? Are
not even ordinarily the simpler sort of them, waxen generally so perfect in the
chief points of their religion, by their pains which they take (though alas
to their perdition) for setting up the throne of the Beast again, as that they
are able therein to go about the greatest part of the chief among us, and put
us to silence? We can many of us be the best companions for them that may be,
Many of us good companions for them.
and can talk with them, of any matter of vain pleasure and commodity, and
happily in scorning at all them, who show any more love to the word, and more
dislike of their abominations, than we do; and who is so good a fellow, as one
of them, though a deadly enemy to the Gospel, and all that sincerely profess
the same; but hardly a word either for Christ and his truth, or against
Antichrist and his iniquity. Though we have as good cause to be armed against
him, with all possible means, especially with the armor of the word of the
Lord, as ever Nation had before, having had so many fair warnings from him. Oh
that this may be well thought of, for sundry parts of our Land?

But here it may be some will say: That there was never more knowledge in the
Land. Objection for abundance of knowledge answered.
To whom I answer: Far be it off from me, from obscuring any gift or blessing
of the Lord amongst us. Nay, I magnify him for them: but that which I have
spoken, has bin of a sanctified and powerful knowledge, wherein the kingdom
of God and our glory consists, Rom: 14 17.
and that amongst our people. And secondly, of such I would demand, as before
the Lord, whether in many a Congregation, there be not a sensible decay, as in
all places where the means have failed; and for the rest, what is our
knowledge generally in regard of our means, and the long continuance of them?
Have we not very many places, where within sundry miles, there are not two to
be found in a Town, which have any sound, substantial, and saving knowledge,
even of matters of salvation, and the ways of God? And of those who seem to
have knowledge, do not many of them, as it were grope for the wall, like the
blind stumbling at noone day as in the twilight, making no conscience at all
of their ways, no not of monstrous sins wherein they live, not fearing any
judgment toward the Land or themselves? Is not the very day dark over them
(as we may so speak) for seeing their own sins, or the fearful sins of the
Land? And may not the Lord therefore as he threatens, cause the Sun to go
down at noone, and darken the earth in the clear day?

And where is that holiness become, 2. Holiness and submission to Christ's
Gospel much removed.
whereby the Lord should be sanctified of us, and honored of all about us,
with that obedience and submission to his most sacred word? Are we not in very
great numbers come to this pass, to make such a fearful revolt from all holy
conscience of our ways, which many began to make, to open impiety and
profanenes; as that certain who were of us, Falling daily to most horrible
impieties and profaneness.
have departed from us, although not without their own fearful sin in that
behalf. The old Serpent has undoubtedly used this, as one first and
principal provocation hereunto. Even the very dishonors done to the Lords
Sacred Majesty amongst us, by our heinous sins, and lest they should be
polluted by our intolerable impieties, whereof they can see no hope of
redress; and also for fear of the vengeance of the Lord hanging over us for
the same: whereby they have made a most grievous rent in the Church of God,
Hence so many separating.
to the indangering of their own souls, and the advantaging of the bloody
enemy against us all, though they observe not so much. Popish sort blaspheming.
Do not the Popish sort blaspheme the religion of the Lord established among
us, for the extreme irreligiousnesse of the lives of too many of us? Do they
not hereupon think, that no cruelty can be devised sufficient for us, no not
the butchering or blowing us up all at once? Though indeed, it be not our
wickedness, which they so deadly malice, for therein many of them far surpass
us. Though it be not our wickedness they hate. But the Gospel.
Let Italy, and Spain, be witnesses hereof: for from them chiefly has our
iniquity come, as will appear hereafter: but it is Christ and his Gospel,
which they so malign to the death. do not sundry make fresh revoults unto
them for some shows of holiness, Sundry make revoults to the Apoc. 18. 3.
that are amongst the devouter sort, accounting it much safer to live in filthy
Babylon, the cage of every unclean and hateful bird; under that abominable
slavery and and drudgery of Antichrist, then to communicate with us at his
table in the true service of Jesus Christ? Our devotion waxen cold.
Is not all true devotion waxen so odious amongst very many of us, as that it
has been thought ordinarily a disgrace for the cheifer sort, and men of note,
to kneel unto the Lord in the congregation at the public prayers? And must
not their private devotion be suitable in all reason. Though it be not or at
least have not been any disgrace for too many of them to kneel in the most
reverend sort, as doing a most solemn service, though not to Bacchus, Ceres,
and Venus, yet to their own bellies. Certainly our Land of late years has
been grievously polluted herewith: whether it be yet left, or at least
repented of, I leave it to our consciences.

Is not the true practice of Christianity, Practice of Christianity more
reproach full then to live in any sin.
consisting in a holy endeavor to walk conscionably in every commandment of
the Lord and in being zealous for his Gospel, which is our chief honor,
become far more vile and reproachful (except in some small remnant) then to
live in drunkenness daily, in swaggering and blaspheming, in scorning and
jesting at all religion, and in making but a sport of sin, namely of those
sins, which are directly against the Lord in the first table? which yet will
one day be found the most heinous and intolerable of all sins: The very name
of a Christian become repro^chfull to many.
yea, which may make the whole land to tremble. Has not that glorious name of
a Christian become a nickname and a name of reproach with too many? This was
well beseeming Italy and Rome it self, A matter fit for Italy. Rhemish
Testament:
the throne of the Beast, as that worthy Doctor Fulk showed long ago; but for
any of us to take it up from them, Acts. 11. Sect. 4.
or for that it had been abused by any, to use it scornefully, and against
those chiefly, who most unfainedly believe, and show forth the power of the
Gospel this may make our flesh to quake, and our very bones to shiver. Lewdest
commonly in credit.
And yet also to proceed a little further. Are not the lewdest commonly in
credit and reputation for the only goodfellowes, but for a man to make
conscience to shun the forenamed and all other sins, and not to runn with all
sorts to all excess of vanity, does not every one see, that this is the only
matter of general obloquie? To come unto the Lords own messengers, How
welcome the Lords messengers are to the greatest part.
whom he has sent to us in kindness and compassion, as David sent his
servants to the king of Ammon, and to the end that he might turn us from our
evil way and spare us, if they be such as are faithful, 2 Chronicles: 26. 16.
as the Lords own mouth, and will tell us of these and all other our sins; 2 Samuel: 10. 6.
who sees not, (although they be never so formal) how welcome their feet are
to all sorts, who have set themselves to run after Popery and all profaneness,
or to live in their evil courses, though amongst all the sins of the land,
there be no one, which the Lord can less endure? Oh is this now become our
thankfulness, Notwithstanding his kindness to us.
to him that has been so kind unto us to be ashamed of him, his word,
messengers and servants who notwithstanding has not been ashamed to
countenance, and to shelter us, and who has so honored us before all the
world in such admirable deliverances, fighting as from heaven, for us unto this
day.

But to leave the Lords messengers, Our unity much departed.
where is that unity become that has been forme^ly amongst us, when diversity
of judgment for ceremonies (which may fall upon the dearest servants of the
Lord) could not hinder our love and holy agreement in Christ? Did not all join
cheerfully as one man, of one heart and of one soul, for the building up the
Temple of the Lord? yea, were not those most truly reverenced, Our reverencing
the most paynfull and holy much gone.
who were the painfullest, faithfullest, and most powerful builders, and all
those most rightly had in honor, who walked most conscionably, and uprightly in
all the good ways of God, to the stoppings of the mouths of all the
adversaries? Has not the glory of the Lord made a sensible remove in this
behalf? Let us see what we can answer him herein? Fruits of our dissentions.
Have not our dissentions and our violent inuectives, and courses one against
another, made not only the Lord and his glory to be reproached, To cause the
Lord and his religion to be reproached.
as if there were no unity nor certainty in our religion, and that therefore we
are none of the Lords; but have they not caused moreover the enemy to insult
over us, as now surely falling and overcome by our selves? The enemy to insult
and be hartned to our destruction.
And are they not heartened hereby to our destruction, when we have begun to
fall by the hands of one another, and every one to make way for the common
enemy to invade? And yet to proceed a little further; where is that
countenance and love that was wont to be showed to the lovers of the Gospel,
Countenance to the true lovers of the Gospel gone. Popish sort shame us herein.
even for the Gospels sake, which we profess? do not the Popish sort put us
to continual shame herein, in showing ordinarily more countenance and
kindness to the most contemptible of their profession, the basest runnagate,
or most ignorant priest, for their very religion which they profess, then we
commonly to the faithfullest preachers of the Gospel or the dearest servants
of the Lord, for the love of him and his most sacred truth? In a word where is
that submission in the greater sort, Submission to the word much removed.
to yield to the word of the Lord, brought us by his messengers; for his honor
whose message it is, and for the reverence of the word it self, being the
eternal truth of Jesus Christ? Must not all needs acknowledge, that our glory
is much departed in these respects?

But to come to the third part of our glory; 3 Protection the third part of our
glory often threatened to be removed.
The Lords gracious protection. Has he not sundry times threatened most
manifestly the utter removing of it; so as all of us have often feared, his final
departing and leaving of us? Most true it is, As never nation had Gods glory
more apparent in protection.
That never nation was either recorded, or heard of to have the glory of the
Lord more brightly shining upon it, in admired peace, wonderful deliverances
and even miraculous overthrowes of the enemies and discoveries of their
secretest plots, then England has had. Psalm: 76. 1.
That we may truly say as the Psalmist did of Judah, The Lord has herein
been well known amongst us, his name has been great in England: yet we
cannot forget how many a time the glory has been almost gone from us, and how
certainly it had gone, if ever the bloody Antichrist, or any of his marked
soldiers had prevailed in any one of their desperate designs. Nor that it was
ever more nearly gone from any nation, So never any from whom it was more
nerely gone.
with whom it remained after, then it has been from us. Did not they
themselves account all dispatched, and the glory quite removed, Accounted to be
carried away in their navy invincible.
in their triumphs which they had for their navy invincible; and that therein
they should have carried all utterly away? Did not many an English heart
tremble for fear thereof? And what could we look for in all man's reason
(considering their long threats and mischievous designs) when ever the eyes of
our tender nursing mother should be laid but either a final taking it away,
The general fear for it when God should take away Qu: Elizabeth. Other
nations wondered.
or a fearful eclipsing or obscuring of it? What heart wished not, that it
might never see that day? Did not other nations wonder at the most incredible
inthronizing of our dread Sovereign and liege Lord in such an unexpected
peace? were we not all become as men that dream, when the Lord so turned away
our captivity in a moment, even before it came. We like them that dream.
Could we for many days think that it was so indeed, or rather that we were
but as in a dream, until that we perceived the Lord ratifying and confirming
it, in so strangely continuing our admired peace, beyond all hope, and not a
dog to move his tongue against us? were not our mouths at that time filled
with laughter, Our hearts filled with joy.
and our hearts with joy, for this so wonderful a remaining of our glory? In a
word as Ezekiel ^aw that the Cherubims mounted upward and flew from the Temple
and from the midst of the City to the mount of Olives, All our glory ready to
mount up at once in the powder surn^ce.
as departing clean away, so to demand of the conscience of the most notoriovs
scorner, was not, all our glory ready visibly to mount upward from us at once?
were we not, as it were, within a minute of the execution? nothing wanting in
effect, but putting fire to the match to have blown up and utterly carried
away all our glory? every part of it altogether? Rebels exal^ing themselves
against the Lord as if it had been accomplished.
did not our desperate rebels make their certain account of it? did they not
exalt themselves against the Lord of Hosts in it, as his vengeance taken upon
some of the chief of them openly did notably declare? No policy could have
prevented.
could all the policy in the world have prevented it, or ever so much as have
suspected such a hellish device, if our gracious God had not yet once again
from heaven, declared the riches of his glory amongst us, and his pitiful
compassion over us and that in a more immediate and sensible working, than at
all former times? The Lord only prevented By themselves, working on the heart
of his anointed.
when he first made themselves the beginners of this discovery, and then so
mightily wrought upon the heart of our Sovereign Lord, casting such a careful
fear upon him, as that he suffered him not to rest, until he had disclosed
it: yea, we may truly say in thankfulness to our blessed God, that he never
gave over, Not ceasing until our deliverance was effected again.
until he had again the second time, wrought the deliverie and preservation
of Great Britain, and of his Church, by the hand of his Royal Servant, and
withal had granted the staying of his glory, that it should yet remain
amongst us: that thereby all our hearts might be more firmly linked to his
Anointed, and unto his Seed for ever; To bind our hearts to his Majesty and
his anointed for ever.
and that we might all the days of our life, send forth more hearty thanks,
and power out more fervent and instant prayers, for his Sacred Majesty, and
for all his Royal Progeny.

What soul did not for the present extol the Lord of glory for it, All did
thus acknowledge it.
as being his only work? Who can be so void of sense, or so brutish, as yet
to have lost the fresh remembrance of it? None can deny but that it was an
evident warning of a final departure, unless we repent.
Or who can now here deny, but that this was first as sensible a danger and
threatening from the Lord, to remove his glory from amongst us, as ever was in
any Nation or Church, since the beginning of the world? Yea, who must not of
necessity be enforced to acknowledge, that this was as miraculous a stay, or
rather a return of the glory again, and withal as evident a forewarning of a
final departure, as ever was read or heard of before, unless we do yet
speedily humble our selves, Our glory as nearly removed as theirs in the days
of Josiah.
and give him better entertainment. And to shut up this point likewise; what
part have we now remaining of all the outward glory, which they had not in the
days of worthy Josiah (the times being considered) or which they had not at
the beginning of all those miseries following: which entered and seized upon
them within three months after the death of holy Josiah, save only this one,
That the Lord to accomplish his work on them, and to make a way to his wrath,
suffered their Josiah to be taken in the nets of the enemy: Only this is added
to allour mercies, that our Josiah is still preserved from the bloody enemy.
whereas he has so graciously, and above all former mercies, yet preserved our
Josiah unto us, when there was but a hairs breadth between him, yea between
us all and death: though yet of late he has so fearfully shaken his rod in
taking away that worthiest hope, that ever our eyes did see before, and in whom
we did so pride and secure our selves.

But alas, What we have done since in token of thankfulness and humiliation, and
in care to retain him.
if our holy God shall now come and examine these things among us, what we have
done since, in token of our thankfulness for this incredible deliverie, and
for this so gracious a return above all other, yea above all, that almost ever
the world heard of; how we have demeaned our selves, in token of our unfeigned
humiliation, for this so dreadful a threatening of his departure? what desire
we show to retain him? how we extol his great name for it, by advancing his
religion, that he might be the better known and feared amongst us? what zeal
we show to put out that execrable and murdering religion, What zeal and
indignation we have showed against y^ murdering religion.
with all the monuments and perilous remembrances of it: that which thus
teaches and inciteth men to expel the Lord and his glory from among them, and
with all to destroy all his people at once from the face of the earth? what
greater hatred and detestation of it, is wrought in us, than heretofore? what
can we answer to any one of these? must we not needs be compelled to lay our
hand upon our mouths, or rather to confess, Our humiliation and thankfulness
in sinning impudently.
will we, nill we, That this is the humiliation and thankfulness of the
greatest part among us, that we do many times more rebelliously lift up our
faces, sinning most impudently against his glorious Majesty, and so far grieve
and quench his Spirit, as that we seek utterly to extinguish all fear of his
name? To grieve and thrust him out. In steed of detestation growing in
admiration of Popery.
And in steed of growing in detestation of that bloody religion, for the utter
rooting it out, according to the just indignation then presently had against
it, (as some good laws thereupon provided, will ever witness against us, to
the end of the world) do not very many begin afresh to grow in admiration of
it, and to dote after it, and the professors thereof, much more than before,
casting away the Lord and his truth? That he may justly reject us, and his
^ervants praying for us, as he did Iosuah. Ios: 7. 12.
May not then the Lord most justly make a final remove? May he not righteously
forsake and leave us into their hands, as he left Judah unto the Babylonian?
May he not say unto his servants, when they are humbled upon their faces in
secret, for these and the like tokens of his heavy displeasure, and for those
who are enchanted, as by the sorcerers of Egypt, so that they put their hands
to the execrable thing;) as he said to Iosuah in the like case? I will not be
with you any more, unless you will give me my glory; but I will utterly strip
you of all my glory, taking away both religion and protection at once: He may
^orsake and leave us into their hands.
I will leave you to be made a prey and a desolation for ever; unless you will
search out the execrable thing, even all your abominations, whereby you have
made your selves odious and execrable unto me, and unless you will do your
uttermost endeavor to purge and cleanse your Land of them all? Not only so many
of us as run a whoring after Popery, For suffering Popery so ^o revive, and
grow up amongst us again; after he had given us so just occasion to seek to
root it out utterly.
or favor it; but even all of us; for that through our general negligence and
security, it reviveth and grows up again so freshly among us, after he had
given such just occasion to seek to root it utterly out of our Land. Yea,
after that he had so (above all former times) set before our faces, the cruel
rage of that blood-thirstie religion in the chief professors thereof, against
his own heavenly Majesty, his true religion and glory, against his Anointed
and all his liege people, professing his name; to destroy all at once, though
with the inevitable hazarding of themselves both souls and bodies, their own
native Country, their children and houses. And also after that he had caused
us to bear such evidence against that Romish iniquity, in those so good laws
then enacted against it, and as it were to give sentence upon it, having
delivered it into our hands.

May he not justly say unto us all, 1 Kings 20. 32. Whether he may not say to
us for this, as to the King of Isra^l for Benadad.
even unto our whole Nation, for this very sin, as he said to the King of
Israel for letting Benadad go? when he spoke thus unto him: Because thou have
let go out of thine hand a man whom I appointed to dye, thy life shall go for
his life, and thy people for his people. So may he not speak and threaten us
much more; especially all of us, both Magistrates, Ministers, and people, into
whose hands he has committed the holy means to restrain and withdraw men
from that murdering religion, Choifly for neglecting y^ holy means, whereby
they might have bin converted and saved.
so many ways convicted and condemned, and to bring them to Christ? and
principally, the spiritual means of the word of the Lord? Yea, above all
other, may he not speak so to those, to whom he has committed the charge of
providing a holy, learned, and faithful Ministry, which may tenderly seek
the winning and saving of every soul; and also of causing all sorts to submit
themselves thereunto, as unto the Lords ordinance to that end: for these means
are first and principally to be used in tender compassion; (...)
when as he has so manifested the power thereof, by so much gracious
experience in sundry worthy Congregations, where under such painful and
conscionable Ministers, the people have bin brought from Popery and
profaneness, to embrace and obey the Gospel, so as hardly one Papist, or
notoriously profane or disordered person, have bin to be found there, but all
cheerfully submitting themselves to the Gospel of Christ. How God may
righteously speak unto all for neglect hereof.
May he not most righteously speak thus unto us therefore; Because through
they negligence and carelessness, thou have suffered to grow up and spread in
the midst of thee, that execrable, bloody, and Antichristian religion,
(whereby my glory is so desperately oppugned; whereby I my self am so openly
sought to be driven out, and with so high a hand, the souls and bodies of all
my people so endangered every hour; yea, that which I put into thy power, and
commanded thee to seek by all holy means utterly to destroy out of thy land;
that, against which thou have so voluntarily made so good laws, for the sure
ratifying of the speedy execution of my Commandment,) thy religion therefore
shall go for it, and all thy glory shall be trampled under foot by them,
until thou know whom thou have dishonored and provoked hereby.

And to conclude this point. Whether the Lord may not as justly plead against
us, as against Judah.
Has not the Lord as good cause to complain of us, and to plead against us,
for the small account which we make of him, for grieving his Spirit, and
driving him from amongst us, by this and all other our fearful sins, as
ever he had to complain of the unkindnesse of Judah, and even to take up the
same complaint against us, which he did against them, when he spoke thus unto
them by the Prophet Micha before their Captivity: Mich: 6. 3.
Oh my people, what have I done unto thee, or wherewith have I grieved thee?
come testify against me. Surely I brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and
redeemed thee out of the house of servants: I sent before thee also Moses,
Aaron and Miriam. O my people, remember now what Balak King of Moab had
devised, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him, from Shittim to
Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord. This is the Lords plea
and complaint against Israel for their unkindnesse; calling the hills and
mountains to witness the equity of it, before that he would depart from
them, and bring upon them that strange and terrible judgment, which he so long
before threatened by his Prophets.

But we will defer this complaint against us, This complaint set down after.
until we shall have seen of our iniquities to provoke and anger the Lord
thereby, to be above the abominations of Judah, considering that we live in
this glorious light of the Gospel, with our extraordinary mercies and means
of all sorts. Because that then, if God shall give us hearts in reading to
consider of these things aright; we shall justify the like complaint of the
Lord against our selves, and shall admire his patient stay, and his abiding
still amongst us.

Thus much therefore shall suffice in like manner for this third cause,
Conclusion.
wherein yet let each of us ask of our own souls; whether in such a decay
both of the love of the truth, and also of holiness, peace and unity in the
Church; yea, in such danger of our protection to be utterly taken away (to
pass over, that it is so far departed, That he that absteineth from evil,
makes himself a prey) and in steed thereof, in such an increase of Popery, of
licentiousness, and of all profaneness, such an enmity against all true
piety, with the insolency of the enemy, the Lord do not call loud upon us
all to watch and to pray for the several removes of the glory amongst us, and
the evident tokens of the Lords threatened departure, which he shows in the
same.

CHAP. VI.
No privileges can do a people any good, if they increase in their iniquity;
but the more their mercies have bin, the greater is their sin; and the heavier
shall their judgment be when it comes, of what sort soever. And what causes
we have hence to watch and to pray.

Verse. 4. And the Lord said unto him: Go through the midst of the City, even
through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of them that
sigh and cry for all the abominations, which are done in the midst thereof.
IN the doubling of the speech, In the doubling of the speech, adding Jerusalem.
Go thorough the midst of the City, even through the midst of Jerusalem,
where the Lord adds Jerusalem, to make the speech more significant; not content
to say, Go through the City, but even through Jerusalem: He would have all to
take notice; That though Jerusalem was the dearest unto him of all the Cities
of the world, All to take notice, that God will not spare Jerusalem, if it
rebel against him.
yet having broken the Covenant on her part, and also cast him off, and defiled
his Sanctuary, he will spare her no longer; he will have no more pity of any,
save only of his faithful ones in her: But contrarily, he will forsake her,
cast her off, leave her to be destroyed, until the remnant left of her, learn
to seek him, and to be reconciled to him again. For the Lords speech is thus
much in effect: Sum of the Lords speech.
Go through the midst of the city, even through Jerusalem, which though it be
unto me the dearest of all the places in the world, the City which I had
chosen to dwell in for ever, and be as the signet upon my right hand: yet
seeing it now casts me off, and despises to hear my voice any longer, or to
be reformed, I will not spare it, neither shall mine eye have pity on it, save
only of my remnant in it, but I will leave it to be destroyed and desolate, at
least for seventie years. Whence the Lord would have all his people to learn,
No privileges can secure a sinful people from Gods wrath.
That no privileges, promises, mercies, deliverances, no, nor any profession
of religion, can do a people any good at all to secure them from his
vengeance, if once they begin to cast him off and his Covenant. But when they
fall to be stubborn against him and his word sent unto them in his mercy, he
will cast them off and leave them.

This also is a matter to be well thought of by us. Because as they of Judah
were wont to secure themselves in their prerogatives, even so do we
ordinarily. First therefore to begin with them: Were not these and the like the
things whereby they were wont to think themselves safe, Things wherein they
secured themselves.
and to make their boast of so, that they could not repent. Sometimes because
they had the Lords Temple, The Temple. Ier. 7. 4.
of which they so gloried, saying, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the
Lord. Sometimes they used to flatter themselves, The Law should not depart from
the Priest.
depraving Gods word, thus: The Law shall not depart from the Priest, nor
counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet. And commonly all singing
this song, Ier: 18. 18.
which their children learned of them, We have Abraham to our father: They
Abraha^s children*
and by these and the like did they grow so extremely impenitent, that they
could not be moved by any warnings. Matthew: 3. 9.


And is it not even so with us; Our custom alike.
That whenever we are admonished of the Lords anger, either by his word or
judgments on us, or by any other signs or threatenings against us, to move us
to seek to pacify his wrath, is not this usual with us to harden our hearts,
and still to lull our selves asleep in our security, thinking that we are in
no such danger; and all for some special privileges, which we imagine that we
have? Although it be acknowledged by all, Privileges wherein we secure our
selves.
that there are most grievous sins amongst us, yea, most horrible contempt of
God, and his word, with dreadful signs of his departing, and that we have had
many strange and terrible warnings, yet the Lord must needs still continue with
us, and there is no such danger or cause of fear, as some imagine: and why so?
Gods true religion.
Because we have Gods true religion, established by law, maintained by
authority, and sincerely professed by many. Gods favor manifested in our
great deliverances.
The Lord has also showed us such manifest tokens of his favor and love in
our sundry and most admirable deliverances: He has taken such vengeance on our
enemies: Overthrowes of our enemies. Prince and hopeful issue.
He still discovers and overthrowes their plots: And which is above all other
his blessings, for that he has given us such a worthy Head and Governor, such
a hopeful Issue; so established the Scepter, and concluded such a peace with
other Nations on every side, as hencforth we cannot have any such cause of
fear, as formerly we have had. Are not these and the like, the things whereby
we are commonly waxen so strong and safe in our own conceit? And are we not
hereupon become so secure from any dreadful judgment, as that no warnings
from heaven nor earth, words, corrections, threats, nor yet any mercies can do
the greatest part any more good, but that they desperately proceed from evil
to worse, as though no hurt could come unto us.

Let us to this end consider a little of the privileges of this City and
people; Ierusalems privileges.
and then if the Lord open our eyes we shall easily see, 2 King: 23. 27.
what causes we have of this our confidence and security. Chosen to be the
place of Gods residencie.
First for Jerusalem; The Lord chose it to dwell in for ever, and Sion to be an
habitation for himself: yea, he after a peculiar manner tied his residencie to
that place; whereas now it is no more tied to any one place than unto another,
but one Country now being unthankful, he removes his Church and abode to
another. 1. King. 8.
There Solomon by the appointment of the Lord himself, His Temple there.
built a house for his glorious Majesty, as the place wherein he would be
specially worshipped, of all the places in the world. Such promises also were
made by him unto that place, as never unto any other: That the people praying
there (because the Temple was a special figure of Jesus Christ) he would hear
those their petitions made in that place. Prayers heard there chiefly.
Or when they could not come thither, 1. King: 8. 14.
if they did but turn their faces toward Jerusalem in prayer, that he would
hear their supplications made in faith and obedience, 2 King: 8. 48, 49.
as he heard Daniel in the Captivity. Valley of visions.
It was so famous for visions and revelations of the Lord, by means of the
Arc of the Testimony there; Dan: 6. 10.
the Priests with the Vrim and Thummim; Isa^: 22. 1.
the Prophets and messengers of the Lord; that it was called the valley of
visions; All must pray for it.
yea, it was so far preferred before all other places, as that all must pray
for the peace of Jerusalem. Psalm: 122. 6.
So that the Prophet David prays for the prosperity of all them who love
Jerusalem. Perfection of beauty.
It is called for the excellency of it, The perfection of beauty, ^am: 2. 15.
The joy of the whole earth: and by our Savior it is named, Joy of the earth.
The holy City, and at that time, when it did grow toward the very worst.
Matthew: 4. 5.
It was then so dear unto him, The holy City.
as that he wept over it to think of the sins of it, with the miseries that
were to come upon it for the same. Luc: 19. 41.
And to shut up this point: when our Savior will set out unto the Church, Heb:
12. 22.
the glory of the kingdom of heaven, Revel: 21. 10.
in the first flourishing estate thereof in earth, and fully in heaven, he
finds no fitter resemblance to express it by, than by Jerusalem, calling it
the new Jerusalem, and holy Jerusalem; because Jerusalem was the type thereof.
These are some of the privileges of the City.

For the prerogatives of the people, The prerogatives of the people.
they are far more surpassing, Rom: 9. 4.
if we will believe the commendations which holy Paul gives of them in the 9.
chapter to the Romans verse. 4. where he so highly esteems of them, that he
could have wished himself accursed, yea, cast away utterly and separate from
Christ for evermore, from eternal joy to perpetual misery, even for his
brethren, that were his kinsmen according to the flesh, if it had been
possible thereby to turn away the Lords anger from them and to reconcile them
unto his Majesty again; that so he might have been glorified in saving of
them. These particular prerogatives are there moreover ascribed unto them.

Israelites.
A people descended of the most noble stock of all the world; Isreal's
posterity who prevailed with God: discending lineally from faithful Abraham,
the father of all the faithful, the friend of God, and with whom God entered
into covenant, to be his God and the God of his seed forever.

Having the right of Adoption*
He carried them forth of Egypt into Canaan the garden of the earth, as upon
Eagles wings, plaguing Kings for their sakes, and expelling mighty nations to
plant them in. Never ceasing until he had settled them and his Tabernacle (the
place of his rest) in this City. Called of God his sons, his first borne, his
precious ones.
They were moreover so dear unto him, as that he cannot content himself to
call them his sons, but he styles them his first borne, his precious ones in
whom his soul delighted. So tender he was over them, Ier. 31. 20.
as when he was compelled to chastise them for their stubbornness, his soul
was troubled for them as a dear father striking his child with a heavy heart.
Ier. 2, 3.
And above all dignities, he calls them a thing hallowed; the Thirdly the glory
was theirs.
that is, the honor of all the earth. He gave them his own name to call upon,
and himself to be called their God. He vouchsafed them his presence to dwell
among and in the midst of them: to show unto them his glorious Majesty, by
such visible signs, 2 Samuel: 4. 22.
as never any other people saw: specially by the Arc, which was therefore
called the glory of God and the glory of Israel: Yea, they had all that glory
spoken of before, belonging only unto them of all other people both inward in
his presence most sensibly and also outward in knowledge, holiness and
protection, as we have heard. Their fourth prerogative was. The covenant.
That they had Canaan to be theirs for an everlasting possession.

Fifthly, the giving of the law was their prerogative. The giving of the law.
The Lord there so spoke to them as never people heard him. Besides all their
judicial laws whereby they were governed (passing Solons laws and the laws
of all people besides) were given unto them by the Lord himself.

Sixthly, The worship was theirs, The worship theirs.
Gods own true

Seventhly, The promises were theirs, The promises.
both the promises

Eighthly, The fathers were theirs, The Fathers theirs.
those chief fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to whom the promises were
made first and confirmed again and again to thousand generations. So that
they might seem the sole heirs of the promises, Acts: 3. 25.
as they are called the children of the Prophets and of the covenants which God
made unto the fathers.

Ninthly, which is the chiefest and highest degree of Of them Christ came.
Of them Christ came, he was of their stock and kindred. He who has so honored
all mankind in taking on him the nature of man, must needs honor them much
more, with whom he entered into so near a bond to be of their flesh, even he
who is God himself blessed for evermore. To conclude, all The Lord had so
miraculously preserved them as all thought Jerusalem could never have been
invaded
and so declared his love unto them in his manifold and most miraculous
preservations and deliverances of Jerusalem, that until the very time of this
lamentable captivity, neither the kings of the earth, nor all the inhabitants
of the world, would have believed that ever the enemy could have entered within
the gates of Jerusalem. Thus have we had in some sort the privileges of the
City and the people. ^a^. 4. 12.
Out of which we may most clearly see, The Jews if ever any had causes to
secure themselves in regard of their prerogatives.
that if ever people might promise unto themselves security in regard of
outward prerogatives, it was certainly they. Yet when they proceed so far to
dishonor the Lord by abusing his religion, which he had committed in trust
unto them alone to magnify him by, and by committing all the abominations
which follow after to make his name thereby to be blasphemed among the heathen,
and when all other his rods and means can do them no more good to reclaim
them and reform them, Yet coming to a height of impiety
he will spare them no longer. But when there is no other remedy the
destroyers must come, Deuteronomy 28. 58. 63.
they must spare none, but execute the Lords most terrible vengeance, according
to all that which in his law he had threatened long before; There is no further
remedy but destroyers must come.
for presently within three months, after the death of their worthy king
Josiah, whom Jeremy so much bewaileth in his lamentations, calling him the
breath of their nostrills, began all those plagues of this people. 2 King 23
31. 32. 33.
For Iehoahaz the eldest son of Josiah was taken captive of Pharaoh Necho and
carried into Egypt, Their miseries begin within three months after Iosiahs
death.
which could not be done without much bloodshed. There land also became
tributary to the king of Egypt, and that tribute, which was very great was to
be levied upon every man of the land according to their estimation, 2 King. 23.
35.
whereby all of them became servants unto him. B^t ceased not ti^l the
desola^on accomplished.
In the place of Iehoahaz did the king of Egypt set up Eliakim his brother,
whom he named Iehoiakim. So he and his people remained servants to the king of
Egypt, until they were soon after conquered again by the king of Babylon,
who prevailing against the king of Egypt, they all became tributaries to the
king of Babylon. 2 King. 14. 26.
Afterward Eliakim rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon,
Nebuchadnezzar came against him with great power, took him, bound him with
chains, carried him into Babel with many of the vessels of the house of the
Lord. 2 Chronicles. 36. 10.
In his place did the king of Babel set up Iehoiakim his son to reign in his
stead, who reigned but three months, but he also is carried away into Babylon,
with other precious vessels of the house of the Lord, 2 Chr. 36. 12. 13.
and Zedechiah his uncle set in his place; who rebelling in like manner against
Nebuchadnezzar, (who had caused him to swear by God) and not humbling himself
at the commandment of the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy; but hardening his neck
and making his heart obstinate that he might not return to the Lord God of
Israel, the chief also of the priests and of the people sinning wonderfully
and not harkening to Gods messengers, he likewise was taken, his sons slain
before his eyes, his own eyes put out, he bound in chains and carried into
Babel, and all this desolation foreshewed was fully accomplished.

All this came upon them, The causes of the captivity, not the sins of a few
years but many of them committed long before 2 King. 21. 15. 16.
as the Lord himself says plainly, partly for the sins committed long
before the days of Josiah, even since their coming out of Egypt, and more
specially for their provocations wherewith Manasses the grave father of Josiah
had provoked him by all his Idolatry, and by the blood of his servants which
he shed, whereof the land was not yet purged; though that blood had been shed
threescore years before, 2 King, 24, 3. 4. and 21, 1^, 20.
besides his sin wherewith he made Judah to sin and to do evil in his
sight. 2 King: 23, 26.
And yet more also for that in Iosiahs days the peoples heart did not so melt
for those and the like iniquities, 2 King: 21, 17.
as Iosiahs heart did, 2 Cro: 34. 27.
but they rather still approved generally of their former evil ways and
practiced them secretly. And lastly because of these abominations following,
whereby they filled up the measure of their iniquities, and against which the
Prophets so cried out, ever threatening this judgment for the same until it
came upon them.

But here it may be said, Our principal prerogatives whereupon we secure our
selves. And are made unthankful.
howsoever these prerogatives of theirs were indeed exceeding great and may
astonish us all, both in regard of our former heinous sins and the judgments
that have been upon us both formerly and of late, with the unplacable rage of
our adversaries; yet we have many things which may seem to assure us of Gods
favor, and secure us from any such judgment or the like.

As first (which was shortly touched) for that we have so many worthy preachers
and good people unfeignedly fearing the Lord. Secondly, that we have the Lords
true religion so soundly maintained. Thirdly, all open Idolatry is banished.
Fourthly, such good laws so religiously established; Fifthly, for that more
then all these, we have the Lords anointed so graciously and miraculously set
over us in peace, with such a happy unity concluded withal neighbor nations,
and also so blessed an issue. Sixthly Above all these, The Lord has so often
testified his fatherly love and care for us, in such tender and mavelous
preservations, both of our Princes and of our whole nation, and in so bringing
his and our enemies to shame, as he has hereby made this Island the wonder of
the world. And lastly for that never nation did enjoy the Gospel so long in
that flourishing prosperity and peace, which we have done; All these and the
like are such evident tokens of the Lords favor and love toward us, as that
we can have no such cause of fear, as this forewarning and many of our
Preachers would bear us in hand.

To answer all these and whatsoever else can be said to secure us; Answer to
our securing upon our prerogatives.
Let us but consider, what King reigned in Jerusalem, and how many years
together before this Captivity, even when these judgments were so threatened
and hastened on, Judah in the beginning of her miseries nothing inferior to us
in such prerogatives.
and when many of these abominations following were committed, and how he
continued till within three months of these miseries begun, as we heard
before: and it will appear most like, that this people could not be then
inferior to us in any of these signs of Gods favor, except this, that we
live in the days of the Gospel; to which we shall answer after. For first
immediately before this vengeance began, they Josiah, They had that holy King
Josiah.
whose praises and worthy example shall remain unto the end of the world; and
him they enjoyed, reigning in peace over them, for one and thirty years
together. And secondly, for purity Purity of Religion.
we know that never King went beyond Josiah in his reformation and care,
compelling all strictly to serve the Lord according to his word; 2 King: 23. 3,
4, 5, 6. and 12. 24, 25.
and in taking away, so far as he was able, the very monuments of Idolatry,
with all things that might either revive it openly or secretly; or that might
be any way a snare unto the people. And also how he reformed all other
abominations, All abominations reformed.
that could be spied in all the land of Judah, or in Jerusalem. So as the Holy
Ghost bears this witness of him, that like unto Josiah was no King before
him, that turned unto the Lord with all his heart, nor rose up after him: That
for purity of religion, and a holy reformation, we can make no doubt but they
were equal to us.

And for worthy Teachers according to that time, I Worthy Teachers according to
that time.
that we can make no question, but that they had many of the Priests and
Levites both learned and godly, when the King himself was so forward to
encourage and provoke them thereunto. Besides those famous Prophets stirred up
by the Lord extraordinarily, as Jeremy, Z^phanie, Habakuk and others, with
Esaias and Micha but a little before, for many years together, and Ezechiel
presently after. All these and sundry others they had, howsoever they dealt
most unkindly with them, as Ieremies example does fully witness.

Many good people.
but that where such a worthy head and example was, with such excellent
Teachers, there must needs be also many of the children which God had given to
them; and those of all sorts, even of the chief Magistrates, as well as
others. Such were these which mourned in Jerusalem for the abominations, Isai:
8. 18.
who are commanded to be marked, who lived when they were at the very worst,
and sundry Worthies, as those which spoke for Jeremy, and others, which were
carried away in the Captivity; yea, Dan: 1. 3, 4, 5.
even children of the Kings seed, and of the Princes, as Daniel and his
companions, to wit, Hananiah, Mishael, Azariah, with others, as we shall see
hereafter. Though these were and had long time bin made as signs and wonders
unto the rest, Isai: 8. 18.
and the off-scowring of all other, like as those Prophets were whose doctrine
they obeyed.

All open Idolatry and the monuments thereof taken away.
that they had none openly in all Iosiahs days after the reformation; nor so
much as the prints suffered to remain, nor any thing that might revive it, as
we saw, but only that they had not repented of that which had bin before. 2 Chronicles* 34. 33.


And for peace; 2 King: 23. 1, 2, 3. 25.
It seems to be manifest; That Josiah had peace with all about him: for
although he Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, it was his own seeking, I^siah had
peace with all about him.
and a just punishment for attempting it, and not consulting with the Lord, nor
harkening to the words of Necho, 2 Chronicles: 35. 20, 21, 22.
which were from the mouth of God. For the King of Egypt sent messengers unto
him, to tell him that he came not against him, but against the house of his
enemy, which was the King of Assyria, and therefore he would not in any case
have foughten with him. If the Assyrian had bin Iosiahs enemy, it is not like
that Josiah would have hindered the King of Egypt from fighting against him.

Iudahs security then in regard of their Prince and princely progeny.
if ever Nation could glory therein, it was surely they, having, as was showed,
as worthy a King as ever was, by the Lords own record: whom they therefore
accounted the breath of their nostrils, and such a goodly tree as under whose
shadow they were safe in the midst of the Heathen, 2 King: 23. 25.
as they mourn after in the Lamentations. Lament. 4. 20.
This their good King had also sundry sons and sons sons, 2 King: 23. 24.
as may appear in the history alleged before.

As for Gods tender love and care showed for us in our continual
preservations, Miraculous preservation.
and in all our former deliverances, Ezechiah, and others mentioned.

Whereas this may be yet further imagined, The Gospel contemned can be no
freedom from a temporal scourge.
for our vain securing our selves, that we live in the days of the Gospel,
wherein the judgments of God are more spiritual, and therefore having
received so many strange deliverances, it is more like that he intends to
punish us more spiritually; which is indeed the heaviest judgment of all
other. We answer; That true it is; That we may as yet certainly expect an
increase of the spiritual judgment of blindness of mind and hardness of
heart, to fill up the measure of our iniquities, and to make the condemnation
of all the reprobate and our plagues the more just thereby; yet these things
following thought of and well weighed, with the former, may cause us to dread
some temporal plague, and that heavier than all which have gone before.
Witness temporal judgments on sundry Churches and Nations*
As first the outward and temporal judgments which God has been wont to
bring for the contempt of the Gospel; like as in the last final destruction
and scattering of this Nation of the Jews over the face of the earth after the
preaching of Christ and his Apostles: and sundry other, where the Gospel has
come, as the judgments accomplished in removing those seven golden
Candlesticks of Asia, Apoc: 2. 5, 10, 12, 13 and 2. 10, 16.
and in many other famous Churches, with the afflictions upon them; which must
needs be very grievous in all reason, before the Gospel could be utterly taken
away. And secondly, 2. Our neerenesse to such scourges, besides what we have
felt.
if we call to mind, how many forewarnings we have had of such a sharp
scourge; and withal how often it has bin so near to our backs.

Thirdly, that we have had (as I take it) all the forerunners of the greatest
temporal calamity, 3. That we have had all the forerunners of it.
which is the very sword it self. That we have felt both dearths and
pestilences, and also heard the cries of the poor for merciless oppressors,
ravening and devouring almost in every part of our Land. Besides the taking
from us so many of the Royal issue, and principally Him, upon whom all the
eyes of our Land were bent, for continuance of our shelter, yea of our life and
all our blessings: to cause all the godly to droope in fearing continually some
greater judgment, and giving all the enemies such cause to lift up their heads
afresh, as now expecting their day again.

Fourthly, the implacable malice of our bloody enemies against us, 4. The
implacable malice of enemies, with all the sub^leties of hell.
either to destroy us utterly, or to bring our Nation by strong hand under that
Babylonish yoke again; which cruel rage of theirs does threaten such a plague
every hour, but that the Lord in mercy stays it.

This, 5. We cannot be more secured that our land is as yet purged of the
Idolatry and blood of his servants, than Jerusalem in Iosiahs days.
fifthly, may terrify us all, so often as we think of it; for that as I take it
(under submission to better judgments) we cannot be any more assured, that our
Land is as yet purged more of the abominable Idolatry committed in former
times, and of the blood of Gods servants, the faithful Martyrs of Jesus Christ
in the days of Queen Marie, with innumerable more abominations committed both
before and since, and increased also to this day to anger the Lord, than
Jerusalem was in the days of Josiah. 2 King: 21. 15, 16.
If God remembered against Judah all the Idolatry, bloodshed, and other like
abominations of former days, and in the day of his visitation visited them for
all, what can we look for, or how can we secure our selves?

And yet above all these, God purposing to remain with us, must needs deal as
a kind father to bring us to obedience.
That if the Lord do love us, and purpose to continue his religion and
presence with us, (as we have great cause of hope that he does) then he will
deal with us as kind and wise fathers are wont to do with their disobedient
children, he will double and treble his fatherly strokes upon us, until he
amends us and makes us stoop to him. He has already corrected us very
sharply, with all his other rods, over and over, and continually one or other
upon our backs, and most thick of late time; whence we must needs expect a
more sharp scourge to awaken and amend us than any of the former, or than all
of them together. And what can that be, we take not upon us to divine. But let
every one bethink himself, and look into the book of God, and he will
easily see by the course of Gods former proceedings, what cause we have to
fear: especially, if the same abominations be found amongst us, or rather
greater than these, for which the Lord threatened, and brought this woeful
judgment: for if he spared not the natural branches then, Rom: 1^ 21.
neither will he spare us now, 1 Cor: 10. 11.
being but wild Olives, and having so far greater light than they, This our
lesson now.
and other means to reclaim us. And therefore this is our lesson in this our
day, and left to admonish us now, as it was given first for them.

For other prerogatives; Other prerogatives more increases the wrath; as the
Gospel for our denying the power of it.
If any can be found wherein we do excel them, they will but rather serve to
increase and hasten our judgment. As the Gospel, for example, offering more
grace and power of obedience, must needs more kindle the Lords wrath. Because
so many of us making profession of it, Tit. 1. 16.
do yet deny the power thereof, 2 Samuel: 12. 14.
so far as that we make the very enemies to blaspheme, and do moreover
proceed not only to hate, Isai: 52. 5. and 59. 15.
but also to scorn all who labor to bring forth the fruit of it by a holy
conversation. Ier: 15. 10. and 20. 7, 8.
For as it is with the most gracious and munificent Princes, As the grace of a
Prince abused.
that they will show most severitie to such of their Subjects, whom no patience
nor benefits can win, but that they rather wax more rebellious by the mercy
and bounty of their Prince: so we must know certainly, Rom: 2. 24.
that it is with the Lord, that his mercies so abused, must needs provoke him
to the heaviest indignation: which if it be but the removing of our
candlestick, The removing of our Candlestick the heaviest judgment.
how dreadful it is; yea, whether it be not far worse than any bodily plague,
let all the wise-hearted judge.

Thus much likewise for this point: Conclusion.
That no favor or privileges can give any security to a sinful people,
professing Gods religion, if they begin to cast off his yoke, and to wax worse
and worse, to make his name to be blasphemed; but the more their privileges
are, the greater is their sin, and the more grievous their punishments shall
be. And secondly, what causes we have hereupon to give our selves more
instantly to watching and prayer, for the innumerable mercies and privileges
bestowed upon our Land on the one side; and the increase of our sins, with
the tokens of Gods vengeance, and our deep security on the other side. Lest
our plagues do prove greater than the plagues of all other people, Man: 11.
21, 22, 23.
as much as we seem to have bin lifted up above most, if not all others, in
blessings, in this last and most sinful age of the world, if all our blessings
temporal and spiritual be compared together and considered aright. Oh Lord,
at length open our eyes, and then we shall so clearly see our estate, that it
will not be any more needful to cry unto us to awake, to watch and to pray.

CHAP. VII.
The marking of the godly: that is, How Gods own people are marked in the
midst of the greatest confusions, before the destructions come, and what caus^s
every one has to watch and to pray, that he may be so marked.

Verse. 4. And set it mark on the foreheads of all that mourn.
IN this Commission to the marking Angel to set a mark on the foreheads of
all that mourn. The Lord has ever a special care of his in the greatest
co^fusions.
The Lord giving such a charge to his holy Angel thus carefully to preserve
his chosen from this destruction; to go through the City, and set a mark upon
every one of them, to overpasse none: and also the destroying Angels to follow
after the marking Angel, so as they hurt none, till all the faithful be
marked; he would have all to know thus much: That he never casts off the care
of his people, no, not then when all things seem most confused in the earth.
And secondly, when they are so mingled amongst the wicked, as that they can
hardly be known amongst themselves, much less to the eyes of the world, that
yet he still tendreth them, and watches over them continually. Thirdly, that
he will at length make his fatherly care and watchful providence known unto
them, and that by some gracious and wonderful deliverance, even in this world,
if it be so best for them and for his glory. And lastly, that they evermore
must be surely marked before the destruction come. The Lord has bin very
careful to set down this point also most clearly, in every of those great
destructions, which are recorded in Scriptures, for examples and warnings to
all posterity: That hereby his own faithful servants may receive comfort
against the greatest afflictions that can come upon the world.

As first in that terrible* 1. At the stood.
overflowing in the general destruction of the old world. The waters came not
until Noah had first prepared and finished the Arc, G^n: 11. 16.
and also God himself had shut up both him and his in the same; so locking and
sealing up the doors with his own hand, as that all the waters, rage they
never so horribly, and hoyse him up above the highest mountains, yet cannot
hurt him. And why deals the Lord thus carefully with Noah? Thee (says he)
have I seen righteous before me in this generation: that is, I have seen they
heart sincere, and thy purpose and endeavor ever to please me; not following
the course of the times, but crying out of the iniquity thereof, Hebr: 11. 7.
believing my threatenings, and preparing the Arc according to my commandment,
to save thy self and family from the vengeance to come.

Secondly, 2. At Sodomes destruction.
in that dreadful overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, before the fire and
brimstone came upon those filthy Cities, Gen: 19. 16.
Lot must not only be marked, but also gotten forth safe from the destruction.
The Angels have such a charge of him, 17. 22.
as that they get him by the hand, pull and hale him for haste, being far more
careful for him, than he is for himself, and they never leave him, till they
have safe conducted him out, and then bid him hie for his life, get him into
Zoar. They tell him plainly, that the Lords care was so great for him, that
they can do nothing in this destruction, their hands were tied, until he be
there safe out of all the danger. The reason of it also is carefully set down
by the Lord himself, 2 Pet: 2. 7, 8.
why he accounted him worthy to escape; for that he was a just and righteous
man, grieved with the unclean conversation of the wicked, his righteous soul
was vexed from day to day with all their abominable deeds.

Thirdly, 3. Before this destruction.
before this destruction the Lord foretold to Jeremy particularly, That he
would give him his life for a prey, Jeremy and sundry of those who favored
him.
in all places wheresoever he came, because of his faithfulness in sticking to
his word and commandment, and for his warning the people. And so indeed it
came to pass, Ier: 40. 2, 3, 4.
that the Lord did not only preserve him with sundry others fearing his name;
but gave him also special favor, in the eyes of the enemies, who led them
captives. So as Nebuchadnezzar himself gives charge to Nebuzaradan his chief
steward, to look well to Jeremy, to do him no harm, but to do for him as
himself would; whether to go home with them into Babylon, and there to
receive kindness, or to tarry still in the land of Judah with the people,
which should be left there behind. And this mercy did the Lord show not only
unto Jeremy, but unto others also that had bin kind unto his Prophet: as
Ebedmelech.
As to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, who had spoken for Jeremy to the King of
Judah, to get him out of the dungeon: Ier: 38. 8. to 13.
to whom also the Lord gave his life for a prey, because he put his trust in
the Lord. Ier: 39. 16, 17, 18. Gedaliah.
And Gedaliah* whose father Ahikam had formerly delivered Jeremy out of
danger, and from the rage that was against him, Ier: 39. 24. and 48. 5. and 26.
24.
he is made Governor of them that remained in the Land, howsoever he was
trecherously slain not long after. Baruch.
So to Baruch in like manner, who was Ieremies Scribe, Ierem. 45. 5.
and had stuck so close to him in all his troubles; God promises to give him
also his life for a prey in all places wheresoever he came. We have likewise
the ensamples of Daniel, and of his three companions, Daniel and his companions.
called the three children; unto whom, besides their preservation from the
common destruction in the first Captivity of Babylon, Dan: 1. 3, 4. 6. 7. ^.
5, 6, 9. 13, 15, 17.
the Lord granted that extraordinary favor, both to be brought up by the King
of Babylon himself, and by his special appointment, in all excellent
learning, and so far to surpass all others, as to be most meet for their
singular knowledge and understanding, to stand with high favor in the presence
of that mighty Monarch, though otherwise a cruel oppressor of the Church of
God, who had carried them away captive. Dan: 3 27.
He gave unto them moreover divine testimonies of his fatherly care and
protection, in the presence of all his enemies, in those miraculous
deliverances out of the fiery furnace, Dan: 1. 8.
and from the Lions den, because they did cleave so fast unto the Lord, that
they would not suffer themselves to be polluted with the least part or show of
the Idolatry of the Heathen. 6. 22.
The like favor for preservation he granted to Ezechiel, So to Ezekiel and
sundry others.
and sundry others.

And to omit all other examples; The Christians before the last destruction of
Jerusalem.
At the last and final desolation of this City and Nation by the Romans;
Histories do report that presently before the taking of Jerusalem, a voice was
heard among the Christians, Go forth to Pella, Go forth to Pella, which so
soon as ever the Christians had done, and that they were safe there, the City
was sacked, and all that desolation fully accomplished, as was declared before.

God thus providing to set them safe before the destroyers came. Whereby we may
see evidently both by the testimonies and charge of the Lord himself, and the
continual examples, that the faithful servants of God, cleaving firmly unto
him, in the backsliding of the rest, have the only immunitie and privilege,
above all others, to be preserved at such times, so far as shall be any way
good for them; and shall be withal, for the Lords own glory, and the
salvation of his people.

To confirm us yet further in the assurance hereof, For assurance hereof we
have the Lords promise and direction.
and to stir up our hearts, so to walk with our God, before that time do
come, we have the Lords most gracious direction and promise made to the Prophet
Esaias and to the godly of his time, Isai: 8. 11, 12, 13.
teaching them how they should carry themselves in such outrage of iniquity,
and in such signs of the approaching of his vengeance. he has caused it to be
written for a most comfortable president to all succeeding ages, and for a sure
preservative against all fear of every such danger. How to behave our selves
in such times as that we may be sure to have the Lord a Sanctuary to us in all
places.
It is therefore carefully to be marked of all his servants. The Prophet says,
That the Lord spoke unto him in taking him by the hand, as it were encouraging
and strengthening him and thus he taught him. That they should not walk in the
way of that people, nor have a confederacy with them, nor fear their fear,
no, nor yet be afraid of them: that is; He would be a place of refuge and
comfort unto them against all terrors, I^zech: 11. 14. 16.
as the Sanctuary was. And by the Prophet Ezekiel he adds, That he would be
thus unto them, in all the places wheresoever they should come.

Lastly besides this gracious promise we are to observe, Observe how the godly
are excepted in the greatest denunciation of vengeance.
how in the most terrible denuntiation of vengeance against this people, that
God would not spare them, for the greatness of their iniquity, no, though
Noah, Job, and Daniel were amongst them, yet always this exception is added
and carefully recorded by the Spirit of God, Ezekiel: 24. 14. 16. 18, 20.
That they, to wit, Noah, Job, and Daniel, being amongst them, Should yet
deliver their own souls by their right eousnesse. And again, They only shall
be delivered themselves, but the land shall be wast: So the point is most
clear from the Lords own warrant.

Let us now consider the reasons of it to strengthen us yet further against the
time of temptation. A principal cause hereof is, The Lords most fatherly and
tender love toward these. That howsoever they are unto the world men most
odious and monstrous, Isa: 8. 18.
for that they will not run with the rest to the same excess, 1 Pet. 4. 4.
as the Apostle Peter speaks, and because they by their holy profession and
carriage condemn the world as Noah did in his age, by his preaching and living
and making of the Arc, yet are they unto the Lord as dear as the apple of his
own eye. Zach. 2. 8.
That he cannot possibly forget them, wheresoever they be dispersed and
howsoever. No, though it were possible for the mother to be^so unnatural as to
forget the child of her womb, Isay. 44. 14, 15, 16.
yet he cannot forget these. They are graven on the palms of his hands and are
ever in his sight. His mercy is about them in the greatest distresses, as a
wall of fire to fence them and to consume all contrary violence, so far as he
sees best. And as chariots of fire to carry them safe out of all such dangers,
Isa: 43. 1. 3.
yea, to save and deliver them in the midst of the fire and in the midst of the
water. And therefore when the day of the Lords vengeance comes, those who
formerly thought on his name, and spoke to keep others from the wickedness of
the times, are taught to comfort themselves herein, because they are written in
the book of his remembrances, Mal: 3. 16, 17, 18.
as Malachi speaks. They are indeed the Lords true flock: and then will he
declare it openly; sparing and tendering the^ as a father does his own son in
who^ he is delighted; that men may oftentimes plainly discern between the
righteous and between the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that
serves him not, as we saw in all the former destructions. And finally for
their sakes It is why he spares a sinful nation so long. But if they be once
forth, the rest can look for nothing but fearful execution of vengeance, for
then he bids, Smite and spare none as follows. Job: 22. 30.


But here It will be said, If this be so; How comes it to pass, Objection.
that many of the godly do so often feel the smart of such calamities as well
as the rest. The godly often feel the smart of such calamities as well as the
rest.
As it is very clear. That many of the dear servants of God, were carried away
in this and the former captivity as well as others: even many of those who were
marked; as we heard before. That the Prophet himself was carried away in the
former captivity, as also Daniel and his companions, with many other, and so
were partakers of the common miseries of the captivity with the rest. It is
likewise very probable that sundry of them died by the sword of the enemy, and
some by other calamities. And on the other side It is certain, that many of
the wicked escaped amongst the godly. It may be therefore demanded, what this
marking did then stand the godly instead or what they were better for it.

To this it may be answered, Answ:
First, That this is very true, Why the Lord often lets his, feel the smart with
the rest.
that many of the godly do often feel the smart of such general judgments.
And that most justly for sundry causes, for which God threatens, his wont to
correct his dearest servants. As either for their former security, Apoc, 1, 2.
4, 5. 15, 16, 20* and 3. 19.
or else for seeking their peace carnally, by fashioning themselves unto the
evil times, as the greatest part is wont to do ever, so far as possibly they
may, not falling utterly from God. Or for that they have not mourned for the
abominations of the rest. Or in that they have not been so instant with the
Lord, for pacifying his wrath and turning away the judgment as they ought. Or
for neglecting their duties of Magistracy, ministry, government in their
families; or at least of admonition, exhortation, or example for saving the
rest, and staying the course of sin. Or finally for that they have not been
so faithful in all things, in their places and callings as they should: or for
some other their scandalous sins, or sins against conscience, whereby they
have provoked the Lord against them: for he uses to correct such, and other
sins like to these in his own servants, by heavy and sharp temporal
scourges, and sometimes by death it self. Thus he shewred his displeasure
against good Josiah for thrusting himself into battle without warrant. 2
Chro, 35. 21, 22.
And against Moses for not sanctifying the Lord at the waters of strife. Number:
20. 12. 1 Cor: 11. 30.
Among the Corinthians also for their unreverent receiving the Lords supper.
And thus may he suffer his own dearest servants, to endure the common
calamities with the rest at such times, either for a just correction of their
former sins, as has been showed; or only for the trial of their faith and
constancy, or for an exercise of their faith and repentance, and to make them
more fervent in prayer, or to further their sanctification to conform them
more and more to Christ; or it may be to increase the vengeance against the
enemies through their cruelty against them, Apoc: 3. 14.
or some other like cause, as we shall see more after.

Yet nevertheless, What the marking profits Gods ^e^uants suffering with the
rest.
The marking teaches us thus much, That though such go into Captivity, yet
there the Lord will be with them, his holy hand will there be over them as a
buckler; There he will so protect them, that he will turn all the evils that
come unto them, Isay, 4^, 12, 3. 41. 8. 9* 10.
still to do them good. He will thereby further their salvation and increase
their glory in the heavens. Rom, 8. 28.
And when they are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for the
slaughter; yet in all that which they endure, they are more then conquerours,
thorough him who has loved them. Rom, 8. 36, 37.
He chastises them thereby to make them to walk more holily and more humbly
in his presence; and so teaches them more sound obedience by the things which
they suffer, then ever they learned in all their lives before, that they shall
in time acknowledge, that to have been the best school that ever they came
into. Heb, 5 8.
By this fire he fineth them from much of the dross of their sins and
corruptions, and specially of their unbeleife, to make them to come forth more
pure, then the gold. For First, he at such times taking from them the means
and stays, that they were wont to lean upon in their prosperity, makes them
to see their carnal and vain confidence, upon what propts they formerly
relied and what unbeleife is in their hearts. And then raising up for them such
means as they never knew (as he did for his people Israel in the wilderness
and in other their distresses) he teaches them to look up higher then to
earthly means; even to his own heavenly hand to depend upon him for all, and
to give him all the glory, making him their only stay and comfort. At such
times and in the very greatest extremities; he has ever been wont to reveal
himself far more familiarly to his, in the gracious works of his fatherly
providence and extraordinary favors, then ever in former time, and that even
outwardly in things belonging to the necessity and comforts of this life. But
above all for the inward comforts of his Spirit, supporting and chearing up the
hearts of all his elect, they ordinarily find them more true and heavenly joy
with certain assurance of Gods favor and love in Christ, then ever they felt
before. And hereby does he most fully manifest to the very enemies their faith
in his promises, their patience, hope, obedience, love to his Majesty, and
what they are ready to suffer for his name. Hereby he is wont also to kindle
in his people a greater fervency in prayer, smitting them to the end to prepare
their hearts thereby, that he may incline his ear unto their cries. Psalm. 10.
1^.
To make them able in all things to give thanks and to rejoice in their most
grievous afflictions; Psalm. 107. ^, 6. 11, 12, 13. 17, 18. 19.
and so to be able to sing with a holy melody, when the fetters are about their
feet. 1 These: 5. 16. 17, 18.
He waines them from the earth and makes them long after the heavens, to be
ever in his presence, Acts, 16 24. 25. and 26. 19.
where all tears being wiped* away is fullness of joy for ever more.

He then also uses these his poor servants, as a special means of the
conversion and saving of the rest of his elect and in these to reserve a holy
seed by which to renew and in large his Church again. Esai. 6. end.


And which is well worthy our careful observation: God hereby works grace in
some who could never be moved by other means.
Some, who could never attain to any grace at all, under the best means, in
the days of their prosperity, but did run riot, as the prodigal son, being
most rebellious against the Lord and his word: yet when he has brought them
into the fetters and chains of afflictions, then have they set themselves to
seek him; and then the word which before they despised, has begun to work in
them to life.

A notable president of his mercy herein he has caused to be registered in his
Book, 2 Chro: 33. 1. 2. 3.
for all posterity, even in Manasseh, who though he had so good a father, as
that worthy Ezechiah, and was so virtuously brought up; yea, and had seen his
fathers reformation, yet (as the Holy Ghost says) he went back and builded up
that iniquity which his father had destroyed. ver, 20. 11. 12.
He never had grace to bethink himself, nor to hearken to the word of the
Lord, until he brought upon him the Captains of the host of the King of
Asshur, who put him in fetters, bound him in chains, and carried him to Babel.
But when he was in tribulation, he began to seek unto the Lord his God, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, and so God was
entreated of him, heard his prayer, and brought him again into Jerusalem into
his Kingdom. Then (says the Holy Ghost) Manasseh knew that the Lord was God:
and then he destroyed all the Idolatry and abominations, which he had bin the
cause of, and restored that religion, which he had before defaced. And to shut
up all: By these the Lord does exceedingly advance his own glory in the midst
of his enemies; as here he did by Daniel and his companions, and makes himself
and his truth evidently known by their constancy, and leaves the wicked
enemies the more without excuse.

As for those whom he takes away by death in such times, The state of the
godly, whom God takes away at such times.
their death is unto them but as the gate of life. It is a final deliverance
from all their sins, and from all fear of every kind of enemy and misery.
It is unto them a more speedy entrance into the full possession of their
fathers joy, and of their glorious inheritance, than otherwise nature would
have afforded them. And thus much for the godly which go into Captivity, or
fall by the sword, or endure any calamity with the rest; what the marking
avayleth them; how happy their estate is, whatsoever come to pass.

But on the other side; State of the wicked in such calamities.
for the wicked, who in such general calamities escape the sword, or the like
cruel death, it is clean contrary with them: For the Lords anger and
revenging hand ever follows them, Am^s 9. 4.
whithersoever they go, until they be destroyed from off the face of the
earth. All these miseries are but the beginnings of the pouring out of the
viols of Gods wrath upon them, to the increase of their torment, and their
fearful expectation of further vengeance. Their calamities which they endure,
are nothing else but preparatives and forerunners of the damnation of hell.

Hereby they also become more senseless and impenitent; they wax more hardened
and enraged to murmr and blaspheme against the Lord. And ordinarily they are
always chased in their own consciences, as Cain; having a sound of fear in
their ears; the worm beginning to gnaw, and their sin to sting them to the
very hearts; and consequently to become runnegates to the grave, and to
eternal confusion. Or let the best be supposed, that ever can befall any of
them; they are but in a lethargy or sleepie sickness, without sense, until
the vengeance of God light wholly upon them, to send them to the place of their
destruction, where they shall never find any rest after. But for their
wretched estate, we shall see it further in another place. And thus we may
behold the estate of all both good and bad in such general calamities.
Conclusion.
Now who is there that believes the word of the Lord, whom the due
consideration of this one point alone, must not needs drive to watching and
prayer; and to cause him to seek to be prepared aforehand in these days of
our peace, that he may be thus undoubtedly marked, and under this protection:
yea, that he may be thus hid in the evil day, and find all the comforts
belonging to the godly; and that he may be sure to escape those certain and
dreadful miseries of the wicked, what judgments soever it shall please him to
exercise us withal: Prove. 22. 3.
for A wise man (as Solomon says) foreseeth the plague and hides himself;
but a fool goes on still, and is punished.

This therefore may serve as a first cause to enforce us all to betake our
selves more instantly to watching and prayer, then ever we have done, if we
would be so marked, as to find the Lord to be a Sanctuary, and a hiding place
unto us in the evil day; how soon soever he shall bring it upon us for all
our sins and provocations; and in the mean time, to get boldness thereby,
and peace of conscience, against all assaults whatsoever. And more also,
unless we will strip our selves wilfully of his most gracious providence and
protection, and desperately expose our selves and all ours, to all kind of
misery and unhappiness, both in this life present, and that which is to come.

If any shall demand further, What the mark was wherewith the godly were marked.
what this mark was: we must remember; That this Vision was given according to
the capacity of man, to show this unto the Prophet, that he might make it
known to all sorts, what care the Lord has for his faithful ones in the
greatest confusions, and when they seem to be utterly neglected and forgotten;
and to this end he has caused it to be written for us. This moreover seems
evidently to be an allusion to the custom of men, who use to set a mark on
such things as they have a special care to preserve heedfully. Or rather an
alluding to the marking of the houses of his own people in Egypt, with the
blood of the Lamb, Exo. 12. 22, 23.
that the destroying Angel might not touch any of them, when he destroyed the
Egyptians. Or else at least to the marking of Rahabs house in the City of
Jericho, Josh. 2. 18.
before the destruction came, for the saving her self and hers.

But if it be demanded, Quest.
whether they had not indeed some special mark of difference to be discerned
from the rest: we may answer truly; That there is no question, They were marked
both inwardly and outwardly.
but they were marked indeed both inwardly and outwardly: Inwardly, by the
blood of Christ sprinkling them, and by the Spirit sanctifying them, making
them to cry, Abba oh Father: Outwardly, by a bold and constant outward
profession of the truth of God in word and deed; and more specially by mourning
and crying out, for all the abominations, which were practiced daily to anger
the Lord, as follows after. But this is not that marking here spoken of, much
less is it any marking with any outward mark or sign, as some do vainly
and very fondly conceit; but only to make them sure, that they might be
preserved from the destroyer. The words signifying nothing else, What y^ words
signify.
but mark them with a mark, or sign them with a sign. That is, mark them
surely and carefully, Ezech: 9. 4. (...)
doubling the word, according to the manner of the Hebrew phrase. And thus much
also shortly for answering those doubts. Now to our next cause, which every
soul has, to watch and to pray.

CHAP. VIII.
The property of the godly living amongst the wicked, in a sinful age, is; To
sigh and cry for the abominations and tokens of Gods anger. So what cause all
Gods servants have to watch and pray for the fewness of such, and to labor to
be of that little number.

TO proceed to a sixth cause, which yet more nearly concerns each of us, and
calls on us all to watchfulnes and prayer. We are all, who desire to find true
assurance and comfort, to consider, who and what ones these servants of God
are, which are thus marked. They are described in these words, Who are they y^
are marked: viz. the mourners.
which sigh and cry for all the abominations.] They were those who were so far
off from framing themselves to the wickedness of that evil time, as that they
contrarily abhorred, with a vehement indignation, all those sins, whereby
Gods anger was so kindled, and their destruction hastened so fast: Insomuch as
that thereby they did not only mourn in themselves in secret, but being
enforced with a zeal of Gods glory, and indignation against all the
abominations, cried out against them, according to their places and callings,
and sighed in secret for mercy and redress.

Here we must observe, The condition of Gods children living amongst the
wicked, to mourn and cry for all the abominations.
The Lord setting before our eyes the condition of the true children of God
living in evil times, and amongst a people void of the sense of sin, and of
the fear of Gods judgments; That their manner is not to approve of the wicked
ways of the ungodly, much less to sooth and flatter them in their evil
courses, nor to give over themselves to any jollitie or carnal delights, as
others do; but they use to have continually much heaviness in themselves,
sighing for the grievous sins which are committed. An example hereof the Lord
has set forth to all posterity in holy Lot, As Lot.
who living amongst the filthy Sodomites, was thus grieved with their ungodly
conversation; for so says the holy Apostle Peter, 2 Pet: 2. 7.
That he being righteous and dwelling among them, in hearing and seeing vexed
his righteous soul from day to day, with their unrighteous deeds. He was so
disquieted with their beastly manners, provoking the Lords most holy eyes, that
his whole life, for the time that he dwelt amongst them, was but weariness and
a continual mourning. This holy man, the Lord would have set forth as an
example to all succeeding ages, to show the condition of all his true and
faithful servants, living amongst wicked and ungodly men. To him we may
adjoyne that faithful Prophet Jeremy, Jeremy.
who though he lived in a far better time and place, both in the bosom of the
Church, and in the days of that holy King Josiah; yea, and in that worthy
reformation for many years together, (for he began to preach unto them in the
thirteenth year of Josiah, and so continued until this Captivity was brought
upon them) yet he likewise is vexed continually, even from the beginning of his
prophesying. This was a daily corosive to his soul, to see the people so
backward in embracing the truth, so senseless and impenitent in their sins,
in such evident tokens of Gods vengeance rushing upon them, so prone to the
former Idolatry, wherein they had lived, and to all other abominations, to
anger the Lord, notwithstanding the example of their most worthy Prince, and
all the means used to reclaim them. This made his very soul to faint within
him, and his heart to tremble, that no admonitions of his, nor of other the
holy Prophets, could do them any good, although they daily discovered their
iniquities, and so proclaimed this desolation. That beholding this and seeing
that now, there was no more hope, but that their plagues must needs break in
violently upon them, he wishes his head full of water, Ier: 9. 1, 2, 3.
and his eyes a fountain of tears, that he might weep for them day and
night, and for all the miseries that were to come upon them. And moreover
desires that he had (if it were) but a poor cottage of a wayfaring man in the
desolate wilderness, to live all alone, and never to hear of their sins,
nor to see their wicked conversations any more.

More than this, we may also observe, how carefully this is recorded in the
Book of God. That diverse of his most faithful servants, hearing of some
heinous sins committed, to his dishonor and provocation, and considering the
judgments due thereunto, or foreseeing by evident signs some present
calamity hasting upon them for the same, have bin strangely humbled thereupon:
yea, how they have wept, prayed, fasted, lain down on the ground, and could
not be comforted. Besides Moses, Moses.
who was ever thus humbled upon the new provocations of the people, and with
him Samuel, David, and others; see Ezra Ezra.
his behavior, how he rent his clothes, Ezra 9. 1 and 10. 6.
plucked off the hair of his head and of his beard, sat astonished, got
privately into his chamber, fasted, neither eating bread nor drinking water,
mourning, because of the transgressions of them of the Captivity, and fearing
some new wrath to come upon them. This caused him to be cast down in himself,
and 9. 2.
when he heard of the strange women, which Gods people had married in the
Captivity, and 10. 9.
contrary to his law; how they had mingled themselves with the profane
Heathen, which were given to all abominations, whereby their children began to
prove heathenish also; and because the Princes and Rulers had bin chief in
this trespass. And not only he himself, but the people likewise, sat
trembling for those and other sins, and for a grievous rain, which God had
sent upon them at that time, as an evident token of his displeasure.

Josiah, when he heard the words of the Book of the Law, Josiah.
which was found, 2 King: 22. 11.
laying to heart the threatenings in it, and considering thereupon the wrath
kindled against them, for their own sins, and for the sins of their
fathers, v^rs. 19. 13.
he mourning thus humbled himself, rent his clothes, his heart did melt, his
eyes powered out tears. He sends straight way to inquire, where he could have
any answer, even of Huldah, because he knew that she was a Prophetess of the
Lord: with which fact of his, declaring his unfayned humiliation, the Lord was
so pleased, that he sends him this message; That his eyes should not see the
vengeance, 2 King 22. 19, 20.
which he would bring on that place. He should first be taken away in peace,
before those plagues came.

Our Savior.
and yet beholding the people so senseless in the midst of the imminent
danger, when his preaching will do them no more good, he stands and weeps over
them thus lamenting: (...) 19. 41, 42, 43.
Oh, if thou had known, at least in this thy day, those things that belong
unto thy peace! But now are they hid from thine eyes; for the days shall come
upon thee, that thy enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall make thee even with the
ground, and thy children which are in thee, and they shall not leave in thee a
stone upon a stone, which shall not be cast down, because And for continual
mourning for this, Paul.
the holy servant of God, Paul, Rom* 9. 3.
calls Christ to witness to his soul, that he had a continual heaviness and
sorrow in his heart, for his stiff-necked and unbeleeving Countrymen, the
Jews. And that he could have wished himself separate from Christ, so that
they might not have been cast off, from being any more a nation, or the people
of the Lord.

Finally, the two Prophets in the Revelation, representing The two Prophets in
the days of Antichrist.
after the manner of mourners, Apoc. 11. 3.
bewailing the strange delusions of the people of God, by the abominations of
Antichrist, in so clear a light of the Gospel of Christ, shining again so
gloriously.

And thus have we seen plainly, this property of Gods people, how they use to
sigh and mourn for all the iniquities of the times wherein they live.

Now to ascend to the next degree of the grief of the godly for the
wickedness of the times, the Prophet says, That they sigh and cry; not only
that they sigh, but sigh and cry for all the abominations.

Wherein the Holy Ghost would have all to take notice, The godly wont not only
to sigh, but to cry out for the abominations of the wicked according to their
calling.
that the godly at such times, have been so far off from bearing with the
wicked, or flattering them in their sins; as that from mourning, they have
come, in a zeal of Gods glory, and in an holy indignation against sin, to
cry out openly against the grievous corruptions and transgressions; and have
showed thereby their detestation, so far as their calling would any way
suffer them; especially, when the provocations have been heinous to anger the
Lord. To omit the boldness of the young Prophet sent to Jeroboam, and of Eliah
to Ahab in the case of open Idolatry: this was the continual course of these
three worthy Prophets, as Esaias.
Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and so of the rest that lived before the Captivity.
Thus God bids Esaias to lift up his voice as a trumpet, Jeremy.
to tell his people of their transgressions. Ezekiel.
And this was Ieremies usual tenor, Esa. 58. 1.
for which all his hatred and troubles came upon him, with earnest contention
to cry out against the fearful sins of his time. These God has left as
presidents to all his faithful messengers to the end of the world, to declare
how they ought to carry themselves in such evil times, according to their
places and callings. John Baptist.
So John Baptist cries out against the hypocrites: Matthew. 3. 7.
O generation of vipers, who has forewarned you to fly from the vengeance to
come. Our Savior also among the Scribes and Pharisees, Our Savior.
being hypocrites, thunders out nothing, Matthew. 23.
but woe, woe. This in like manner was the principal occasion of all the
malice against him; Mat. 21. 45, 46.
for that he testified in every place, Ioh. 7. 7.
that their deeds were evil; and also for denouncing Gods judgments to come
upon them.

And to omit all other: Lot a private man.
That righteous Lot in Sodom, Genesis 19. 6, 7.
though a private man, yet cries unto them for that shameful outrage, I pray
you, my brethren, deal not so wickedly. In a word, this has been the
continual behavior of the Martyrs and Confessors of Gods truth, The Martyrs
and Confessors.
(as all Histories do witness) thus to cry against the sins of the times,
within the limits of their calling; whence ordinarily they have suffered such
bitter persecutions.

For crying also unto the Lord at such times, The godly have bin wont also to
cry to God in such times.
it has been a most usual thing with all the faithful Prophets and other of
his servants, until that he have forbidden some of them, as he did Jeremy,
that he should not pray to do that people any good, Ier. 7. 16. and 11.
when as they did grow obdurate and most extremely malicious against him: 11.
and 14. 11.
and always the nearer they have seen the wrath, the more vehemently have
they cried unto the Lord, as Moses and Samuel, Psalm. 106. 23.
stepping into the breach to stay the Lords hand, 1 Samuel 7. 8, 9, 10.
that he should not destroy his people.

So that this point is likewise most clear. Reasons why the godly so sigh and
cry for all the abominations.
Yet to cause it to work more effectually upon our consciences, it shall not
be unnecessarie, a little to ponder some of the reasons, why the godly do so
sigh, and cry. As

Hating that with God hates.
in hating those things, which he hates, with a vehement indignation; and what
sins they cannot reform, nor restrain, those they sigh and grieve for.

Secondly, that they can no more endure the dishonors That they cannot endure
the dishonours done to him.
according to that measure of grace given unto them, than the Angels which are
in heaven, do according unto theirs; and therefore they being subject unto
these passions of grief and sorrow, must needs in seeing and hearing vex their
righteous souls continually.

Thirdly, because they have of the very ^ame spirit of The spirit of zeal in
them.
which was so fervent toward his fathers house, Ioh: 2. 17.
that to see it defiled, it did after a sort eat and consume him.

Fourthly, how can it be, but that they who are the Because of Satan set up in
Christ's throne.
must needs be troubled to see Satan set up and worshipped in the throne of
their heavenly Father; for so he is in all places where iniquity has the
upper hand. Or what child is there, except he be extremely unnatural, that is
not cast down in himself, when he sees his father angry.

Fifthly, because not taking to heart such sins, we become For that they are
otherwise guilty of the same sins.
for so Paul charge the Corinthians for the incestuous person, that they were
therefore guilty of his sin, because they had not sorrowed for it: and says,
1 Cor: 5. 2.
that they afterward by their sorrow and indignation, 2 Cor: 7. 11.
testified so many ways, upon his letter sent unto them, did show themselves
free from his wickedness.

Sixthly and lastly, which is the principal; because for For that for one
notorious sinner unpunished, all y^ place is in danger of Gods wrath.
Gods anger may be kindled against all the place where he is; and that
therefore all of them are in danger of this vengeance with the rest; even every
one that does not what he can within the compass of his calling to reform it;
at least by mourning for it, and crying unto the Lord for pardon and redress.
This he shows plainly in sundry places of his holy word; although the
contrary practice of the world, declares evidently that very few believe this
point. Let us but observe two or three places, the more to convince us and
rouse our souls out of this our deep security. Evident in the law of
inquisition for murder.
As first that, of the case of inquisition for murder, when one is found
murdered, if there be not the utmost endeavor, both in Ministers, Magistrates
and people, Dew: 21 1, 2, 3, 4 etc.
to find out the murderer, and to punish him by death (according to the law
against murder) the land is defiled, as is evident both by the strict manner
of the inquisition, that was to be made, by all the people of Israel, and by
the protestation of the Rulers in the behalf of all the people, clearing
themselves from it; and also by the prayer, that they were taught to make in
this form; verse. 8.
O Lord, be merciful unto us thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and
lay no innocent blood to the charge of thy people Israel, and the blood shall
be forgiven them. verse. 9.
So (says he) thou shall take away the cry of innocent blood from thee; when
thou shall do that which is right in the sight of the Lord. Whereby we may
plainly see, that the blood of one man thus murdered, defiles the bordering
land, and provokes the Lords displeasure against the people; if it be not
carefully sought out, and all holy means used for the avenging of it, and
taking away the cry thereof. Secondly, the Lord declares there evidently, Number:
35. 33, 3^.
that the Land cannot be cleansed, and the sin pardoned unto it, but by the
blood of him that shed it; or at least, when no means is neglected, to find
it out and to punish it. Thirdly, that innocent blood cries for vengeance from
the earth continually, as Abels did, until all the means be used for purging
it.

A last reason of Gods severitie is; God is more severe with his Church than
any other.
because it is not with the Church of God, as with the profane Heathen; for he
dwells in the midst of his Church, and therefore if any defile the Land, Numb:
35. 34.
where his Church is, he will either punish them severely, Exodus: 32 33.
or utterly depart from them, as appears evidently in his threatening after the
making of the Golden Calfe: Le^^^: 10. 3.
for he will be specially sanctified in them that draw near unto him, Lev: 18.
24, 25, 27, 28.
in such a holy profession. Lev: 20 22, 23, 26.
He is very terrible in the assembly of his Saints. Now, as it is in this case
of blood, so every notorious sin defiles the land, Every notorious sin
defiles the Land to make it spue out the inahbitants, as Canaa^.
and cries for vengeance against all the inhabitants: the Land cannot bear
it, but will endanger all, even to spue out that people in the end, if it be
not purged, as their abominations did cause the Land of Canaan.

This we may see in sundry examples, The sin of some few may endanger all.
how sometimes the sin of some of the people has endangered all the rest;
sometimes the sin of one city, and sometimes even the sin of one man; when it
has not been sought out and punished. As to omit that sin at the making of
the golden calfe, which although it was not the sin of all, yet it As for the
golden calfe.
See the fear of the people of Israel, for the suspicion of the provocation,
by the two tribes and The fear of Israel at the erecting the Altar of witness.
which the rest of the Tribes did think that they had done for sacrifice,
contrary to the commandment of the Lord. They al purposed to have gone
immediately to make war against their brethren for the punishment of that sin;
Ios: 22. 18.
yet sent messengers to know the truth of the matter before, with this message,
v^r: 28.
That if they did rebel against the Lord that day, the morrow next he would be
wrath with all the congregation of Israel. The like we may behold Gibeah in
abusing the Levites Concubine and the vengeance that came not only upon the
City wherein it was committed, The vengeance on Gibea, and all the Tribes of
Benjamin.
but also upon all the Tribe of Benjamin, Judge: 19. 25. and 20. 13, 14.
because they delivered them not to be punished, but would seem to defend
them, for as much as they were apart of their Tribe. And not upon that Tribe
alone, On Iabesh Gilead for not helping to avenge the wickedness.
which might seem justly accessory; but also upon all those who helped not to
take vengeance for that wicked fact; as on all the inhabitants of Iabesh
Gilead, because they came not to the war to see Gods judgments executed upon
those wicked men. Judge: 21. 4.


To come to the sins of particular men. The very sin of one alone may
endanger all as Achans.
Did we not hear before of the vengeance on Israel in the days of Ioshuah
for the sin of Achan? How that worthy Captain with his valiant soldiers were
not able to stand before their enemies, until Achans sin was found out and
punished? Yea, the Lord tells them, he will not be with them any more, I^sh, 7.
12.
unless they destroy the excommunicate from amongst them: which thereupon they
were glad to do. And far be it from us to think the Lord to be unjust in
this, or any other of his judgments, or to have diminished any part of his
justice or holiness unto this day. Saul's in murdering the Gibeonites.
Secondly, we cannot forget that anger that was kindled against Israel and the
famine that came upon them in the days of David for three years together, 2 Samuel: 21. 1, 2 3.
for the sin of Saul in killing the Gibeonites to gratify the people, Josh:
3. 16. 17. 2 Samuel: 21, 1. 2. 6. 14.
contrary to his fidelity: Though they were but heathens of the cursed
Amorites, and had dealt deceitfully with the Israelites in making their
covenant: Yet the wrath could not be appeased or the Land purged, until
vengeance was taken upon his bloody house for that murder committed so long
before. Gods anger often breaks out long after, for sins committed long before.
And therefore since his anger may break forth so long after, even for such
sins, much more for such notorious abominations as are committed daily by them,
who have given themselves over to all manner of profaneness and impiety; and
whereof they can have no such color or occasion.

This was the chief reason of the solemn inquisition, The cause of the
inquisition at fasts for horrible offenses.
which was at the public fasts in Israel, for the finding out both of
notorious offenders and offenses to have vengeance taken of them openly. 1
King: 21. 9. 10, 11.
Hence was the pretense of Iezabell for the saving of Naboth under a show of
execution of this justice against a blasphemer to pacify the Lords anger. One
cause of reading and preaching the word at solemn fasts.
This also seems to have bin one principal cause, why the word was read and
preached at those their solemn fasts, that thereby the sins might be
discovered and reformed: Nehe: 8, 8.
as God bids Jeremy to indite, Ier: 36. 2. 3.
and Baruch to write from his mouth and to declare to the people their sins,
with the plagues and judgments due unto them, that they might return from
their evil ways, and so pacify his wrath by crying unto him and reforming
all the abominations. Thus we see this point also clear. That the sins of a
people, even of a few of them not punished do anger the Lord and provoke him
against the whole land, making the land unclean, neither can he be fully
pacified any way, but by the punishing and taking away of those sins. Whereby
it is most evident to the consciences of all men, what just cause the godly
have to sigh and to tremble for all the abominations that are committed amongst
them, and especially which being notoriously known do still remain unpunished.

Now to apply this unto our selves; Application.
And first for the general humiliation of us all, afterward for the comfort of
those few, that are such true mourners indeed.

First, For humiliation to the secure.
this may strike the hearts of all sorts, who imagining that they are the
servants of the Lord, yet hearing and seeing the fearful apostasy, coldness
and security of our age, even in many of the better sort; together with
Atheism, Popery, and all outrageous and profane licentiousness daily
increasing in the rest, are yet never troubled therewith. And much more may it
astonish all such, who are so far off from the condition of these mourners, as
that they can solace themselves as freely, when they hear of all excess in
iniquity, and whatsoever can be devised by Iewd men, to anger the Lord and to
grieve his Spirit, as ever they were wont at other times. Most of all may it
affright and awaken those, who use all devices to drive each thought of Gods
anger or any judgment with every occasion of humiliation and mourning utterly
out of their hearts.

But of all other is their estate most fearful who can make the beastly sins
of others their chiefest sport. Oh you that are such, consider in your hearts!
Is this the spirit of Lot, Moses, Samuel, Jeremy, Ezra, of these mourners
here marked? Of our Savior or Pavl? Is this the Spirit of the Lord? How
deceive you your souls in a vain imagination? what will ye do in the day of
the Lords wrath, if he let it come upon us? as we justly deserve: Or what have
ye done to turn it from us? Know, know for certain, that this sin of yours
will one day undoubtedly bring you weeping enough; you cannot tell whether even
in this life, as it did to them in the Captivity; nay, even whether this same
uery day; when you shall do nothing but weep day and night in remembrance of
this one sin; that your hearts were so hard in the days of your prosperity,
that you could not mourn at all. Besides all the other miseries, that you are
liable unto for all your sins, chiefly if God should give you up for them:
when you shall be utterly destitute of comfort of the Lords mercy, protection
and-favour; until you shall have soundly bewailed all this your senseless
security.

But on the contrary; Application for the comfort of the mourners.
as this is given by the Lord for the comfort of all that mourn for the
iniquities, because they are surely marked before the vengeance come, to be
safe then: so it may serve for the sweet consolation and cheering up even of
all those of every estate and degree, from the highest to the lowest, who find
their hearts thus affected in hearing of and beholding the abominations,
committed daily to anger the Lord, howsoever it shall please him to visit us.
Give me leave therefore (if it were to digress) a little and to turn my
speech to speak to your souls, and consciences, for the confirming and
strengthening of all our hearts who are such. The Lord here sets before your
faces the care which he has for you. Comfort to Godly rulers.
You are surely sealed, whatsoever plagues he shall smite the earth withal;
whether you be rulers, from the greatest to the meanest to begin with you. If
your consciences bear you witness that your hearts are set to advance Gods
true religion and all pretty, and by all holy means to suppress iniquity, and
so to turn away the judgments threatened. And much more also if to this end,
you study to procure what good you can, to the Church of Christ. If you mourn
with Ezra for the grievous transgressions of the people, If as Ezra.
for defiling themselves with the abominations of other nations, and especially
with Popery, Atheism and all irreligious licenciousnes. Of if that your hearts
do melt with holy Josiah, or Josiah.
for the former and present provocations, and to see how the word of the Lord
is despised. If you use to lament and sigh in beholding the intolerable
frowardness of men against the Lord, that they cannot be brought to submit
themselves to his glorious Gospel: and in observing such a strange turning
back of many of our people in their hearts, as who will needs return into
Egypt and Sodom again, and so strive to provoke the Lord yet more thereby and
by all other their sins. And if moreover in seeing that you cannot do that
good that you would in reforming the evils, you are not only daily humbled
before the Lord upon your faces privately; but do also show your grief openly
in your places, as occasion is offered, as this is an evident demonstration of
your unfeigned religion before the world, so it is a most strong bulwark to
your own souls against all fear of the miseries, that can any way come upon
us.

Or secondly, Comfort to the Prophets that mourn.
If you be those that succeed in the place of the Prophets, being set to watch
over, and to warn the people committed to you, thereby to turn away the
plagues, which are tiying upon them, and do find in your selves the
affections of Jeremy in heaviness and lamentation; when you see your pains
to do so little good, that you people generally grow rather worse and worse;
that you labor in vain, and spend you strength in vain, Isay. 49. 4.
and for nothing, as Esaias complains; that although the bellows be burnt, yet
you melt but in vain, the wickedness is not taken away: so that you may seem
to have just cause to deem them to be but reprobate silver, and such as the
Lord has weighed, as Jeremy bewayleth them in his time; Ier: 6. 29.
this may comfort you, that you are of this number, that are marked. And if
furthermore, for this cause, you find your life to be a wearines, that with
Paul you have a continual sorrow in your hearts for your people, and that you
could be content to endure any misery for them, to save them from the Lords
wrath; this is a demonstration that the same spirit of Paul rests upon you.
And yet further also to comfort you; If you be such as are so far off from
serving the time, or flattering them to whom you are sent, in crying peace,
peace, That you have set your selves in all faithfulness to discover their
iniquities, and to cry out against all their sins, Ier: 1. 8. 17.
and that no fear can stop your mouth from doing your duties in your places;
Isa: 58. 1.
this testimony of your consciences shall be as a strong brazen wall unto you,
Ezech: 3. 17. and 33. 6, 7, 8.
whatsoever shall come to pass. Acts 20. 26, 27, 28.


And to speak generally; Mica 3. 8.
If you be private Christians, as Lot and these mourners here marked, 2 Timothy: 1.
7.
and in steed of having a confederacy with the wicked in their evil ways,
Comfort ^o private Christians, sighing for the iniqui^ie.
you find your selves vexed every day for the evils which you hear and see,
it may minister unto you much assurance and heavenly consolation. And more
specially if your hearts be troubled for these dreadful sins: As first, for
our monstrous unthankfulness for the Gospel, with all our blessings
accompanying it, and for that we are most of us so weary in living in obedience
unto it: and so many on the other side, ready to live rather under that
slaverie of Antichrist, or service of sin and Satan. Or secondly; If you
feel your souls continually grieved, in beholding, how many of us there are,
which make a profession of the Gospel in word, yet deny utterly all power of
it in our lives. And withal, how ready many amongst us, (who have heretofore
made conscience of our ways) are now to join hands and run to all excess,
with the Atheist, and with every profane and filthy person. And if above all
this, your hearts bear you witness, that you strive to keep your selves
unspotted in this last and sinful generation, Psalm. ^3. 15.
and neither by Schism run forth of the Church and communion of the Saints;
E^cles. 10. 4.
so condemning the generation of his children on the one hand; nor leave your
places and callings, so long as with a good conscience you can enjoy them, to
cast your selves upon the rocks of innumerable evils: neither yet on the other
hand, to decline to the coldness, Psalm: ^3. 2, 3.
hypocrisy, and looseness of the time, this shall be your comfort
perpetually. And yet to proceed a little further, If you thus staying your
selves from these extremes, do use to speak every one to his neighbor, as
the godly did in Malachies days, Mal: 3. 16, 17.
to encourage one another to walk more heedfully and cheerfully in the ways
of the Lord, each in his rank, and within the bounds of his calling; this shall
be your witness before the Lord. Or finally, If yet now, at least at the view
of our transgressions which follow, and the Lords threatenings against us, you
can feel your hearts so affected, as those mourners, and set to continue so to
walk with your God; then this shall be unto you a gracious assurance, that you
are indeed the Lords own servants, as these mourners were. The same Spirit of
the Lord rests upon you, you are surely sealed therewith, and singled out for
his Majesty. His care is as well for you, as ever it was for Noah* Lot, Eliah,
or any of these mourners: for he is still the same to all who tread in their
steps; his compassions fail not. This is written now to comfort you. Heaven
and earth shall pass, but not one jot or title of his word, until every thing
be accomplished. He may sooner break his covenant concerning the day and the
night, than he can with you. The hills may sooner remove out of their places,
Isa: 54. 10.
than his mercy can from you. Let none of your hearts therefore faint, who have
this witness, that you endeavor hereunto. But come whatsoever will, God will
provide such a deliverance for you, if he see it good. Or if he send you into
Captivity, yet he will there lead you, his Angels shall conduct you, his
Spirit shall support you, with joy unspeakable, even in the midst of all your
trials, until that your testimony be fulfilled, your warfare accomplished,
and the crown of glory set upon your heads; you are written upon the palms of
his hands, Isa^: 49. 15.
that you shall be ever in his sight. And if he let you be taken away by death
among the rest; yet even death shall be unto you the greatest advantage. It
shall make an end of all your miseries, that you shall not so much as see the
evils to come. Then will the Lord turn all your sorrows and fears into
abundant joys and security, giving you the reward of all your labors, and
whatsoever else you have hoped and longed after. Then shall you find the
fullness of those joys, 1 Cor 2 9.
which never eye saw, nor ever ear heard, nor yet entered into man's heart to
consider of. And this shall you enjoy in his glorious presence, with all his
blessed Angels and Saints, with whom ye shall reign for evermore.

But as for all the rest of wicked scoffers and profane contemners of the Lord,
Application to all profane contemners.
and of all his merciful fore-warnings, if he in his justice should leave us
up to such a judgment, to be executed on us, through the hellish devices of
that bloody Antichrist, (whose rage and fury still increases, as our
deliverances and prosperity have done) then must you all know from him, be you
Atheists, Papists, belly-gods, worldlings, that you must look for your portion
to be all alike; that shift or fly whither soever you will, ye shall never be
able to fly from his vengeance. Though you could dig to hell, as the Prophet
Amos speaks, (...) 9. ^, 2, 3, 4
yet his hand should fetch you thence; and although you could climb up to
heaven, yet thence also he would bring you down: yea, though you could hide
your selves in the most secret caves among the rocks, (...) 28.
yet even there should his vengeance find you out: and flying to the uttermost
parts of the earth, he will still there command the sword, the pestilence and
famine to pursue you, with terror of heart, and trembling of conscience,
until you be destroyed from the face of the earth. The Lord will ever set his
face against you for evil and not for good; and this is that, that you must
certainly expect.

And even for you likewise, Application to our pretended Catholics.
that think you shall do well enough, because you have been known to be so
devoted to the Catholic religion (as you term it) and to suffer for it, do
not imagine your cause shall be any thing the better for this. If you bear
false hearts to the Lords anointed and to your native country; how can you
look that vengeance shall suffer you to live? Or can you persuade your selves
that a foreign enemy prevailing, (which evil the Lord still deliver us from)
should ever trust you, whom they found so false to your Prince and country. Be
it so, yet if you be known to be such as have any wealth (if the Lord should
for all our provocations permit such a day) as they have long looked for, have
we not just cause to conceive, that Papist and Protestant should be all alike?
and that tho all such should proclaim at each market cross, that they are
Catholics; yet that there goods would be the goods of Hugonotes; as it was at
the French massacre in Paris? would not then all such be made Puritanes of the
Parliament house? the desperatest ding-thrifts and sharpest swords, slashing
down and carrying all away? And although the Lord shall still at the
intercession of his most faithful and dear servants, (as sometimes of Abraham,
Moses, Samuel, and these mourners) preserve us from the bloody hands of our
deadly and most cruel enemies, and from ever coming under the Babilonish
yoke again (which we ever beg and cry for) yet the estate of all you, The
state of all the wicked, tho the Lord still spare us at the prayers of his
servants.
that are the provokers of his Majesty and grievers of his people by your
horrible sins shall be nothing the better. At death a heavier captivity
shall fall upon you, when you shall be bound in everlasting chains of
darkness, and reserved unto the judgment of the great day, to be tormented
for evermore. And thus if your sleepie hearts come once to be thoroughly awaked,
you shall be sure to live in continual expectation of vengeance, being chased
of your own wicked consciences, as (...), until the Lords most just decree be
accomplished upon you. Then you that could not once sigh or cry to God at all,
for the abominations and dishonors done unto his Majesty, or in fearing his
anger, but thought this foolishness, shall have cause enough to call and cry
continually, in feeling and fearing his most just and heavy indignation, with
all his fierce plagues due unto you everlastingly. But of this we shall speak
yet more, when we come to the several miseries, which they endured in the
Captivity.

And thus much may serve for the estate both of the godly, mourning for all the
abominations, and for the rest. It may suffice likewise for another most just
cause to drive us to watching and prayer with continual mourning: seeing only
the mourners are commanded to be marked, to be preserved from the vengeance to
come: and these are they principally that stay the judgment from rushing upon
us; Job 22. the end.
at least until they be so marked and made safe.

But alas, have we not here a new cause to take up a doleful complaint for the
want hereof? Just cause of lamentation for the small number of true mourners.
Where are they who lament for the abominations, which we have received from
all foreign Nations, and wherewith we have so polluted our profession, as
after will appear? Where are those whose hearts melt to think how the law of
God is trodden under foot, and his judgments hastened daily by all our
provocations? What is become of Moses, Samuel, Jeremy, Paul, and of that
continual heaviness, which they were in, for the obstinacy of the people?
Where are the two Prophets, prophesi^ng after the manner of mourners, for the
prevayling of that Antichrist, and the delusions of Gods people? That zeal of
Lot for all our unlawful deeds? Are we not come very generally to cry, Peace,
peace, and all is well, desiring to be at ease, (...)
as they who trusted in the mountain of Samaria? of whom Amos speaks: and
those who cried, the Temple of the Lord, Ierem* 7. 4.
the Temple of the Lord? Are we not become (I mean exceeding (...) of us) as
they who said, The Lord will neither do good nor evil? Do not our lives
proclaim it? Or as those that spoke against Jeremy, Our general security
fearful.
to ^ull themselves and all others still asleep; saying, we shall neither see
sword nor famine? In a word; Is it not with us for the most part, Ier: 5. 12,
13.
as with them that lived immediately before the flood, and before the overthrow
of Sodom and Gomorrha? Do we not eat and drink, marry and give in marriage,
as they; every man giving up himself to follow his own way, and for his own
advantage; never regarding our Noah's building the Arc, and calling all to
enter; nor our Lots mourning and crying to all, Good brethren, deal not so
wickedly? Do we not daily increase in our senselessness, and still more harden
our selves against all warnings, signs, and tokens, until the floud-gates of
heaven be open, and the vengeance of God come pouring down? And to go yet one
step higher, and to add this one demand more; Are not very many amongst us
come to that height of impiety, Scorning at all that mourn for the evils.
to scorn and to abuse by all means, all those that mourn for the evils, and
who will not run with us to all excess of ungodliness? And if any do ever
reprove such, though in the grief of their hearts, with the greatest love and
reverence, are they not ready to say, as those unto Lot, Hence, who made thee a
Ruler and a Judge? so to thrust them away with all disgrace. Or, which is yet
worse, if worse may be, Is not this too common in very many places, to use them
as Jeremy was used, to load such with all opprobrious slanders, as tho they
were the vilest men, that could live upon the earth, and those that seek not
the good of the Land but the hurt; and as if indeed there were none to be hated
but they, be they never so peaceable and obedient. And finally, are they not
made such in many places, as Jeremy says of himself, whom every body
curses, though they have neither given nor taken upon usurie, but lived
without of^ence or intermedling in the world. Nay, although they be such
persons, whom all the world cannot touch; except for such infirmities, as are
incident to all the sons of Adam; or the matters of their God, as Dani^l was?
Do we not thus add to the increase of their sorrows, to kindle more the
Lords anger for the injuries done unto them, and by seeking to drive them out
from amongst us, or at least to cause them to cease crying to the Lord for us.
Which unkindnesse he can no way endure; since these (I mean, who make
conscience of all his commandments) are the dearest unto him of all the people
of the earth, and the only preservers of the rest, so long as they remain
amongst us.

And thus much shall serve for this in like manner, (...).
what cause we have to watch and pray, yea, to tremble and cry for the small
remainder of our mourners; and also to the end that we our selves may be found
to be of the number of them, so to help to appease the wrath, or so to escape
in the evil day.

CHAP. IX.
The enemies by which the Lord threatens or afflicts his Church, are his
soldiers; and what cause we have to give our selves to watching and prayer,
for the increase of them in number, pride and malice.

IT remains now that we shall come to show the abominations for the which the
godly so sighed and cried, what and how great they were. But the handling
thereof, may be more profitably reserved unto the sixth verse, where the Holy
Ghost sets down, how fierce his wrath was, and how grievous the plagues were,
which the Lord threatens to inflict upon them; that by the greatness of the
vengeance, we may better consider the heynousnesse of the abominations.

Having therefore thus finished this first Commission, which was to the marking
Angel, for the preservation of all the godly: we will come to the second
commission given to the destroying Angels, how they should deal with all the
rest, contained in these words following.

Verse. 5. And to the other he said, in my hearing, Go ye after him through the
City and smite; Let not your eye spare, neither have pity, s^ay utterly old
and young, etc.

Here the Lord delivering this Commission aloud, The enemies by which God
threatens his Church are his soldiers.
and bidding these destroying Angels to go and smite, to spare none, will have
us all to consider this well: That the enemies by which his Church is
afflicted, as the Babylonian here meant, (to whom he said, Go ye after him
thorough the City and smite) are the Lords soldiers. They come not, nor fight
of themselves alone, but at his command: they fight also his battles, though
they know not so much, nor purpose any such matter, but do it in the pride and
malice of their hearts.

No point is more necessary for us to know; The knowledge of this point most
necessary, and most plainly set down in the Scriptures.
becasue in the plots and conspiracies of wicked enemies, and in all the rage
against the Church of God, it is so rare a thing for any man to look at the
Lord, and how he sends and orders all; but every man almost uses still to
look only at the hand of the enemy. Neither is any truth more clearly set
forth in the book of God. We will content our selves with two or three places,
which are past all exception, in which he has of purpose taught this point
most fully.

First, we may begin with the former great Captivity In the captivity of
Israel the Lord sent on them the King of Ass^ur.
of the Ten Tribes carried captive into Assyria by Salmanazar; which was a good
space before this captivity of Judah. The Holy Ghost says, that the Lord in
his wrath sent upon them the King of Asshur to destroy them. Is^y 10. 5, 6.
Whom the Prophet ^say (in speaking of both the Captivities jointly, and the
like instruments and reasons of both) calls the rod of Gods wrath; The
Assyrian, the rod or the Lords wrath.
because he had in his wrath prepared the Assyrian as his rod, to whip both
Israel and Judah for their rebellion. He terms also their staff, meaning the
weapons in their hands, his indignation: because all their weapons were chiefly
prepared to execute his most fierce indignation. He calls them moreover the
Lords axe, whereby he cut down the Nations. All were the Lords instruments: He
sent these Assyrians, The Lord gave them y^ charge, tho the enemy thought not
so.
and gave them the charge to spoil and trample under foot the rebellious
Israelites, as the mire in the streets. But did the proud Assyrian know thus
much, how God used him as his soldier? or did he purpose in it to execute Gods
wrath, and his terrible judgment? No, says the Lord, he thinks not so,
neither does his heart esteem it so, as to avenge my quarrel, but he
imagines to destroy not a few nations: that is, All that he does, he does in
pride and malice of his own wicked heart; and by his own strength, as he
foolishly thinks. Therefore the Lord says plainly, That when he had used
him, as his rod to correct his people, Atter God has corrected his Church, he
will burn his rods in the fire.
first Samaria and then Jerusalem, first Israel and after Judah, that he would
surely burn the rod in the fire: He would visit the proud heart of the King of
Asshur, and bring down his proud looks, and as a fire in his vengeance
consume him utterly. Esa: 12. 17, 14.


Manasseh the son of that worthy Hezechiah, when he went back from the good
ways of his father, In carrying Ma^ass^^ into Captiu^ie.
and set up again all the abominations that his father had taken away, and had
also destroyed that piety and religion, 2 Chr: 33. 1, 2, 3.
which his good father had so labored to build up: and finally, when he caused
his people to do worse than the Heathen, verse. 9. 10. 17.
whom the Lord had plagued, the Holy Ghost says, That first the Lord spoke
unto him, and to his people, but they would not regard. And when that would not
serve, The Lord brought on him the Assyrian.
he says expressly, That the Lord brought upon them the Captains of the host
of the King of Asshur, who took Manasseh, and put him in fetters, and bound
him in chains, and carried him to Babel. And that then when he was in
tribulatior, he prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before
the God of his fathers; and God was entreated of him, and heard his prayer, and
brought him again into his kingdom in Jerusalem: then Manasseh knew that the
Lord was God. So that it was God especially that brought the Assyrian upon
Manasseh, God did all in it.
and fettred him, and carried him into Babylon, and there heard his prayer, and
brought him back, and set him again in his kingdom: it was God that did it.

Thirdly, for this Captivity, as the Prophet here foresaw So in this
Captivity the Lord likewise did all.
and the Lord said, he would do it; and like as he bids the enemies, which are
represented by these Angels, to go and smite; so the Holy Ghost says
plainly, (using the very same phrase of speech, 2 Chro: 36. 17.
that is used concerning Manasseh) That God brought upon them the King of the
Caldeans, who slew their young men with the sword, and spared neither young nor
old, but made this havocke of them all. They came not merely of themselves,
but God sent them as his executioners. This Jeremy confesses in his
Lamentations, That the Lord did it; acknowledging thus in the person of all
Judah and Jerusalem, Lament: 2. 22.
Thou have called as in a solemn day, my terrors round about: meaning, that
the Lord had called their terrible enemies on every fide to compass them in,
that none might escape his wrath: wherein he shows, how the Lord mustered the
enemies to revenge these abominations. And thus has it ever bin, when enemies
have come against the Church, (as we may see clean through the book of God,
and especially in the book of the Judges) it was principally, because the Lord
had stirred them up, he had mustered and brought them. For if he but lift up
his ensign, or but hiss, or whistle for them, as the Prophet speaks, Isai.
5. 26, 27.
they come amain from all the ends of the earth. They sleep not, nor faint,
unless the Lord himself stay them or pluck them back; putting his hook
into their nostrils, and his bit into their jaws, as he did to that proud
Senecharib, (...) 29.
when he came so fiercely against Jerusalem. Although (as we heard) the enemies
themselves do not know so much. And when is it that the Lord brings them? Even
then when his people, whom he has put in trust with his most holy religion,
through long peace, ease, and prosperity, become utterly unthankful, and grow
to loath the heavenly Manna; (...) 26. 3, 14, to 26.
when once they begin to be haughty against the Lord, and rebellious against
his word and messengers sent unto them, and they will obey it no further, than
it does like themselves; Deuteronomy: 28. 15. to 50.
when they do wax so senseless and indurate, as all his fatherly rods of
scarsitie, famine, 2 King: 17. 13, 14, 15, 16.
pestilence, and other sickness, signs and tokens from heaven and earth, no,
nor the continual warnings of his servants, can do them any more good to move
them any longer. 2 Chro: 33. 10.
And finally, when in steed of repenting and meeting him with entreaty of
peace, they proceed to mock his servants, 2 Chor: 36. 14, 15, 16, 17.
to misuse his messengers, despising his word sent in mercy to warn them; for
then he can bear no longer, but sets up his ensigns and calls for the sword
of the enemy to avenge his quarrel, thereby to take away religion and all the
comforts of this life in one day, for that their intolerable contempt of all
his bounty, This threatened in the Law.
long suffering, and compassion. This is that which he has threatened in his
law. That he will punish such a people yet seven times more: (...): 9 4, 5, 6.
the sword and captivity being the last and heaviest outward plague and often
accompanied with all the rest, (...): 26. 24.
chiefly with famine, Deuteronomy: 28 25. to 48.
and most cruel and savage beasts to devour the rebellious people. (...) 5.
17.
This he did fearfully verify in the ensamples mentioned both in the
captivity of Israel and Judah, (...) 14
chiefly in this latter, 2 Chr: ^6. 6. 13, 14.
as the holy Ghost plainly shows, declaring the causes of it. How, when
after their former less captivities and sundry plagues begun, they in general
still increased their trespasses wonderfully, according to all the abominations
of the heathen, and withal mocked and misused his messengers, which he had
sent unto them in compassion to call them to repentance, then there was no
remedy. But he brought upon them the King of the Caldeans, verse. 17. to the
end of 21.
to execute all his fierce wrath and vengeance upon them all. God gave all into
his hands. And this as he says, was to fulfill the word of the Lord spoken by
the mouth of Jeremy, until the Land had her fill of Sabaoths. So all the
days that she lay desolate, she kept Sabbath, to fulfill seventie years. In
which words, it is most evident that the whole Captivity, both for the manner
and continuance, was altogether appointed and directed by the Lord. Whence we
may most plainly conclude, Isai: 54. 16.
with that of the Prophet Esaias, where he brings in the Lord thus speaking of
himself: Behold, I have created the Smith that blows the coals in the sire,
and him that brings forth an instrument for his w^rke; I have created the
destroyer to destroy. If any man shall yet doubt of any part hereof, let him
read with reverence the 26 chapter of Leviticus, and there he shall see all
this set down in order, especially from the 14 verse to the end.

To apply this now to our times, Application to our selves, to behold y^ Lords
Armies.
and to our selves; it being now our lesson to awaken us, and to make us to
look at the Lord, levying his Armies against us, if any thing can stir us.

Did that proud Nebuchadnezzar of Rome sound out his bellowing Bulls, to move
all the Lords people to Pop^sh Bulls sent to move our people to rebellion.
Or has he so often practiced our destruction both openly and secretly
altogether without the Lord? Or did any of that bloody The bloody league.
being Antichrists sworn servants, so band themselves as of themselves,
without the Lords command, to threaten so far forth the ruinating of Christ's
kingdom, and the rooting out of his Gospel? Or those The (...) Armada. (...).
which the enemy, in the pride of his heart, had named, the Navy invincible,
purposing nothing else, but the utter desolation both of this Church and
Kingdom, and to massacre the mother with the children, to satiate themselves
with the blood of every one of us, as their burcherly instruments of cruelty
did proclaim to all the world. Did these (I say) come only of themselves, in
the malice and hautinesse of their hearts, and without the Lord so disposing
and threatening us by them? Could they or durst they ever have attempted those
things of themselves alone? No, no, The Lord will have us all to know hereby,
that these were his own soldiers; it was he that mustered them; he lift up his
ensign unto them; he bad them so to threaten us, to go and smite: (...) 26.
He only brought the insolent Babylonian toward our Jerusalem, (...) 5 15.
he showed us the edge of his axe, he shak'd the sword at us, Yet turned back
and overthrown at our prayers: when w^ndes and wat^rs were armed against them
to take vengeance for us.
to cause us to seek him. And so at our humiliation and prayers, which we then
powered out so vehemently, with fasting, mourning, and confession of our sins,
through the whole Land, his own holy hand plucked them back again. He armed
both winds and waters to take vengeance of that most insolent and cruel
attempt, whereof so many records shall bear witness to the end of the world.
And although the Lord wrought this our deliverance with their overthrow, so
wonderfully by his own mighty arm, and so evidently with his own right
hand, that we might justly have hoped, that they durst never have once so much,
as thought of attempting to rise up against us after; yet do we not see, how
they have since exceeded the insolency of all former ages? How they have not
only Many treasons since.
thereby to make way for the butchering of us all; but even so lately devised
so new, so strange, and so desperate a stratagem against our dread Sovereign,
with our noble Queen, our gracious young Prince, and all that Royal Progeny;
yea, with the Right Honorable Council and Nobility, the whole state and body
of our Nation, to consume all at once, by that most hideous and infernal
furnace? For Chiefly the infernal furnace.
but to have made us all as flesh for the cauldron, and that very day to have
bin the dismal day, both of our flourishing Realms, and also of the Church
and Gospel of Christ, so far as they were able? Of which most execrable fact,
never shall future age keep silence, Branding that religion for ever.
to the branding of that bloody Religion, with the perpetual infamy of lying
and murder, the two principal works of the Devil, and brands of his
servants, Job. 8. 44.
as our Savior directly witnesses; so as none can pretend ignorance thereof,
except they will wilfully blind their own eyes.

And to draw toward the conclusion of this point; Increase of the outrage for
Popery and all profaneness. Their deadly malice increased, declared in all
devises to divide and disgrace us.
what is that so deadly malice in all those who are so bent, to that Romish
Idolatry and impiety; I mean their hatred against both the Gospel and all
the true professors of it? How is it that they are not afraid to show this
openly, by all devices which they can invent to discharge the religion of the
Lord and to divide us utterly amongst our selves, to fall by one another; and
that after so many and so late and strange discoveries of their barbarous
cruelties and Machivillian plots above all, After so many convictions.
of all other religions, that the world has heard of; with such notable
testimony given from heaven of Gods wonderful protection in all the admirable
deliverances of the professors thereof among us.

What are all these with our ungrateful abusing of them by our impenitency.
These fearful denunciations of vengeance.
I beseech you (and herein I appeal to the consciences of all men) what are
they, but infallible denunciations of the hasting of the Lords most terrible
vengeance, And da^ger^us prognostications of a most heavy scourge from Babylon.
unless we repent speedily. Or what can they, with all the former
prognesticate (if we may make a particular construction of them) but
threat^^ngs of the bringing in indeed of that dreadful scourg, (which he in
mercy still keep from us) which formerly he has, but shaken toward us, and
frighted us withal. ^ogive us either wholly into the hand of that bloody whore
of Babylon, and so to bring our necks again under that cruel yoke (the
common vexation of all the people of the Lord) or at least that they should
come to (...) and tyrannize among us, and setting up their cursed Idolatry
again, to pollute the Lords holy religion; and in the end to thrust forth his
sacred truth, and our selves, to live ever in horror and shame, having always
the sword at our throats, as in France and other countries, For abusing his
religion.
where they have so prevailed, they have had too fearful experience. Were not
this most righteous for our abusing that his heavenly treasure, committed to
us, beside all other our sins, which yet. I instantly pray day and night,
that he may prevent, by our most speedy, and unfeigned repentance. And may not
this be a just cause, why he has suffered these so to increase, because
howsoever we can be content with an outward form and name of his holy
religion, Not enduring the power of (...), but seeking to destroy it.
which by the good laws of our land, we do truly profess; yet few of us can
endure the power and practice of it in our selves, or others? We cannot deny,
but that the true practice of religion, is the very life and soul of all
religion, and yet how many do seek to destroy it, in whomsoever it appears,
if all scorns and contempt of it can possibly do it: (...) better of the (...)
for is it not an usual thing with many in most places, to like much better of
the profane man, that has cast all religion and conscience behind his back,
then of those in whom the seeds or the least beginning of grace does appear;
Or which is yet worse, are not many of us in too many places grown to this, to
like much better of the Papist and ungodly, pre ^rring them to be our
compani^^s, and accounting them far honester men, then such (...) fear the
Lord, making conscience to (...) before him, in that good way wherein we al
(except the Popish sort) agree in word and general profession? Let common
experience testify, Experience of the d^slike of al true lovers of Religion.
how few they are who can brook that man who is a diligent frequenter of the
word of the Lord, a strict observer of the Sabbath; careful to teach and
instruct his family, that cannot like of oaths and blasphemies, filthy
speeches and excess of drinking or other vanities. And what may this seem to
be, A manifest joining hands and calling for the enemy.
but to join hands with the enemies of God, and by these and the like to
proclaim a kind of defiance against him that such will not have him to rule
over them? yea, even to challenge him, or at least to provoke him, to bring in
the enemies to avenge his quarrel. If therefore the Lord of hoasts do call
for them, to rise up against us in new conspiracies or open violence, and with
them all the crew of wicked and ungodly men, in whom we have so delighted, to
take part with those to our destruction (as they, it is to be feared will be as
outrageous as the other against all soundly fearing God) is it not just? Yea,
if he should let them to make it Bellum prodigorum, How righteous with God to
bring in the day of the spend thrists.
the day of all the spend-thrifts and of all the vile persons of the land, to
have their fingers in every man's coffers, and their hands washen in the blould
of them, whom they have hated, so soon as ever any of the Babilonish designs
shall take their effect, could we wonder as it? May we not much rather wonder
at and admire his former long sufferings, that he has only hitherto raised
them up against us, as to drive us to turn unto him, but suffered them not to
prevail, no, not so much as against any one of us. To (...) Gods mercy in
saving (...). In the midst of the fire.
That though we have been after a sort in the midst of the hot fiery furnace;
yet not so much as the smell of the fire has been felt upon us, when as
notwithstanding we are so many of us so ready by our countenancing them and
joining with them in their wickedness, We cannot be assured to be delivered
from them (...) their ways.
to blow this fire of his vengeance; to cause it so far as in them lies, to
consume us utterly in one day. Can we ever look to be freed from the danger,
until we more generally abhor their ways? Or can we otherwise imagine, but
that our desperate perils must needs increase daily by them, so long as we are
still so much delighted in them, and cast of the Lord?

Ch^f we had generally so received him, And renew our vows beginning to
perform them.
as our Lord and master, as we have either entered into a solemn covenant with
him at our Baptism, and as in words we make profession; then had he
undoubtedly long ago cast such a fear upon them, as they durst never have
plotted any more against his anointed or against his sanctuary. Oh If we
could yet but think of the good motions and purposes which we have had in the
midst of our dangers, and our greatest deliverances. That for those
preservations and the redeeming of our lives, we would begin to lead new lives,
^zech: 16. 4. 6.
and become new men! Oh I say, That we would at length set our hearts
faithfully to perform those our vows so often renewed with our God, Eccles: 5.
3. 4. 5.
and submit our selves cherefully to obey the heavenly Gospel of his son,
becoming zealous in the profession thereof! Then would the Lord soon humble
our enemies; Our enemies humble by our turning to the Lord.
He would either cause their rage to cease utterly from us, as he did sundry
times in Judah, when the people so sought his face, or if they would still
pursue us, as the Egyptians did Israel into the heart of the sea, Psalm. 81. 11,
12, 13, 14, 15.
we should not need to fear but even stand still, and see what he would do
for us, yet once again in our final delivery from them, and in their
perpetual confusion. But since we are daily further off from this un^eigned
obedience to the Gospel and grow more rebellious; certainly we can never truly
expect, that these enemies (which are his sword drawn against us) shall be
turned back, Never til then.
much less can we secure our selves from them, until we begin to meet him
with a more general submission and entreaty of peace. That is, until that we
do begin to give a more thankful and welcome entertainment to his holy
worship and religion and bring forth better fruits of our profession, bearing
more true affection to his servants, and giving less countenance unto his
enemies, we are never to look for any peace, until his quarrel be avenged.
He will be known to be the same mighty God that ever he was, to hate sin as
much as ever he did, to be as true in his threatenings as ever in former age,
and as zealous for his own glory. And this especially must we assure our selves
of, if the like abominations be found among us, which brought these cruel
enemies upon the people of Judah, even as hethreatned them in all the days of
Josiah; and if he hitherto have used all other his rods in vain amongst us;
and namely, these three of all other, to wit, the sword of the destroying
Angel, shaking and s^iting in most parts of our Land, for so many years
together; The sword of the bloody enemy devouring about us; The same so often
and so long shaken at us, and at length so near to have been sheathed in the
bowels of every one of us that profess his name.

Now then these things being so, What we should do feeling the Lords Armies
approaching.
It concerns so many of us, as whose eyes the Lord has opened, to see the
mustering of his armies, and who it is, that bids them go against us and smite;
to do as David and the Elders of Israel did, 1 Chrou: 20. 16.
when the Angel of the Lord having his sword drawn stretched out his hand
against Jerusalem. It is full time that each of us, who are the Lords
remembrancers, humble our selves in secret falling upon our faces, crying unto
our God and never give him any rest, until he be appeased. Yea that all of us,
who are the Lords watchmen do get upon our walls and watch-towers and still
as the enemy approaches nearer, cry louder to awaken us, out of our dead
sleep and to warn all. That those in authority may more zealously command,
all inferiors more cheerfully obey* to the more joyful receiving and
professing the Lords most glorious religion, that so his anger being assuaged,
he may cease from sending any more the destroyers against us, least otherwise
in the end, our Religion, peace, prosperity, lives and all do pay for it, and
be utterly taken away by them together. And let us all humbly again confess
with the Prophet Amos; The Lion has roared upon us, all sorts have heard him
(as we have so often, Our so many confessions by authority, are so many
principal witnesses of his threatenings by them.
and so publicly confessed) who shall not then tremble? The Lord God has by
his threatenings many a time spoken to us, and still speaks every day more and
more (making us each hour to hearken for some new treachery from Rome, and to
wonder that we hear of none of so long: and likewise causing all of us to
admire the riches of his goodness, in that he has so miraculously preserved
us all from them unto this very day: who then amongs us can but give
signification hereof? Is it not therefore full time to do what we can, every
one with the Lord by instant prayer, and each with men also, stirring up one
another to turn and cry unto the Lord, that he do not indeed bring the enemy
upon us, and give us into their hands without any pity, as he did this people,
and as he has so often and so nearly accomplished the like wrath upon us? But
this may suffice for this cause, which the Lord gives us all hereby to watch
and pray day and night, if we would have him to stay, or to turn from us the
sword of the Babylonian, and every other enemy and terrible plague: or at
least, if we would find him a hiding place in the day of his vengeance.

Hitherto of the first part of the Commission to the destroying Angels, to go
and smite.

CHAP. X.
The mourners being once marked and made sure, then comes the vengeance; for
the destroyers follow at the heels of the marking Angel: And what need we
have therefore to watch and pray, because we know not whether this be not
already accomplished, or how near it is.

Verse. 5. And to the other he said in my hearing; Go ye after him through the
City, and smite, let your eye spare none, etc.
IN this next place we are to observe, how the Lord bids the destroyers, to go
after the marking Angel, following him, as it were, hard at the heels, that
so soon as ever the servants of God are marked and safe, they should stay no
longer; but presently execute their charge, which was, Kill, kill, and spare
none: for so the words do plainly import.

Herein the Lord would have us all to know yet further, The mourners marked*
then comes the vengeance.
that so soon as ever he has gathered forth those, that bewail the sins of
the times, that is, his faithful ones, from among the rest, or made sure
provision for them, then he will stay no longer, but presently begin the
execution of his vengeance on the rest which remain.

This truth the Lord has left unto us as clear as any of the former; This set
down clearly, and why.
that when we see him taking the godly away, all may learn to prepare for
themselves to escape, or else be left more without excuse. To show this in
order out of the former destructions; as being in my understanding most fit, as
so set down, to this purpose; and also most plainly for the simplest to
conceive of.

Noah is no sooner in the Arc, fast locked in by the Lord himself, In the old
world.
and so out of the danger, but presently the sloud-gates of heaven are set
open, the fountains of the great depths broken up, Gen: 7. 11, 13, 16, 17.
destruction rusheth upon them: Noa^.
that (...) they, or climb they whithersoever they will, the vengeance of God
still follows them at the heels, until they be utterly swept away from the
face of the earth, without any more pity and compassion.

Lot is no sooner out of Sodom, and gotten safe into Zoar, Lot.
past all the danger, but (though it was a goodly morning to see to, Gen: 19.
22, 23, 24, 25.
the Sun rising gloriously upon the earth, as it was wont) yet the fire and
brimstone came pouring down, The Holy Ghost says, that The Lord rained upon
Sodom and upon Gomorrha, brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven, and
overthrew all. He turned all those filthy Cities into ashes, making them most
loathsome pits, and a terrible monument of his most severe vengeance to all
such beastly livers, 2. Pet: 2. 6.
to the end of the world. All perish together in an instant, as they were
partakers together in the same filthy sins. Howling and crying then will do
no more good: no place is now lest to repentance, nor to mercy any longer.

The last overthrow of Jerusalem.
but presently Jerusalem is taken, (as Josephus reports) and then as great
cruelties are exercised, Matthew: 24.
as ever upon any City or people before, and as great miseries followed them,
according as our Savior had foretold.

Josiah has his eyes no sooner closed, This captivity beginning upon the
death of (...).
that he might not see the vengeance, and himself taken to his rest, as the
Lord had promised him; because his heart so melted, at the hearing of the
abominations, and the judgments denounced for them, but straightway, 2 Chr:
34. 27, 28.
even within three months, begins this woeful tragedy of Judah and Jerusalem.
Ierem: 8. 7.
As the flying away of the Swallow is a sign of winter at hand; so the
departing and taking away of these mourners forth of any Church, must needs be
a fearful threatening of some terrible winter, Gen: 17. 10, 11* and 19. 22.
if not a desolation, to come upon that people; 2 Cl^^: 34. 27, 28.
especially, when we consider, what such are for the preservation of the place
where they are. And so much first for the evidence of this truth.

Now that we may again return home unto our selves; Application to our selves.
Let us see whether hereby we have not just cause to be awakened, and each to
betake our s^^ves to watching and prayer, to stay the vengeance of God, before
it be come upon us, and it be too late. Have not many of our Noah's, Many of our
Noah's plucked into the Arc.
I mean, many of Gods faithful servants, most famous both in Church and
Commonwealth, for helping to build and prepare the Arc, bin taken away from
us, not many years ago, long before their time? And amongst others; Did not
the Lord specially pluck unto himself, in a short space, together, sundry of
our most worthily renowned and victorious champions, so approved against that
proud Goliath of Rome? Has he not thus carried up these, into the Arc, not made
with hands, as accounting us thereby unworthy that they should remain any
longer amongst us upon the earth, to help to stand between the Lords wrath
and us? What heart was so flintie, which dissolved not into tears for sundry
of them? or which was not astonished at the apprehension of his manifest
displeasure therein, and in a fearful consideration of that which he says,
Isai: 57. 1.
That the righteous are taken away from the evils to come.

This yet is some comfort; Our comfort in the remnant of the mourners still
among us.
That we have still some Noa^s carefully preparing and finishing the Arc, and
warning the secure and unthankful world. All our Lots are not yet plucked from
amongst us. The Lord of hoasts has as yet in mercy reserved us a remnant, who
unfeignedly fear the tokens of his wrath. He has some that still lift up their
voices like trumpers, Isa^. 58. 1.
to tell his people of their sins. Some that lift up their hearts with their
hands, with Moses against Amaleck. Some that made continual intercession with
faithful Abraham. Some that mourn in secret, who wrestle and weep with Jacob,
and who will not let the Lord go, until he show us mercy and save us, from
the scourge, which we have justly deserved. Some, I say, (for what are they
compared with the rest, or in regard of our time and means, or that they have
been in sundry parts of the Land) otherwise we had bin made long ago as
Sodom and like unto Gomorrha.) Isay: 1. 9.
And we may further say by the infinite mercy of God; And the preservation of
the Lords Anointed.
That the Lords anointed is still preserved, for our shelter and the breath of
our nostrils, by whom alone under the highest, we hitherto enjoy our safety, in
the midst of the greatest furies of our implacable and bloodthirsty enemies.
If the Lord had ever, or yet should never so little take away his hand for all
our provocations, 1 amen: 4. 20.
(which evil of all other, what could we look for, these being taken away.
he ever turn from us, like as hitherto he has done) since the enemies hunt
after his life and the lives of us all continually, and our sins do cry for
it, what then could we look for? Or if he should any way suffer the mouths of
all his faithful messengers to be shut that there might be none to reprove,
and much more if he once take from amongst us, those that sigh and cry out for
all the abominations, and restrayn utterly that spirit of mourning and prayer,
what may we expect then? And is not this the thing which the Atheist and
belly-God, Though the ungodly long for it, and why.
with all the company of the wicked and ungodly do desire so much, and which
the I do latrous murdering enemies do conspire continually? And why? Because
these are they that chiefly trouble all the wicked: these will not suffer them
to lie wallowing in their sin; but seek to pull some of them with violence
out of the fire, Jude. 23.
others to save with fear as Jude speaks. These are continually watching
upon their walls, crying out of iniquity with (...), and threatening the
judgments of Gods approaching for all the crying sins, so to turn away the
plagues from us by turning us to the Lord. These are still in Christ's place
calling Gods people out of Babylon; discovering the filthiness of the whore,
and warning all to get far of from her for fear of her burning, Apoc: 18. 4.
to beware of being partakers with her in her sin, lest they be partaker with
her in her torment.

And to be brief, for that these are they, who have stood principally in the
way of the bloody enemy, that they could neither bewitch nor invade the
Church and Sanctuary of the Lord, as otherwise they would have done. These
once taken away, to look for the judgment.
Well, all of us should yet consider in time, that if these shall be once
plucked away from us, (as being unworthy of them) and the Swallow having taken
her flight (howsoever some may conceit, that then it would be well with us, and
we should have merry times, yet) then undoubtedly we may justly look for the
coldest and wofullest winter, that ever the Church amongst us felt and endured:
for after that these are once marked and made sure, what can be expected, but
the destroyers to follow after their heels? what, but this terrible charge,
When all shall be alike.
Smite, spare none. Then shall belly-god and worlding, Papist and Atheist, be
all alike; because they have joined alike in angring the Lord, and grieving his
servants, to make them thus to sigh and cry unto him. And thus had it bin with
them long ere this day, Thus had it bin, if God had not prevented.
if ever foreign enemy had prevayled, or any of their treasonable practices;
and much more if that late infernal devise, had taken effect: yea, if the Lord
of hoasts had not in mercy, at the cries of these mourners, saved us even
miraculously from that evil day. To cry for the preservation of our si^elter,
and all these.
This may teach us therefore to cry day and night, that our shelter may never
be taken away from us; but that it may spread it self more largely, and that
the candle of Israel may never be put out, but shine still more bright, until
his glorious appearing. This may also warn all of us, who believe the word of
the Lord, To make more account of Noah and our mourn^s.
to make more account of every Noah, which is yet admonishing and finishing the
Arc: and of poor Lot, whose righteous soul is vexed for the abounding of
(...)


