A Dialogue betwixt a Citizen, and a poor Countryman and his Wife, in the
Country, where the Citizen remains now in this time of sickness.

Written by him in the Country, who sent the copy to a friend in London,
Being both pitiful and pleasant.



London Printed by R. Oulton for H. Gosson and are to be sold at his shop upon
London Bridge near the Gate.

1636.



A Dialogue betwixt a Citizen and a Countryman.
Citizen. GOod Even good friend, inhabit you nere hand?


Countryman. Chy dwell not varre hence, what would you I pray?


Cit. No harm, I would but kindly understand,
Where I might lodge and eat, and frankly pay.

Coun. Why sir, whence come you? mass chiveare you come
From London, where the Plague is parlous hot,
And it be so, no further words but mumme:
No meat, nor drink, nor lodging will be got,

Cit. Alas why so? are you a Christian,
And suffer any die for lack of food?
I am not sick believe me honest man,
I would not do thee hurt for any good.

Coun. Yea zo zay all that know not where to go,
When as the Plague does drive them from the City:
But many a one does work himself great woe,
With foolish showing of another pity.

Cit. Why here is gold and silver for thy pains,
I Will richly pay for whatsoere I take.

Coun. You Will pay the Plague. O these are pretty trains,
Which makes the simple woeful bargains make.

Cit. Why search, and see, if I be not as sound,
As any creature in your Country here.

Coun. Oh sir, the infection is not so soon found,
For Clothes will keep the Plague in half a year.

Cit. Yet let me lodge but in your barn or stable,
Some cote, or out-house, that you best may spare:
I Will be content to take a simple table,
Nor shall you find me dainty of my fare.

Coun. Sir, hold your rest, they zay a horse, a hog,
And cats and mise, will die of that disease:
I promise you, I would not lose my dog:
Not for a strike of the best beans and pease.

Cit. But do you make of cattle more then men?
That were unchristian, Heathens do not so:

Coun. Why let us want our cattle, horse, and then
How dogged some men we shall find I know.

Cit. What men are they, that in extremity,
Will not in conscience christian pity show?

Coun. Even you rich Landlords that have heard our cry
Yet rack your rents, how ere our sorrows grow,
Fruit blasted, cattle die, be never so poor,
Pay rent at day, or turn us out of door.

Cit. Why we are thousands that no rent receive,
But subject are to Landlords, and their wills:
It is the Devil does the world deceive,
Which town and country with his veno me fills.
Be pitiful, and think not on the worse,
Believe me, I am free from this infection:
The kind are blessed, and the cruel cursed,
Beasts in their kind will show their kind affection.

Coun. Indeed: I hear an Ape will lime himself
With putting on a pair of painted breeches:
But I will not so play the foolish elfe,
To kill my self with listening to your speeches.
There came this other day into our town,
A handsome fine old man for flesh and blood:
And as you do, went plodding up and down,
And was (zome za) a man of much worlds good,
Met a poor man, as you do me, and quired,
Where he might come by lodging, meat, and drink.
The man with money, being poor, was hierd
To get him lodging: and where do you think?
But in a cottage of his own here by:
Where well he had not rested full three days,
But he was dead and buried by and by,
Whose purse the poor man to much wealth did raise,
But long the riches did not with him bide:
For in a week his wife and children di'd,
Save only two, which yet are in good health:
But as for me I seek for no such wealth.

Cit. Why trust me of my word, you need not fear,
Both you and yours shall better fare by me.
I am not sick, in faith and truth I swear,
My clothes are fresh, and not infected be.

Coun. I pray stand further, zome will zay, the wind
Will bring it through ones nose into their brain.

Cit. Alas, their faith is of a fearful kind,
Whose idle heads do beat on such a vain.

Coun. Why is it not fectious, and does kill so many?
Why cats and dogs will bear it to and fro.

Cit. Yea cats and dogs, but Christians few, if any
That take it, in the time they pity show.

Coun. Oh, you are fine, it is, and it is not, well:
You fear it, and fly from it where it is,
And yet you zeeme an idle tale to tell,
How zome twill hit, and other zome it will miss:
But be what twill, our Justices of Peace
Have chargde our parish, upon pain of galie,
To take in none, until the sickness cease:
And think you such Precepts of none avail?

Cit. Alas, should so our City keep you out,
How would you sell your corn to pay your rent?
It may be ere the year does go about,
You may this lack of charity repent:
For God can show his mercy where he will,
And plague all those that will not pity show.
The City well, the Country may be ill:
(But yet I pray the Lord it be not so.)
You are not free from sin, no more than we,
Nor yet free from deserved punishment:
Let us then now in you your pity see:
And by our plague learn you amendment:
Be not afraid man, do not stoppey our nose.
Me thinks, your age should bid you fear no death.

Coun. Yet I am loath, good sir, my life to lose,
By an infection of a plaguey breath,
But what will all my neighbors think on me,
If they should know that you from London came;
There would be work enough ywis for me,
To shut up me, my household and my dame.

Cit. That were but if some in your house do die,
Of the infection, and not other wise.

Coun. I tell you no, they are so jealous,
They are almost afraid of London flies:
A Londoner is looked on like a sprite,
The Citi's thought a Sepulcher or grave.

Cit. Oh faithles souls whose hearts are so affright.
All civil rites and government they have:
But for your self, let me entreat you yet,
Some little room, and vittaile what you will,
I Will pay you well and one day think on it,
And for your kindness not requite you ill.

Coun. What? shall I danger all my house for you?
The loss will be far greater then my gain.
If that your pass the Constable allow;
The best I can I will you entertain.

Cit. Then need I not your Courtesy entreat,
But say I have none, shall I starve for food?

Coun. No, God forbid, I Will help you to some meat,
Which you may eat upon that piece of wood:
Many a good time have I upon that block
Fed hungerly, on such as God has sent,
Though now the Lord increased has our stock.
On Easter days we do not make our Lent.
But, should I lodge you in my little house,
And that my Dame would so contented be,
If there should die a catte, a ratte, a mouse,
That any neighbor by ill chance should see,
I were undone, and if that you should die,
You must he buried here in my back side,
For not a man of all our ministry
Will bury them that of the plague have did,
And therefore this is all that I dare do,
Under that hovell where my hogs do lie,
Sit down, I Will bring you drink and vittaile too,
The best I have, there you may sit you dry,
Soon, if my Dame will gree thereto, I Will see
What may be done, but further pardon me.

Wife. Bones, man, how now? who is that you talk to so,
A Londoner? for Gods sake come away,
Are you too well? what do you mean I trow?
You do not know yet who is dead to day,
My neighbor Ione that took home her lame sons,
Both dead, and thus we shall be all undone,
The fection will be round about the town,
So many came to them when they were sick,
And knew not it was the plague: her wosted gown
She gave my Judge, and her sons cloak to Dicke:
But I will hang them on the pales all day,
And air them well, before they put them on.
But, pray do you leave talking, come away,
Lest you be taken napping too anon.

Coun. Why hark you Madge, the man is hail and well,
For aught I see, and haz good store of gold:
Faith be content, cha heard my vather tell,
They are no men that do no pity hold:
Thou see it is late, the man's a hansome man,
Well colored, well clad, and monied too:
The Zittie may do well again, and than,
God knows what good the man for us may do.

Wife. Well zaide y wis, when he haz killd us all,
Where goes his good, when we are under ground?

Cit. Good woman, let no fear your heart appall,
I would not hurt you for a hundred po^nd.

Wife. And truelyi honest man, if I knew how,
I could find in my heart to do you good,
And this I care not if I do for you:
I Will see you shall notstarue for lack of food,
Though some here in our town are so hard hearted,
They care not though they see a thousand die:
But God be thanked, some of them have smarted
For showing of such dogged cruelty.
But for it seems that God has done his part
In you, I hope you are a Christian,
I will be glad in troth with all my heart,
To do you good, and do the best I can:
You shall come in, I Will venture once a joint:
What my poor house can yield, you shall command,
I care not for the Constable a point:
For if by chance that any man demand,
From whence you come, or what you are, or so:
I Will frame a tale shall serve the turn I trow,
Come in on Gods name, man, be of good cheer,
My daughter Judge shall go for double beer:
I have a goose, a ducke, a pigge, a chicke.
A piece of bacon, butter, milk, and bread.
God hold you sound, that you do not fall sick,
You shall do well: but truly for your bed,
You must content your self, with such a one,
As our poor state affoordes, and we have none
But two of straw, and one poor matteresse,
That you shall have, we keep it for a friend,
And you are welcome, you shall find no less,
And glad I bought it to so good an end.

Cit. Good woman, God reward your kind good will,
Which at your hands I take most thankfully,
And credit me, you need to fear no ill:
Believe me, none before his time shall die,
I hope my coming shall be for your good:
Your pullein only by my means may die:
But I will pay you soundly for your brood.
I pray you kill a pullet by and by:
Heeres gold and silver, send for bread and beer,
God give us health, and we will have good cheer.

Coun. Why lo you wife, you know how money goes:
Surely, God sent him for our good, I see:
I hope in God at last we shall not lose,
By doing good to such a one as he:
But pray remember that you go to morrow
To master Baily with our Landlords rent:
And if you lack, you know where you may borrow.

Cit. No borrowing now, I pray you be content:
I will supply your want, what ere it be:
You shall not find so ill a guest of me,
Here Is forty shillings, which I freely give.

Coun. God bless your worship, and long may you live.

Wife. Amen pray God: Ho Sisse, go take the kan,
And fetch some beer and white bread for this man:
But take heed that you tell not for whom it is,
And hie you home again. And hear you Sisse,
If any chance to see him, and do quire
Who it is, say it is my Gossip master Squire,
But and they do not ask, say nothing, no:
Go, let me see how quickly you can go:
Judge, kill the peckled pullet, the red chicke,
Scald them, and to the fire with them quick, quick:
Bid Dicke go fetch in sticks, cleave an old pale:
And Gentleman, love you a cup of Ale?
That we have in the house, pray sit you down,
And welcome, tut, a pin for all the town,
My husband is an honest man, and I
Fear not the best of them a halfpeny
I pay the Parsons tithe, and Scot, and Lot,
And care not for the Constable a groat:
A sort of Hogs will see men die for food:
They, or their brattes will come to little good.
I marvel what the pestilence they scrape for,
And what it is their wide mouths do yawne and gape for:
But meat and drink, and cloth for me and mine,
I seek no more, nor ^are I to be fine:
To pay my rent, and with my neighbors live,
And at my door a dog a bone to give.
Be merry Gentleman, I pray be merry,
And take your rest, I fear me you are weary.

Citti. Not much, my walk has not bin long to day,
And your good mirth drives weariness away:
I thank you for your kindness heartily,
And if I live, I Will quite it thoroughly.

Wife. I thank you sir, I doubt it not y wis,
Husband, I pray go meet my daughter Sisse,
And beat her home: you spoil her, that you do:
Judge, blow the fire, and lay the pullet to.
Sir, you may see rude gearles, they are but raw.
Sisse, set down your kanne and fetch in fresh straw,
Lay in the bed, and air the hempen sheets
That lie in the brown chest, and strew some sweetes
Along the windows, Isope, Marioam,
A Rose or two: come Gentleman, pray come,
Take a hard cushin, be of good cheer I pray:
Grief does no good, no, no, cast care away:
I thank my God that hither thus has sent you,
And if our fare and lodging will content you,
Stay even your pleasure, til your self be weary,
We Will do the best we can to make you merry.

Cit. It was my hap, after a weary walk,
With this good man and wife to fall in talk:
And where before I went in heart full grieved,
I could not in my sorrow be relieved:
Each sullen slowch and slut would so disdain me,
As if they scornd or feared to entertain me:
Scarce bread and drink for money I could get,
Which from the house upon the ground was set,
As if that one should cast a dog a bone.
And thus I wandered up and down alone,
Until I met these honest people here,
Who for my money made me hearty cheer,
And kindly careful of me every way.
With good content I here was glad to stay,
Where I beheld a number passing by,
That (as I heard) did in the highways die:
Some harbourlesse, and some through want of food,
While faithless hearts did fear to do men good.
Oh heavy time, how many hearts are broken
With helpelesse grief, it is not to be spoken:
But God almighty look upon the City:
And in his mercy show his glorious pity,
To cease this plague, or killing pestilence:
Forgive us all the ill of our offense.
Preserve his people, and our health restore,
That we may love and praise him evermore.
Preserve the Court and Country every where:
Our King and Queen, their royal progeny,
Their Counsel, friends, and all that true hearts bear
Unto their gracious worthy Majesty.
And bless both Court, City, and Country so,
That none may to another stranger be,
But passage free for every man to go,
And friend his friend in friendly love may see,
And all to gether may record in one,
To give all glory unto God alone.

Amen.


London*Trumpet Sounding into the Country. When Death drives, the Grave
thrives.
Sin calls down Punishment: Punishment should bring forth Amendment of life:
Amendment ever meets with mercy, and mercy stops Sickness, when it is in the
highest speed: So that if we still go on in wickedness, we must every week
look to have the bill of Terror strike us more and more.

The visitation (and rightly may it carry that Name) has now four times in a
few years Rode circuit through the whole Kingdom, and kept a dreadful
Sessions, within London, and round about it: Death does at this hour Scout up
and down the Suburbs, and shows his Ghastly face in some Parrishes of the
City.

Those houses which are shut up, Charity opens, and most liberally feeds them.
Those houses of poor Handy-crafts-men, that stand open, are for want of work
pinched with hunger, and the people ready to go a begging.

Yet there is one comfort, there is no man (be he never so poor) but meets
in every corner, one poorer than himself: So that, what Adversities soever are
laid upon us, we are bound to praise God, in that we are not cast down to
the lowest Misfortunes in the World, for we hear of ten thousands in forteine
places, in fat worse estate then we are.

Now, as Men and Women, have a particular cause to send their Devotions up to
Heaven, when they compare their present beings (how wretched soever) with
others more wretched: So many Towns, Cittyes, and Kingdoms, may (in general)
lift up their eyes with joy, when albeit the Divine vengeance has smote them,
with a Mace of Iron: Yet if they look on their Neighbors, miserably torn in
pieces: They behold those overwhelmed with more raging billows then they feel
or see coming near themselves.

As for example, this goodly and beautiful City of London, has now but a few
faint spots set in her flesh: A few pestilentiall sores sticking on her body:
But a few Tokens are sent her, to bid her Remember, who sees her doings: She
hears no great Number of Bells Tolling: No terrible number of Graves are opened
in her sight: Not whole streets of houses are now shut up with Read Crosses on
the doors: And Lord have Mercy upon us, over those doors, to fright
Beholders: There are not such Fines, and Incomes, to be paid for Tenements of
the dead, (Heaven be blessed) as there were either at the coming of King James
to his Crown, or of King Charles our Sovereign to his.

Alas, these marks, Printed (London) upon thee now, are but Flea-bitinges to
the stripes which drew blood from thy very Heart, in those days of Desolation.

And yet, how art thou Frighted? How pale are thy Cheeks? How does this one
fit of a burning Fea^er, inflame all thy body? How do thou shake the Head,
and complain, that doings are cold? that Trading lies dead? and that money
keeps her bed, and is not stirring.

How do thy Coaches, and Caroaches run through thy streets, and so out at thy
Gates, full of brave, rich people to live safe (as they hope) in the Country?
Not caring how sorrowful a life thou leadest here in their absence.

How little do they regard the poor, which they leave behind them? What is
it to them, if some poor wretches drop down in the streets? This touches not
them: It wounds not them: Gallants, and Citizens, take leave of them with much
complement at the Coaches side, the Coachman with his Heart off, asking if he
shall ^et forward: On, on, they then all cry, and away (in a Hurry:) thunder
they (O London) out of thy Reach.

Yet, cast thine eye on this Picture above, they cannot be out of his reach:
who is ready to follow them, with Times Glass in one hand and his own black
darts in the other. This Rawbone Footman can run by the side of the
Coach-horses, and smite the officious Coachman in the midst of his journey.

When in heaps, people stand gazing on a dead Corpse suddenly stricken down
in the fields: This cunning dart-caster, can stand before them, look at them,
threaten them, and tell them (when he is bidden but to shoot) They shall feel
the strength of his lean arm, as well as the others.

And yet, albeit so many Wagons laden with Household Stuff, are every day
drawn from thee: Albeit so many doors are locked up, and so many take their
heels, and fly in this day of Battle: Yet their flight is for the most part
into the mouth of danger. For, the Country looks with a more pale, and sickly
Color, then (London) thou do.

Rejoice not that thy Neighbors are so ill, but clappe thy hands for joy then
thy self art no worse. Pray for thy distressed friends, neighboring Towns,
and Cities: And relieve them to thy power, if they want: As thou have with a
Noble, Free, and bountiful hand done to some of late already.

It is warrantable by the Laws of God, to shun infection, and to fly
persecution: Divines and best men, dos the one, And the Martyrs when they lived
did the other. But now (blessed be the white hand of mercy) there are no such
Tyrannical Enemies beating at thy gates.

If they that are in the fullness of Riches, and the fatness of the Land, have
Manors, and Lordshipps to ride to: And Country houses to repair to, for
pleasure, to avoyde infection: In Gods name, let them go, wish them well at
their setting forth, welcome them with Embraces at their coming in: But
withal put them in mind of one thing, to do some good to the poor in the
Country, though now they do none here, and all shall be well.

And you in the Country, whose Barnes are full of Corn, and whose fields are
crow'nd with blessings: You, into whose Nostrilles the breath of Heaven,
suffers his wholesome air to pass to and fro, to give you health, and to make
long lusty old age wait upon you at your Tables: To you I speak, your eyes
do I wish to be opened. To look back at your hard and unkind dealings with
Citizens, in the two last great Sicknesses: Remember how your Infidelity then,
has been punished since: And therefore welcome the Sons, and Daughters of
London coming to you now, as if they were your own.

This Sickness called the Plague, has a quick foot, and a stirring hand: Yet
(blessed be the sender of this dreadful Pursivant) he has not been too busy
with us as yet: Let your eyes but look beyond Seas, into other Cities and you
will acknowledge the Almighties Mercy wonderously extended to us. For, those
three punishments (Sword, Pestilence, and Famine,) of which, David's Prophet bid
him (from an Angels mouth) make his choice of one, do at this instant hotly
lay about them in some part of Italy: In so much, that for 4. Months, (Now in
this Summer) there have dyed of the Plague in Millan, 30000. In Mantua, 36000.
In Parma, 20000. And so in other Cities great number besides.

The soft wings of compassion, all this while Cover us, not that we deserve to
be spared, but that out of his love, God does spare us. For in this last blow,
which he gives us, be fights not with many old men, he gives them time yet to
repent, nor with many young men, he winkes at their faults a while, hoping
they will be wiser: But look over all your weekly Bills, ever since there
dyed at first but one, and you shall find, of Infants and young Children,
twenty for one snatched out of their Cradles, because God will be sure to
increase his Saints in Heaven.

The king of kings when he sees his time, shorten and end these miseries, and
power down his wonted blessings on this Land, This City, us all, AMEN.



Death NOw whither a Gods name run you (...),
Why ride you here, why trudge you there
As though for fear you were aghast?
come stay your journey strait.
For do you not know in field or town,
That I am a captain of high renown?
So when I list, I can beat you down, for still I lay in wait.
Consider then, I pray you men,
What moves you thus to fly?
Come home again, for I tell you plain,
That here I could make you die.

Life. What art thou every where to find?
Fearfully thus thou come to us,
With cruelty thou art inclinde, for to pursue men still:
Thou wast in London when we came out,
Throwing thy deadly darts about,
And now in the Country thou art as stout, to follow thy froward will.
What need thou to make us bow?
The air is pleasant here:
The grass does spring, the birds do sing:
For Gods sake come not near.

Death. Oh weak of faith I see you are,
Consider and know what David does show,
In the sixth Psalm his sayings are, as thus it does begin:
Good Lord in rage rebuke me not,
When thy displeasure is waxen hot,
For then we must needs go to the pot, as herbs that be put in.
Cry mercy then, you fillie men.
For wondrous weak you be:
You are perplexed, your bones are vexed,
As far as I can see.

Life. O Lord our Souls are troubled sore,
Release our grief, and send relief,
Have mercy as thou had before, forgive our sins and save our lives.
Or else it little does avail,
For death does follow us at the tail,
O let thy mercy still prevail, save us like Bees in hives.
And thus we know it needs must go,
That thou may have thy will:
Thou have met us here, as does appear,
Which thought to have lived still.

Death. Is not Iehova your chief defense?
For under his wings he keeps all things,
Then what have you need to run from hence, if that your faith were strong?
Though the air be fresh, and fields be green,
And goodly fruits which you esteem,
Yet I can come when least you deem, and lay you all along.
On Christ be bold, to take your hold,
Your anchour-holde is he,
None other may, this pestilence stay,
But all must come to me.

Life. Alas our flesh is frail to see,
When Christ did groan, and make such moan,
Besides the mount of Calvarie, when thou approched'st near:
And there did sweat both water and blood,
And suffered death to do us good,
These things of thee are understood, it was seen that thou wa'st there.
At last did he, both sin and thee,
Tread down and conquer too,
Which faith of his, if we should miss,
Alas what should we do?

Death. I come not every way a like,
Three darts in band, I hold in hand,
The first is war, when I do strike, in other Countries far,
And I think all Belgia quakes at me,
And Spain you know has not gone free,
It Is much to speak of each Country, for I turn them all to dust.
And here the rest shall be expressed,
Of two darts more in store,
Of Famins power, which does devour
Whole regions more and more.

Life. Then the dart of Pestilence at the last,
Takes all in store, were left before,
Oh spare us Lord, we will pray and fast, and all our sins repent:
Vouchsafe to stay, sweet Christ thy hand,
Upon this sinful English land,
And give us grace to understand, these dangers to prevent.
It Is time to pray, that he away,
His indignation take:
Lord grant us grace, in every place,
Petitions for to make.

FINIS.

