THE PREACHERS CHARGE.

AND PEOPLES DVTY.

About Preaching and Hearing of the WORD.

OPENED In a Sermon, being the first fruits of a public Exercise, begun in the
Parish Church of Lownd, for the benefit of the Island of Louingland in Suffolk.

By JOHN BRINSLEY Minister of the Word in great YARMOVTH.

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT BIRD, and are to be sold by Thomas Carre in
Norwich. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, SIR JOHN VVENTVVORTH of Somerley-ton in the County
of Suffolk, Knight: saving health and eternal happiness.
Right Worshipful,
I Here send you the first fruits of your own; your own by countenance, your
own by maintenance. What you heard with attention, I questi^n not but you will
willingly reuiew, and in what concerns you, readily practice. The Charge which
is here opened is directly ours, but by consequence yours, and whose not. The
Preaching of the Gospel being a public work, though it requires not every
man's mouth, to preach it; yet his ear, and his hand it does, to receive it, to
uphold it. This Arc of the new Covenant (more is the pity it should be so
frequently laid upon the Cart) is properly for our shoulders to bear, but yet
none are debarred from touching of it. It is not only the liberty, but the
duty of every private Christian to further the cause of the Gospel in what he
may, much more of them whom the Commonwealth calls forth for public
employments; I bless God that I have no need to press this charge upon your
particular, or if I do, my arguments must be commendations. The bellies of
the poor of these parts bless you already in these times of scarcity, I hope
some of their souls shall bless you for the Bread that perishes not. This
religious exercise which God has made you the instrument to erect, and I hope
to contiue, shall honor you in the eyes of God and his Saints. The Lord make
it as prosperous as it is needful, and give you the true comfort of it here,
and hereafter; So prays

Your Worships ever in the Lord JOHN BRINSLEY.

A Table for the Prophets chamber.
Parts ^
The Ministers Charge. A Duty enjoined. Preach: where is explained The thing:
what Preaching is. The signification of the word, implying The Preachers
office, viz A Crier, a Herald. Manner of discharging it, viz. To whom he is to
speak: to all. In whose name: his Masters. How Boldly. Faithfully. Plainly



The Word. Christ. The Gospel of Christ. Consisting in four particular
actions.

Manner of performance. General: Be instant. Earnest with Themselves. Others.
Diligent.
Particular. In Season. At the set ordinary time: the Lords day. Special
seasons and opportunities.
Out of season: when the word seems to be so in respect of the Speaker.
Hearer. Both: viz. on the week day.



The Peoples duty, by way of application, in five particulars. 1. Hear. 2.
The Word: not being offended at the simplicity of it. 3. Be instant. Earnest
with Themselves, in exciting To the duty. In the duty.
Others God: that he would give to his Ministers Ability. Liberty. Efficacy
Man Ministers themselves, exciting them to their duty, by Christian
exhortation, which must be done with Love. Wisdom. Respect to their paces.
Encouragements. Verbal. Real. Competency of maintenance. Honor and respect
due to their callings. Entertaining the word with gladness, in Receiving.
Practicing.



Private persons, stirring them up to attend upon Gods ordinances.


Diligent.
4. In Season. At the set time: the Lords day. When God disposes the heart
after a special manner.
5. Out of Season. On the week day, as occasion shall be offered. When outward
occasions may withdraw or hinder. When inward indisposition may discourage.




THE PREACHERS CHARGE* AND, PEOPLES DVTIE.
2 TIMOTHY 4. 2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season.


IN all solemn Assemblies, and public meetings upon civil affairs, the
first act, usually, is to open and read the Commission which may warrant the
business to be undertaken. This course I have thought good to observe and
follow, in making entrance upon this holy and religious Exercise: First, to
open unto you the Commission, which may warrant and bear out the duty we are
now to go about; and that, not only in the substance, but also in the
circumstance.

In this Exercise there are but two things subject to question: the Exercise it
self, and the season for the performance of it.

The Exercise it self, The Preaching of the Word. Carnal minded men, who
savor not the things of God, will happly conceive of it, at the least, as not
so necessary: The season for the performance of this Exercise (being on the
week day,) others perhaps will censure it as not expedient. To both these the
Spirit of God, in the words I have now read, gives us an express warrant; and
that not by way of allowance only, but by way of iniunction; as of things that
not only may be done, but must be done. To the Exercise it self, [ Preach
the Word,] not only a toleration, but a peremptory command. To the
circumstance of time, the season for the performance of it, [ Be instant in
season, out of season:] No season unseasonable for this so necessary a duty:
Even that which may seem to carnal reason, to flesh and blood to be out of
season, is yet seasonable. Though it may seem unseasonable to the hearers, yet
it is seasonable in the speaker. This is Saint Paul's charge to Timothy in
particular, and in him to all the Ministers of the Gospel, [ Preach the Word,
be instant in season, out of season.

In this Apostolical charge, Diuis.
there are two things present themselves to our consideration, The duty
enjoined; and, The manner of discharging it: The Duty that is enjoined, is,
Preaching of the Word, Preach the Word: The Manner how this duty must be
discharged, is, With earnestness and diligence, with undaunted resolution,
with indefatigable industry; Be instant in season, out of season.

To begin with the Duty it self: Preach the Word. This is a Duty imposed by
God upon all the Ministers of the Gospel:

They must Preach the Word.

This is the charge, Doct.
we see, which S. Paul here imposes upon his son Timothy, and he does it
with as much seriousness and earnestness as possibly can be conceived: I
charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing, Verse 1.
and his kingdom, Preach the Word. Did you ever hear a charge set on with
more pressing arguments, with more compulsiue and commanding persuasions? I,
but in imposing this charge upon Timothy, does not Saint Paul deal, as our
Savior says of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23. 4.
who bind heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, but they themselves will
not move them with one of their fingers? Nothing less: What he imposes upon
Timothy, he conceiueth and acknowledges to be as deeply charged upon
himself: Necessity is laid upon me, 1 Cor. 9. 161*
yea, We is unto me of I Preach not the Gospel. So deeply did this great
Doctor of the Gentiles account himself to stand charged with this Duty. There
was a Necessity lay upon him for the performance of it; that Necessity backed
with a Woe if he should neglect it. The like Necessity, the like Woe lies
upon all the Ministers of the Gospel in their several places and stations:
They must Preach the Word: Woe is unto them if they do it not: I must not
dwell upon confirmation. This was the first and the last charge which our
blessed Savior gave to his Apostles, when he was to send them forth into the
world after he had told them whither they should go; the first charge he
gives them, is, Mar. 10. 7.
As ye go, Preach, When he himself was to leave the world, and to take his
last farewell of them, the last charge he gives them, Mark. 16. 15.
is, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.
Preaching of the Gospel was the Alpha, 1 Cor. 1. 17.
and the Omega in their Apostolical Ministration; and it is one of the maine
businesses which the Ministers of the Gospel must attend unto; They must
Preach the Word.

By way of explication, and illustration, I will here unfold unto you two
things: What is meant by Preaching; what by the Word.

For the first: To Preach in a general and large acception of the Word, What
Preaching is.
is to declare, or any ways make known the will of God unto man: In this
sense every declaration of the will of God, be it by any of his Mercies,
Chastisements, Judgments, Creatures, may improperly be called Preaching: The
heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19. 1.
and the Firmament shows his handy work. Never a Creature in heaven and earth
but reads a Lecture, preaches to the eye of the beholder, the mercy,
wisdom, power and goodness of God: And so in this general sense, Reading
may also be called Preaching. But more specially and properly, in the ordinary
phrase of the Scripture, Preaching imports a Ministerial action, wherein the
will of God is made known to the Church, after a special manner, by the
Ministers of the Gospel. To speak distinctly. The Ministers of the Word,
being Agents betwixt God and his people, Wherein the office of the Ministers of
the Word consists.
their office consists in two things: 1. In dealing with God for the people.
2. In dealing with the people for and from God. First, they are to deal with
God, for and on the behalf of the people; to be, as it were, their Mouths
unto God, in putting up their suits, and supplications, and thanksgiuings unto
God, in expressing their desires unto God, to pray for them: God forbid that I
should sin against the Lord, inceasing to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12. 23.
says Samuel unto the people. And secondly, as they are to be the peoples
mouth to God, in praying for them, so they are to be Gods Mouth to the people,
in instructing them, in declaring his will to them. If thou take away the
precious from the vile, Ier. 15. 19.
thou shall be, as it were, my mouth, says the Lord to the Prophet Jeremy. The
Prophets of God, the Ministers of the Word, are Gods mouth, whereby he speaks,
and makes known his will to his people. The will of God is made known to the
Church, by the Ministers of the Gospel, two ways: By Visible signs, by
Audible voice.

By Visible signs: The Sacraments, which, being presented to the Church by
hands of the Ministers, are as visible words to make known and ascertaine to
every believer, the eternal gracious purpose, the everlasting good will of God
toward him in his Son.

But secondly, and principally, by Audible voice: By Audible voice the will of
God is declared to the Church by the Ministers of the Word in two Ministerial
actions; In Reading; in Preaching: In Reading the Text, the letter of the
Scriptures; in Preaching, interpreting, expounding, applying them to the
edification of the Church: Both these Ministerial actions you have joined
together in the practice of Ezra and the Levites in Nehe. 8. 8. They read in
the book, Neh. 8. 8.
in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused the people to
understand the reading. That which we have here to deal withal, is the last
of these Ministerial actions, Preaching, properly so called, which, to speak
shortly and fully, is an action of the Minister of the Word, Preaching defined.
soundly interpreting and opening the sense of the Scriptures by the
Scriptures, with Application of them to the use of the Church by Doctrine,
Instruction, Exhortation, Reproof, Conviction, Comfort.

This is properly Preaching: You now see the thing: Look we back a little
upon the word, that will afford us something worthy our observation, Preach;
the word in the original is (...), The signification of the word (...), Preach.
a word borrowed from public Cryers or Heralds sent from Kings, Princes,
States, to proclaim and make known their minds, edicts, determinations unto
others. The Metaphor is no less elegant than fruitful: it reads us, the
Ministers of the Gospel, a double lesson: First, what our office is: Secondly,
how we are to behave our selves in the discharge and execution of that office:
It first puts us in mind what our office We are Cryers, Heralds, Ministers
are Criers, Heralds.
sent from the Lord of Hoastes, the King of heaven, from God himself, to
declare and proclaim his will to the Church. This was the office of John the
Baptist, he was a Crier: The voice of a Cryar in the wilderness: Mat. 3 3.
A Crier sent to proclayme to the world the coming of the Messiah, to work
the redemption of his people. This was the office of the Apostle Saint Paul: he
was ordained to be a Preacher and an Apostle, as himself tells us: 1 Timothy
2. 7. 2 Timothy 1. 11. a Preacher: the word in both places is (...), 1 Timothy 2. 7.
a Crier, 2 Timothy 1. 11.
a Herald; one sent from God to proclaim and make known to the Gentiles the
glad tidings How we are to behave our selves in the discharge and execution of
this office, in declaring the will of God to the Church; and that in three
particulars: To whom we are to speak; In whose name we are to speak; and, How
we are to speak:

All: Criers, They must deliver the will of God to All.
Heralds, they make public Proclamations, that All the people may hear and
understand: It is the speech of Babshakeh to Eliakim, (we may make use of the
actions of wicked men, as our Savior does of the unrighteous Judge in the
parable,) when he was sent by his Master, the King of Ashur, as an Herald to
give a summons unto Jerusalem: Has my Master sent me to thy Master, 2 King.
18. 27.
and to thee, to speak these words; has he not sent me to the men which sit
upon the wall. Heralds make Proclamations, they speak to all the people. Thus
must the Ministers of the Gospel declare the will of God, publish the glad
tidings of salvation, offer Christ to all, so runs our Commission given to the
Apostles by Christ himself: Go Preach the Gospel to every Creature: that is,
Mark 16. 15.
to Jews and Gentiles, to bond and free, of what state, of what degree, of
what condition soever. Thus the Prophet Esaias makes his Proclamation, Esaias 55^
1.
Esaias 55. 1. Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. There are
none excepted, none excluded out of our Commission: we must tender Christ unto
all: So must we Preach to the Churches, as S. John writes to them in his
Revelation: Reu. 1. c. 2^ c.
He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches:
Preach the Gospel to all.

In the name of God.
but in the names of them that send them: Thus says the great King, the King
of Ashur, says Rabshakeh to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: So must we speak
to the Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, in the phrase of Heralds; not in
our name, but in the name of him whose messengers we are, in the name of God:
Thus says the King, the great King of heaven and earth. Thus spoke the
Prophets of old, The Word of the Lord; the burden of the Lord: Mat. 21. 9.
Thus did our Savior himself (as he was man) come unto his people: Blessed is
he that comes in the name of the Lord: Thus were the Apostles to preach unto
the people: it is our Saviors own charge to them a little before his
ascension; That Repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name. And those outcasts in the Gospel, Luke ^^^. 17.
when they would plead, as they thought, effectually for themselves, they do
it in this phrase, Mat. 7. 23.
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name. Ministers must speak to the
Lords people, not as Lords over them, but as messengers, as Heralds, in the
name, in the authority of him that sends them: in the name of God.

3 How we are to speak and deliver the will of God to the people, namely, as
Heralds should do: How is that? Why, 1. Boldly: 2. Faithfully: 3. Plainly.
Boldly, as having authority, as representing the person of the Prince that
sends them: Faithfully, neither adding to, nor detracting from what they have
received in instruction from their Masters: Plainly, that all they to whom they
are sent, may hear and understand their message: Thus should the Ministers of
the Word behave themselves in the dispensation of the Gospel, in preaching of
the Word: Deliver it,

1. Boldly, Boldly.
as standing in the place, representing the person of God himself: not fearing
the faces of them to whom they are sent: Behold, Ezekiel. 3. 8, 9.
I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong
against their foreheads, As an Adamant, harder than Flint, have I made thy
forehead, says the Lord to the Prophet Ezekiel. Such an vandaunted boldness,
such an invincible resolution should there be in the Ministers of the Word, in
delivering the will of God to the people; in instructing, exhorting,
conuincing, reproving; they must do it with boldness. They that preach
Christ, Mat. 7. 29.
must so preach him, as Christ himself preached, when he was upon the earth,
as having authority: It is Saint Paul's charge, in express words, to Titus:
These things speak and exhort, Tit. 2. 15.
and rebuke with all authority: (...): that is, with a Ministerial authority.
In this, Christ's preaching, and our preaching of Christ, differ; He preached,
(...), as having authority in himself, from himself: We must preach with
authority too, but not as having authority in our selves, but with a derived, a
Ministerial authority, derived from him whose Ambassadors we are, whose
person we represent: Preach with authority: Boldly.

2. Faithfully: Faithfully.
Deliver the will of God, his whole will, nothing but his will, neither adding
to it, nor detracting from it: Thus did the Apostle Saint Paul preach and
deliver the will of God to the Churches: What he delivered to others, 1 Cor.
11. 23.
he first received himself; I have received of the Lord that which also I
delivered unto you. And as he received what he delivered, so he delivered what
he received; he kept nothing back: I have not shunned to declare unto you all
the Counsel of God: Acts 20. 17.
They are his own words to the Elders of Ephesus at Miletum. Thus must we
deliver the Counsel of God, his revealed Will (for that is meant by Counsel
in that place, not his secret Decrees and Purposes, but his revealed Will,
specially his Counsel and Purpose touching the way and means of salvation, by
Christ, and Christ alone) we must deliver it faithfully; not adding to it, nor
baulking any thing necessary to be known. Exemplary to us is that resolution
of the Prophet Michaia, when he was sent for to prophecy before King* Ahab:
At the Lord lives (says he) whatsoever the Lord says unto me, 1 King. 22. 14.
that will I speak. Deliver the will of God faithfully.

And thirdly, deliver it plainly: Heralds speak distinctly with an audible
voice, Plainly.
in a known language, to the understanding of those to whom they are sent:
Rabsaketh, 2 King. 18. 26, 27.
when he was sent as an Herald to the people of the Jews, he would not speak
to them in the Aramites language, as Eliakim would have had him, but in the
Jews language, that the people might understand his arrand. Thus must Gods
Heralds, the Ministers of the Word, in delivering his Embassage, in preaching
of the Word, they must speak plainly, distinctly, in a known language, to
the capacity of the hearers: Thus did Ezra and the Levites, Neh. 8. 8.
in that forenamed place; They read in the book, in the Law of the Lord
distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused the people to understand. And it is
noted of the Apostles, at the day of Pentecost, as an exemplary president to
the Ministers of the Gospel for ever: That Every man heard them speak in his
own language: That is, Act. 2. v. 6.
they spoke to every man in his own language; not that the hearers heard that
in diverse languages which they spoke but in one, as some have (not without some
color in the words) coniectured; for then (as Mr. Calvin upon the place well
observes) the miracle had been in the hearers, Calu. in loc. v.
not in the speakers, whereas the cloven tongues rested upon the Apostles, not
upon the people. Their tongues were cloven, they spoke to the people in their
own languages, that they might understand as well as hear: For a Herald to
deliver a message of importance in a strange language, which none understand
but himself, he had as good be silent. They that take upon them the preaching
of Christ, must speak in the language of Christ, and the language of the
people; they must speak plainly. This it is properly to Preach, viz. To
deliver the will of God, as Heralds do the commands of their Masters: to
speak unto all: to speak in the name of God, with boldness, faithfulness,
plainness. You now see the first question resolved and cleared: What is meant
by Preaching: But what must we Preach? The voice says to us, Esa. 40. 6.
Cry; but what shall we cry? That is the second thing to be unfolded: The text
tells us, The Word: (...), We must Preach the Word.

This word (...) ( the Word) The Word taken two ways.
it admits of many and diverse significations in the Scriptures: In this place
it may be taken two ways: 1. For Christ himself.
First, for Christ himself, who is sometimes in the phrase of the Scripture
called ( the Word,) In the beginning was the Word: Are in text.
That is, the eternal son of God, the uncreated, Ioh. 1. 1.
essential Word of the Father. Christ is called The Word (to omit other more
witty than solid conjectures) principally for two reasons: First, because he is
the sum and substance of that Word, that first and great Word, that Word of
words, the Word of promise made by God himself to his Church at the beginning;
and afterward, in effect, from time to time renewed and ratified unto the
Patriarchs: Genesis 3. 15.
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: The substance of this
promise is Christ himself, the seed of the Virgin, in him this promise is
verified and made good, and therefore called the Word: Secondly, he is ( the
Word,) because by him the will and purpose of God is made known to the Church,
as our minds are expressed to other men by our words; Ioh. 1. 18.
No man has seen God at any time, but the only begotten son of the Father,
he has declared him: Declared him: (...), says the Original; the word
signifies to conduct, and direct, and lead a man, as it were, by the hand to
the finding out of something that was hid before. The will of God was a thing
that was locked up in the breast of his secret counsel, a thing hidden from
our eyes, as the purpose of a man's heart is from the knowledge of another. Now
Christ has led us to the knowledge of this will by declaring of it, as a man's
words lead another to the knowledge of the intents and purposes of his heart,
and therefore called The Word.

Secondly, 2. The Gospel*
by the Word, here we may understand the revealed will of God made known in
his Word in the Scriptures: specially his will concerning his son, and the
salvation of his people by him: The Word of the Gospel: The Gospel is called
( the Word) the word (...): the whole Bible, every part and parcel of it is
the word of God; but the Gospel is the pith, the marrow, the quintessence, the
sum and substance of this word, and therefore called, by way of eminency,
Acts 15. 7.
The Word of the Gospel: That the Gentiles might hear the Word of the
Gospel: (...): the word by way of eminency: This is the Word which the Spirit
of God is pleased to honor with so many honorable additions and compellations
in the Scriptures; sometimes calling it the Word of life, the Word of eternal
life: Master, Ioh. 6 68.
thou have the words of eternal life, says Peter to our Savior. The Law is a
Word of death, a killing letter: the Gospel is a Word of life, a quickening
Word, giving life, leading unto life: Sometimes again, Ephesians. 1. 13.
the word of Truth: In whom ye also believed after that ye heard of the Word
of Truth. Every word of God is a true word, the Gospel is the word of Truth:
Sometimes the word of the Kingdom: Mat. 13. 19.
Whenever a man hears the Word of the Kingdom. The Word of the Kingdom,
because by this Word, as by his Scepter, Christ rules like a King in the
hearts of his people: and by this Word he makes them Kings, bringing them by
it, to the Kingdom of grace here, and of glory hereafter: Sometimes again,
Act. 13. 26.
the Word of salvation: To you is the Word of this salvation sent, says Paul
to the men of Antioch. The Word of salvation, because it is the power of God to
salvation. There is a singular excellency and eminency in this word of the
Gospel, and therefore here in the text, called The Word.

Now to which of these two interpretations we should incline, it matters not;
there is no material difference betwixt them; Whether Christ, or the Gospel
of Christ, all comes to one: Christ is the subject of the Gospel, and the
Gospel is the doctrine of Christ; The subject of Preaching, is Christ and the
Gospel.
the sense is still one and the same: That which Timothy and the Ministers of
the Gospel must preach, is nothing but the Word, Christ, the Gospel of
Christ: They must preach Christ: Him did Philip preach unto the Samaritans; He
preached Christ unto them. Acts 8. 5.
Him did Paul preach immediately after his conversion; Acts 9. 20.
Straightway he preached Christ in the Synagogues: To this subject did he ever
confine his preaching: We preach Christ crucified: 1 Cor. 1. 23.
He preached Christ, nothing but Christ: 1 Cor. 3. 2.
I determined not to know any thing among you save Jesus Christ. Thus must we
preach Christ, and the Gospel of Christ: They are the express words of our
Commission, Mark 1^. 15.
Go Preach the Gospel: Here is then the subject of our Preaching, nothing but
Christ, the Gospel of Christ. True indeed, we must preach Moses, we must
preach the Law; but how? We must Preach Moses as a harbinger to Christ; we
must Preach the Law, but in reference to the Gospel, that we may thereby, with
John the Baptist, Mat. 3.
Prepare the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight: that we may by this
means level and smooth the way for Christ, that the offer of salvation by him
may find the better entertainment: That which we must principally eye and
look at in our Preaching, is, this Word, Christ, and the Gospel of Christ.

To preach Christ and the Gospel of Christ, is a great work: if you would
know what it is, it consists principally in four Ministerial actions: I
will but name them:

1. In revealing of Christ; To preach Christ, and the Gospel of Christ,
consists in four parts.
in laying open the truth of doctrine concerning Christ; his own person; his
two natures, Godhead and Manhood; his three offices, Kingly, Priestly,
Prophetical; with the several works of either; the several passages of his
incarnation, birth, life, death, resurrection, Luke 24. 27.
ascension, intercession, coming again at the last day. Act. 2. 22. to 37


2. In revealing the will of God concerning Christ: viz. 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20
that it is his will to save sinners by him, and him alone; that he has set
him forth as a means of reconciliation; that he has given him as an
all-sufficient sacrifice for the sins of the world: so making a general
offer and tender of Christ to all that will receive him as a Savior, and a
Lord.

3. In revealing the way to come unto Christ, Romans 10. 8.
and to God by him: viz. By faith, and faith alone, which is the only hand and
instrument ordained of God to apprehend and take hold of Christ, to apply the
merit of his active and passive obedience unto eternal life.

4. And lastly, 1 Ioh. 3. c. ver. 23.
in giving and applying Christ particularly to every poor penitent sinner that
is heavy laden under the burden of sin: Commanding him in the name of God to
believe in Christ, Act. 16. 31.
to receive him as a Savior, to take hold of him, and to rest upon him:
assuring him withal, in the name of God, that Christ dyed for him in
particular, and that the merit of his death and passion belongs to him, and
shall be imputed unto him; so by this particular application, forming Christ in
the soul, Call. 4. 19.
from whence will follow a through change, and conversion both in heart and
life. This it is to Preach Christ, and the Gospel of Christ. And this is the
duty which S. Paul here imposes upon Timothy, and which all the Ministers of
the Gospel should principally be employed about.

I might here now give you some reasons of the necessity of this duty of
preaching the Word after this manner: To omit all other:

The reason of reasons is, Reas.
because it is the ordinance of God; Romans 1. 16.
his power unto salvation: that is, his powerful instrument which he has in
his wisdom appointed and set apart for the working of the salvation of his
people; 1 Cor. 1. 18.
for the begetting, beginning of grace, increasing of grace, perfecting of
grace in the hearts of his chosen, and so consequently to bring them through
grace to glory.

The time preuents me, give me leave now to pass from the duty it self, to
the manner of performance: I shall make the application of both together. The
manner how this important duty should be discharged, is set down, first,
generally, then illustrated and explayned more particularly: generally, [ Be
instant] particularly, [ In season, out of season.] I will be brief in all.

Be instant, (...), says the original: the word signifies to stand to, or
over a business: Our English word expresses it fully, Be instant: To be
instant in a business, imports two things; Earnestness, and Diligence. Thus
must the Ministers of the Gospel be instant in preaching of the Word;
Ministers must be instant two ways:
they must stand to, and stand over the work 1. with earnestness: 2. with
diligence.

Earnest, and that
they must be instant and earnest about this work of Preaching the Word:
Earnest, 1. With themselves; 2. with others.

earnest with themselves, With themselves.
and that in stirring and exciting up themselves to the work, in putting
themselves forward upon this service: great need of earnestness this way.

There are many auocations which will be ready to divert and turn us aside,
Reas. 1.
to call us away, to pluck us back from the work: profits, pleasures,
preferments, ease, quietness and the like: Flesh and blood will always be
whispering in our ears, as Peter in his Masters, Master, favor thy self.



Paul must make account to meet with an Elimas; every Moses with a Iannes and
Iambres: Always in one kind or other, we must make account to find Satan
standing at our right hands, when we are to go about this work, as he stood
at the right hand of Iehoshuah, Zach 3. 1.
to resist him, when he was to stand before the Lord to execute his office.
Great need of earnestness to put our selves forward in a service where we
shall meet with so many auocations, so many discouragements, so much
opposition: All our earnestness will be little enough to make us bear up
head against this tide. Strange it is how far these have prevailed many times
against the faithful messengers of God, to the disheartning, almost to the
silencing of them: It was the Prophet Ieremies own case: such was the
entertainment that he met withal, in the discharge of his office, that he had
even resolved with himself not to make mention of God, Ier. 20. 9.
not to speak any more in his name. It made him almost to silence himself
from Preaching any more: and had not the Word been in his heart, as a burning
fire shut up in his bones (as he there speaks) he had been for ever silent:
Such defamations, such minting and coining of slanderous reports, Verse. 10.
such catching at his words, such watching for his haltings, such lying in wayt
to entrap him, (as himself tells us in the next verse) that he had even
resolved to turn his back upon his office. If any of the Messengers of God
meet with better measure in the discharge of their duties, it is more than God
has promised them, or they can promise to themselves. Great need therefore to
stand up to the work, that we may ouerlooke and ouerleape all these blocks
that lie in the way: Great need to be earnest, even to offer a kind of holy
violence to our selves to stir up our selves to the work. Even as the Cock,
the true Emblem of a Minister of the Word, first awakens himself by the
clapping of his wings, that he may awaken others by his crowing; so must we
offer a kind of holy violence to our selves to awaken and stir up our selves
to the work of our Ministry, that being stirred up our selves first, we may

2. Awaken and stir up others: Ministers must be Others.
offer violence to others, in Preaching the Word, as well as to themselves. The
Kingdom of heaven should suffer violence as well in the speaker, as in the
hearer: in the mouth of the one, as in the heart of the other: It is the charge
which the Master of the Feast gives unto his servant, when he sends him
forth into the high ways to fetch in guests to the Supper; Luke 14. 33.
Compel them to come in. Thus should we Preach the Gospel, inuit men to the
participation of Christ with commanding arguments, with compulsiue persuasions,
so as to take no denial. So should we deal with the souls of men, as the
Angels did with the bodies of Lot and his family, pluck them as firebrarnds
out of the flames, and that with a holy violence. Jude 23.
It is the charge which the Lord gives to the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 55. Cry
aloud, spare not: Great reason the Ministers of the Word should Cry aloud, Esa.
55. 1.
they often speak unto dead men, such as are dead in trespasses and sins:
Do we see men sleeping and snorting securely in their natural states and
conditions, without sense, without remorse, Cry aloud: Maledictum silentium
quod hic conniuet; Cursed silence that now spares to speak: Do we see men
walking on securely in the paths of hell and of death, living in any sinful
course, posting on to hell and destruction, Cry aloud, spare not: Crudelis
misericordia; Cruel is that mercy that suffers a man rather to be drowned
than to pull him out of the water by the hair of his head. Thus must we
(...), be instant about this work of our Ministry, be earnest both with our
selves and others:

Ministers must be diligent.
that is, Diligent: (...), Sta cum diligentia, so the Syriacke renders the word
in this place, Stand to the work with diligence. Ministers must be diligent,
as well as earnest. This is the commendation of that eloqueut Apollos, he was
not only seruent in the spirit, Acts 18 25.
but also, he spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord. Ministers,
in the dispensation of the Gospel, are Gods seeds-men to sow the seed of
eternal life in the hearts of his chosen. Now it is the seeds-mans charge,
given by the Preacher; In the morning sow thy seed, Eccles. 11. 6.
and in the evening let not thine hand rest. The Preaching of the Word must be
a Ministers work, 1 Cor. 3. ^.
his daily work, not his recreation; a continual work: We are Gods
Husbandmen, his people are his tillage, as Saint Paul makes the comparison:
Now it is the Husbandmans portion, redit labor actus in orbem; his work goes
round in a circle, it is never at an end; Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, no
vacation in any: They that put their hands to Gods Plough, must put on an
indefatigable resolution to follow the work with diligence: It is the reason
which the Apostles give, why they would have Deacons chosen to take care of
their poor; because (say they) We will give our selves continually to prayer,
Acts 6. 4.
and to Preaching of the Word: (...), Insta^imus, says the vulgar Latin, we
will be instant in it, attend unto it. Thus must we, whom God has honored so
far as to make us dispensers of his sacred mysteries; we must (...), attend
upon the work, stand to it, be instant in it, first, with Earnestness;
secondly, with Diligence.

This in general: more particularly, In season, ta^ he^^. 2. ways.
Be instant in season, out of season: (...): I will be brief in both.

In season; the word may be understood two ways:

1. It may be taken for the ordinary set time appointed and set apart for this
exercise: For the set time, the Lords day.
The ordinary time set apart by God himself for this duty, is the Sabbath day,
the Lords day: Exodus 31. 13.
And then to Preach the Word, is to Preach it in season. Ezekiel. 20. 12.
The Sabbath was, and the Lords day is a sign of sanctification unto the
people of God; never are the means of sanctification so properly in season as
then. This season did our Savior and his Apostles usually observe. Mark. 6. 2.
Before his resurrection they went into the Synagogues and taught upon the
Sabbath days: Luke 4. 16, etc.
After his resurrection, Act. 13. 14.
they met together every first day of the week, Act. 2.
upon the Lords day, Act. 20. 7.
as at the day of Pentecost, and at other times. And this season the Ministers
of the Gospel are to observe after a special manner. In this there is a
difference betwixt the word of God and that Mannah which came down from heaven
in the wilderness; that fell upon every day of the week except the Sabbath,
this spiritual Mannah never falls so seasonably as then.

In season: that is, at such times and seasons when the Word may be most
acceptable, Other special oportunities.
most profitable unto the hearers. There are certain seasons when the Word is
likely to find better acceptance and entertainment, to take place rather than
at other times: as, viz. when men are humbled under the hand of God, when the
heart is broken under some great affliction or other, whether present or
feared, that is a season when the Word is like to find easier passage, and to
make a deeper impression: So again, when the heart is warmed and melted with
the fresh apprehension of some new mercy, that is a season when the Word is
likely to find a wide and effectual door opened to it to let it into the
soul: So again, there are certain seasons when some particular doctrine is
more seasonable, than others; As to minister comfort and consolation to an
afflicted dejected soul: when the heart is pricked, wounded, when the spirit
is broken under the apprehension of sin and Gods wrath due to it, then to
preach, comfort is like the pouring in balsome into a bleeding wound, or like a
shower of rain falling upon the new mowne grass, it is a word in season. Now
Ministers should observe, and watch, and apply themselves to these seasons. We
know what commendation the Wiseman gives of words thus spoken in season, Prou.
15. 23.
How good is a word in due season? Prou 25. 11.
And again, A word spoken fitly, (Super rotissuis says the original, (...).
spoken upon his wheels; that is, with a due concurrance and observation of
all circumstances, of time, place, person, and the like, which are as the
wheels upon which our words and speeches should run) is like apples of gold
with pictures of silver, both delectable and profitable. Herin should the
wisdom of the Ministers of the Word be exercised in taking hold of these
opportunities to improve them for the best advantage, that they may minister a
word in due season.

They must be instant in season; Out of season
and a. Out of season.

What, is the Word ever out of season: that which seasoneth all other things,
is that ever unseasonable?

Ans. In it self, in truth it is not; but in the opinion of men, in the eye of
carnal reason, in the judgment of flesh and blood it seems sometimes to be
out of season. Out of season three ways, in three respects: 1. In respect of
the speaker: So the Word seems to be three ways.
2. In respect of the hearer: 3. In respect of both.

First, in respect of the Speaker, the Minister himself, out of season, In
respect of the Minister.
when his ease, his pleasures, his profits, his worldly employments, some
unnecessary auocations or other, draw him another way. When there is no
constraint, no necessity of Preaching, the Law of the Land requires it not,
neither is there any benefit, but perhaps danger likely to accrue to himself
by Preaching (as in times of persecution) then it may seem to him to be out
of season.

In respect of the Hearers, when their Farms, their Hearer.
perhaps sports, pastimes, recreations draw them another way: When they cannot
repair to the hearing of the Word without some pains, without some hardship
in respect of the season, the weather, ( A snowy morning.
as it falls out this morning,) or otherwise, then the Preaching and hearing
of the Word, seems to them to be out of season.

Thirdly, to both Speaker and Hearers it may seem out When it is preached not
only at the set ordinary times, To both.
upon the Sabbath, the Lords day, but also at other times, upon other
occasions, upon the week day; then flesh and blood will be ready to think it
as a shower of rain in the midst of Harvest, out of season. Now at these
times, which to carnal reason may seem unseasonable, must the Ministers of
the Gospel stand up to the work of their ministry, take all occasions, all
oportunities, and advantages of Preaching publicly, of instructing privately.

Thus did our Savior and his Apostles, they went about, Preaching: Luke 8. 1.
vlt.
as they went into the Synagogues on the Sabbath days, Mark. 20.
so they took all other occasions on the Luke 19. 47.
week day to instruct the people publicly, beside their teaching from house
to house: Act. 2. 46.
And here is our warrant for this religious exercise, Act. 12. 42. (...): v* d.
Bezam in an. not. in margintransl. Engl.
into which, I have this day made an entrance. It may seem, perhaps, to some
to be out of season, being in the week day, when men should attend upon their
particular callings, and other employments: If it do, yet we dare not neglect
it: the Spirit of God here gives us a warrant for it, nay, lays a charge
upon us to embrace the occasion, to take hold and make use of this advantage
which God and authority have put into our hands: here is our Commission, Preach
the Word, etc.

I have dwelt long upon the doctrinall part of the Text, perhaps you may think
too long. All this time you may say, what is this to us? To make you amends in
that which remains, give me leave to turn my speech now wholly unto you. The
doctrine has been ours (I wish we may make it ours by practice) the
application shall be yours.

You see what charge it is which the Spirit of God here imposes upon us:
Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season: The peoples duty in
five parts.
Do but turn the tables, the Charge is yours* Hear the Word, be instant in
season, and out of season: This charge has many parts; to set it on the
better, I will break it in pieces.

First, Use 1. Hear.
Hear the Word: Preaching and Hearing are Relatiues: If there lie a necessity
upon us to Preach, by the same rule there lies a necessity upon you to Hear:
He that ordained us to Preach the Gospel, has also ordained you to hear the
Gospel: And therefore let me exhort you, in the name and fear of God, to
attend upon this ordinance of God: I call it his ordinance: and so it is as
well in the hearer, as in the speaker: Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. Hearing, by the word of God; Rom 10. 17.
that is, by his ordinance, by his commandment, as Mr Beza most naturally
interprets the word. Bezannot, inl^cum.
Attend upon it therefore, and that because it is his ordinance. There is a
great deal of force and strength in this argument, to persuade men to attend
upon the hearing of the Word preached, because it is Gods own ordinance. A man
may always expect to find God when he seeks him in his own way. Then may a
man comfortably assure himself of a blessing, when he seeks it in the
ordinance of God, in that way which God himself has chalked out, and
appointed for that end and purpose. It is the ordinance of God that makes
every thing to be useful unto us, that makes every comfort to be
comfortable, that makes every means of our good to be helpefull and
serviceable to us: Why does bread nourish us more than the grass of the field?
It is Gods ordinance, There is a word of command that goes along with the one,
Matthew. 4. 4.
and not with the other, which has ordained, appointed, and set it apart for
that particular use, and has given it a special efficacy for that end and
purpose. Now such a word there is in this ordinance of God, the Preaching and
the hearing of the Word: God has, in his counsel and purpose, set it apart,
as the only ordinary means for the beginning, increasing, perfecting the
work of grace in the hearts of his chosen, and so to be his power unto
salvation; and has given it a special efficacy for this end and purpose.
Surely, if men did but seriously consider, and certainly believe this, they
would wait and depend upon it with more confidence, with more assurance of
success.

What is the maine reason why men make so little account of it, and reap so
little benefit by it.

Amongst others, this I take to be the principal, they do not esteem it, nor
attend upon it as Gods ordinance, but as man's ordinance. If they come to the
hearing of the Word, they look upon it with a squint eye, they come to it out
of some base, by, sinister respect, and not in obedience to God, to wait upon
him in the use of his ordinance: And this it is that hinders the fruit, the
efficacy of it, Esa 53. 1.
that they do not find the arm of the Lord revealed to them in this
ordinance. This day you have heard it, that Preaching, and so by necessary
consequence, Hearing, is the ordinance of God himself; and therefore be
exhorted to submit and to subject your selves unto it, to come to it, to wait,
attend, depend upon it as his ordinance.

And secondly, Use 2.
be not offended with the simplicity of this ordinance of God: The Word;
without offense at the simplicity of it.
You see that our Preaching is confined to one subject, from which it may not
swerve or stray; viz. The Word: Christ, and the Gospel of Christ; we must
know nothing else amongst you: Do not you desire to know or hear any thing
else from us: This is the property of Saint Peter's newborn Babe, one borne
again of water and the spirit, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
to desire the sincere milk of the Word: (...): Milk that is pure as it
comes from the breast, without the mixture of any thing else with it. If we
feed you with this sincere milk be not you nauseated with it, take heed of
loathing of it: A sincere heart will desire after sincere milk: So much
longing after mixture in the Preaching of the Word, as a man shall find in his
heart, so much insincerity is in it. If we preach the bare Word to you, if we
present Christ unto you, and naked Christ, without the clothing of humane
wisdom, the wisdom of words, as Saint Paul calls it; be not you offended
at it. We must Preach Christ as Saint Paul preached him, 1 Cor. 1. 23.
Christ crucified: Now he was crucified naked; even so must we preach him unto
you. This is the excellency of preaching, not to set forth Christ under a
veyle, as it was in the time of the Law, but to lay him naked, that every one
may see him with open face: So to present Christ unto the ears and hearts of
the hearers, Gal. 3. 1.
as Saint Paul himself presented him unto his Galathians, to draw him out to
the life, to crucify him before them: so to present him, as he was presented
to the eyes of the Jews, when they saw him hanging upon the Cross. Be not
offended therefore with the simplicity of Christ, and the doctrine of Christ,
we must Preach nothing but this Word.

Be instant; Use 3.
we must, (...), stand up to the work, so must you in your place and station.
Be instant two ways,
Be instant, and that as we must be instant: 1. With Earnestness: 2. With
Diligence.

1. Be earnest about this work: It is good to be earnest Earnest. Gal. 4. 18
Sure I am, you cannot be earnest, or zealous in a better cause than this; It
is Gods cause, it is the Churches cause, nay, it is your own cause, a cause
that concerns you nearly, your souls cause, your welfare, your happiness,
your life and liuelihood, your salvation depends upon it: If ever you will be
earnest in any cause, be zealous in this. Be earnest, 1. With your selves; 2.
With others.

1. With your selves, and that both to stir up your selves to the duty, With
themselves, exciting them. seues,
and in the duty.

First, be earnest to stir up your selves to the duty: great need of
earnestness in exciting and stirring up your selves this way.

For 1. there is a natural averseness in every man, that To the duty. Reas.
Why,
Flesh and blood find no taste, no relish in this ordinance of God, the Word
purely preached: This is one of those things of God, of which Saint Paul
speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
That the natural man receives not, discerns not, understands not: Great
need therefore to use all holy means to quicken and to excite spiritual
appetite.

And 2. Besides this natural averseness, you shall find many pull-backes,
many auocations, many lets and impediments to draw you aside, to hinder you.
Those in the Gospel (which I named before) are too common; Farms, Oxen,
domestical affairs, civil employments. The worlds business will steal away
the time from Gods business: Our bodies will seek to starve our souls; our
particular callings will ingrosse all the time, that there shall be little left
for the general.

3. Besides these auocations, you must make account to meet with many
discouragements: It may be taunts and reproaches from profane and wicked men;
it may be an ouerly countenance from friends and alliance: some dust or other
Satan will be ready to stir up to blind your eyes withal, that you should
not see to find the way to the house of God, to attend upon this his
ordinance. Great need of earnestness to excite and stir up your selves, that
you may ouerlook all these seeming lets, impediments, discouragements.

in the duty: In the duty.
as there is a natural averseness in us to the duty, to keep us from it, so
there is a natural slothfulness, deadness, dullness, weariness, which will
be ready to seyze upon us in the duty, to make us perform it carelessly,
formally, negligently: The best of Gods people have often experience of this
malady in themselves. Sometimes our bodies will be disposed to drowsinesse and
sleepiness (as it was with Eutichus at Saint Paul's Sermon) and that perhaps
rather now than at any other time; Act. ^0. 9.
but oftener our hearts, Cant. 5. 2.
our souls: I sleep, but my heart waketh, says the Spouse. In hearing of the
Word, we may often inuert the sentence, I wake, but my heart sleeps: Our
bodies are present, but our souls, our hearts, are absent. Great need to
awaken our selves, that we may hear, and hear with attention; that we may
watch unto hearing, as the Apostle exhorts the Colossians concerning prayer,
That ye should continue in prayer and watch in the same: Col. 4. 2.
So, continue in hearing, and watch in the same: Watch lest we should be
overtaken with this spiritual deadness and drowsinesse, which is so ready to
creep upon the soul, to come over the heart, to bind up the senses, the
affections of it. Our Savior reproves his Disciples that they could not watch
with him one hour, Ma(...)
when as he himself was yet absent from them. The reproof will lie as justly
against us if we cannot stir up our selves to watch with Christ one hour,
Ma(...)
especially when as Christ himself is present with us, and that after a
special manner, as he has promised to be in the midst of this his ordinance.
And therefore when we draw near unto God in this part of his worship and
service, let us in his fear, as in his presence, awaken our hearts, intend our
spirits, that we may attend unto what the Lord shall say unto us. It is Lydiaes
commendation, after that God had opened her heart and wrought effectually upon
her, Act. 16. 14.
she attended to the words that Paul spoke. Thus should Christians attend upon
the Word; even hang upon the lips of the speaker, as the Babe does upon the
breast: watch every word to take it before it fall to the ground. Thus should
Christians be earnest with themselves, in stirring up themselves to the duty,
in the duty. They that will take the kingdom of heaven, dispensed by the
Ministers of the Word, they must take it (as they did in the days of John the
Baptist) with violence. Mat. 11. 12.


2. As you must be earnest with your selves about this Be earnest with othe^^
and that
and with man.

First, Be earnest 1. with God: It is he that holds the With God Amos 4. 7.
that causes it to rain upon one place and not upon another: It is he that
waters his own inheritance, his garden, his Church, where, and when, and how
it pleases him. And therefore forget not to be instant and earnest with him:
1. That he would send forth faithful laborers into his harvest, For three
things.
such as may be endued with ministerial abilities for the discharge of this
work: Mat. 9. 38.
2. That he would give liberty unto them, Col. 4. 3.
that he would set open for them a door, 2 These. 3. ^.
a wide door of vtterances: 3. That he would give efficacy to their labors:
that he would not only set open a wide, but also an effectual door; that the
Gospel may have free passage in their mouths, and in the hearts of the elect
people of God: Ability, liberty, efficacy in the dispensation of the Gospel,
depends all upon God himself: And therefore be you instant with him, that he
would be pleased to water your inheritances with this dew of heaven: It is
Achsaes request (I remember) to her father Caleb, Josh. 15. 19.
that seeing he had given her the South-Country, he would give her the springs
of water also. God has allotted unto you in this Island, a seat pleasant
enough, every ways accommodated with all other requisite conueniences: you
want nothing but the springs of water, springs of those waters, those living
waters, flowing out from the Sanctuary. Be instant with your God, your heavenly
Father, that he would strike the rock for you, that he would give unto you
these Springs from above, that he would more abundantly refresh and make glad
your dwelling places with these living waters: be instant with God.

Men about this work, and that both with the Ministers themselves, Be instant
with men: and that
and others; with the one to Preach, the other to hear the Word, both to
attend upon this ordinance of God.

Ministers themselves, to stir them up to their duty.
It is not only your liberty, but a part of your duty to put us in mind of our
duty, whom God has set over you: Say to Archippus, it is Saint Paul's charge to
the Colossians, Col. 4. 17.
it is a principal part of our duty to preach the Word, Reu. 2. 4.
if we neglect it, grow slack and remiss in it, as it was the case of that
Angel of the Church of Ephesus: Be you instant with us, put us in mind of
it, stir us up to it: We are but men, and therefore subject to forget you
and our selves, to forget our duty, though we have never so much cause to
remember it: Ion. 1.
Jonas falls asleep in the hold of the ship, in the midst of that stresse,
when he should have been praying for himself and those that were with him.
Thus it fares, many times, with the Ministers of the Word, we are subject to
a supine forgetfulness, to be rockt asleep with the profits and preferments
of the world, whilst, in the mean time, our flocks, our charges, nay, our
selves too are in eminent danger. Let us crave that favor from you, that in
this case you would play the Mariners part, that you would awaken and stir
us up to the discharge of our duty, which concerns you and our selves so
nearly, Stir us up: but how? Why, 1. by Christian exhortations, friendly
advice and By Christian exhortations, wherein three cautions.
Herein only observe three Cautions; that this be done, 1. with love, 2. with
wisdom, 3. with a due respect to our places and callings. With love, that it
may be without bitterness, without any tincture of private spleen against our
persons: dip your reproves and exhortations in oil, they will drive the
better; with wisdom, with a due poyzing and weighing of all circumstances, as
time, and place, and the like, as also a due consideration of our strength and
ability, for the discharge of this duty: with respect unto our callings and
functions: It is Saint Paul's charge to Timothy; Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort
him as a Father: 1 Timothy 5. 1.
Tart and masterlike reproofs out of your mouths, though we deserve them, yet
do not become you. Exhort us as Fathers: Thus stir us up by exhortations:
And,

2. Stir us by encouragements: By encouragements, chiefly real in three
things.
what encouragements? viz. 1. Competency of means and maintenance, suitable to
our pains and charge: Take heed of being accessory to the staruing of this
ordinance of God and your own souls, by muzling the mouth of the Ox: Let
them that wait upon and serve at the Altar, live, and live comfortably by the
Altar: 2. by giving due honor and respect to our places and callings. Though
our persons, perhaps, deserve little, yet our callings are honorable. Paul
himself was of a mean presence ( His bodily presence was weak, 2 Cor. 10 10.
) of a low stature, of a mean personage, but his function challenged respect:
3. By accepting our labors, lending us your presence, your ears, your hearts,
your lives, giving entertainment to the work of our minister: No encouragement
to the Ministers of the Word like unto this* When the people are 1. ready to
receive the Word at their mouths; the one as ready to hear, as the other to
speak: When they hang upon the Priests lips for knowledge. This is even like
sucking of the breast, which makes the nurse to give down the milk more
freely, more plentifully, even whether she will or no: It is the want of this
sucking of this sincere milk that has made so many dry breasts in the Church
of God: that has disheartened and discouraged so many forward and hopeful
instruments in the Church, if not to the stopping of their mouths, yet at the
least to the damping of their spirits, to the quelling of the life and power of
their Ministry. And 2. when they profit by the Word, grow and thrive in grace
by it. No such encouragement to an Husbandman as when he sees his tillage to
prosper, no such encouragement unto a nurse, as when she sees her child
battle and thrive; it makes them think no pains too much: Whereas on the
contrary, a barren soil, and a starueling nursery kill the hearts of both. No
encouragement unto the Ministers of the Gospel like unto this, when they find
the work to thrive and prosper in their hands; when they see that the seed
which they sow is not cast away, when they see that their labor which is not
vain in the Lord, is not in vain neither in the hearts and lives of the
hearers. This will make us stand up to the work, watch when we should sleep;
labor when we could be content to be at ease and quiet; think no pains too
much. Thus stir up the Ministers of the Word, be instant and earnest with
them.

others, private persons, neighbors, friends, Be earnest with others Psalm.
122. 1.
acquaintance; stir them up to wait and to attend upon this ordinance of God,
Ioh. 11.
with more diligence, with more care, Ioh. 4.
with more conscience: Come, let us go up to the house of the Lord: Philip
calls Nathaniel: The woman of Samaria fetches her neighbors to come unto
Christ: Thus should private Christians excite and stir up one another, labor
by friendly exhortations, persuasions, encouragements to bring their friends
and neighbors to meet with Christ in this his ordinance: This will be our
comfort another day, that we have every one of us, in the several places and
stations wherein God has set us, bin instant and earnest in the cause of God,
zealous and forward for the furtherance and propagation of the Gospel.

Be earnest: And 2. be Diligent in this work; The diligent Diligent. P^ou. 10.
4.
says the Wiseman. It is no less true in spiritual than in temporal
riches. Do you desire to be rich in grace and holiness, the best riches;
attend, wayt upon this ordinance of God with diligence, with co^stancy. If God
be not weary of speaking, be not you weary of hearing. Frequent the house of
God upon all occasions. What ever the world thinks and speaks of it, it is no
disgrace to be accounted a frequenter of Sermons, so that other necessary
duties be not neglected: Christians must be like the Be that goes from flower
to flower, to gather a little honey from every one to carry to the hiue, to
make up the store. We shall have need of a stock, a store of grace, and
therefore let us go from flower to flower, (I speak the more liberally and
freely, because in these parts there is not the like fear of surfeiting of the
Word Preached, of erring on the right hand by an unwarrantable running from
Sermon to Sermon, to the neglect of men's particular callings, as may seem to
be in some other parts of the kingdom) embrace every occasion which the Lord
offers in the public Ministry of his Word, for the gathering of honey, the
gathering of grace to carry home to the hiue, to lay up in the heart, to make
up a stock, a store against the winter, against hard times, evil days, the
days of trial, sickness, death: We shall then find all to be little enough,
and therefore whilst our Summer of health, and liberty, and peace lasts, up
and be doing; every day be increasing of the store; get something from every
Sermon, from this which you have this day heard; if you carry away nothing
else, yet carry away this resolution, that by the grace of God inabling you,
you will endeavor to make better use of all the public means of grace which
God shall hereafter in this or in any other place afford unto you. One flower
will not load a Be, neither will one Sermon, though never so excellent, load
the head and heart of a Christian to make him rich in grace: And therefore be
Instant, as Earnest, so Diligent.

This is the third Use: Use 4. In season; 2. ways.
to draw toward an end in the fourth place: Be instant in season: And that 1.
at the set ordinary times, set apart for this Exercise; the Sabbath day, the
Mannah, 1 Cor. 16. 2.
to make your provision for the week ensuing. Then may you expect a special
blessing from God in attending upon this holy exercise, because as the exercise
it self is Gods own ordinance, so the day also is set apart by the Be instant
in season; viz. At those special times and seasons when the Lord is pleased to
fit and to dispose you unto the duty, after a special manner. There are
certain seasons, certain gales of grace (as we may call them) which the
experience of every Christian can inform us of, when the Lord is pleased to
breath more kindly, more sweetly, more effectually upon the heart and soul, to
the quickening and enlarging of it, than at other times: Sometimes when it is
kindly humbled and broken under some affliction, either outward or inward;
sometimes when it is warmed, and suppled, and melted with the fresh
apprehension of some new mercy, especially with a clearer glimpse of the light
of Gods countenance, a more full and rauishing apprehension of the unspeakable
love and favor of God in Jesus Christ: Sometimes again, it is after a secret
and inexpressible manner moved, and inclined, and molded to a more cheerful,
a more acceptable performance of all duty. Now these are seasons which should
be very precious in the eyes of Christians, which they should not let slip
without a special improuement: take hold of them, make use of them, as for
other duties, so for this: When the wind blows, whilst the Spirit of God
breaths upon the soul with a fresher gale in sweet motions, inclinations,
affections, resolutions, hoyse up the sail, make use of that advantage, in
hearing and applying of the Word; to hear it with more frequency, with more
power, with more life, with more intention of Spirit: Thus in season.

5. And lastly, Be instant out of season: And that

1. At other times, Use 5.
beside the set, the ordinary time, set apart by God himself; Out of season
three ways.
upon the week day, as well as upon the Sabbath day, when God shall offer a
fit occasion.

2. Out of season; when it may seem to flesh and blood 2 Samuel 24. 24.
yet remember what David says to Araunah; he will not offer a sacrifice unto
God of that which cost him nothing: Borrow a little from thy body, thy estate,
thy worldly employments, to bestow it upon thy soul: Make bold a little with
other occasions, to purchase some time for God and his worship and service.

Be instant out of season, even then when thou find thy self unfit and
indisposed unto the duty: yet even then when thou find a present
indisposition hanging about thee, attend upon this ordinance of God: It is a
Word of life, a quickening Word, as well to put life into the soul, and to
stir it up when it is dead, as to preserve and increase it: It is an
Anabaptisticall frenzy that Christians should never attend upon this or any
other duty, but when the spirit moves them: We often see ships riding a long
time in a road stead, when they might be in the haven; wherefore is it? that
they may be in the winds way (as we say) to take the first opportunity that
shall be offered: Even thus should Christians anchor, as it were, in the house
of God, even then when they seem to be becalmed, that they cannot stir and
move themselves about holy duties as they were wont to do, yet even then ride
it out, wait upon God in the use of this ordinance: though unfit for the
present, bemoane and bewail thy unfitness, look up unto God for life, and
seek it from him in thy attendance upon this ordinance. This is Gods own
command (as for us to Preach) so for you to Hear the Word, to be instant in
season, out of season.

FINIS:

