THE CHRISTIANS GVIDE.

For his better, and more comfortable passage through the wilderness of this
troublesome world, unto that promised rest in that heavenly Canaan, the
Kingdom of glory.

Consisting of diverse holy Meditations and Prayers serving to that purpose.

PSALM. 107.43. Who is wise that he may observe these things?

PROVE. 9.9. Give admonition to the wise, and he will be wiser; teach a
righteous man and he will increase in learning.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Samuel Man, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Ball. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT, Lord RICH, Baron of Leez, etc. increase of
all true honor here, and everlasting happiness hereafter.
Right Honorable:
HOW needful it is to have always at hand diverse helps and furtherances to
godliness, and to be often conversant in Meditation and Prayer, and such like
holy and religious Exercises, none can be ignorant, who is either privy to his
own natural indisposition and untowardness unto that which is good, or
otherwise a diligent obseruer of the sundry occasions whereby the affections
are distracted, and with-drawne from that, on which they ought chiefly to be
placed; or lastly, not forgetful of the subtlety and stratagems of that old
and malicious enemy, in seeking by all means, either to keep men from
entering into the right way, or else to divert them from it, being once entered
into it, by laying many stumbling blocks in the way, or insnaring them with the
alluring baits of the lying and deceivable vanities of this fading and
perishing world, with which many are so strangely enchanted, that whiles they
fondly think therein to find felicity, they run on headlong unto utter
ruin and destruction. Hence it is, that many moved with the zeal of the glory
of GOD, and the good of others, (the welfare of whose souls was dear unto
them) have employed themselves in seeking to remedy this evil, by seasoning
the affections of men with wholesome instructions, and to preserve them from
that danger, which otherwise they were like to fall into through the craft and
malice of that deadly adversary, who desires nothing more, then to make a prey
of them, and to drown their souls in perdition, without all hope of recovery.
And this indeed it was, that first induced me (being also moved thereunto by
the often and importunate request of godly and wel-disposed friends) to publish
this Treatise for the benefit of others, and to proceed in the course which
upon the like considerations, I had formerly enterprised. The Work I
acknowledge to be slender, yet such as I hope may not be without profit to
those that are sincerely affected; and not sick, either of that evil disease
of vain and fond curiosity, which reigns among too many: or else of that
spiritual surfeit, which is a cause of much hurt, not to a few, whose distemper
causes them to loath better and more sauory dishes then this, which I here set
before them, not having indeed any relish in any thing which is not fitted to
their Aguish and disordered appetite. Whatsoever it be, I presume to send it
forth into the light, under your Honorable Patronage. Why I should use this
boldness; among others, this was not the least incitement; namely, considering
that your Lo: has not only been a Patron of the Labors of diverse in this or
the like nature: but also an Honorable and worthy Instrument for the entrance
of many into that chief and maine work of the Ministry, dealing therein
with much sincerity and faithfulness (a thing so rare in this decayed and
corrupted age, wherein either Flattery or such like sinister respects, or
(which is worse,) Briberie and Simonie, have so much defiled and defaced the
Lords Sanctuary, to the loss of many souls, which have perished by means of
such execrable and sacrilegious impiety.) I thought it my duty, to take
occasion hereby, of joining with others in publishing to the world your sincere
and religious care herein toward the Church of God (which shall no doubt in
due time be more abundantly recompensed 1 Cor. 11.15.58. Gal. 6.9.
;) not so much to stir up your noble and generous mind, to continue in that
honorable and worthy course, wherein I know right well your Christian and
constant resolution and forwardness, as to provoke others of your, or
inferior order, to whom that great and weighty business is committed, to
follow your steps, that thereby they may participate with you in the like
deserved praise, and so the Church fare the better for them; which they ought
to account (as it is indeed) their greatest glory: being that wherein Christian
Princes and Emperors in former times have much rejoiced, and striuen who
should therein exceed and surpass others. Besides this general respect,
which together

(...) THE CHRISTIANS GVIDE.
PROVER. 19.20. Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be
wise in thy latter end.

2 TIMOTHY 2.19. Let every one that calls on the name of Christ depart from
iniquity.


What preparation and reverence is to be used in Prayer and other holy and
religious Exercises.
IF men be to come into the presence of an earthly Prince, to put up a
supplication Mal. 1.8.9
unto him for something which they are desirous to obtain of him, or to hear
him speak unto them of somewhat which nearely concerns them, how careful
will they be to prepare themselves, in the best manner that can be, aforehand?
With what reverence will they present themselves before him? O then what care,
what preparation, what reverence is to be used of all men, when they are to
come before the King of glory, 1 Timothy 1.17 Dan. 2.47. Isa. 40.15.
the Lord of heaven and earth, the great God of the whole world, at whose
feet all Princes, and the mightiest monarchs in the world are to cast their
Crowns, and their Scepters, and to humble themselves with all reverent
submission both of body and soul, Isa. 45.23.
acknowledging themselves to be nothing unto him; yea, the brightness of whose
glory is so great, that those glorious Creatures, the Angels themselves, are
feign to veyle and to cover their faces in his presence: Isay 6.2.
Exodus 3.5. and 34.8. Psalm. 95.6.7 Mat. 26.39 Acts 20.36 Genesis 18.27
in what a holy and reverent manner ought they to present themselves before his
Majesty, either when they are to speak unto him in Prayer, or to hear him
speak unto them out of his Word, or to meditate upon his holy and righteous
ways and works, or to be acquainted with any part of his will, so as may
concern his glory or their good! They can never use too much diligence when
they prepare and address themselves unto this great and weighty business.

But alas (a grief it is unto one that has his heart well affected) who does
not see how exceeding careless and negligent most men are in this duty; yea,
how strangely and irreuerently they rush often into the presence of God, Eccl.
4.17.
without all preparation, yea, scarce once thinking or considering with
themselves, what they are, before whom it is that they are to stand, and what
business they have in hand; which if they did, sure it would make them to
stir up their lumpish and drowsy affections, and to settle themselves unto
it in another manner then they do; yea, with far more reverence and
preparation then if they were to appear before the greatest Monarch on earth,
and that when he were in his greatest State and Royalty, attended with all his
Nobles and Peers, in the most maiesticall manner that could be.

O most mighty and most glorious God, let me be always affected with the
consideration of thy glorious and divine presence, as I ought to be, especially
when I approach nearer unto thee, either to offer up my humble suites and
supplications by prayer unto thee, for the obtaining of grace and mercy at thy
hands, or to attend upon thee, in that holy ordinance of thine to hear thee
out of thy word, teaching me what thy will and pleasure is toward me, or to
be couersant in reading, meditation, or any other holy and religious exercise,
whereby I may be furthered in the ways of grace and salvation. Far be it
from me to thrust my self into thy holy and sacred presence (as the manner of
the profane and ungodly ones is) without a careful and conscionable endeavor
to have my heart rightly prepared, and my affections truly sanctified. O Lord,
this is not in my power more then in any other; it is thy grace only: let it
please thee therefore to give it unto me. Purge my heart, I beseech thee, from
all things which cause me to offend; free my mind from every thing, which
might be a cause of any distraction unto me; lift up my soul far above all
earthly cogitations and desires, and possess me with such an entire love, and
such a holy reverence of thy Majesty, that thou may always be truly
glorified of me, Leuit. 10.3
whenever I draw near unto thee, and enter into thy presence to perform any
duty which thou requirest of me. Hear me (O Lord) and that only for the
merits and mediation of thy Son, and my blessed Savior and Redeemer, Christ
Jesus: in whose Name alone, I pour out all my suites and supplications unto
thee, and look to obtain grace and mercy from thee.

Humility, the way to true knowledge and spiritual understanding.
MAny there be that have taken great pains, and been very industrious in
searching after many things, the knowledge and understanding whereof (although
excellent in it self, and worthy the laboring for) yet they could never
attain unto, because they sought not for it, with a meek and humble heart,
and with a purpose to use it to the right end, and for the greatest benefit
both of themselves and others, but for sinister and by-respects. They that are
most humble shall be best learned, and receive the greatest blessing in the use
of the means which God has appointed. The Lord reuealeth his secrets unto
them, Psalm. 25.9.
which are hid from the proud, Mat. 11.25 1 Cor. 2.11 12.
and such as are wise in their own eyes. They shall understand the wonderful
things of God, the great things of his Law, those deep Mysteries contained in
his word, even those things which the vvisest of this world, and the learned
Scribes amongst men cannot reach unto shall they comprehend and understand,
because the Lord has promised to give them the teaching of his Spirit, that
holy annoynting, 1 Ioh. 2.27
and will send down that light from above, which will so illuminate and
inlighten their minds, Ephe. 1.17 18 Ioh. 7.17.
that they shall see clearly into those things which are dark and obscure
unto others. Good Lord, I humbly bow the knee of my heart and soul before thy
glorious Majesty, suing unto thee earnestly and instantly in the mediation of
thy Son, for a further increase and a greater measure of that heavenly grace:
for this I will pray, yea, cry unto thee daily and incessantly. Do thou
therefore vouchsafe to grant it unto me, and more and more to increase it in
me. Give me a meek spirit, a lowly mind, and an humble heart, a heart which
may be set, not for the seeking of my self (for that were wickedness) but for
the advancement of thy glory, referring all my studyes and endeavors to the end
which thou have appointed that we should aim at continually; and then I know
that thou will reveal thy will unto me, and give me understanding of thy
word as far as is requisite and necessary for me; yea, that thou will cause
me to conceive and comprehend those things which are wonderful, and which none
can search into, or find out, but those alone that have thy Spirit to be their
teacher, which thou have promised unto them only that are of a meek spirit,
and of an humble mind, which is a thing exceeding pleasing unto thee, James
4.6.
and wherein thou much delightest, but abhorrest all those that are of a proud
heart, and deniest thy grace unto them.

Humility, the fruit of true saving knowledge.
HE that knows things aright as he ought to know them, especially if he has
attained unto the knowledge of himself, and of his maker; the better he
knows and understands these things, the more lowly, the more base and vile
will he be in his own eyes; and the more will he magnify and extol his
God, the Creator, and the Lord of all things. They are but smatterers, 1 Cor.
8.2 1 Timothy 6.20.
and nouices of true knowledge and understanding (whatsoever they may seem to
themselves or others) who have not as yet learned to esteem meanly of
themselves, Genesis 18.27. Isai. 40.17.
and very highly of the God of glory; the advancement of whom, is the chief
end, unto which all knowledge should tend and aim most directly. Grant O Lord,
that I may use all means whereby I may come unto that knowledge which is
necessary and convenient for me, especially that I may know my self aright,
even what I am in my self, and of my self; a worm of the earth, a wretched
and sinful man, dust and ashes; and thee, the mighty Creator and glorious God
of heaven and earth, the possessour of all things, infinite in power and
majesty, the brightness of whose glory the Angels themselves cannot fully
comprehend: that hereby I may learn always to humble and abase my self, and
to glorify and extol thy name for ever and ever.

The right use and end of all knowledge.
IT is an ordinary thing amongst men, to study rather to know much, then to
live well; from whence it comes (as every one that is of any discerning may
easily see and observe) that many, whiles they have their heads stuffed with
multiplicitie and variety of learning, yet have their lives barren, and
altogether fruitless and unprofitable. How do such deceive themselves? whiles
they profess themselves to be wise, Romans 1.22.
yet herein they show themselves very vain and foolish. A strange thing:
certain it is, that men being otherwise so learned and intelligent, yet in
this should show themselves to be so exceeding simple, and so grossly ignorant,
as not to know the maine end of all their knowledge; or else so ill disposed,
as if they know it, yet altogether to neglect it, or little to regard it.
Doubtless, knowledge is good and excellent in it self; a singular blessing,
and both given and appointed of God for the great benefit of mankind, such as
without which a man is scarce a man; and by which a man comes nearer unto
those heavenly natures; yea, does in some sort participate of the divine nature
it self, receiving thereby a print and stamp of the image of God, 2 Cor. 3.18.
1 Samuel 2.3.
who is infinite in wisdom and knowledge. Knowledge then is excellent; who
will deny it, but he that is very sottish and ignorant? and to be much
desired and sought for, and that with diligence of all that have means to
attain unto it, who will, not easily grant it, that is not deprived even of
sense and reason? But yet this we are to know also and acknowledge (as that
which is undeniable, and to be yielded unto of all) that action is to be
preferred before speculation; 1 Cor. 4.20. Mat. 7.24. Iam. 1.25. Romans 2.13
John. 8.51
the doing of things known before the mere notion it self; in brief, the
practice of a holy, a virtuous and religious life, before an idle, a bare and
naked knowledge, without conscience and practice: In the day of the last and
general judgment, it shall not be so much inquired of us, what our knowledge,
Math. 25.35. etc.
as what our works and actions have been; how much learning we had, as how
soberly, how righteously, and how religiously, we have lived in this present
world: This is that into which then especial inquiry shall be made, and
according unto which we shall then chiefly be judged. O Lord, give me the
knowledge of al those things which are meet and requisite to be known of me
vvhiles I live here below; give me the true understanding of thy word, and of
thy holy and blessed will which thou have therein declared and revealed unto
us: and as I know these things, so grant that I may be always careful with a
conscionable endeavor to practice and perform them; that so using the
knowledge which thou shall give me unto the right end which thou would
have us principally to intend and to aim at, even to the glory of thy name, in
vvalking before thee, and before all men in the course of a holy life, and of a
goodly and Christian conversation, I may hereafter be glorified of thee in that
celestial kingdom of thine, through the merits of Christ my Savior. Amen.

Another.
THe more knowledge that any has, the greater shall his condemnation be; if
he endeavor not to do those things which he knows. If he learneth not
thereby to live more holy, John. 9.40 41.
and to do the will of God in all things more perfectly, he shall be sure to be
beaten with more stripes, Luke 12.47.
and be more severely dealt with then those that are either altogether
ignorant, or else have not attained unto the like measure of knowledge that he
has. Small cause therefore have any to be puffed up in mind with self-conceit
for those things which he knows, but rather to be humbled and to fear the
greatness of the danger that he is in, if he be not much bettered in his life,
according to the measure and proportion of his knowledge. O heavenly Father,
give me to know that good, that acceptable, and that perfect will of thine; and
not to know it only, but to do it also, with all diligence, readiness, and
cheerfulness, even as the Saints and Angels in heaven do; that thus I may not
only avoid the curse which otherwise would fall upon me, but also receive
that blessing which thou have promised: Ioh. 13.17
If you know these things, blessed are ye, if you do them.

Divine contemplation.
AMong all creatures here below, Man, only bears the image of God his
Creator, and has his countenance erected and lifted up to heauen-ward, that so
being given to a contemplative life, he might think often of his ascent into
those heavenly places, where there is only true peace and perfect happiness
in the fruition of that glorious presence; and in the mean time whiles he
lies here below in a strange land, as one that is in exile and banishment out
of his own country, 2 Cor. 5.6.7.8. Heb. 11.13
be taken up with the frequent and serious cogitation of those things whereby
he might every day be more fitted and prepared for that long journey into his
blessed home, those celestial mansions: But alas (so has Satan prevailed
with the most, having great advantage from the perverseness of their disordered
and corrupted nature) that almost every man (as if they had forgot themselves)
neglecting or little regarding the contemplation and meditation of things
spiritual and heavenly; even from their youth up follow their own ways, and
in a very strange and preposterous manner pervert the end of their creation, and
abode here in this world, during that short moment of time, which he who is
the rule of all time has measured out unto them; Habak. 2.6 Psalm. 4.6.
one addicting himself to base vvorldlinesse, as if there were no other riches
then these fading and transitory things which shall soon perish: Eccles.
11.9. Luke 12.19
another to voluptuousness, pouring out himself to vain and sinful
pleasures and delights, as if there were no happiness elsewhere to be found:
another to ambition, Judge. 9.2. 2 Samuel 15.2.3. 1 Kin. 1.5. Este. 3.5. and 5.13.
etc.
fondly doting upon the painted shape of the entising and bewitching honors
and preferments of this mutable and changing world, in which there is no
stabilitie, no steadfastness: and others giving themselves over to more
grievous and fearful sins; and which is worst of all, lying and continuing in
them, without any sense or feeling of them, or purpose to return, and to leave
and forsake them: and so (as if there were no felicity, nor misery, but on
the earth, on which they tread, Jude 10.
and lie groueling in a brutish sort) spend their days as unprofitable
burdens thereof, and falling from the dignity and excellent estate whereunto
they were created, become like the beasts that perish, nay worse. A woeful
case, and to be lamented even with tears, of those that have Wisdom and
Understanding to see into these things, and to consider of them aright. Many
there be that are wholly drowned in these outward and earthly things; few that
set themselves to seek after the chief good, and that which is most to be
desired of all those that are the sons of wisdom. Blessed Lord, keep me
from the folly and vanity of the world, who walk in such blind and
dangerous paths. Give me eyes to discern of the true good, that whereunto I
was created; and let my heart be wholly set upon the same: let me not be led as
the brute beast is, with those things which are sensible and carnal, but as
in mercy and goodness thou have stamped thine own Image in me; and set my
face to thee-wards, so Lord, let me always be looking up unto thee, and
meditating of those things which are spiritual and heavenly, Psalm. 119.148.
that so after a few days spent here below on this sinful earth, in these
earthly cottages, where there is nothing but misery and vanity; I may live
with thee above in those celestial mansions, and enjoy that glory and
happiness which is endless and unspeakable, and that only through the
merits of thy Son my blessed Savior and Redeemer, who has purchased so
great things for me, and to whom with thee and thy gracious spirit be all
praise and glory, both now and evermore. Amen.

The end of the Preface.
Election.
WHY the LORD has elected us unto life, and suff^red others to walk in the
way unto death and everlasting perdition; there can no reason be given but
only this, that it was his own good will and pleasure: Romans 9.11 and 11.5.
Gal. 4.9. 2 Timothy 1.9 Ephesians. 1.5. Iam. 1.18.
it is so because it pleased him it should be so. Oh then how infinitely are
the Lords chosen bound unto him, in that he has taken them unto himself, and
let go thousands of others, who deserved this favor at his hands as much as
they did? How should their hearts be inflamed toward him, for that so free and
unspeakable love and kindness toward them? How should it even enforce them
to seek by all means to testify their unfeigned love and thankfulness unto
him for the same? Romans 15.36. Ephesians. 1.6. Col. 1.12.
O blessed Lord, how vvonderfull is thy goodness toward me? how unsearchable
are the riches of thy free grace, which through thy Christ thou have vouchsafed
unto me, denying the same unto others, who might have made as good claim unto
it as I. Thou have written my name in the book of life, when thou might have
suffered me to have my part and portion amongst those that being rejected and
forsaken of thee, and cast out of thy presence, shall perish and be damned for
evermore. Thou have chosen me unto life and salvation before all worlds,
without any merits or deserts of mine; even because it pleased thee, O Father,
and because thou had a love unto me: thou have chosen me to be one of that
small number, that little flock of thine, Luke 12.32
for whom thou have prepared a kingdom, and in whom thou will make the riches
of thy grace and glory to appear in most glorious manner. Oh what shall I
return unto thee, Psa. 116.12
answerable unto this marvelous love and goodness of thine toward me? O do
thou affect my heart with it continually, and let the remembrance thereof
constrain me to love thee, to reverence thee, to sing praises unto thee, yea
to seek by all means to glorify thee, being fervent in the duties of piety
and holiness, which thou have commanded, and fruitful in all those good
works which thou have prepared for me to walk in. Grant this I beseech
thee, for thy mercies sake, and for the merits of thy dear Son, my blessed
Lord and Savior, in whom thou imbracedst me from everlasting, with so great
love and fatherly compassions: and to whom with thee and that good spirit of
thine, which has sealed the assurance hereof unto me, be ascribed, as due is,
all honor, 2 Cor. 1.22.
glory, praise, Majesty and dominion, both now and for ever, Amen.

Those that are elected unto life and salvation, are elected also unto the
means whereby to attain unto the same.
IF GOD has ordained me unto life, says the careless and secure wretch, I
shall be saved, do I what I will, or live I how I list; and if otherwise I
must needs be damned, do I what I can, or what course soever I take: and
therefore soul live at ease, Eccl. 11.9.
sport thy self in the pleasures and delights of sin, walk in the ways of
thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, let all grief be put far from
thee, take no thought for the time to come, for howsoever thy life be, thou
shall surely come unto the end which is appointed for thee, and whereunto thou
art destinated and ordained of old. O vain man, how has Satan deluded thee?
yea, how wilfully and foolishly do thou deceive thy self, and beguile thine
own soul, whilst thou reasonest after such a fond and strange manner;
thereby laying a snare, with which, if thou bewarest not in time, thou art sure
to be entangled, to thy utter confusion? Deuteronomy. 29.19.20.
See thy folly: If God has decreed that thou shall live any longer, thou shall
live till the date of that time be expired which he has appointed, though
thou neither eat nor drink, nor use any means to preserve thy life: and if
he has decreed that thou shall die shortly, thou must needs dye then, what
means soever thou seek to continue and prolong thy life: will thou
therefore hereupon refuse thy meat, and neglect the means whereby thy life
should be maintained and preserved, reasoning with thy self in this wise: if
God has appointed that I shall live, then I shall live without the use of
these; and if otherwise, I must dye of necessity, all the world cannot help
me: would not thine own reason convince thee of great senslesnesse herein?
and would not all that should hear of thee, condemn thee for thy simplicity;
yea, extreme folly, in that as one destitute of all understanding, thou
would through such a sottish opinion, break in sunder the thread of thy
life before the time, and even wilfully hasten thine own destruction, and in a
desperate mood dig a pit for to bury thy self in before thou were dead;
yea, when as thou might yet see many days in the Land of the living.

Good Lord, although the foolish and ungodly perish in their vain and wicked
imaginations, yet let not any of thy servants fall into their snares, but give
true wisdom and understanding unto all those that love and fear thy Name.
Grant that as we desire the end which we hope for, even life and glory in
thy Kingdom, so we may be always careful to use those means duly, Ephesians.
1.4. 1 Pet. 1.2.
whereby we may attain unto the same, working out our salvation with fear
and trembling; and that as we are desirous to escape death and destruction, so
we may be as careful to shun those things which are the cause and procurers
thereof, and to avoid those paths which lead directly to the congregation of
the dead and damned. Thus doing we shall not dye, but live and be saved
eternally.

The Book of Nature.
NExt unto the Book of Books, the sacred and holy Scriptures, which are
written with the finger of the Spirit of God, and wherein the manifold and
unsearchable wisdom of God, and those great and glorious mysteries are most
clearly revealed to them that have eyes to behold them: Ephe. 3.9.10.
Next unto this, the heavens are the clearest and fairest Book that we can
open or read in. Thence we may learn what profound and excellent knowledge;
yea, he that has skill of never a Letter, may herein read distinctly the
magnificence, ^^b 37.23. ^^al. 19.1.
the power, the wisdom, the glory and majesty of the Almighty Lord and
Creator of all things. ^^m. 1.20
He is altogether inexcusable, that has no skill, no desire, no endeavor, to
gather instruction unto himself out of it; or that having it so long open
before him, shows himself to be a Non-proficient, one that is nothing at all
bettered by it, in regard of his knowledge and understanding of those things
which concern GOD, and his Worship and Service. Lord, let that Book of thine
be never closed or sealed unto me; neither let mine eyes be so dim, that I
should not be able to read those things which thou have written therein in
such great and Capital Letters, and with such a clear and legible hand: but
give me the right understanding of the same, and grant that from thence I may
learn to fear, to love, to praise, and extol thy great and glorious Name,
who art so exceeding vvonderfull in all thy works.

Gods marvelous workmanship in the frame of the world.
IF thou see a stately Palace, or some rare and exquisite frame, wrought by
the hand and by the curious Art of man, thou do presently vvonder and admire
at it, and vvithall give large commendations of him whose workmanship it was.
Lo, thou beholdest every day that most exquisite and glorious frame of heaven
and earth, the work of Gods own hand; Psalm. 8.3. and 135.6.
the roof whereof is bespangled and adorned with those celestial creatures,
Eccle. 3.11
those glorious Lights, the Sun, the Moon, and all those bright and
glittering Stars, in which the wonderful glory and wisdom of the Creator
shines forth so clearly, Psalm. 104.24. and 111.2.
that even the blind Heathen could not but see and acknowledge it; yea, the
whole building whereof, even every part of it, is most admirable, such as that
it shows plainly, that it had no other to be the Maker and builder of it
then GOD himself; Job 38.
and yet thou never or seldom look upon it with an holy admiration, thou
art never moved with the serious consideration of it, to acknowledge the great
and vvondrous work of God therein, and to magnify the Creator of all things.
O the blindness and senslesnesse, nay, Psalm. 92.5.6.
brutishnes of man! Lord, do thou raise up my thoughts to the due meditation
of thy unspeakable wisdom, power, goodness and mercy in those things which
thou have created and made for thine own glory, and for the use and benefit
of man; even those wonders of thine in the heaven, the earth, the sea and all
places: Psalm. 107.12.24. Romans 1.20
Let me in them see the invisible things of thee who art God and Lord of all,
even the infinite power and glory of thy eternal and incomprehensible Deity:
Job. 26.14
Let me acknowledge thy goodness and mercy toward me (a worm of the earth)
for whose sake thou have made heaven and earth; yea, let me never cease to
praise and glorify thee, whose name is so excellent in all the world, who
art Creator and Governor of all things, holy and blessed for ever. Amen.

The creatures provoke man to serve his Creator.
ALL creatures serve their Lord and maker. The birds of the air by their
pleasant notes and cheereful melody, sing praise unto their Creator; Psalm. 104.
the fishes of the Sea, the beasts of the field, by serving for the use of man
according to the ordinance and appointment of God. Even the creatures without
sense and life, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars; all these keep their
places, their motions which he has assigned unto them; al these declare the
glory of God their maker, and show forth his power and wisdom. Psalm. 145.10.
Man only is found disobedient, unserviceable; nay, rebellious against his
Creator, who of all should chiefly be serviceable and obedient unto him, since
all things were made for his sake, even to draw him to love, to duty and
obedience, that so he might glorify his Creator who had so highly honored
and advanced him. Ierem. 8.7.
O blessed Lord, far be it from me, to be more senseless then the brute
beasts, yea, the insensible creatures themselves. O let it be far from me, to
be so unkind, so undutiful, so ungrateful, so stubborn and disobedient
toward thee my God, my Creator, my Father, my Sovereign, to whom I owe all
service and homage; yea, let me pass the beasts in duty and obedience, or
else even they (those dumb and unreasonable creatures) shall be witnesses to
testify against me, and cause thee to proceed in judgment, Psalm. 8.4.5.
and to give sentence with more rigor and severity to my deeper condemnation.

The greatness of the benefit of the redemption of mankind by Christ, and how
much we are bound unto God for the same.
IF any one of us were taken by his enemy, put into a dark prison or deep
dungeon, where he could see no light of the Sun, or of the Moon, not any of
the Stars for a long season; and besides this, were laden also with many
heavy chains and yrons, and no ways able to help himself out of that misery,
yea, in regard of any means which himself could use were clean out of all
hope ever to be delivered, sure to rot and perish; would he not think
himself much beholding, and greatly indebted unto him that should freely of
his own love and voluntary accord seek to bring him out of that woeful
estate, unto light, life, and liberty; especially, if so be that he that did
him this favor were one of whom he never deserved any thing: yea, to whom he
had been a professed and open enemy? 1 Timothy 1.17 Revel. 4.10.11.
O then how much more ought we (even all such as are the chosen of God, and
the redeemed of Christ Jesus) to magnify the grace and the tender mercy of
God our Savior toward us? how deeply are we to acknowledge our selves to be
indebted unto him for the exceeding riches of his love and unspeakable
kindness toward us? how are we to praise his name, and to extol his infinite
goodness and bounty, so graciously vouchsafed, and so manifestly declared unto
us; seeing that no prison, no darkness, no bondage, no misery, is, Isai.
42.6.7. Zach. 9.11.
or can be like unto that wherein we were enclosed, and shut fast up,
without all hope of ever enjoying the light of that glorious Sun of
righteousness, or once beholding the bright beams of that rich grace and
mercy of God, which now shine so clearly and so comfortably upon us in the
face of Christ Jesus our Lord; and seeing that we being holden under sin and
Satan, and sitting in the shadow of death, were never able in any wise, by
any means whatsoever procured by our selves or others (Angels, or any creature
else) to have recovered our selves, but should have lain rotting in that woeful
and damnable estate, and so have perished eternally, if God of his mere love
had not vouchsafed special grace and favor unto us, and that when we were
his enemies, Romans 5.10 Isay. 49.9. Luke. 1.79.
and freed, and redeemed us from that miserable bondage and thraldom, yea,
from the power of darkness, even death and destruction it self, and
translated us into that glorious liberty of his Saints in light; and this by
no small or ordinary means, 1 Pet. 1.18.
but by the shedding of the precious blood of Christ his dear son our blessed
Savior, who loved us, and according to the determinate counsel and decree of
God, gave himself to be crucified and slain for us; even for us that had
dealt most treacherously and rebelliously against him, and made our selves
altogether unworthy of the least mercy and favor of his. O merciful God,
heavenly father, give me to see what, and how great this benefit is which I
have received from thee, in and through thy Christ. Let me ever be mindful of
it, and unfeignedly thankful unto thee for it; yea, as this bountiful and
inestimable goodness of thine toward me (so sinful a wretch, and so
unworthy a creature as I am, and have been) deserves all praise, so let me
endeavor by all means to set forth and to publish the same, unto the glory of
thy grace, whereby in the riches of thy love, through thy beloved, thou have
done so great and wonderful things for me, for which I can never be
sufficiently thankful, nor return that praise which is most due unto thee.
Oh that thou would draw me yet nearer unto thee, and cause me even to melt
in love toward thee my God and Savior, and with heart, voice, and life to
magnify and extol thy name; yea, to give up my self both body and soul, and
all that is within me, unto thy service, and to the advancement of thy glory,
both now and ever, Amen.

Thankfulness to God for all his favors toward us, especially that
wonderful love of his in our redemption.
IF GOD had given us nothing but our being, we ought to be stirred up with the
remembrance of that alone, to be thankeful unto him, and to acknowledge his
mercy and goodness toward us herein. But now, seeing that he makes us
Lords of all these senseless and unreasonable creatures, Psalm. 8.6.
whereas he might have made us brutish, and void of sense and reason, like
unto them, 21.
(for we were all made of the same common matter with them, and were in his
hands as the clay in the hand of the potter to be wrought to what form and
fashion it pleased him the Creator of all things; 42.
) seeing he has preferred us before all these visible creatures, making them
to serve us, whereas he might have subjected us unto them; and in every
creature both in heaven and earth, does sparkle toward us his love with
innumerable benefits: yea, (which is the sum of all,) in Christ upon the
Cross, casts forth the flame of perfect charity, and of his infinite and
unspeakable mercy and kindness toward us; sure our hearts are frozen and
even dead within us, if we be not moved to love him with an entire and
unfeigned love. How should we be affected with these things? O blessed LORD
touch my heart with a true and lively sense and feeling of the riches of that
endless and incomprehensible love of thine toward me: enlarge this narrow
heart of mine, that I may be able in some measure with all thy Saints to
comprehend the breadth, Ephesians. 3.18.19
length, depth and height of that wonderful and vnspeakeale kindness of thine
toward me in thy Christ which passes all knowledge. Inflame my affections
with the meditation thereof, and let me be constrained thereby to love thee
with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength; ever to acknowledge
thy free grace and marvelous goodness toward me, and for the same to sing
praises unto thee continually, who only art worthy to be praised and magnified
now and for ever, Amen.

Who are the redeemed of Christ.
THey that are Christ's are led by the spirit of Christ, that dwells in them,
rules them, Romans 8.9.14
gouernes and sanctifies them thorowout. It freeth them from the law of sin
and death, and causes them to live the life of grace and holiness: Romans 8.2.
they are crucified with Christ, in regard of their corrupt and fleshly nature,
and the sinful lusts and affections thereof; Gal. 2.19. and 5.24. 1 Cor.
3.16.17. 2 Cor. 6.16.
so that they live not now (as they did before) but Christ lives in them, and
makes them a mansion and a holy temple, fitted and prepared for the blessed
and glorious God, to rest and to abide in for evermore. This is a truth that
the Scriptures of God have sealed, and therefore cannot be denied, or once
doubted of, except we will give the lie unto the spirit of truth it self, who
has spoken it. Whose then are they that are led altogether by the spirit of
the world (even that wicked spirit that works in the hearts of the children
of disobedience) by the spirit of envy, Ephesians. 2.2.
maliciousness, uncleanness, profaneness, etc. walking after their own
lusts, following the sway of their own corrupt and sinful nature, and
delighting in fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the mind, resisting the
spirit of grace, and rebelling against Christ, Luke 19.14
and that light which he has revealed unto them, in his word; so that they
will not have him to rule over them? Surely, Luke 19.14 1 Ioh. 3.8.10.
they are exceeding blind, and marvelous full of self-love and vain
presumption, if they can think that they are Christ's, redeemed by his blood,
and justified by his grace: nay, if they can once imagine themselves to be
otherwise then of Satan (the god of this world) such as (if they continue in
that estate wherein they are) he will cause to be slain before his face, Luke
19.27 Romans 8.13
when he shall appear in the brightness of his glory; yea, Psalm. 2.9. 2
These. 1.8 Matt. 25.46.
bruise and crush them in pieces, as it were, with a rod of iron, and cast
them into hell, where they shall be kept for ever in chains of darkness with
the rest of those damned spirits, because they have taken part with Satan
against Christ, and showed themselves to be enemies to him, in refusing to
believe and obey his blessed Gospel. Let not therefore their own hearts
(which are very deceitful) nor Satan (who has been a liar and a murderer
from the beginning) deceive and delude them any longer. Iere. 17.9.
John 8.4.
Let them know what they are, and whose they are; and let them (as they have
cause) fear and tremble, whiles they think of it, and labor by all means to
dispossess that evil spirit that heretofore has had the rule and sway over
them, and in stead thereof to have the holy and sanctifying spirit of God
dwelling and abiding in them, crucifying and mortifying their wicked and
corrupt nature, quickening them unto a spiritual life, and leading them
forward continually to the constant and conscionable practice of all the duties
of righteousness and holiness required of them, that hereby they may have the
Lords seal set upon them, Romans 8.14
and be marked out for the redeemed of Christ Jesus, those whom he has bought
from this world and Satan, to live with him in glory for ever. Gracious LORD,
as it has pleased thee of thy free and undeserved grace to redeem me by the
blood of Christ my Savior, and to unite me to him by a true, saving, and
justifying faith, apprehending and laying hold of his merits and absolute
satisfaction for my full reconciliation unto thee; so vouchsafe also in the
riches of thy mercies, and for thy promise and covenant sake, Ier. 32.40. Ezekiel.
36.26.27.
made with me in that beloved One, to indue me with the spirit of Christ unto
true sanctification and holiness both of heart, of life, and of conversation:
pour out those clean waters upon my soul, which may purge and cleanse me
from all iniquity; let me find the flesh daily more and more crucified in
me, with the sinful lusts and affections thereof; and let me feel the
spirit powerful and effectual in me; yea, mightily prevailing within me, to
the mortifying and abolishing of the old man of sin, and to the subduing of
every corruption, especially those which heretofore have been the strongest in
me, and had the greatest hand over me; as also to the quickening and
increasing of every saving grace in me, faith, love, hope, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, sobriety, temperance,
patience, godliness and the rest: that so not only living, but also walking
in the spirit; yea, having the spirit of thy Christ ruling and reigning in me,
I may be more assured daily, upon good evidence, that I am not of the world,
nor of Satan, but that I am a true and lively member of the mystical body of
the Lord Jesus, redeemed by his precious blood, shed for me; that I am his and
he is mine, Cant. 2.16 Ioh. 17. ver. 10.23* 24. Ephesians. 2.6 and 4.10. Ioh.
14.2.3.
and that together with him after a while, I shall be raised up unto those
heavenly places, into which he is already ascended, and where I shall enjoy
that blessed fellowship and communion of thee the everliving God, in the
fullness of joy and blessedness, lauding and praising thee incessantly with
all thy chosen Saints and elect Angels for evermore, and that only through the
merits of my blessed Savior, to whom with thee, O Father, and thy gracious
Spirit, three distinct persons, but one most wise ^^d glorious God, be ascribed
(as due is) all honor, might, and majesty, dignity and dominion, both now
and evermore. Amen.

Hypocrisy, the vanity and danger of it.
HOW great is the folly of those that choose rather to serve God in hypocrisy
then in truth and sincerity; to seem to be holy, then to be so indeed? They
please not God; yea, rather they are an abomination unto him, Psalm. 5.6.
his soul loathes them, because they make the outward badge and cognizance of
his children a cloak of their impiety and wickedness. They want that which
is the life of a Christian, true spiritual comfort, and constant and heavenly
joy. Job 20.5.
They lose that blessed reward which is promised unto them; and them only
that walk in uprightness and singleness of heart before him: Genesis 17.1 Prou.
10.9
and that vizzard which through vanity they have put upon them, to delude the
world withal, shall at length be plucked off from their faces, to their shame
and perpetual reproach and infamy. For that which is fained and counterfeit
cannot stand long; Mat. 21.19
and it is a true saying, He that begins Religion in Hypocrisy, ends in
Apostasy. O blessed LORD, let my heart be always upright before thee. Let it
be my desire ever rather to be more then I seem to be, then to seem to be
that which I am not, (for alas what will it avail me to dissemble before
thee my God, who art of so cleer^ eyes that nothing can be covered or hid from
thee, Job. 26.6.
who art the seer and the searcher of the very heart and reins, Heb. 4.13.
Pro. 15.11
and discernest the secretest thoughts and intents of the mind and soul; yea,
long before they are.) O far be it from me to turn aside into crooked ways
with those that are workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125.5
Job. 15.34 and 27.8. Matthew. 24.51. and 23.27.
whom thou hate, and to whom thou have threatened endless and everlasting
destruction and confusion without recovery; but let it be my continual care
and endeavor to serve thee in spirit and in truth all my days, and to walk
continually as in thy presence, seeking to please thee, and to increase more
and more in all the fruits of righteousness and perfect holiness, that so my
whole course may be acceptable unto thee, I may be filled with the joys of
thy spirit here, Job. 8.21. and 15.11.
(those sweet and heavenly refreshings which the hypocrite may talk of, but
never soundly tasted of) and be crowned with glory hereafter in thy kingdom
for evermore, Amen.

God bears with the frailties and weaknesses of his Children.
PARENTS delight in their Children, not only when they are come to man's
estate, but also when they begin first to creep on the ground, and to speak
some few words in an imperfect manner. And will GOD our heavenly Father
despise the poor endeavors of his vveake and little ones, Psalm. 119.5
who cry unto him continually for strength and ability to perform that which
he requires of them, Romans 7.24.
and grieve, yea, mourn incessantly that they are not able to walk with more
steadfastness and sincerity in his ways. Far be it from us, once to think
or imagine this: for what were this else, then to make the Lord less
pitiful, Psalm. 86 15 and 145.8.
less tenderly affected and compassionate toward his, then earthly Parents
are unto theirs; the very thought whereof is no small sin, but exceeding
displeasing unto him, whose love toward his children does infinitely surpass
and exceed the natural affection of any Parent whatsoever, Psalm. 27.10
even as far as the heavens exceed the earth; Psalm. 103.11.13.
(their love being but a shadow of that which is in him in an infinite and
unspeakable manner;) yea, what were it else, then to call his truth and
faithfulness into question, and to deny him to be that which he has declared
and revealed himself to be, and bound himself by promise, Exodus 34.6.7. Mal.
3.17.
to show himself to be unto his, whom he has chosen unto himself, and upon
whom his delight is set; yea, it were to derogate from his glory, seeing he
will be glorified as well in the acknowledgement of his goodness and mercy
toward his children that fear him, Pro. 8.31.
as of his justice and severity toward the wicked and ungodly that know him
not.

Blessed Lord, and gracious Father, thou know the desire of my heart; Psa.
119.40
thou see with how many weaknesses and infirmities I am compassed about
continually, how many lets and hindrances are cast before me in the way of
godliness, which leads unto life and salvation; thou discernest perfectly
what I am made of, Psa. 103.14
how frail and feeble my nature is, even as the dust, or as the withering hay;
into what form and mould I am cast, yea, that I am nothing without thee, and
thy quickening and strenthening grace; ready to sin against thee every hour,
every moment. O be thou merciful unto me, spare me as thou have promised, as a
Father does his little ones in whom he delights. Pardon my sins, heal my
infirmities, accept my weak and imperfect endeavors, give me a continual
supply of thy heavenly grace, and a greater measure of strength and ability to
walk before thee with a perfect heart, and to serve thee with cheerfulness,
and alacrity and in truth and sincerity all my days, until I come at length
unto that perfection both of grace and glory, whereof I shall be made partaker
in thy Kingdom for ever. Amen.

Good Motions.
EVery good motion arising at any time in the heart of any one, is the voice of
God himself, Isay 30.21
speaking inwardly unto the soul and conscience of man, and therefore never to
be lightly accounted of, much less to be smothered, or wilfully resisted and
gainsaid (for that is a most fearful thing, Ierem. 6.16. and 18.12.
even rebellion against God, and the voice of his spirit which speaks in
them, and unto them) but always diligently to be harkened unto, and by all
means to be embraced and cherished, that so it may become effectual, and not
die and vanish away without fruit or profit, to the hardening of the heart, and
the making of it the more incapable of grace and goodness; the ordinary and
most fearful judgment which the Lord usually brings upon men for so great
a wickedness. Romans 1.28 Psalm. 106.15. and 81.12.13. 1 These. 5.19.
Good Lord, suffer me not at any time to quench thy spirit, to resist that
heavenly voice of thine speaking unto me according unto thy word, least thou
give me over to hardness of heart; Cant. 5.2.
but whenever thou do knock at the door of my heart and soul, Reave. 3.20
let me be ready presently to open unto thee, and to give thee the best
entertainment that I can, by yielding my self euery-waies pliable and flexible
unto thee: whensoever thou do inspire me with any good motion or holy
desire, grant that I may use all means whereby the same may be quickened and
increased, that so thine own work may daily be more and more perfected in me.

Yielding to the wicked motions and desires of the heart.
THe vain and wicked desires of the heart can never be satisfied; yea, Isa.
57.20.
the more that any does feed them, the more insatiable shall he find them. He
can never be filled, never have enough of them. Who sees not this most clearly
in the covetous, the voluptuous, the ambitious, yea, in all such as give the
reins unto their own sinful and inordinate affections. It is as it were a
fire in their bones, which will never be quenched, till the fuel which
ministers continually new matter unto it be quite taken away. It is as it were
the flame of hell, kindled by Satan himself, to the scorching of the
conscience, which is drowned in these earthly, these sinful, and these sensual
delights. It is like a greedy worm which continually lies gnawing upon the
soul, and in time will eat out the very heart and intrals, if the evil be not
timely prevented. O blessed Lord, withdraw my heart I beseech thee, daily more
and more from these lying and deceitful vanities, which can never yield me any
true contentment, but rather be a cause of torment and vexation unto me,
robbing me not only of thy grace but of my peace also, seeing my mind can
never be satisfied with them. And grant that the desires of my heart may be
set wholly upon thee, who art the fountain of all goodness, of all true
bliss and happiness, that so I may be satisfied and replenished with the
plentifulnesse and abundant riches of thy grace and heavenly blessings, Romans
2.10 Gal. 6.6.
and have thy peace and mercy resting upon me, and abiding with me all my
days. Amen.

How fearful a thing it is for a man to be left unto himself, and to his
own desires.
THere can no greater evil befall any man in this world, then to be left unto
himself, Psalm. 81.12 Isai. 1.5. and 63.17.
unto his own will and ways, and to the corrupt desires and affections which
are most pleasing to his wicked heart and unsanctified nature. Of all
judgments which the Lord does suffer to come upon men in this life, it is the
greatest and most dangerous, though through the marvelous blindness and
sottishness that is in men, least either discerned, or feared of the most.
Better were it for them by any means to be restrained from those things which
their corrupt nature is prone unto; yea, better were it for them to be held
down continually with some painful sickness and grievous disease, or to be
laid fast up in close prison all their lives long, and to endure the greatest
outward misery that can be, unto their dying hour. O blessed Lord, give me not
over unto the ways of mine own heart (an insensible, but of all judgments
the most fearful) leave me not unto my self, suffer me not at any time to
wander and go astray from thee by following those things which are good in
mine own eyes, and pleasing unto carnal and corrupt reason; O let me never
fall into so great an evil, but be thou merciful unto me to order and dispose
all my affections, to guide and govern me with thy spirit, and to direct my
steps according unto the rule of thy holy and blessed word; that so being
kept and preserved by thee from those sins whereunto of my self I am prone
and inclinable, and established in every good way and work, I may glorify
theein my life, and find joy and comfort in my death, and after death live and
reign with thee eternally in fullness of all glory and happiness, through the
merits of Christ my Savior.

The many differences between a natural and a spiritual man, one that is
truly sanctified.
What difference is there between a carnal and natural man, and him that is
spiritual and truly regenerate How opposite and contrary are they in their
thoughts, desires, inclinations, proiects, purposes, and practices; in brief,
in the whole course and carryage of their lives? It is wonderful to observe
and see how exceedingly they differ, what a marvelous contrariety there is
between them: the natural man does always eye those things which are visible
and temporal; the spiritual, 2 Cor. 4.18 Heb. 11.1.27
those things especially which are invisible and eternal. The natural man
does delight altogether in the creatures, and in fulfilling the wicked lusts
and vain desires of his own heart, Mat. 24.38 1 Pet. 4.4. Genesis 19.9
and therefore never grieueth more then when he is most crossed in those
courses which he so much affects; Psalm. 33.21 Psalm. 37.4. and 95.1. 1 Samuel
30.6.
but the spiritual man's chief delight is in the Creator, the fountain of all
true pleasure and delight; and in feeding his soul with good thoughts, 1 Pet.
1.3.6.
blessed hopes, holy desires, and divine and heavenly meditations, Psa. 119.97
with which he can never be satiated; whereas for all earthly vanities he
has a great distaste, Gal. 6.14.
and a base esteem of them, or at least, he looks over them with a kind
of holy disdain; he does not so much affect them, but that he does earnestly
desire and endeavor to restrain his mind from the sinful and inordinate love
of them, and never thinks himself better at ease, then when he can most
weane his affections from them, Eccle. 2.17
and crucify that corrupt nature of his, with the wicked motions and
concupiscence thereof, Gal. 5.24.
then which he finds nothing more grievous and burdensome unto him, or from
which he has a greater desire to be altogether freed. Romans 7.24
The natural man is led with the spirit of Satan, Ephesians. 2.2
and of this world, which rules and reigns; yea, rages in him: the
spiritual man is led by the Spirit of Christ and of God, Romans 8.9.14.
that holy and sanctifying Spirit of grace; which dwells in him, rules,
gouernes, and directs him, and leads him forth into the vvayes of
righteousness and holiness. The natural man does wholy wed himself to the
world, Hosea 2.5. James 4.4.
and therefore savors nothing but the things of this earth, Ioh. 3.31. Romans
8.5.
dotes fondly upon them, and lies groueling upon this slime and baser molde,
like a Mucke-vvorme, vainly supposing that there can be no greater happiness
then to enjoy abundantly the pleasures, honors, preferments, profits, and
commodities thereof; and therefore being foolishly enamoured, Phil. 3.19. 2
Pet. 2.19
or rather strangely besotted, with the vvhorish love of it, does in a base and
sordid manner even deuore himself to the service of it: But the spiritual man
does not so love the world, but that (when he has his eyes in his head,) he
flies from it, as far as with conuenience he may, knowing the vanity, and
the exceeding both danger and deceitfulness of it; 1 Timothy 6.9 10.17. Eccles.
1.2.14. 1 Cor. 7.31 Psa. 119.19 Heb. 11.9. Phil. 3.20. Gal. 6.14.
he uses it as if he used it not, makes himself a stranger to it, and had
rather utterly renounce and give it over, and be divorced and quite separated
from it, then be so much yoaked unto it as he sees others are, or tied with
so strait bonds of love and amity as that seeks to chain and fasten him
unto it, and so to draw him to a more near and entire union with it then he
desires; yea, so contrary is it to his mind to be matched or joined in any
league with it, that he accounts himself most happy when he has least to
do with it, and most freed from the encumbrances of it; that so he may soar
aloft, and have more fellowship and communion with God, and greater liberty
wholly to deuote himself to his worship and service, assuredly persuading
himself, that herein and in nothing else consists true felicity and
happiness, and therefore vvisely makes it his chief treasure, that which he
esteems far above all other things. The natural man seeks for comfort
and contentment only in sensible and external things; the spiritual, Eccl.
11.9. Luke 12.9.29. and 16.19 Psalm. 4.6.7 and 37.4.
in the inward graces of Gods Spirit, and in the assurance of his love and
favor, which is a greater joy and refreshing unto him then all other things
whatsoever? Yea, the sweetness of the world is bitterness to him in
comparison of this. Phil. 2.21.
The natural man seeks his own private good, that which may be most for
thee advancement of his outward state in the world; his own credit, honor,
profit and commodity, without any respect unto others, the care of whom he
thinks little or nothing appertains unto him, if they be not such as nature
has linked and chained unto him by such bonds as the very Heathen themselves
would not break. But the spiritual and regenerate man seeks the good of
others, 1 Cor. 24.33. 1 Cor. 13.5
as well as his own, yea, he does rather desire (if he may conveniently do it)
to benefit many others then himself alone, since he knows well that he was
not borne for himself, but for others also, and that he is no less bound to
others then to himself, James. 2.8.
and therefore not only to wish, but, as far as he can, to procure their
good with the same affection that he does his own. The natural man cares not
how much, or how often he offends or prouokes others, so that he may please
himself, and satisfy his own lusts, yea, it is a pastime to him many times
to grieve, disquiet, and molest others, and those especially that are most
innocent and harmless, Psalm. 56.5. and 97.4. Psalm 59.3. and 64.4.
neither thinking nor speaking, much less working any evil against him, but
rather praying for him, and seeking and desiring his good. The spiritual man
on the contrary is very loath to give offense unto any, yea, to the meanest and
simplest ones; 2 Cor. 6.3. 1 Cor. 10.33. 1 Ioh. 2.20 Romans 15.2 1 Cor. 8.13. 2
Cor. 6.3 2 Cor. 13.5.
he seeks to please his neighbor as well as himself, and had rather do or
suffer that which would be some ways inconvenient to him, then that his weak
brother should be displeased or offended at him; he is very wise and wary this
ways; so far is he from delighting to grieve or provoke others, that he is
much grieved when he sees that others take occasion (where there is none
given) to be grieved and displeased with him, or by means of him; and seeks
presently in a loving affection toward them to heal that wound, and to salve
that sore which they have rather brought upon themselves then taken from him.
The natural man does scarce love his best friends, except it be carnally and
in worldly respects, Psalm. 41.6.9. and 62.4.
so far as he may make use of them, and receive some benefit by them; the
spiritual man does love, and that entirely and unfeignedly even his greatest
enemies, Psalm. 35.13.14. Mat. 5.44. Acts. 7.60. 2. Sam. 16.11 2. Cor. 11.30
Phil. 4.12. 2 Cor. 12.10 Acts. 5.41.
those that seek his hurt, and are most maliciously bent against him. The
natural man is greatly afraid of contempt, disgrace, and ignominy; he cannot
with patience endure to be reviled, or abased by any means; the spiritual man
willingly vnder-goeth this; yea, he rejoices when he is thus humbled; he
accounts it a matter of great joy that he has this honor vouchsafed unto
him, to suffer rebuke for Christ, and for righteousness sake; he esteems
more of it then of all the treasures of the world, Heb. 11.26
has more joy whiles he suffers, then others whiles they wrong him; or if he
be any ways grieved, it is not for his own sake so much as for theirs who are
his enemies unjustly, and speak evil of him falsely to the dishonor of God,
and the great hurt of their own souls. The natural man is never thoroughly
content when his estate is best, Number. 11.6 Psalm. 78.18
but seeks causes of coffeehouse where there are none; the spiritual man
is always content (even when his estate is at the worst) or at least he
desires, 2 Cor. 4.8 Phil. 4.11
and endeavors to be so. The natural man seeks for praise and estimation
amongst men, to be in account and reputation above that which he deserves, and
to be honored and applauded of the world; 1 Samuel 15.30. Ester. 5.9
the spiritual man aymeth in all things at this especially, that whatsouer
becomes of him, or howsoever it fares with him, God may be glorified by him;
that he may receive that praise and honor which is due unto his name, 1. These.
2.6. Phil. 1.20 2 Cor. 6.8
though himself suffers the greatest disgrace, and be exposed to the greatest
ignominy and dishonor that may be. The natural man esteems death his
greatest enemy; the very remembrance of it is exceeding bitter unto him; he
thinks (as it is indeed) that he loses all when that comes; the spiritual man
judges it to be no loss, no hurt, but great gain and advantage to him, Phil.
1.21.
and therefore fears it not as an enemy (though in it self an enemy and
somewhat fearful to him till he looks wishly on it, and with other eyes
then those of flesh and nature) but addresseth himself willingly to entertain
it as a welcome guest, Luke 2.29.
and a means of much good unto him. He desires to be dislodged, and to be with
Christ his Savior, and says often with David, Psalm. 42.2.
when shall I come and appear before the presence of my God? when shall I
behold his face in glory, and be satisfied with the plenty of his house? and
commonly the nearer he is unto death, the greater taste and feeling has he of
the life to come. The natural man lives by sense, Jude. 10.
and believes nothing but that he can see reason for, or bring within the
compass of his brain; the spiritual man lives by faith, believing things
that are far above the reach of sense and natural reason, Gala. 2.20.
and which the worldling wonders that he can believe and trust to. So great is
the difference between a natural and spiritual man even whiles they live
together in this world; yea, more then has been yet set forth unto us. O
heavenly father, weaken I humbly pray thee, and diminish the power of corrupt
nature daily more and more in me; and vouchsafe unto me such a plentiful
increase of thy grace, that I may in every thing see a manifest difference in
my estate, and in the whole conversation of my life from that which is in those
that are altogether carnal and unregenerate; yea, that I may find such an
inward change and alteration in me, such holy motions and desires, and such
sanctified affections, as are in none but in those that are renewed by thy
grace, and become truly spiritual, having the lively impression of thine own
image, which sin had before exceedingly defaced: that thus I may not only
have more full assurance of the certainty of my election and salvation, having
that seal of thy spirit apparently set upon me which is proper to thy elect
and chosen, but also may be every day better enabled to pass the rest of my
time, which I am to live, in this sinful world, more to thy glory then I
have done heretofore, even as it becomes him, whom in thy infinite mercy thou
have translated from the state of nature, into the state of grace, from the
power of darkness into the kingdom of thy dear Son, to whom with thee, O
Father, and thy blessed Spirit, be all praise, and thanksgiving, both now and
evermore, Amen.

Exhortations and Reproves.
THey that do not, as occasion serves, and according to their places and
calling, mutually exhort, rebuke and admonish one another, they have forgotten
what charge the Lord has laid upon them, Mat. 18.15 Heb. 3.13.
they neglect those necessary duties which the laws of friendship and
charity require of them. Leuit. 19.17. Pro. 27.5.6.
They are regardlesse of the good estate of their neighbors; for what more
wholesome, what more profitable then a seasonable exhortation, admonition or
reprehension? It is as precious balm, of a very sovereign nature for the
curing of internal and spiritual maladies, of great use and necessity, for
being blind in our imperfections, how needful is it for us to borrow our
friends eyes, and to lend them ours, that so we may advise, admonish, and
correct each the other to the mutual good one of another. Nay, (that I say no
more) they that are sparing, or altogether careless of this duty, they are,
or at least seem to be, either envious, or else quite void of all compassion
toward their poor brethren, and those amongst whom they live and converse;
unwilling to do so much for them, as one that has any good nature in him,
would do for the brute beasts. Exodus 23.4.5.
For who would not (as the law of God also enioyneth) take up the beast even
of his enemy when it went astray, and were ready to perish, Pro 12.10
and yet they (cruel friends and merciless men) will not seek to reform,
and to save the soul of their friends, yea, Iam. 5.19.20
of their brethren, when it wanders out of the way of life and salvation, and
is in peril (for want of their helping hand) of imminent destruction and utter
confusion. Far be this from me, O Lord, forgive me my former desert and want
of the due performance of this so necessary and so profitable a duty, which
thou commaundest, and even Nature it self calls for at my hands; and make
me more careful for the time to come, of the discharge thereof in a wholesome
and seasonable manner. O let not that bloody voice of Caine once proceed out of
my mouth, or the least thought of it once lodge in my breast. Am I my brothers
keeper? Genesis 4.9.
O let not the bowels of compassion ever be so wanting in me, that I should
(as far as in me lies) suffer any of thine to perish through the neglect of
that duty unto which thou have so straightly bound me, but let me always be
ready with all wisdom and Christian affection, both to exhort and admonish
others, Pro. 15.31 Heb. 13.22
and to be rebuked and reclaimed my self, whenever I shall wander and go
astray from thee and from thy ways.

A Preservative, needful in these corrupt and infectious times.
THey that live in a bad air, or infectious places, will be careful to
provide themselves of preservatives, that so they may not receive that hu t
thereby, which otherwise cannot be well avoided. What poison is so infectious
as sin? what air so corrupt and dangerous as the example of the wicked and
profane multitude? and what age more contagious then this in which we live,
wherein virtue is become odious; yea, as a thing monstrous amongst many, Zach.
3.8.
piety accounted simplicity and foolishness, a reproach and disgrace unto
men, so that the most are half ashamed of the very profession of it; and vice
and ungodliness advanced and much made of, as though it were a special grace
and ornament unto those that have put it upon them. How truly may we say with
the Wiseman in this regard, Eccle. 6.7.
I have seen servants on horseback, and Princes walking as servants on the
ground; bruitishnes, and base servile courses extolled and set in great
excellency, and the most princely and heroical virtues and graces of the
mind, debased and trodden under the feet of the vile and contemptible.
Assuredly, Job. 30.8.9 1 Ioh. 5.19.
the world lies in wickedness, the very dregs and sink of former times is
fallen into this last and worst age, the venime whereof spreads it self daily
more and more to the corrupting of others. How needful therefore is it for
every one in such infectious places, and in so contagious an air to get the
best preservatives whereby they may be kept from that poisonous steame, with
which most are corrupted, and which in the end will prove deadly if it be not
timely prevented. O LORD, seeing it cannot be avoided but that I must live for
a time in this present evil world, Ier. 9.2.
where virtue and true godliness is contemned, and vice and wickedness gets
the upper hand; the examples unto goodness so rare, unto ungodliness so many,
abounding every where: seeing there be so many occasions to infect and poison
my soul, and to draw me from that simplicity and godly pureness which thou
requirest. Psa. 51.6. 2 Cor. 1.12.
O give me grace by all means to provide my self against the danger of this
evil, by vvalking wisely and circumspectly; yea, Ephesians. 5.15.
do thou so preserve me with thy grace, that I may never be corrupted as
others are, nor fall from my uprightness and sincerity; but carefully
avoiding all occasions of sin, as the very bane of my soul, be free from
those deadly diseases, into which others fall without recovery, and so die and
perish in them.

Delight in sin, what folly it is.
I Can never marvel enough to see the extreme folly of the most who find so
much sweetness, Job 20.12 13
and take so great pleasure and delight in those things which they know will be
as bitter in the end as gall and wormwood; nay, as death it self. Pro. 20.17
Iere. 2.19. Eccl. 7.10.
Poison, though it be sweet, yet because it is deadly, is carefully avoided:
but sin which is the bane of the soul, how greedily is it swallowed, Romans
6.23.
because it is pleasant to the taste? Lord, suffer me not to eat of the
dainties of the wicked, lest I perish with them, but cause thou my soul to
loathe and abhor them, that so I may live for ever. Amen.

How dangerous it is to take liberty unto ones self in any one sin.
He that gives himself liberty in any one sin, is as one that lifts up
the sluices, or breaks up the damme; 2 Samuel 11.2.4.15. Matthew. 26.70.71.72
even floods will ouer-flow and overrun him; many, great, and dangerous
waters will break in upon him and ouer-whelme him if he look not to it in
time. Good Lord, suffer me not willingly to yield unto any sin at any time,
but grant that I may be careful always to stop it at the beginning, least
it get a head and prevail against me; yea, do thou make up the manifold
breaches of my soul, least I be drowned in perdition, and perish with the
world of the ungodly.

Another.
ONe rotten member will hazard the whole body, if it be not in time cut off,
and so the danger thereby prevented. This is true in the body, much more in the
soul: one sin will bring death and destruction both of body and soul, Ezekiel.
18.31.
if there be not a timely prevention. Lord, if my right eye cause me to
offend, Mat. 5.29.30.
let me not spare but pluck it out, and if my right hand cause me to offend,
let me not delay to cut it off, and to cast it from me. Let no sin be so
dear unto me, as that I should be loath to be rid of it; yea, not willing
to cut it clean off from me, though with painfulness, rather then thereby
to perish everlastingly.

Custom in sin how dangerous it is.
AS hard is it to pluck up a tree by the roots, as to cause him to leave his
sin, Ier. 13.23.
who has a long time been accustomed unto it. Experience every where gives
too evident proof of this; in the unclean person, the drunkard, the covetous
worldling, etc. The longer that any has continued in any sinful course, the
more is he daily rooted and settled in it, and with the more difficulty drawn
from it unto goodness. His mind becomes every day more blind, his
conscience more seared, his heart more hardened, his will more crooked, his
affections more disordered, and himself faster tied and bound, Act. 8.23.
as it were, with many cords and chains unto his iniquity, so that it is
impossible for him to be loosed, and to be pulled out of the snare of Satan, 2 Timothy 2.26.
except the LORD vouchsafe an extraordinary grace, and work as it were a
miracle upon him. So dangerous a thing is custom and continuance in any sin,
in any kind of wickedness. O Lord, although through weakness and frailety I
fall daily into sin, Eccl. 7.22. 1 Ioh. 1.8.
(and cannot do other-wise) yet let me never lie or continue in the same, but
seek presently to recover my self and to arise speedily out of it; that so
howsoever I am subject unto many sins, yet not one of them may at any time
have power and dominion over me.

Another.
See thou how it is with him that is tumbling down from an high and a steep
hill; how he cannot possibly stay himself till he come unto the bottom, and
by that fearful downe-fall be quite deprived of life, so that he can rise no
more, but lies groueling on the earth as a dead man, not able to stir hand
or foot: so is it with those that once give themselves to the committing of
any sin, or to delight in any wicked and ungodly course; they fall daily more
and more, and that very dangerously, never staying, till in the end (if the
Lord be not the more merciful, to hold forth his hand to keep them from that
danger, and to save them,) they fall right down into the bottomless pit, even
into the depth of hell, the place of vvoe and torment, to the endless
perdition both of their souls and bodies. O Lord, order my ways aright; grant
that I may avoid all occasions and prouocations unto evil, and that I may
walk wisely and circumspectly all my days, that so I may not only be
preserved from that woeful downe-fall of the wicked, but also live in peace
and safety unto the end; and in the end having escaped the danger of this
evil and sinful world, may live with thee in glory for ever. Amen.

Sin committed, presently to be repented of.
He that has taken down poison, will labor as soon as he can possibly to
cast it up again, or else to procure some remedy for it, least otherwise it
prove his bane; and the sooner he does this, the better it will be for him.
Every sin that any one commits, is poison to his soul: if he seek not
to be clear of it, having once drunk it down, it will be his ruin, his
death. How careful therefore ought every one to be, when he has fallen into
any sin, to seek for a present remedy against it; to purge and clear
himself of it, by casting it up again by a true and unfeigned confession of
it; and to take heed that he endeavor by all means to abstain for ever after
from it, least otherwise he perish with it. Good Lord, let me always consider
how dangerous sin is unto my soul; how that if I lie in it, if I keep it in
me unrepented of, it must needs be my destruction, and therefore whenever
through frailty or infirmity I shall be ouer-taken with any sin, and drink
down that deadly poison which Satan offers unto me in a golden Cup, and
which my corrupt nature does exceedingly desire and long after, Job. 15.16.
thinking that there is great sweetness in that which indeed is as bitter as
death: Ier. 2.19.
grant that I may have an inward loathing of it, and finding my soul
surcharged with it, presently empty my self of it, and be more careful for
ever after to refrain from it, that so I may not dye but live and praise thee.

Sin truly deciphered, that being once known, it may be ever loathed and
abhorred of all.
A Strange thing it is that men should delight in any sin, yea, that they
should not loathe and abhor, and utterly abandon it for ever; if they either
consider the vile and cursed nature of it, or the woeful and damnable fruits
and effects of it. First, it is the most vile and abominable thing in the
world: the stincke and noisome smell of it has infected heaven and earth, and
made all those glorious Creatures, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, subject
unto vanity, so that they must be purged by fire in that great day of the
Lord. Romans 8.20 2 Pet. 3.10


In Scripture, besides many other names which set forth unto us the filthiness
thereof, Ezekiel. 16. Ierem. 13.27. Psalm. 51.2.
it is compared to the most loathsome disease in the world, even the filthy and
contagious Leprosy, a disease so much abhorred, that he that was infected
therewith among the Jews, by Gods own ordinance was to be excluded and shut
out from all company, Numb. 5.2 2 Kin. 15.5
as unmeet to live and converse amongst men; and yet this was but a type and a
shadow of the filthiness and uncleanness of sin. If we had seen the Jews
Leprosy, it would have seemed very loathsome to us, we would have wondered at
it, for the contagion of it was such, that it did not only infect the whole
man who was tainted with it, but his garments also which were about him, Leu.
13.47.
and sometimes also the very walls of his house, and 14.34.45
so that it was feign to be broken down, and to be cast out of the City, into
an unclean place: But if we had eyes to see this spiritual Leprosy of the
soul, it would seem much more loathsome unto us, we would vvonder at it,
and at our selves, that we should once ever give our selves in any sort to
delight in it; yea, it would humble us, and cause us to blush, Romans 6.21.
and to hang down our heads for shame; nay, with holy Job, Job 42.6.
even to abhor our selves, and to abase our selves unto the dust, and to
think of our selves as most vile, and more loathsome then any Lazar that lies
by the way, full of blaines and sores; unworthy ever to come into Gods
presence, or to partake of his holy things, who are so unholy our selves, and
so exceedingly polluted and defiled from top to toe, Isa. 1.6.
from the crown of the head to the sole of our feet, with that inbred
corruption and actual pollution; yea, we would never be quiet or at rest in
our selves, till we had procured that grace and mercy of the Lord, whereby we
were washed and cleansed from the filthiness of our sins and iniquity,
Psalm. 51.7.2.7. Heb. 10.22
with the sprinckling of the blood of that immaculate Lamb, and the pouring
out of those clean waters of his sanctifying Spirit, Ezekiel. 16.25. Zach. 13.2
which flow out of that heavenly Sanctuary, and so found the unclean Spirit
departed from us.

Such is the filthy and loathsome contagion of sin; nay, surely, it is so
ougly, so vile, and so loathsome, that neither I, nor any else, is able fully
to decipher, or to express the ouglinesse and loathsomenesse thereof: if we
were able to paint it forth, or to lay it open in it true colors, there is no
man but would even be flaited and affrighted at the very sight and appearance
of it; there is none but would hate and abhor it more then the most
loathsome Toade, the most venomous Serpent, or the ougliest Creature in the
world. For there is no toade so loathsome, no Serpent so venomous, no creature
so ougly as sin is: nay, if a man (if it were possible) should make a
confection of all the Spiders, Toades, Snakes, Adders, Serpents, Vipers, and
all the most filthy things in the world, it would not be half so vile and
infectious as Sin is.

That this may appear yet more clearly, think with thy self, what is the
most detestable and execrable thing (besides sin) that possibly can be named.
Is it not the Devil? I know thou vvilt and needs must say so. For his very
name does affright men; and when we have named him, we think that we have
reckoned the worst, and the most loathsome and hateful thing that can be: yet
I tell thee, that even Satan himself, that hellish Fiend, is not so filthy,
so loathsome, and deformed as sin is. Marvel not at this, as though it could
not so be, but consider thoroughly of the matter, and thou will easily perceive
and willingly acknowledge it to be so. For, what is it that makes the Devil
so much abhorred both of God, men, and Angels? Is it not sin, and sin
only? yes doubtless: it cannot be denied. For who knows not (that knows any
thing) that those damned Spirits, even all the Devils in hell, Jude v. 6.
were at the first, more glorious, excellent, lovely, and amiable Creatures,
then any mortal man whatsoever; yea, that they were like Stars, Angels of
light, shining and glistering with purity, holiness and righteousness,
before they were stained and defiled with the loathsome contagion and
infection of sin and transgression. Sin only it was that blemished that
goodly beauty: Sin only it was that darkened that vvonderfull brightness
and that resplendent glory, wherein they were at the first created, and
wherein they should for ever have continued, had they not sinned against the
Majesty of GOD their Creator. Sin only it was that dimmed all their light,
and damped all their glory, the beams whereof would have dazeled any mortal
eye. Sin only it was that of Citizens of that Royal palace, that heavenly
Paradise, that celestial Jerusalem, 2 Pet. 2.4.
the Presence Chamber of the Lord of glory, made them wretched bond-slaues, and
most miserable captives, in that deep dungeon and dark prison of hell, where
they are kept in everlasting chains of darkness unto that great damnation.
Sin only it was that transformed them into damned Spirits, cast them down
from the brightness of heavenly glory, into the darkness of hellish misery, and
of bright-shining Stars, as it were, made them most ougly and loathsome
Devils. In brief; Sin, and Sin only, it was, that made them as loathsome
as ever they were lovely; as ougly as ever they were amiable, as greatly
abhorred of God and of all his holy and elect Angels, as ever they were loved
of them before. And were they freed from sin, they would become Angels of
light, glorious creatures.

Now then, if sin does make others, (yea, such glorious creatures, as the
Devils once were) so vile and loathsome; yea, odious unto all other creatures:
oh then how vile and loathsome a thing is sin it self? Surely so hydeous a
monster is this monstrous Monster, (I know not how to term it) of Sin, that
those whose eyes GOD has once opened, that they are able rightly to discern
of the same, will undergo any torment, 1 Ioh. 3.8.
any sorrow, any punishment whatsoever, rather then once willingly commit the
same; as we may see in the examples of many holy Martyrs, Heb. 11.35 36.37.38.
and godly Professors, who have endured the loss of their goods, lands,
livings; yea, and life it self: and willingly suffered all kind of tortures
and torments that their cruel Adversaries and bloody Persecutors could devise
or imagine, rather then they would be brought to that one sin of denying the
known truth or dissembling their profession.

Notable to this purpose is the saying of that ancient and religious Father,
that he would wish rather to be torn in pieces with wild beasts then
willingly and vvittingly to commit any sin. And from a more heroical and
divine spirit, Anselme.
was that speech of him, that professed, that if he should have the choice
either to burn in hell fire continually, or to sin any sin willingly, he
would rather choose those endless and unspeakable torments, then yield
consent to the other: so vile and monstrous did sin seem unto him.

What should I say more? Men would be much afraid, if the Devil should
appear unto them in some shape; yea, the very naming of him strikes a deep
impression of fear into many. But could these once behold sin it self, which
makes the devil so odious, if they could view it, as it is indeed, they would
be wonderfully flaited and affrighted at the very appearance of it, it would
make their hearts to tremble within them, and their hair to stand upright on
their heads; they would fly from it more then from the most poisonous Serpent
or venomous creature in the world; yea, as much as from the Devil himself.
They would never shake hands with it, as they have done heretofore, they would
never keep company with it, they would never be quiet till they were freed
from the dominion and slavery of it. It would be even death unto them to have
any fellowshippe therewith, as no doubt it is to the godly man; who, because
he sees he cannot be fully rid of it in this life, therefore is constrained
often to cry out, as one that were stabbed at the heart, Woe is me that I
remain in Mesheth, Psalm. 120.
and dwell in the tents of Kedar: or as one that had the pangs of death upon
him. Romans 7.24
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? So it
is with the religious soul, when it is ouerswaied with the corruption of it
own sinful nature, or carried away violently in a sort with the forcible
blasts of Satan's temptations: Oh so far it is from doing it willingly or from
taking full delight in it, that it rather complains and mournes bitterly
(though secretly oftentimes) for it: It gals that man at the very heart for it;
it is as it were, a prick in his eyes, or a thorn in his side: yea, every
sin which he commits, when he once knows it, is as an Awle at his heart:
it stingeth and wounds his conscience, and makes him to mourn like a Dove,
and chatter like a Swallow.

In a word, the very consideration of this, that he should commit so filthy a
fact, and so foul an offense, causes his heart and soul even to bleed within
him. Neither hinders it any thing at all, which some might bring with some
color for the gaine-saying of this. What, is sin so vile and loathsome a
thing as you make it? How comes it to pass then that it seems so sweet, so
amiable and pleasant, as it does unto the most? How comes it, that it
allureth, enticeth, and draws men unto it, causing them to follow it, to
love, embrace, joy and delight in it: yea, to serve and obey it with all
greediness, and to spend all their time, their strength, wit and wealth in
the service of it? Can sin be so vile and deformed a monster, and yet be
sought after with such great care and diligence, and pursued with so great
delight and cheerfulness, as if it were some excellent and precious thing,
which might well cause all to be enamoured with it.

To answer thee in this; behold the depth of the mystery of Satan, here it
lies; herein consists the chiefest and craftiest slight and policy of that
wily Serpent, the Devil, the enemy of mankind, whereby he has deceived and
deluded many thousands, to their utter overthrow. For he knowing well enough
that sin, if it should appear in his own likeness, would be abhorred of all
men, deals very cunningly and deceitfully, like a crafty merchant. He casts
a goodly gloze upon it: He painteth, colors it, and guilds is over with the
false colors of his deceivable policy, and withal, casts a mist before men's
eyes, making them fondly believe that its a goodly thing, a very pleasant,
delightsome or profitable thing, even as the counterfeit and crafty Iugler
makes simple men believe, that an Oister-shell or a Counter is a fair piece
of silver or gold. And thus having trucked and trimmed up, as it were, this
cursed darling of his, covering it with the false shape of some seeming good,
and clothing it with the deceivable cloak of pleasure, profit, delight, or
one goodly outside or other, he presents it to the view of the poor seduced
sinner, as some rare or precious thing, who thinking that he has met with
some great treasure, falls presently in love with it, and will part with it for
no good; and thereupon entertaineth and lodges this vile monster in the
secretest closets of his heart and soul. Thus Satan deals with men as the
Panther or Leopard deals with the beasts: For that spotted and ravenous beast
(as is reported of him) knowing how the rest of the beasts fly from him, by
reason of his ougly head, which fraies them, hides only his head, till they
coming about him and gazing on his goodly spotted hyde, nothing suspecting, or
fearing the danger they are in, suddenly he breaks out and makes a prey of
them: so the devil, knowing well how much sin would scare men, if they should
see that ougly and deformed head of it, hides that by all means he can, and
sets out the fine colored skin thereof, viz. the pleasing delights and the
deceitful profits and preferments of this vain and transitory world; Genesis
3.5. Mat. 4.8.
with the gaud and glory whereof whiles they are bewitched as it were, and
foolishly enamored, never thinking of that hellish monster which cunningly
shrouds it self under those goodly shows and entising allurements, he thereby
intangleth them unawares, and having caught them in his claws, preyeth upon
them, and deuoureth them with vvide and open mouth, in most fearful manner.
Oh if men could see that filthiness, and that vile an loathsome deformity
which lies lurking under that veil which Satan has drawn over it to
deceive and delude men vvithall; if they could but consider, that under those
sweet and delightsome baits which are offered unto them there are most
dangerous and deadly hooks, which if they be not very wary, will quickly draw
them under the deep waters of everlasting destruction; if they were so wise as
to remember that in that golden cup of the pleasures and profits of sin there
is nothing but most rank poison, the venom whereof, will even drink up the
health, yea, the life of their souls; if they could behold that loathsome
tode, and that stinging serpent which lies secretly hidden under the green
and pleasant leaves of worldly and sinful delights; if they could think that
in those golden apples there is such deadly poison as was in the apple which
our first parents tasted of through the devils suggestion.

In a word; if the eyes of their minds were opened that they might see the
mystery of Satan in this work of iniquity, making sin which is so vile and
so detestable in it self to seem so sweet, so lovely, and so amiable unto
men, then I verily persuade my self, that they should not need to be dissuaded
from it by so many motives: the very sight and appearance of it would be
reasons and arguments sufficient to make them quite out of love with it, yea,
to loath, hate and abhor it for ever, and to be ashamed and confounded in
themselves, that they had so much to do with it heretofore.

Haback. 13.
Now, how fearful a thing is it, to delight in that which is so displeasing
unto that glorious majesty? Every one will be afraid to displease his Prince;
how much more him who is the Prince of Princes, in comparison of whom all the
most princely Potentates and mighty Monarchs in the world, with all their
glorious pomp, and shining train are nothing; whom the Angels, the heavens,
and all things in the world, besides sinful man, and the damned spirits, do
serve and obey; who with the word of his mouth made all things, and with the
breath of his mouth is able in one moment to confound all things, Psalm. 104.
and to bring them to naught again. Psalm. 103.20. James. 2.19. Isai. 6.2.
The Angels praise him and wonder at his greatness; the devils fear him and
tremble at his power; all the Saints reverence and adore him for his goodness.
Seraphin and Cherubin continually sing laud and praise unto him with covered
faces; Ier. 8.22.
and shall man, miserable mortal man, be so shameless as to set so little by
him, as to do that which is such an abomination unto him, Ierem. 44.4. Iesem.
3.6.7.22. and 6.28. and 11.9.
and so exceeding displeasing unto his Majesty; yea, rebellion and high
treason, as it were, against him who is the Lord of glory. Who does not
tremble when he thinks of this? Oh me thinks the very remembrance of this
should cause the most obstinate and hard-hearted sinner in the world to fear,
to shiuer and shake, and to be amazed and astonished, Dan. 5.6.
as Belshazzar was, even in the midst of all his bravery and iollity. Me thinks
it should be a forcible motive to arrowse and to awake out of the dead sleep
of carnal security, the most secure, the most careless and drowsie-headed
sleeper in the world. Yea, me thinks it should be a bridle to curb and to
restrain the most cursed Cain, the most profane Esau, the most desperate
Judas, the greatest blasphemer and outrageous swearer, the most licentious and
lascivious person that lives upon the earth, as surely it will if they be not
blind-foulded by Satan, so that they cannot see their great folly, and
marvelous presumption: For know thou, O man, that committest the least
sin against God, know thou (I say) what thou do? Know thou what a
glorious majesty thou therein offendest? No, but the devil blinds and
imboldeneth thee to thy destruction. For, were thine eyes open thou would
not for all the world, no not for a thousand worlds, commit so great a villainy
against so great a God. Saint John fell down in a swound at the very sight and
appearance of him. Revel. 1.17 John 18.6. Exodus 33.20. Judges 13.22.
And no marvel: for who is able to see him and live? who is able to behold the
greatness of his glory and the brightness of his Majesty? And is it not then
a great marvel that thou, whosoever thou art, dare be so bold as to set
thy self against him, and even to spit in his face as it were, by preferring
every vile creature before him, and doing that which is so displeasing and
abominable in his sight, having had express charge and commandment of him to
the contrary. Ierem. 2.12.
O heavens be astonished at this, be afraid, and utterly confounded; so we may
well cry out, considering the strangeness and wonderful boldness and
presumption of sins in this high dishonor and open contempt of God. Oh that
men's eyes were open, that they might plainly see and consider of these things.
Psalm. 103.14. and 104.29.
O that they would cast down their eyes, and see what they themselves are,
dust, earth, weak and frail creatures, whose breath as soon as it is taken
from them they die and perish: and withal, lift up their eyes and see what an
infinite, powerful and glorious God, what a high, mighty, and dreadful
majesty they offend and provoke grievously in the wilful commission of any
one sin whatsoever. It is a wonder, yea, it is the wonderful and
unspeakable mercy of God that the whole frame of heaven and earth is not for
sin, yea, for one sin, utterly confounded and brought to naught. And it may
well seem marvelous and vvonderfull in our eyes, that the Lord being of such
infinite glory, power, and majesty, should bear with men for the committing
of the least sin that can be, being a thing so contrary to his nature, every
way so much abhorred of him. O therefore that men would love him for his
goodness and great mercy, in having spared themselves thus long, who committed
so many and so great sins against him; and that they would fear him for his
power and unspeakable Majesty, and be moved thereby never willingly to
offend him hereafter by doing the least sin whatsoever, (as men count little)
but carefully shun it; yea, hate, detest, and abhor it from their hearts
and souls.

as it is exceeding displeasing unto God; so wonderful pleasing and delightsome
unto him. He delights in it, as being his own brood and cursed offspring; he
first brought it into the world, John. 8.44
and him it represents, being the express image of his corrupt and monstrous
nature, and therefore he must needs take pleasure in it, seeing every thing
loves his own, and that which does most resemble it self. Besides, how
pleasing it is to him, it is evident by that great desire which he has, and
that great diligence which he uses to draw, and even to force men unto it. It
is neither silver, gold, jewels, pearls, or any such like precious thing in
the world which he seeks after. He cares not for all these, he regards them
not at all; he is not so covetous or ambitious in this regard as men are: But
this is his care, his study; this he laboreth for, and aymeth at continually,
even to make the souls of men spotted and defiled with sin, that so he may
see in them the resemblance of his loathsome visage and ougly deformity. This
he continually hunteth after, about this he spends all his labor and
industry. He seeks continually where he may hatch this cockatrice egg, and
so bring forth that loathsome monster of abominable sin. He compasses the
earth to and fro, and trauerseth over every part and parcel of it, sparing for
no pains, so that he may effect this. All his plots and proiects tend unto
this. It is even meat and drink unto him to bring men hereunto. And therefore
he uses many fetches, many policies and crafty devises to inueigle, to
ensnare, and to entangle men before they be aware of him; one while by this
means, another by that. For as the Scribes and Pharisees compassed sea and land
to make a Proselyte, Math. 23.15.
a superstitious hypocrite, like unto themselves: Job. 2.^.
So Satan seeks by all means to make others like unto him, even besmeared and
defiled with sin as he is. He makes as though he were a friend, when he is
a most deadly foe; yea, he will not stick to give men a view of all the
pleasures, profits, and preferments of this life, and to say unto them as he
did unto Christ; Math. 4.9.
All these will I give thee, if thou will worship me; if thou will obey me in
the commission of any sin. Thus he offers continually unto his guests a
draught of most deadly poison, in the golden cup of sinful and worldly
pleasures, profits and delights, that so with the sweet relish and pleasant
savor thereof, he may intise and allure them to drink deeply of it, till they be
enchanted by it, and become like unto himself transformed into his own image.
In brief, he seeks by all means to draw, and even to hale men unto the
committing of it. It Is his daily and usual trade. He never sets himself to
any other business. He is never at rest, but always stirring and striving to
atchieue and to bring to pass this devilish enterprise; and will never be
satisfied, although he has employed himself and his wicked instruments in this
cursed work, both night and day, almost for the space of these six thousand
years together. With such an eager desire to effect and accomplish it, is he
carried continually; an evident proof that he has marvelous delight and
pleasure in it. Now who would delight in that which the devil so much
delights in? who would take any pleasure in that which is so pleasing unto
him? What a shame and disgrace is this to any one? what a blot and stain unto
the soul of man? There is none of us but would take it very hainously of him,
that should tell him that he did nothing else in the whole course of his life,
but seek to please the Devil, and to satisfy his desires: and yet thus do
all they that love sin, and give themselves to any kind of iniquity. Fie
upon it, that any should so much forget himself, as to take any pleasure or
delight in pleasing so foul a fiend, so deadly a foe, thereby in the mean
while vexing and grieuing the good and gracious spirit of God? Romans 6.21.
Who should not blush even to think of the committing of it, seeing thereby he
not only displeases God, whom he ought to love above all things, but also
exceedingly pleases the Devil, making him sport and pastime, as it were, and
causing him to triumph over him, who of all creatures ought to be most loathed
and abhorred of him. To please the Devil and to displease God, what a shame is
it? to honor a slave, and to dishonor the Master, what a folly is it? to
labor to serve him, and to fulfill his lusts with the loss of their own
souls; yea, to prefer him before the eternal and most glorious God of heaven
and earth, the author of all our good; oh what a heinous and horrible fact is
it? what greater abomination can be devised? And yet thus does every one that
lives in sin willingly. He places the Devil before God: he sells
himself from God to the Devil for a few transitory pleasures, profits, and
preferments of this wicked world: nay, he does, as it were, put God and the
Devil together in one and the same balance; God in the one Scale, and the
Devil in the other; and at last makes the Scale wherein the Devil is, to weigh
heauiest, preferring him before the Lord of glory. A wonder of wonders it is
that any should be thus foolish, thus sottish and senseless; and a thing which
one would think incredible, if we did not see thousands continually thus
blinded and bewitched by Satan.

and wonder how thou can delight in it any longer. It cast the wicked Angels
from heaven to hell, 2 Pet. 2.4.
from the height of glory to the depth of misery: Genesis 3.24.
It turned our first Parents and all their posterity out of Paradise; and
whereas before they were in a most blessed and happy estate, made them of all
creatures (next unto Satan himself) most miserable, odious and abhorred of
God, and subject to infinite evils, in this life, Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit 26. Psalm.
32.10 Pro. 24.20. Isay 6.10. and 57.20.21. Ephesians. 2.2.
and in the life to come: infinite sorrows, plagues, miseries, and most
fearful judgments; blindesse of mind, hardness of heart, deadness of
spirit, horror of conscience, vexation and anguish of soul, bondage under
Satan the Prince of darkness; and banishment from God (the fountain of all
bliss) 2 These. 1.9
and the hope of the glory of his heavenly Kingdom. It defaceth Gods Image,
disfigureth the soul, and makes men monsters, Isay 1.3.
worse then the brutish creatures; All these are the fruit of sin, besides
the many and grievous maladies and diseases with which the body and outward man
by means hereof is afflicted and oppressed; who is able to rehearse them? or
who is there that does not often complain of them, and groan under the burden
of them?

And finally, it opens a gate into hell, and sets it wide open for men to
enter in at to their eternal confusion. Mat. 7.13.
The Devil is the Porter, as it were, standing continually at the gate, ready
to receive them in: and sin is the key that vnlocketh the door, Pro. 21.1^
and leads unto that place of destruction, the Congregation of the dead and
damned. And such is the folly and extreme madness of wretched and sinful
men, that they daily knock at hell gates, and call as it were, for the Porter
to let them in; yea, as though that were not enough, they bring the key, and
open the door themselves, which leads unto the fearful place of endless
desolation.

Who is there so blind, so hard-hearted, so void of Grace, yea, Reason and
common understanding, with whom all these motives should not be of force to
cause him to loathe all manner of sin, and utterly to forsake the same, and to
give it an everlasting farewell, Ephesians. 5.11.
how pleasing and delightful soever it has seemed heretofore? yea, that should
not think it too much that he has done heretofore, 1 Pet. 4.3.
and be ashamed of it, Psalm. 119.106.
and purpose and resolve willingly never to do the like hereafter?

O merciful GOD, discover unto me daily, more and more, the cursed nature,
and woeful effects of sin and iniquity: let the filmes and scales which
Satan seeks to draw over mine eyes to blind and delude me, be taken away
from me. Let not those fair shows and counterfeit glosses of sinful
pleasures, profits, honor, and the vain and deceitful things of this world,
with which he seeks to bleare mine eyes, any longer deceive me, as they do
the most. But let me see daily more clearly in the Crystal glass of thy
Word, the ougly and deformed image of sin, the wretched nature, and fearful
and damnable effects of it; how heinous and grievous it is in it self; how
exceeding offensive unto thee, and how pleasing and delightful unto Satan;
how it alienateth and estrangeth men from thee, Isay 59.2.
defaceth thy Image, and transformeth them into the likeness of Satan, John
8.44 1 John 3.8
makes them his slaves and vassals; how it depriueth them of thy grace and of
all good things, Ier. 5.25.
and brings all evil and mischief upon them, both in their bodies and
souls, in this life and in the life to come. Let me see these things, and
wisely consider of them, and so be brought to a true hatred, and through
dislike and detestation of all manner of sin and wickedness, how pleasing
soever it has been unto my nature heretofore, and howsoever it seeks with
deceitful pretenses to draw me unto it again. O let me not bring so great a
blot, and so foul a stain upon my soul, by doing that which is such an
abomination unto thee, and would be a cause of so much woe and misery unto
me. But teach me to avoid it, and to fly from it, whenever it first
presents it self to me, in what shape or disguised form soever it seeks to
inchaunt me: yea, the more closely and covertly that it seeks to wind it
self into me* and to find intertainement within me, the more let me abandon
it, and forsake it, hating it even with a perfect hatred, as thou hate it.
And let my whole delight be in seeking to please thee, more then ever I have
displeased thee heretofore. Let it be the joy of my heart, to walk continually
before thee, with a pure, and a sincere, and upright heart in all the ways of
righteousness and holiness, and to cleave fast unto every good thing which
thou commaundest; that so I may not only be freed from thy wrath, and from the
evils and miseries which sin brings upon the wicked and ungodly, but also
be received into thy love, be made partaker of the riches of thy grace and
glory; thou may take pleasure in me, and rejoice over me thy poor
creature, to do me good all my days: the Angels in Heaven, Luke 15.10
those glorious attendants of thine, may rejoice and sing to see thy name
glorified by me, and at length may translate me into that blessed kingdom of
thine, there to live and reign with thee, and with all thy elect and holy
Ones, in fullness of glory and happiness for evermore; and that only through
the merits of Christ my Savior, who with thee, and thy Spirit, be blessed,
and praised, both now and always. Amen.

Another most effectual motive to the leaving of all sin, from the
consideration of Christ's death and Passion.
COnsider O man, who has redeemed thee, by what he has redeemed thee; from
what and unto what he has redeemed thee. Christ Jesus, the Son of the
everliving God, equal unto his Father in Majesty and glory, the Heir of the
world, Hebr. 1.
and the Lord of all things both in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth; he
it is that has redeemed thee, according unto the good will and gracious decree
of God his Father. He has redeemed thee, by becoming man for thy sake, by
living a base and ignominious life, subject unto all the infirmities whereunto
thou art subject (thy sins only excepted) and dying a shameful and cursed
death, 1 Pet. 1.19
pouring out his precious blood for thy sake. He was borne in a stable, laid
in a manger (an abasement unto which the basest amongst men are not usually
subject) rejected of his own, Ioh. 1.11. Isa. 53.
despised of the most, accounted as a dry and withered branch, one in whom
there was no form, nothing to be desired; laden with reproaches, broken with
sorrows; buffeted, spit upon, made to drink gall and vinigar, reviled,
scourged, made a scorn to the beholders, Mat. 27.30. etc.
a spectacle to men and Angels, and a wonderment to the world: tossed as it
were, from post to pillar; from one judgment seat to another: condemned, as a
vile and notorious malefactor, worse then a thief and murderer; and crucified
upon the Cross, without the gates of the City, in that loathed Golgotha, Heb.
13.1^.
where his head was crowned with thorns, his hands and feet pierced with
nails, and his side with a spear, so that water and blood gushed forth
abundantly: and at last, when malice and envy had wrought all the wickedness
they could against him, laid in the grave, dead and buried, as one cut off from
among the living: and all this for thy sake, Romans 5.10
even for thee who were his enemy, a traitor and rebel against him, Ephe.
2.3.
and a child of wrath and of the curse, heir of perdition and confusion. He
was made sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13.
a curse and subject unto death for thee, that he might bring thee from sin,
from the curse of the law, from the wrath of God, from death, hell, and
damnation, unto righteousness, blessedness, grace, glory, heaven and
everlasting happiness in that celestial kingdom, which he has purchased and
prepared for all his redeemed ones. All thi^ he has done for thee, O wretched
and sinful man, not for any merits or deserts of thine (for what was there
in thee for which he should any ways respect thee? Tit. 3.4.
) but of his own free grace, and of the infinite and unspeakable riches of
his abundant mercies, wherewith he embraced thee, when he might have justly
cast thee off for ever, as one mo^^ unworthy to be beloved of him, especially
with so great a love. Ephe. 3.19
All this he has done for thee, and for thy sake only. O therefore, vvilt
thou be unmindful of his wonderful love, his unsearchable goodness and
bounty toward thee, and the great and maruailous things which he has wrought
for thee? 1 Samuel 12.24.
Will thou be so unthankful to him? Nay, will thou be so unkind, so
ungracious, as to continue still in thy sins, and so to grieve his spirit,
and to crucify him again? Heb. 6.6.
For believe me, so many sins as thou willingly committest, so many thorns
do thou pleat on his head, so many nails do thou thrust into his hands, so
many spears do thou pierce his side withal, and (a fearful thing to
consider) so often do thou imbrue thy wicked hands with his precious blood, and
tread it in a profane manner under thy Heb. 10.29
feet, so that it may be said unto thee, as Peter said unto the Jews, Thou
have crucified the Lord of life, Act. 2.36. and 3.14.15.
thou have murdered the king of glory, the Son of the ever living God, Christ
Jesus, that just and holy One, and preferred not Barrabas, but (which is as
bad) thine own wicked and sinful lusts; yea, Satan himself, before thy
blessed Savior and Redeemer.

O monstrous ingratitude and treachery! The Angels do blush at it, the heavens
stand amazed and astonished at it; and worthy it is to be lothed and abhorred of
all creatures. Do thou so reward the Lord, O vain and foolish man? Deuteronomy. 32.6
Is this thy kindness to thy friend? thy thankfulness to thy Savior? Do
thou return him evil for good, and hatred for his good will? Because he has
abounded in love and kindness toward thee, will thou abound in sin and
wickedness against him? O be not so hard-hearted: O deal not so impiously, so
ungraciously, so treacherously with thy best friend, thy beloved Savior, who
has magnified the riches of his grace so wonderfully toward thee, as that if
thou had a thousand tongues thou could not fully express the same, nor
yield him sufficient praise and thankfulness for it. Or if thou had many
thousands of years to live upon the earth, and should employ them all in his
service, with the greatest diligence and most careful endeavor that could be,
yet all were too little for him. Return therefore, return O thou who have
been deceived heretofore by thine own wicked heart, and deluded by Satan, thy
most malicious and deadly enemy, who is ever seeking thy destruction and utter
overthrow. Return at length, behold thy loving Savior, yet stretching out his
hands ready to receive thee, and to embrace thee with the arms of his mercy
and tender compassion. Pro. 1.24
He calls thee, Isa. 55.1. Ioh. 7.37.
and cries aloud unto thee; why do thou fly from him? why do thou not
cast away thy sins and come unto him whiles the acceptable time of grace and
salvation lasts? 2 Cor. 6.2
Behold, he stands knocking at the door of thy heart, by the motions of his
Spirit, and by the voice of his word; calling unto thee, Cant. 5.2. Reave. 3.20
that thou would open unto him, that so he might enter in to thee, and dwell
with thee, and make thee partaker of all the riches and treasures of his
heavenly graces, and of eternal life and salvation: Behold him yet offering
himself unto thee; yea, Pro. 9.5.
sending forth his messengers daily, persuading thee effectually to leave those
husks and draffe which the Swine of this world delight to fill themselves
withal, Luke 15.16
and inuiting thee most graciously to come and sit with him at his table, and
to eat of the finest fare in his Fathers house, that heavenly Manna, which
none know but they that have tasted of it, and which when they have once
thoroughly tasted of, and felt the sweetness of it, they will not part with it
again for all the sweetest delicates, with which the wicked glut themselves,
till they surfeit dangerously; no, not for all the pleasures, profits, riches
and revenues of the whole world. Behold, the base estate and condition which he
took upon him for thy sake: Behold the shame and reproach which he sustained
for thee, and for thy sins: Behold his face (whom the Angels, Heb. 1.6.
those celestial creatures, do reverence and adore) spitted upon for thy
cause: Behold him, who is the Author of blessedness, become accursed for
thee, that he might free thee from that curse which was due unto thee: Behold
him, Isa. 66.1.
whose Throne is in the highest Heavens, the Lord of Glory and Majesty,
descended down into the earth, and abased to the lowest degree of humiliation,
becoming as one of no reputation, Phil. 2.6.7 Psalm. 22.6.
a worm and not a man, that so he might exalt thee, and raise thee from shame
to glory, from Hell to Heaven, from the depth of misery and wretchedness, to
the height of endless and everlasting blessedness. What should I say? Behold
the Lord of life, dying upon the Cross, that he might bring thee from death
to life, and make thee of a child of wrath and perdition, an Heir of glory
and Salvation. See his Head crowned with thorns, his body sweating drops of
blood, for the anguish that he was in for thy sins. See the blood streaming
forth out of his side, to vvash and cleanse thee from thy wickedness. See the
fountain of his love, his grace, and mercy set vvide open unto thee. Zach.
13.1
All these cry loud unto thee, and are as a shrill voice in thine ears, to
call thee from thy sins, and to cause thee utterly to abandon all thy former
wickedness, even that vain conversation wherein heretofore thou
delightedst. And will thou yet continue therein? God forbid: O heart, more
harder then the Adamant or flintie Rock, if these things do not move thee,
and cause thee to relent; if nothing else will: (neither remembrance of the
vileness and loathsomnes of sin, the fearful and woeful misery and
bondage, whereunto it brings thee; the stingings of conscience wherewith it
vvoundeth the soul, and makes it to smart grievously, oftentimes when none
perceives it, nor the many judgments which it exposes thee unto, both here
in this life, and much more in the life to come, in hell fire for ever.) If none
of these will, yet let this, this I say, even the due and serious consideration
of the great and vvonderfull things that Christ has done for thee, to redeem
thee from thy sins, and to loose the bonds of thine iniquities, 1 Ioh. 3.8
O let this draw thee from the same, in a forcible manner: yea, let his infinite
and boundless love and mercy toward thee herein, even break thy stony and
steely heart, and cause it to melt into tears for thy sins past, to grieve,
to sorrow, to mourn and lament for the same; and to purpose and resolve with
thy self, never willingly to offend him hereafter, though thou might gain
thereby a thousand worlds. Let thy heart be sooner plucked out of thy body,
then thou drawn from this godly purpose and Christian resolution, which well
becomes all that are Christ's redeemed, 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Ioh. 3.9.
and will be in thee, if thou be a true Christian indeed, and not in word
and show only. O blessed Lord and Savior, when I look up unto thee, and
consider thy marvelous Love and Bounty, in that great and gracious work of
thine, in redeeming me from that miserable estate, into which I was plunged
as well as others, unto that glorious condition of thy redeemed ones: how thou
abasedst thy self to become man for my sake; to be accursed, that thou
might free me from the curse which I had brought upon my self; to dye that
so shameful a death, and to be buried in the earth, that thou might raise
me out of the grave of my sins, and bring me from sin, death, hell and
damnation, unto grace, life, and everlasting salvation, in that blessed and
glorious kingdom of thine, which thou reseruest for me in the heavens; when
I look up unto thee, and call to mind how wonderfully thou have dealt with me
in these things; and on the other side, cast mine eyes upon the whole course
of my life past, how vile, how sinful it has been; and view my estate
present, how many and grievous the sins are whereby I have provoked thee
daily, even since thou calledst me to the knowledge of that saving grace of
thine: my heart fails within me, I am ashamed and confounded in my self,
that I should have been found so unkind unto thee, who have been so
exceeding kind and gracious unto me.

O do thou cause me daily more and more to see and bewail the greatness of
my sin herein; and heal my soul in whatsoever I have offended thee. O let
thy love, thy goodness, thy grace, and bounty, in redeeming me, so wretched,
so unworthy a Creature, by thine own blood, from so fearful and woeful a
condition, into so blessed and glorious an estate, O let it constrain me to
love thee unfeignedly; let it dissolve me into the tears of true and unfeigned
repentance for all my sins and transgressions, whereby I have displeased
thee, my God and Savior: and let it work in me a perfect hatred and
loathing of all kind of ungodliness, and a continual desire and endeavor to
please thee, and to show forth my thankfulness unto thee, by walking carefully
before thee in all the duties which thou command me, that so I may be every
day more assured, that I am one of that small flock, which thou have redeemed
with thy precious blood, and for whom thou have provided that glorious Kingdom
in the heavens.

Drawing others unto any wickedness, a bloody and fearful sin.
MVrther is abhorred of all men, and that most justly: for it is a fearful
and a crying sin; committed, Genesis 4.10.
nor approved of any but such as have lost in a manner, the very nature of man,
and become, as it were, brute and savage creatures, yea, monsters, such as are
to be driven out from the company and society of men, and to be deprived of
this light which they do enjoy, and are no ways worthy of. Deu. 19.13
But yet behold (a strange thing and much to be wondered at) to murder the
souls of men, by drawing them to wickedness by ill counsel, Pro. 18.21
or by corrupt example of life, or otherwise, is slightly accounted of, not had
in that detestation among men that the other; although, as it is more common,
so it may well be sorted and rancked with it. Is not the soul more precious
then the body? Mat. 16.26
the life of the soul more worthy, and far more to be regarded then the
life of the body? Why then is not the murdering of this accounted as wicked,
as heinous, as the other? why is it not as much abhorred of all men? why are
not such esteemed rather monsters then men? and how is it that their own
consciences do not accuse and vvound them for so bloody a crime; yea, that
they rejoice and glory in it, many of them, and make a sport and pastime of it?
O horrible impiety! Pro. 10.23 and 14.9.
How are the consciences of such seared, and their hearts hardened? yea, how
like are they unto Satan, their father, who was a murderer from the
beginning, Ioh. 8.44.
and delights in nothing more then in hunting after the precious life of man,
and wounding his soul unto death, by entising and drawing him unto wickedness?

O blessed Lord, far be it from me at any time, to commit so great a sin,
against thee, against my neighbor, against the life and soul of any, which
ought always to be most dear unto me. Let me not be a means to wound the
conscience of my brother, by giving him any just offense, by walking before him
in any scandalous course: let me never be an occasion of death unto the soul
of any, by seeking to draw him to the commission of any sin, or to the
practice of any kind of ungodliness, by any means whatsoever. O far be
this from me; yea, O Lord, let me be as much afraid of this, as much abhor
it, as the murdering and destroying of the body of any; which is so horrible a
sin, that even the Heathen themselves, by the light of nature, have seen and
judged it to be worthy of the sharpest and most cruel death. And let me seek
by all means rather to save and preserve the lives and souls of men (yea,
Iam. 5.20.
of mine enemies) by keeping them (as far as in me lies) from sin, which is
the cause of destruction; and by turning their feet out of the ways of death,
and showing them the path which leads unto everlasting life and happiness,
and walking therein before them: that so we may at length rejoice together, Luke
15.9 10.
and be made partakers of that glory of thy Saints in the highest heavens. Amen.

What ought to be the maine care of every one in this life.
THe Heathen Orator could say, that none is so foolish, Demosth.
so sloathfull, as to neglect his own safety. This is true indeed of the
safety of the body. He is a monster in nature; that does not seek by all good
means, the preservation of it; there be but few that may be complained of in
this regard. But the eternal salvation of the soul, who sees not how little
it is regarded of the most; how strangely neglected; how faintly sought after;
yea, of many scarce thought upon? O folly of follies, and desperate
sloathfulnesse; yea, extreme madness of men, who are so sottishly careless
of that which of all things most nearely concerns them! For, what would it
advantage them to game the whole world, Mat. 16.26
and to hazard the loss of their own souls; yea, of soul and body for ever?
O blessed Lord, let the counsel of the wicked seem foolishnes unto me, and
preserve me and all thine, from the same both now and ever. Let me ever be
most careful of that which is most necessary; Luke 10.42
more solicitous of the eternal salvation of my soul, then of the safety and
preservation of this mortal and corruptible body, which is shortly to be
turned into the dust, and made food for the crawling worms, or baser vermin.
Above all cares let me be careful of this, to seek by all means, and to use
all diligence to make my Calling and Election sure: 2 Pet. 1.10
that so I may have comfort in this, that I am ordained to life, and shall be
preserved by thy mighty power, 2 Timothy 4.18 1 Pet. 1.5.
unto that glorious salvation which is prepared to be showed in the last time,
when thou shall be glorified in thy Saints, 2 These. 1.10.
and made marvelous in them that believe; yea, that so soon as the earthy
house of this tabernacle is dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1.
and this vveake and frail body turned into the earth out of which it was
taken, I shall be received into those heavenly habitations, those celestial
mansions, and be made partaker of that rich, that immortal, undefiled, and
neuer-fading inheritance purchased unto me by the blood of thy Son, and
reserved for me in the highest heavens, where thou raignest in endless and
unspeakable glory, blessed for evermore, Amen.

Christians often ill Judges of themselves and their own estates.
THe Children of God, (who are marked out by GOD himself unto life and
salvation) are oft-times ill Judges of themselves: they discern not aright of
their own estate, because they measure themselves by an uncertain and
deceivable rule; viz. not by the Word of GOD, which is of infallible truth,
but by sense and feeling, and by present apprehension of things, offered unto
their thoughts without due consideration of the wise and gracious dispensation
of the Lord, in his dealings with his children. Sometimes he fills their
hearts with joy, Psalm. 30.5.11 Isai. 66.11. 2 Cor. 1.3.4 1 Pet. 1.6.8.
and causes them to feel the sweetness of his divine and heavenly
consolations, that so they may have a taste of his goodness, yea, of the
exceeding riches of his grace and mercy, wherewith he imbraceth them in Christ
Jesus. Psalm. 10.1. and 13.1. and 2. and 22.1.42.5. and 119.82.143 1 Pet. 1.6. 2
Cor. 6.10.
Sometimes again he seems to hide his countenance from them for a while, and
vvithdraweth those comfortable and glorious feelings wherewith they were
before wonderfully refreshed, and wherein their souls rejoiced in unspeakable
manner; that thus they may be the more humbled in themselves, knowing that all
is from him, and not from themselves; and become the more earnest suitors unto
him, for the enjoying of that, Psalm. 34.4.
wherein they see their blessedness consists; as also, that he might vveyne
them the more from this wretched world, and cause them to aspire unto that
heavenly life where these comforts shall be always present with them in more
excellent manner, Psalm. 16.11 6.8.9.
without any intermission or alteration. O blessed Lord, teach me always to
judge rightly of my estate; not according to feeling, or the present
disposition of my unsettled mind, but according to the rule which thou have
given us in thy word, which never fails. Though thou do not always cause
me to taste of that heavenly Manna, Revel. 2.17
wherewith sometimes thou do refresh me; though thou do not always look
with a cheerful face, and with a smiling countenance upon me, causing thy
light to shine in my heart; but make as though thou were angry and much
displeased with me, and gave no ear to my humble supplications which I
power out in silence before thee; yea, Psalm. 22.2.
suffer me to be exercised with many and grievous temptations, and to endure
many a hard and doubtful conflict with that deadly enemy and adversary of mine,
who thereby seeks to make a prey of me; yet let me always lift up my heart
unto thee, Psalm. 27.14: James 1.2.
and comfort my self in thee continually, knowing assuredly that thou art
present with me, when thou seem to be farthest absent from me; that thy
gracious hand sustaineth and vpholdeth me, Psalm. 34.18 Genesis 42.7. and 45.1.
and that thou love me dearly, when thou seem to deal most roughly with
me, and that thou vvilt never leave me, till thou have through many changes
brought me, through the wilderness of this world, to the possession of that
heavenly Canaan, where (after I have been exercised here for a while, for the
trial and increase of thy graces in me) I shall be satisfied with the
pleasures of thy house, Romans 5.3.4 James 1.3.4.
and drink the waters of comfort, out of the well of salvation, yea, when I
shall see thee face to face continually, and rejoice with that joy before
thee, which shall never have any change, nor can ever be taken away from me.

Satan's policy in making the faithful to distrust God in his promises.
Satan when he cannot otherwise prevail with the children of God, seeks to
cast many doubts into them, of Gods mercy, goodness, and truth in the
performance of those rich and gracious promises which he has made unto them,
2 Cor. 2.7 11.
and to disquiet their consciences with restless fears, that so seeing he
can by no means deprive them of that glory and happiness which hereafter they
shall enjoy for ever in the heavens, yet he may bereave them of those inward
spiritual comforts, and heavenly refreshings wherewith their souls should be
cherished, their hearts strengthened, 2 Cor. 5.6.7.
and their lives vpholden, vvhiles they continue here as pilgrims and strangers
upon earth, absent from the Lord, and in hope and expectation only of the
fullness of that glory and blessedness, which hereafter they should have the
fruition and possession of for ever. O merciful and gracious Lord, stablish my
heart I beseech thee with thy grace: John. 8.44
Let me never give ear to Satan, that lying spirit, who enuies at that
blessed estate, whereunto, in the riches of thy unspeakable mercies, thou have
freely called me; but let me believe thee, who art the God of truth and
faithfulness, and rest upon thy word and promises, which abide sure and
steadfast for evermore, 1. Pet. 1.25
when all other things fail and come to nothing. Far be it from me, that I
should receive the witness of man, who is subject to error and deceit, and
not much more give credit unto that inward testimony which thou (who never
deceiuedst any that trusted in thee) 1 John 5.9
scalest unto my soul and conscience by the effectual working and operation
of thy holy and blessed spirit; yea having received so many pledges of thy
love, so many and so clear evidences of thy goodness, thy truth, thy power,
and thy wonderful providence, which works in all things (so that they that
are dimme-sighted may behold the but same a far off) let me shake off all
infidelity and unfaithfulness, and rest ever assured of thy mercy, that so my
life may be comfortable, my death joyful; yea, in life and death I may be
satisfied with the sweetness of thy grace, and so at length be filled with
the riches of thy glory in that heavenly kingdom of thine, which thou have
promised unto me.

Despair, or distrust of Gods promises, a great sin.
TO doubt of Gods promises, and to despair of his mercies, is a grievous sin,
and a most heinous offense in the eyes of God. For thereby men rob God of his
glory; Romans 4.20
they do him great injury, making his infinite mercy less then their sins;
Psalm. 51.1. and 103.11.12. and 108.4.
whereas the multitude of his mercies are as a bottomless depth, able to
swallow up the greatest offenses that are committed against him (if they be
truly repented of) yea, Act. 3.19. 1 Ioh. 5.10
they call his truth and faithfulness into question, Isai. 57.15 16. Math.
11.28.
and make him a liar, seeing he has promised forgiveness to all those, that
being truly humbled sue unto him for mercy. Lo, (such is their faithlesnesse)
they will not believe him of his word (who is the God of truth) nor give
credit to the truth which he (who never failed any) has sealed, Exodus 34 6
Ierem. 10.10. Deuteronomy. 7.9 Josh. 21.45
whereas they will credit a man who may deceive them. No doubt ought once to
be made thereof, of those who know what God is, Number. 23.19. 2 Cor. 1.20.
and how firm and stable all his promises are; or if any doubt shall arise
from the corruption of that evil and unbelieving heart which is in man, Heb.
3.12. Luke 9.41.
or the suggestion of Satan (who being a maine enemy as to all grace, so
especially that of faith, which is as it were the life and the anchor of the
soul, seeks continually to cast many doubts and vain fears into the mind)
it is not to be yielded unto by any means, Psalm. 42.11 James 4.7. Mat. 8.26.
but to be checked presently, resisted and driven back as it were with strong
hand, knowing that the testmony of the Lord is true, more certainty in it, then
in the warrant of any mortal man; yea, then in all the writings, Evidences,
Seals, Indentures, and witnesses, which all the men in the world can afford us.
O Lord, make me now and always such as to whom thy promises belong, and having
wrought this gracious work of thine in me, strengthen my faith, that I may
have full assurance and confidence in thee through thy Christ, and apply unto
my self all those gracious promises which thou have made unto me in thy word,
which shall stand for ever. O keep me from doubting of thy truth and
faithfulness at any time, Ier. 17.13. Heb. 10.38.39.
least it displease thee, and cause thee to withdraw thy self from me.

The small number of them that shall be saved.
THat there are but few that shall be saved, many damned, is a truth which the
word of God has sealed, yea, which Christ who is the truth it self, with his
own mouth, has ratified unto us, Mat. 7.13. Luke 13.24
calling the way to life a strait gate, and narrow way, which is found but of a
few; but the way to death and destruction, a wide gate and broad way, in which
most walk. What need we other proof? How can we once doubt of it? How
dare we ever call it into question, or enter into dspute of it? But because
many through Satan's suggestion, and the perverseness of their own wicked
disposition, are hard of belief even of those things which in Scripture are
most clear and evident unto us: Lo therefore a plain demonstration of it,
that so if thou be so faithless that thou will not believe it with thy
heart, thou may see it in a sort with thine eyes, and confess it with thy
mouth, when thou art so manifestly convinced of it. To calculate therefore, as
it were, the number of those that walk in this narrow way to life, by ranging
the whole world into certain sections and several ranks and orders. All that
ever were, or now are in the world, may be generally divided into two sorts;
called, or uncalled. Now compare these together, and we shall find that the
number of the uncalled (the Apostles times only excepted) has always exceeded
the number of the called, those I mean that were called by an outward calling,
through the ministry and preaching of the word. To begin from the beginning,
and so to proceed and descend lower. From the beginning of the world to the
departu^e into Egypt, which was above two thousand years, the Church was shut
up in the families, either of the holy fathers before the flood, or of the
Patriarchs; only they of their households called upon the name of the Lord;
only they made profession of religion in the true worship of the true God; the
rest were Idolatrous and profane people that cast off the Lords yoke.
Afterward, the Church began to be enlarged, and the bounds thereof extended;
the whole people of Israel were called, and accounted the people of God
(according unto the promise made unto Abraham) and all the rest of the world,
Genesis 17.7.8. Romans 9.4. Isay. 55.5. Hosea 1.10. Ephesians. 2.12 Luke 1.79.
a people that were no people, unto whom God did not so much as afford the
outward ordinary means of salvation, but suffered them to sit in darkness,
and in the shadow of death (though we deny not but that some few might be
extraordinarily called, even as many as joined themselves unto him) Now what
was Israel to the multitude and ouerflowing of the Gentiles, which were
scattered over the face of the earth; even as a plant among many people, Exodus
19.5 Deuteronomy. 7.6.7. and 14.2.
a pearl amongst many pebles, one grape of a cluster, or as the gleaning after
the harvest.

Well, to go on to succeeding ages; after many generations, the Lord, upon
just cause, Acts 13.46 Romans 11.20 1 These. 2.16
forsaking the Jews for a long time, (as we see) and casting them off from
being his people, as they were in former times, the Gentiles (of whom we are)
according to the promise, succeeded them, Romans 11.17.
and were planted in, in their room. And yet, how small is the number even of
them that are called, in comparison of those that remain uncalled to this
present day? This will be easily perceived if it be duly considered; how many
thousands, yea, thousand thousands of Infidels, Pagans, barbarous Turks, and
mis-beleeuing Jews there be, which sit in darkness, and in the valley of
death, without God, without Christ, and so without the means of Salvation;
not having so much as the knowledge and outward profession of true
Christianity and godliness. For one Christian even in outward profession,
there are many, who either never heard of the name of a Christian, or else hate
it, and are professed enemies unto it: Turcisme, Iudaisme, and Paganism having
ouerspread most nations, like a winter flood: these things then being rightly
observed, we see clearly that the greatest part of the world in times past
has been, and yet now is, uncalled, and therefore out of the way of salvation.

To passover therefore those numberl^sse multitudes of such as never had any
calling, and to leave them to the s cret counsel of the Lord (for as far a^
God has made known unto us in his revealed Will, there is no means of
salvation for them, or any of them, continuing in that estate.) Let us come
unto that other sort; those I mean, that are outwardly called, by the
preaching of the Word, which sounds amongst them, and make an outward
profession of Christ and his Gospel; within how narrow a room are they
confined, within the borders of Europe, the skirts of Asia under Turkish
bondage and tyranny, and that remote and almost unknown part of Africa, under
that Ethiopian governor, Prester-Iohn.
and not elsewhere, except it be a sprinkling here and there of some few,
that are scattered in the Indies, or in some other Countries. They are even
shut up, as it were, in this Angle, and corner of the world (as is apparent to
those that are of knowledge, and cast their eye upon this larger frame.) And
yet how few even of them that have received this outward calling, are and shall
be saved? Let that saying of our Savior himself testify; Mat. 20.16
Many are called, (by an outward calling and external profession) but few
(even of those that are so called) are chosen: to which also, that holy
Apostle of his, Romans 9.27
out of the kingly Prophet does well accord. Isa. 10.22.
Though the number of the children of Israel were as the sand of the Sea, yet
shall but a remnant be saved. All are not Israel which are of Israel; neither
shall all that are of the Church militant be of the Church triumphant. Even of
those that are called, the fewest are saved. And this will be better conceived
of us, if we consider what a multitude there are: First, Bellarm. pref. in
lib. de Pont. Nisi per Petrum non peruenitur ad Christum.
among the Papists, that Antichristian Synagogue, who make indeed a profession
of Christ, and Christian religion, have glorious shows to the eyes of the
world, fair titles without truth, boasting strangely, that they, and none but
they, are of the true Catholic and Apostolic Church, Bellar. lib. 4. de Not.
Eccl. cap. 4. Constat nostram solam esse veram Ecclesia^. vid. cap. 5.6.
that they have the keys of Heaven in their keeping only, and shall have
Heauen-gates hereafter set open unto them (all other being excluded and shut
Coster. Enchir. Conclusio. Absque dubio in aeternum peribunt. Gal. 5.4. John 16
2. Gal. 4.29. 2 The. 2.11
out) and yet indeed are clean out of the way of salvation, yea, persecute
them that walk in it, thinking that therein they do God good service, and
walk blinde-folded in those crooked paths of their own inventions, and
idolatrous worship, and superstitious obseruances which tend unto everlasting
perdition and condemnation. Revel. 14.9.10.11. and 18.4. 2 These. 2.12.
Yea, even amongst us, where the name of Christ is truly called upon. For
thousands there be in the bosom of this our Church, who are called indeed
Christians, (being baptized into the name of Christ, and wearing the outward
badge and cognizance of a Christian) who notwithstanding are as far from
salvation, as hell is from heaven, as their wicked courses and vain
conuersations do evidently witness to their faces, Isa. 3.9.
and even proclaim with loud voice to the whole world. For some, although
they have the name of Christians, are in truth no better then plain Atheists,
vvanting even the outward profession of that which they bear the name of,
making their pleasures, their profits, their honors and preferments, yea,
their bellies their Gods, Phil. 3.19.
altogether deuoting themselves to their service, never thinking of God, nor
regarding to walk in his ways, but scorning, and hating them that seek to
bring them to a holy submission unto him, Psalm. 1.1. Prou. 1.22 29.
and to his blessed ordinances. Some again, (though not so bad as they, yet
bad enough) seem to make some profession outwardly, and would be called and
accounted Christians, and yet live like Heathen, Pagans, Turks, Infidels, (if
not worse) having their lives stained very foully with many enormious crimes*
yea, such whereof the very Heathen would have been ashamed, and which cause
the sacrilegious Turks and Mahometans to blaspheme our religion, and to scorn
our most holy profession in disdainful manner. It were infinite to reckon them
up; Romans 1.29
fornications, adulteries, murders, usury, oppression, pride, maliciousness,
and many such like cursed fruits, which never sprung from that Religion which
those that practice them unjustly make profession of.

Others again, make indeed a goodly show and a glorious profession, 2 Timothy
3.5.
having the form of godliness, but denying the truth and the power thereof,
viz. all glozing hipocrites and counterfeite dissemblers, with whom the Church
of God has been always pestered, to the wounding and disgracing of true
Professors; Mat. 23.14.
their condemnation is the greater.

Thus if we go through all sorts of those that are outwardly called; yea,
amongst whom the true Religion, wherein salvation only is to be found, is
entertained, we shall see that even the number among them that shall be
saved, is but small: Mat. 7.21.
Not every one that says Lord, Lord; not every one that is an outward
professor, shall enter into the kingdom of Glory.

Now then, if the number even of Christians and professors (who have the way of
life and salvation plainly described before their eyes, and called upon daily
to walk therein, yea, encouraged with many and forcible reasons and
allurements to set forward therein with all speed that may be,) if the number
of them that are saved, is but small, (as it is so clear a truth that none
need once to doubt of it; nay, cannot, except he will gainsay him who is
the Truth it self) what then, I beseech you, is their number in comparison of
the whole world, which is so vvide and spacious, and of so large extent, that
it makes them that have any discerning of it, to vvonder at it? Sure they are
but even a handful to speak of; Luke 12.32
a little flock, as the shaking of an Olive tree, Isay 24.13
or as the grapes when the Vintage is ended. The number when it is cast up,
will be gathered into a short sum. Romans 9.28
In a word, as there are more Nettles then Roses, more Weeds then Flowers,
more Brambles then Vines, more Earth and baser Metal then pure Gold or
Silver; so, the number of them that shall be damned, is far greater then of
those that shall be saved, and made partakers of the blessedness of the Saints
in glory. Oh therefore how great is the security of the most, that go on so
boldly in their wicked and ungodly courses, never thinking of this narrow way
to life? How is it that they are so careless of their estate, seeing so few
shall be saved, so many damned? How has Satan bewitched and besotted them,
that though they hear and know these things, yet they dare presume to go
forward in that broad way, because they see so many vvalking in it, more blind
then blind Balaam, Numb. 22.23.
that saw less then his Ass; or if not as blind, yet as desperate, rushing
forward to their own destruction, when God causes though not his Angel, yet
his Ministers and Messengers (who are also called his Angels) to stand in that
broad way, Reu. 2.
with the drawn sword of his threatening sentence, Romans 8.13
to turn them out of it, that they perish not with the multitude; and to
enforce them, in a manner, to take the narrow way which is before them,
telling them often that the number of them that shall be saved is but small, in
regard of them that shall be damned eternally?

How should this terrify them? how should it amaze them? yea, how should it
awaken all of us, and quicken us in the way which leads to life and
salvation, making us to walk wisely and circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15.
not once daring to set our foot in the wrong way? If we were assured that
all in the world should be saved except some one, how ought every one to look
about, and to provide so, that he might not be that one? how much more
behooves it us, now to bestirre our selves, whiles this sounds in our ears,
that the fewest shall be saved, the most damned? If we were to go over some
high or steep mountain, where there were a narrow bridge, or a strait
passage, and that very slippery and dangerous, insomuch that we saw the
greatest part of them that went before us, for want of heedfulnesse and sure
footing, tumbling down in fearful manner among the craggy rocks, unto the
bottom of that deep gulf that was under them, to their present and
irrecouerable destruction, how careful would we be (except we were desperate
and madmen) to look with all diligence to our footing, that we slip not, and
to take the surest course that possibly we could? How much greater care and
diligence should we use in seeking to go forward in the safest manner that
may be, in this strait passage to life, especially seeing that so many
thousands do miscarry therein, and that the danger of missing it, is ten
thousand times more then the falling from the top of an high mountain into a
deep valley; (that being only the beating out of the brains, or the bruising
of the body, to a temporal destruction; this, the utter ruin and confusion
both of body and soul for ever.) Or if we were to pass through a field, or a
highway, wherein many thieves lie lurking on every side, so that few escaped
with their lives, would we not be much afraid of the imminent danger, and
therefore seek to provide for our safety in our journey, as much as possibly
we might? Doubtless we would. Well then, being now all of us to pass through
the vast Wilderness of this sinful and dangerous world, wherein the Devils,
even many thousands of damned Spirits, (our most cruel and malicious enemies
and deadly adversaries, the very Cut-throates of our souls, who always seek
by all means to work our destruction) lie continually in wait for us, as it
were so many troops in secret ambushment against us, so that few escape
eternal death and damnation, and come to life and salvation: ought not we much
more to be afraid, and to be careful by all means to escape that great
danger, and to come unto that exceeding glory? Have we any cause to be
careless and secure as the most are? Is it meet that we should give over our
selves to our vain pleasures and sinful courses, eating, drinking, playing,
sporting, (as those in the days of Noah, Luke 17.26 27.28.
and of Lot, did, when their destruction was at hand) and even drown our
selves in such dangerous looseness and security (as the most do) whiles our
enemies cut our throats? 1 These. 5.6
Is it meet (I speak to them that are of any wisdom or understanding to
discern what I say) is it meet, that we should be thus vain, thus
negligent, thus desperate, even with the wicked of the world, letting go
the hope of life, and plunging our selves into the depth of everlasting
confusion and condemnation, in so vvretched a manner?

O consider of this all ye that forget God, and casting away the means of
grace which he offers, run on headlong in a violent manner (as you are
led, yea, driven by Satan) unto your own destruction. Think of this: What do
you, O men, blinded and deluded by that deceiuer, (who as he has been
always a murderer, so now seeks to murder your souls; yea, Ioh. 8.44.
souls and bodies for ever.) Will you still suffer your selves to be mislead
by him? Will you needs bar your selves out of heaven, yea, out of all hope
of heaven and happiness? Will you needs for the sweetness of a few
transitory pleasures, profits and delights, deprive your selves of so great
glory, those full and euerflowing streams of all heavenly pleasures and
delights, which if I had the tongue of men and Angels, 1 Cor. 2.9.
I were not able fully to express? Will you needs be so foolish and unwise as
for the obtaining of these fading and perishing things, in a sinful manner,
to cast away your selves for ever? Will you needs set upon your selves the
brand of eternal perdition, the notes and marks of a reprobate, so that they
that see you, may say, Lo, there goes one that walks in the broad way to
hell, and destruction? Or, do you think that walking and continuing in that
broad way, it is possible for you ever to be saved, and to enter with that small
number into that glorious kingdom, Ioh. 3.3.
or to escape that fearful pit of endless confusion? O be not so secure, so
foolish and unwise in that which so greatly and so nearly concerns you. O be
not so great enemies to your own souls, so cruel and merciless to your
selves. Do not so desperately deprive your selves of so great glory and
happiness, in comparison of which, all the things of this world (pleasures,
Matt. 16.26.
profits, honors, and whatsoever else is most highly accounted of in the
world) are but draffe, dross, and dongue, dreams and fancies, vain and
transitory things, not worth the speaking of. Do not so unwisely, do not I
beseech you in the fear of the Lord, and in the bowels of Christ Jesus, cast
away your souls in such a careless manner, which he came to save with his
precious blood; yea, and sweat drops of water and blood, that he might redeem
the same. 2 Cor. 5.20.
Christ Jesus himself entreats and beseeches you, in the mouths, and by
the means of his own Ministers, in and by whom he speaks to you, to leave
the broad way, Luke 13.24. 2 Pet. 1.10 Phil. 2.12.
wherein you walk, and to strive to enter in at the narrow gate, to give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure and to work out your salvation
with fear and trembling. O therefore, hear his voice whiles it is time, and
let not Satan stop your ears, and delude and bewitch you, as he has done
heretofore, and as he does the greatest part of the world, to their utter
ruin and everlasting confusion both of body and soul. Oh his sleights and
policies, how many and how treacherous they are! O let him not keep you any
longer from vvalking in this narrow way to life, and cause you to walk on in
that broad and crooked way, the end and issues whereof (howsoever they seem
pleasing to you) Pro. 12.15 and 14.12.
are death and endless vvoe and misery. If the fear of loosing heaven and
happiness (which the enjoying of all the things of this world cannot
recompense) will not move you, let the danger of falling into hell and
damnation amaze you, and cause you to stand at a stay, and to go no further in
so fearful a way, but speedily to recall yourselues, and to turn out of it.
The very bruit beast will not run into a deep pit, or any danger which it
sees before it in the way wherein it should go, but will turn aside with
Balaams Ass, and seek by all means to escape and avoid it: and will you be
more unwise then the brute and unreasonable creature, taking rather the way of
death and destruction then the way of life and salvation? If you will needs be
so brutish and senseless, and will by no means be reclaimed, go on (as those
who are destitute of understanding and all true spiritual wisdom) and
fulfill the measure of your wickedness, till you perish in it, and complain
when it is too late, of your great folly, in making so bad a choice, and
following so unwise and dangerous a course, though you were often forwarned of
the wretched end of it. But Lord, though others be so careless and secure, yet
let it not be so with any of thine; let them shake off all slothfulness and
negligence in so weighty a matter as concerns thy glory, and their own
everlasting either wealth or vvoe; yea, let them never be at quiet, never at
rest, till they know certainly and upon good evidence that they are picked and
sholed out of that great number that shall perish and be damned for ever, to be
of that little flock that shall live with thee eternally. And make me truly
thankful, I humbly pray thee, for this gracious work of thine toward me. O
merciful Lord, how great is thy goodness which thou have vouchsafed unto me
herein, in that it has pleased thee in the riches of thy grace, through
Christ, to make me one of that small number, for whom thou have prepared a
kingdom; that thou have caused me to walk in the narrow way which leads to
life and salvation, when as thou suffer the most to run on headlong in
that broad and crooked way which leads to death and everlasting destruction?
What am I, or what is there in me more then in others that perish, that thou
should show this favor unto me more then unto them? It is only thy love,
and thy undeserved kindness, which it has pleased thee of thy bounty and
goodness in thy Christ to vouchsafe unto me. O let me never be unmindful of
the same. But let the often and serious consideration thereof draw my heart and
all my affections unto thee, causing, yea, even constrayning me to love thee
entirely and unfeignedly above all things, to fear thee, to stand in a holy awe
and reverence of thee continually, and to seek by all means to glorify thee.
And let me never be discouraged with the straitness of the passage or the
many difficulties, which I shall meet with, vvhiles I walk in this narrow way,
seeing that it tends to life and salvation; but let me go forward without
faynting at any time, yea, with much cheerfulness and delight, knowing that
all these light and momentary afflictions are no ways worthy of that glory,
Romans 8.18
unto which through the straitness of this gate I shall shortly have passage.

All that are of the Church visible or militant, shall not be of the Church
Invisible and Triumphant.
MAny have access into the Princes outmost chamber, who are not admitted into
the chamber of Presence, but excluded and shut out from having entrance
thereinto. In like manner; Many are brought to the fellowship of the visible
Church, which is as it were the outmost chamber of the house of God, the palace
of that great King (and a favor it is that is vouchsafed them herein, for all
do not attain unto it: Psalm. 147.19.20.
) but few are so blessed as to be led, by the spirit, further into that secret
and privy chamber, where God shows his familiar presence, Cant. 2.4
and unto which none are admitted, but they who are of the communion of
Saints, Hebr. 12.22.23.
of the court of heaven, heirs of the glory of that celestial kingdom,
where they shall always attend upon the Majesty of the highest, the great God
of the whole world. O Lord, it is thy mercy that thou have called me to have
a place in the visible Church here on earth, and to live among thy Israel, thy
Saints and chosen, to enjoy thy word and Sacraments, and to look as it were,
Cant. 2.9.
through a c^euis into the holy of Holies; (for the greatest part of the world
have not obtained thus much: How many thousands of Jews, Turks, heathen do
we see at this day excluded and cast out from the lists and outmost bounds of
thy Church? Revel. 11.1.2.
) But it is thy vvonderfull and unspeakable goodness toward me, that thou
have admitted me into the chamber of Presence, calling me to the blessed
fellowship and communion with thy Saints, yea, with thine own self, making
me one of thy Israel, John. 14.21.22.23. Gal 2.20. Phil. 3.10. Reave. 3.20.
one of thy Saints and chosen; a true member of the Church militant here on
earth, and heir of the glorious and triumphant Church in the highest heavens,
where I shall live with thee for ever. John. 14.2. and 17.24
O blessed be thy name for the riches of thy love and infinite grace vouchsafed
unto me herein, through Christ Jesus my Lord. Thou might justly have
excluded me as well as others, yea, even from the outmost courts of thy Sion;
but it has pleased thee, O Father, to magnify thy great mercy toward me thy
poor and unworthy creature, that so my heart might be drawn up the more unto
thee, and inflamed with an unfeigned love of thee. O therefore that thou
would knit my heart and soul unto thee, and cause me to set all the
affections of my love, joy and delight in thee, to whom only they are due,
and to whom alone I desire they may be given. And teach me withal to seek
daily more and more to press forward, and to strive to get nearer access unto
thee, indeauouring by a holy life and godly conversation to obtain full and
comfortable assurance that thou have called me into the communion of thy chosen
ones, admitted me into the chamber of thy gracious presence, John 8.35
and that I shall abide in thy house for ever, even in those glorious mansions
and heavenly habitations where thine honor dwells, and where all thy Saints
shall reign and triumph with thee for evermore.

The blessed estate of a true Christian, in regard of that spiritual and
heavenly union that is between Christ and him.
OH how blessed a Union is there between Christ and every true Christian: Who
is able to express it? who does not admire and vvonder at it? It is a great
matter for them to be accounted his friends, Ioh. 15.13 15. Mark. 3.34 Leuit.
25.25* Heb. 2.11.12.13
his kinsmen, his brethren, his children (as all these names and titles he
gives unto them in the Scriptures.) But this is not all; it is not one half;
for they are not only tied unto him by these strait and sacred bonds of
friendship, kindred, and brotherhood; but they are made one with him, one
flesh, Ephe. 5.31 Ephe. 5.30 1 Cor. 12.12. Hebr. 2.11
one body; yea, in a sort himself, having his own name given unto them (as
afterward.) To shadow out this union unto thee by those types, as it were, and
semblances by which the Scriptures have declared it unto us, in that manner that
our frail nature is able to conceive of it (for the weakness and
shallowness of our capacity is such, as it is not able fully to comprehend it
in the excellency of it.) See thou not what union there is between the head
and the members of the body? So it is between Christ and true Christians.
They are knit unto him as it were, by the sinews of the spirit, and by the
bond of faith, as the members of the body are unto the head; and from him as
from the head, Ephe. 1.22 and 5.23. Gal. 2.20.
life flows into the whole body; the life of grace and spiritual motion and
action is conveyed and communicated unto the Church and all the faithful
members thereof, which are the body of Christ. 1 Cor. 12.27 Ephesians. 4.12
Again this union between Christ and them is compared to that which is
between the Vine and the branches: So, John. 15 1.2.
that as the stock and the branches grow together, so the faithful being
rooted in Christ, and set as it were into him, Romans 6.5
as branches of that heavenly Vine receive life and sap from him, growth of
all spiritual and heavenly graces. It is compared to a fountain, and the
waters issuing and steaming therefrom Ioh. 4.14
? Likewise to the cornerstone, in a building, and the stones that are built
upon the same Ephe. 2.20.22.
? For so Christ is often in Scripture compared to the cornerstone, upon which
(as their manner of building in old time in those parts was) the whole building
was fastened and combined, and so reared up; and the faithful compared to
living 1 Pet. 2.5.
stones built upon that sure foundation; and thence also called the temple of
the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19 Ioh. 14.23 and Reave. 3.
wherein God himself dwells ^0.
, and will dwell for ever. It is compared also to the body and the apparel
which clothes and couers it, and shelters it from cold and rain, and from the
injury of the weather, whence the faithful are said to put on Christ Romans 13
14 Gal. 3.27.
. And lastly, to the Husband and his Spouse; whence Christ is often called the
Husband of his Church, Ephesians. 5.23. Mat. 25.6
the Bridegroom which is preparing for his marriage solemnities; and the
Church his Bride Revel. 21 2. and 22.17
, his love, Cant. 1.8. and 5.1.2.
his dove, his undefiled Spouse; a pure Virgin, Psalm. 45. 2 Cor. 11 2.
prepared for him, and in whom he greatly pleases and delights Psalm. 11.13.15
himself. We know how near and strait the union is between the husband and
his dear and loving Spouse; they are according to Gods own ordinance but one
flesh Genesis 2.14. Ephe. 5.30 31.
: Such is the union in this spiritual marriage between Christ and his Church,
and every faithful member of the same. Thus then thou see what a near and
strait union and conjunction there is between Christ and the true Christian,
even all that are justified by his grace, and sanctified by his spirit. They
are in him, and he is in them: He is their head, and they are his 1 Cor. 6.15.
and 12.27.
members, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; they are ingraffed into
him, and become one with him, John 17.10.21.22.23.
as he is one with the Father. He dwells in them, and they in him Ephe. 3.17
1 Cor. 6.17. John. 6.56
. But lest thou should conceive of this amiss, consider seriously what
manner of Union this is, and how it is wrought. A heavenly meditation, and
vvorth thy best attention. First then, know that this union is not carnal, but
spiritual, not natural but supernatural and mystical. It is not a carnal or
a corporal union, as if Christ's body were turned into our bodies (as the
Papists feign in that new-deuised Transubstantiation, and strange metamorphosis
of theirs;) nor joined unto them in a local or bodily manner. Thou must not
imagine any such matter; for that were with the Capernaits Ioh. 6.41.52.
to conceive grossly of Christ our Savior, and with Nicodemus Ioh. 3.4.
to show thy self altogether carnal inconceiuing these heavenly mysteries. It
is against the nature of Christ's body which is Ephesians. 1.20 and 4.10.
ascended into Heaven, and there sits at the right hand of God in glory, and
therefore cannot be united unto us in that manner, being on earth, so many
thousand miles distant from him. But it is a spiritual and heavenly union: It
is not a real transfusion of the substance of Christ unto us (as some
Heretics have dreamed) but an essential communication of himself and his
graces unto us, in a spiritual manner. More distinctly. First, the faithful
are united unto his flesh, and to his humane nature; and then by means hereof
unto his divine Ioh. 6.53.56.57. Hebr. 10.10.20.
nature. His flesh is, as it were, the veil by which they have entrance into
the holy of Holies, and became in a sort partakers of his divine 2 Pet 1.4
nature. Their whole person is united unto Christ, whence they are said to be
his flesh and his bones, not as they are men, but as they are Christians, and
ingraffed into him, and so with him make one body, whereof he is the head,
they the members. Whole Christ is united unto them, both his humane and his
divine nature; and they are wholly united unto him; both their souls and 1 Cor.
6.15.
bodies, and their whole person. Adam, as He^ah was joined to the first Adam
(for that union between them was a type of this spiritual union between him
and his Church, his Spouse.) Now the whole person of Euah was joined and united
to the person of Adam; whence they are said to be no more two but Ge. 2.24.
Ephe. 5.31
one flesh.

Acts ^.12
neither for one nor other. the Son of God, assumed and united unto himself
the whole nature of man, not his flesh only, or his soul only, but both; and
therefore by virtue of that union, the whole nature of man must be united unto
him. Ephesians. 5.23
head and and Savior of all his faithful members, and therefore their whole
person must of necessity be united to him; otherwise how shall he be the head
of both, and the Savior of both, even of the whole man? Thus then there is a
true, a real, an essential and entire union between the faithful and
Christ, if we respect the things united, viz. Christ and his members; but if
we regard the manner of this union, it is wholly spiritual, mystical and
supernatural; far above the reach of the natural 1 Cor. 2.14
man yea, of any man fully to conceive and comprehend it; nay, it is a great
and a vvonderfull mystery, firmly to be believed as an article of our Faith,
and not curiously in a carnal and sensible manner to be searched into. And
therefore the Apostle shadowing it out unto us by the union which is between
Man and Wife, coupled together in mariage-bond, breaks forth into this Ephesians.
5.32.
speech; This is a great Secret, or a (...).
great Mystery, viz. this union beweene Christ and his Church. It is a great
mystery, not to be comprehended by sense and carnal reason, but to be believed
and apprehended by faith only, which is that supernatural light by which we
see things that are Heb. 1.11
invisible, and cannot be otherwise seen or discerned. Happy are they that
have felt by comfortable experience what it is that we say. Having seen what
this union between Christ and the faithful is, it is next to be considered
how it is wrought in them. This union therefore and spiritual conjunction is
wrought by the spirit on Christ's part, and by faith on our part. These are the
two bands of it. First, the spirit, through the effectual operation and
working thereof, knitteth them unto Christ. As the nerves or sinews being
diffused from the brain into all the parts and members of the body do join
and unite them al unto the head, from whence they receive life and action: So
the Spirit of of Christ, proceeding from him who is the head of the Church, is
diffused as it were, and communicated unto his whole body, which is the Church,
1 Cor. 12 27.
and unto every member of the same, every particular believer; and so knitteth
and unites them unto Christ their head, so that they have communion with him,
and receive from him all spiritual grace, Ioh. 1.16
life and motion, according unto their measure Romans 12.3. 1 Cor. 12.11. Ephesians.
4.7.
: yea, it knitteth them unto him in a more strait and near union, then the
members of the natural body are knit and united unto the head. For they may be
separated from it, and so perish; but there is no separation, no division, no
disunion possibly to be made between Romans 8.39
Christ and any one of his members, much less the whole Church.

Again, (for I had rather be too plentiful then too sparing in the
illustration of this so excellent and so heavenly a truth) as all the members
of the body are united unto the head, and quickened by one and the same soul,
which animates them, and conuayeth natural life unto every one of them: So
all the faithful, whether they be in Heaven above, or in Earth below, of the
Church militant, or triumphant, are joined and united unto CHRIST, by one and
the selfsame Spirit, which coming from the Head CHRIST JESUS, gives
spiritual life, quickening and motion unto them, so that the whole body being
coupled and knit together Ephesians. 4.16.
by every joint, receives increase of grace by degrees, and grows up daily
more and more, till the body of CHRIST, which is his CHVRCH, be fully
perfected and consumated, receiving the Ephesians. 4.13.
accomplishment of all Grace and Glory in the highest heavens. This is the
first means, whereby this union is made between CHRIST and the faithful,
even this sacred bond of the Spirit. And from this efficacy and operation of
the spirit, uniting us unto CHRIST, it is said by the Apostle that we (even
all believers) have drunk into the same 1 Cor. 12 13 Ephesians. 4.4.
Spirit. And again, that we are baptized into one body; that is, we are made
one Body, whereof Christ is the Head. Now that other bond, by which they are
tied and united unto Christ, and that on their part, is Faith. For the Spirit
of God having begotten a true and lively faith in us by the preaching of the
Word, by means of this excellent grace we are united unto Christ. For thereby
we lay hold on Christ with all his merits and 1 Cor. 1.30 2 Cor. 3.18. Phil.
3.21. 1 Ioh. 3.2. Gal. 2.20.
benefits, and apply them in particular to our selves, and so become one with
him; all which he has done for mankind, being made as proper unto us, as if
it were our own. And hence it is that Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by
Ephesians. 3.17
Faith. Faith is the hand, as it were, whereby we receive Christ being offered
unto us in the Word; by means of it Christ is made ours, and we his, by an
inseparable union. And thus we have at large described that spiritual and
mystical union which is between Christ and the faithful, his members. So
near and so strait a union, that the holy Ghost in Scripture gives sometimes
(as was said) the name of Christ himself unto the Church, and calls it by
his own name; even as the name of the husband, by reason of that union
between them, is given unto the Wife, and she called by his name. As 1 Cor. 12
12.
the body is one (says the Apostle) and has many members -- even so is
Christ, that is, the Church of Christ. Such is the nearenesse and efficacy of
that spiritual conjunction of Christ and the faithful, that he calls them not
only Christians, (as sometimes they are Acts 11.26.
named) or his Spouse, his Sister, his Cant. 5.2.
Love, his Dove, his Undefiled, etc. but even Christ, his own name: Whence
also it is, that that which is done to the Church, or any member thereof, he
accounts it as done to himself, whether it be good or evil. The works of
Love and Charity done to his poor members, in the day when he shall sit upon
his Throne to judge the World, he will pronounce them to have been done unto
himself. I was a hungry, Mat. 25.35.36.40.
and ye gave ME meat: I thirsted, and ye gave ME drink: naked and ye
clothed ME: sick and ye visited ME, etc. In as much as ye have done it unto
one of the least of these MY Brethren, ye have done it unto ME. And when Saul
persecuted the poor Saints of God, and breathed out threatenings and slaughter
against them, Christ looking down from heaven, and beholding him, cries out
unto him with a loud voice, Acts 9.4. Heb. 4.15. Zach. 2.8. 1 Cor. 12.26.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me? The Foot is wounded on earth, and the
Head feels it, and complains of it from Heaven. The persecution or wrong done
to his Church, or any member thereof, he esteems it as done to himself. O my
soul raise up thy self unto the often and serious consideration of this
spiritual and mystical union of the faithful with Christ their head and
Savior? Oh how full is it of sweetness and much comfort and inward solace?
Think of it, and believe it without all wavering and doubting. Say not, as
carnal men are wont, and as Nicodemus did in a point of like nature, How can
this be? John 3.9. and 6.42
How can Christ being in heaven so far distant from us in regard of bodily
presence be united unto us? Reason not so, as flesh and blood will suggest unto
thee; but believe this steadfastly and assuredly, as if thou be spiritual
and not carnal, thou will, and can not do otherwise. The truth of God has
sealed it, the Scriptures in many places ratify and confirm it, and it is a
great measure of infidelity to deny it, or to doubt of it. Thou see it not
with the eyes of thy body: What then? vvilt thou believe nothing, but that
which thou see with thy bodily eyes; then thou will not believe that there is
a Union between thy soul and thy body, for thou see it not with thine eyes;
and yet if it were not, thou were a dead man, and a liuelesse carcass. Thou will not deny, but that there is a Union between man and wife, though they be
distant in place, yea, though the one of them be in this country, and the other
in that (for it is a received Maxim, or rule granted of all, that distance of
place dissolueth not the marriage-bond: both Gods law, and man's law so
determines it) and will thou be so faithless as not to believe that there is
a Union between that heavenly bridegroom Christ Jesus, though he be in
heaven, and his faithful members, many of them, on earth? Shall not faith be
of more efficacy then nature? Thou will not deny (that which experience
teaches thee, except thou be blind) that the sight of the eye of thy body
in a moment of time as it were, and in an instant does reach unto the Stars
in the firmament, and is in a sort united unto them, though so many thousand
miles distant from thee; and wilt not thou grant much more, that faith which
is the eye of the soul, and of a far more powerful, and piercing nature,
may ascend presently into heaven, where Christ sits in glory, and lay hold
upon Christ, and so join and unite the believer with Christ; not only with
his Deity (which is every where) but also with his humanity, which is in
heaven only, yea, with whole Christ, God and man. Be not so carnal, so
incredulous. Have faith and thou vvilt believe it, yea, if thou have faith and
the spirit of Christ dwelling in thee, thou can not but most assuredly
believe it as a main Article of thy Christian Faith, and a principal pillar
and groundwork of thy salvation. Neither do thou think it sufficient to
believe it only, but labor to feel it by a comfortable experience of it; and
withal seek to raise up thy self by the due meditation thereof to the
beholding of the infinite and unspeakable love and bounty of, Christ thy
Savior toward thee and toward all true believers. Assure thy self of his
love, who has come down from heaven, and by a spiritual marriage allied,
yea, linked himself unto thee, Esaias. 9.6 Hebr. 2.16
giving himself unto thee, clothing himself with thy flesh; and joining thee
unto himself, and in him unto God his Father; John 17.21 Isa. 53.
and so in him, and through him made thee partaker of all those rich treasuries
of his grace and glory, even whatsoever he has wrought for mankind, and Romans
8.32 1 Cor. 3.21.22 Reave. 2.17 27.28. and 3.5.12.21
made promise of in the Gospel, wherein that contract which is made between
him and thee is published to the whole world, and the consummation thereof by
that marriage feast and joyful solemnities reserved for another world in that
glorious kingdom of his, where thou shall live and remain with him for ever,
inioying his love, and the comfortable fruits and eff^cts of it, in
unspeakable and glorious manner, to thy endless and everlasting bliss and
happiness. Assure thy self of this; and let thy heart spring for joy in thee;
yea, with heart and voice sing forth cheerfully with the Spouse that heavenly
Ditty and marriage-song, I am Can. 2.16. and 5.4.16. and 6.2. and 8.6.7
my welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine: His mouth is as sweet things, and
he is wholly delectable: My heart is altogether affectioned toward thee: Set me
as a seal on thine heart, and as a signet upon thine arm; for love is strong,
the coals thereof are fiery, and the flame vehement: much water cannot quench
it, neither can the floods of persecution drown it: If any would give all the
substance of his house, yea all the riches of the world, I would Phil. 3.8.
contemn and despise it, rather then be Ruth. 1.17
parted from thee, O my blessed Savior and Redeemer, who have loved me so
dearly, and given thy self Gal. 2.20 1 Cor. 3 21. Revel. 21.7
for me, yea, unto me, that thou mighist make me one with thee, and one with
thy Father, and so, heir of all things both in heaven and in earth. Assure thy
self hereof, and raise up thy self thereby, in a joyful manner to sing
praises unto him continually, who has done so great things for thee without
any deserts of thine, and Romans 8.23
long earnestly for the time wherein thou shall in a more heavenly manner enjoy
the benefit of that blessed union; desire to be Phil. 1.23
dissolved from this earthly body, and to be with thy Savior in the heavens,
which is every way best for thee: Sigh after him, and let him hear thee crying
after him with the voice of his Spouse. O my well-beloved, flee away Can. 8.18
and be like unto the swift Roe, or to the young Heart upon the mountains: Come
riding upon the heavens in those fiery chariots to judge the world, and to take
me unto thy self, and to carry me with the voice of triumph Psalm. 45.14
and melody into that glorious palace which thou have prepared for me, there
to dwell with thee for ever; and with the Spirit and the Bride, Come, Reave. 22
17.20 Psalm. 22.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: My soul thirsts after thee my God and
Savior; when shall I come and appear before thee? when shall I see thy face,
and enjoy thy blessed and glorious presence in those heavenly mansions which
thou art gone before to provide for me, Ioh. 14.2
and for thine with me? Thus do thou unfeignedly desire and long for
continually that glorious Tit. 213
appearance of our Savior, when as he shall be made 2 These. 1.10
marvelous in his Saints, and cause thee to see how great thy blessedness is,
in regard of that heavenly union and conjunction with him. And in the mean
while rest with patience, and comfort thy self in all estates; for can it be
but that it should be well with the who art so nearely allied unto Christ; his
well-beloved Spouse whom he has married Hose. 2.19
unto himself for ever in righteousness, in mercy, and in compassion; yea, for
whom he has shed his own precious blood, that so he might cleanse Ephesians.
5.26
and sanctify thee unto himself; yea, whom he has made flesh of his flesh?
Can it bc that he should not have a special care over thee, Romans 8.32.33 Psalm.
23.1. and 34.10. and 84.11
and provide every thing for thee, which he sees to be best for thee? Can he
suffer any evil to happen unto thee? yea, rather will he not seek by all
means to cherish thee? No man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes
and cherishes it: Ephesians. 5 29
Even so does the Lord his Church, which is his own body, whereof he is Ephesians.
5.23
the head and Savior. Even nature will teach every one to make much of his
body, to preserve it from all evil, from all hurts and dangers which might
befall it, or any part or member of it, and to do it all the good he can by
any means; how much more shall Christ (who is the God of nature, and the
fountain of all grace, and far more tender over his body (the Church) and
all the members of it, then any man is, or possibly can be, of his own
natural and corruptible body,) how much more shall he save, defend, preserve,
and provide all things necessary and convenient for his? It cannot be
otherwise. Eccles. 8 12 Isay. 3.10.
Assuredly, it shall be well with thee, and with all that are his. He is
Almighty and able to do it for thee, and most loving, careful and tender
over thee, and therefore will do it according to his promise plighted unto
thee in this behalf. Hebr. 13 10
Comfort thy self with this; and fear not, howsoever Satan and his wicked
instruments Psalm. 3.6. and 118.6.
shall oppose themselves against thee; be not danted or dismayed thereat, yea,
let them (as they have cause) be stricken with fear, and damped in their
malicious courses intended against thee. Little think they what they do when
they do ill unto thee; they strike against the Rock which will dash them in
pieces Isay. 8.15
; they kick against the prick Act. 9.5.
. Touch not mine anointed, Psalm. 105 15
says the Lord, those that are anointed with the heavenly graces of my holy
spirit; yea, (which is more) touch not, harm not, those that are united unto
me, that are as near unto me as mine own flesh and bones, the Zachar. 2 8
apple of mine eyes, most dear and tender unto me. Christ cannot endure this,
he will not suffer it to go unpunished: O it is a fearful thing to be an
enemy to the least of Christ's redeemed ones. Fear Isay. 8.12.13
not therefore the fear of any man, that in opposing thee, sets himself
against Christ thy Savior, but let them fear and tremble whiles they do it,
and trust thou in the Lord, and cleave fast unto him in all things. And seeing
he has linked thee unto himself so near, making thee his Spouse, and
professing himself to be jealous of Exodus 20 5. Hos. 2.2.7
thy love* see that thou preparest thy self so as thou may always be ready
to be presented unto him as a 2 Cor. 11.2.
pure Virgin, that so he may delight Prou. 8.31 Cant. 4.10
in thee, and in thy love continually.

O merciful LORD, do thou work and frame my heart unto these things daily
more and more, I humbly beseech thee; especially inflame my frozen and benumbed
affections, and kindle in me the sparks of true and unfeigned love unto thee,
who have dealt so exceeding graciously with me above, all merits or deserts of
mine. Oh what a vvonderfull and unspeakable love is this of thee, my GOD and
Savior, that thou should pick and cull me out of the Gal. 1.4.
world, a sinful wretch, a forlorn person, not worthy of the least degree
of thy love, a branch of that cursed Romans 11.17. and 5.12 17.
root, the son of Adam, the child of wrath and perdition (for so I must
needs confess I was by Ephesians. 2.3. Tit. 3.3.
nature as well as others) and unite me so nearely Ephesians. 2.13.
unto thine own self, as to be flesh of thy flesh and bone of thy bone, one
with thee, as thou art one with the Father. O the depth Ephesians. 3.18
of thy love, and infinite compassions toward me! It cannot be conceived, it
cannot be expressed, what a marvelous degree of love this is. It is
unsearchable, boundles, bottomless. O let the meditation of it even ravish my
heart and soul, and cause me to break forth incessantly into praise and
thankfulness unto thee and to seek by all means to show my love unto thee,
who have magnified thy Grace and Mercy so richly toward me, in making me of so
wretched a creature, so blessed and glorious, though the veil be yet so spread
before mine eyes, that Col. 3.3.4. 1 Ioh. 3.2.
I cannot perfectly see or discern what my blessedness and glory is; but
shall have it fully manifested both unto my self and others, when thou (who
art my life and hope) shall appear in glory, and be made marvelous in 2 These.
1.10.
all them that believe in thee.

How Christians are to live in regard of that near union that is between them
and Christ.
THE body of every true believer, is a member of Christ's 1 Cor. 6.15
body. How carefully therefore ought they always to keep them from being the
instruments of sin, or the weapons Romans 6.19.
of unrighteousness, since Christ thereby is so greatly dishonored? Shall the
members of Christ be made the limbs of Satan? Shall his tongue speak
wickedness, his eyes see vanity, his hands work iniquity, or any part of
his mystical body be made an instrument to commit sin and unrighteousness?
God forbid. Blessed Lord, seeing it has pleased thee of thy free grace,
through faith, to unite me unto Christ my head and blessed Savior, to ingraffe
me into his body, and to make even this weak and frail body of mine, a true
member of his mystical body; grant I beseech thee, that I may labor
continually to keep this vessel of mine, holy and undefiled, free from all
pollution and defilement of sin, and from being an instrument to commit any
wickedness, lest thereby I should dishonor my head, and show my self
unworthy 2 Cor. 6.14.15.
to be joined unto him in so near and happy a union: yea, let it be my
endeavor always to preserve my body in purity and holiness, and to give all
the parts and members thereof, servants unto righteousness, yea, to serve thee
continually, both in body 1 Cor. 6.20.
and spirit, that so honor and glory may redound to Christ my Savior, who
with thee, O Father, and thy Spirit, be blessed both now and for ever, Amen.

How Christians are to be affected one toward another in regard of their union
to Christ, and each to other.
ALL that are true Christians, being united unto Christ their head, are 1 Cor.
12
members of the same body under Christ their head; united each to other, as
they are all to Christ: members one of another, Ephe. 4.4
living by the same Spirit, and looking for the same glory, 1 Pet. 1.3 Ioh.
17.24
even that immortal and neuer-fading inheritance reserved in the heavens for
them, where they shall dwell with Christ their Savior for evermore. How then
should they envy, hate and malign one another, and seek to procure what
mischief they can each to other? What an unkind and unnatural thing is this?
Does one member of the body ever hate 1 Cor. 12.20.21.
or envy another, yea the basest and meanest (though indeed even the basest
and vncomliest have not only a use and conueniencie for the rest, but also a
kind of beauty and comeliness in themselves, howsoever in the present estate
of this sinful life covered with the show of indecencie and moral
dishonestie;) yea, does not one care for the other, 1 Cor. 12.25.26.
suffer with the other, and rejoice with the other? So is it with all that are
true Christians, natural and lively members of that mystical body of Christ
Jesus. There is a mutual sympathy between them. They are, as it were of one
heart, and of one Acts 4.32.
soul. They cannot but love and affect those in whom they see evident, or
likely signs to persuade them that they are true Christians, grafted with
them into the same stock; they can not hate them from the heart, they can not
vvish or procure their evil, but desire and seek their good in all things,
and so much the more will their love abound toward them, as they see that they
are more nearely united unto Christ their Head and Savior. Either therefore,
show thy entire and Christian affection unto all the Saints, the members of
Christ, or else never deceive 1 Ioh. 4.20
thy self with the vain dreams of thine own brain, but know thy self, and
confess (as the truth is) that thou art not yet united unto Christ, that thou
have no part in him, but art a stranger from him and from that life of grace
and glory which flows from him; yea, that thou art of that serpentine Genesis
3.15.
seed which is always at enmity with the redeemed of Christ, one of that
wicked race, and of Satan's brood Ioh. 3.10
, a child of the curse and an heir of perdition Phil. 1.28.
, who could never abide the sons of the promised Gal. 4.29
. If thou say thou art in the light, thou give God the lie 1 John 2.9.11.
; nay, thou art covered with darkness, and walk like one blinded, unto
thine own destruction in that place of utter darkness and everlasting
desolation.

Gracious Lord, as thou have in the riches of thy mercies united me unto
CHRIST, and so through him to all that are his, making us all members of one
body, whereof he is the Head; so unite my heart and soul, I humbly pray thee,
in an entire love and affection unto thee, and unto thy Son, my blessed Lord
and Savior; and in him, and for his sake, to all those in whom I can see any
signs or evidences that they are ingraffed into that mystical body together
with me, children of the same Father, brethren of the same Savior, and Heirs
of the same grace and glory, which thou have freely promised to all thine. O
let me never hate, despise, or vvrong the least of them in any sort (for
thereby I should show my self to be very unnatural;) but let me love them,
delight in them Psalm. 16.3.
, and seek to do Gal. 6.10
them what good I can by any means. Let me root out of my heart all sinister
conceits and wicked surmises, (which are the very bane of true Christian love
and Charity) and let me bend my self always to think the best of 1 Cor. 13
them, and to do the best for them, according to their necessity, and my
ability; yea, let them always be dear unto me, and precious in mine eyes,
and so much the more as they shall appear to be more nearly and firmly
united unto thee; that thus I may please thee, and have assurance that I am a
lively member of CHRIST JESUS, the Head of his Church, and my blessed LORD and
Savior, to whom with thee and thy Spirit, be all praise and glory, both now
and evermore, Amen.

A wicked life, and the profession of Religion, how ill they agree.
AS is a precious Pearl in the dirt, or a Jewel of Gold in a Swines snout, so
is the name of a Christian, or the profession of Religion in one of a wicked
and profane life. How unbeseeming a thing is it? How ill do they agree? How
is the glory and beauty of the one stained, and blemished, by the vileness
and baseness of the other? Either therefore, let men never take this honor unto
themselves to be called and accounted Christians, and to wear the badge and
cognizance of Christ's holy and redeemed ones, or else let them (as it is meet
they should) cast away the cloaks of shame wherewith they have covered
themselves heretofore, and abandon all their former sinful and evil courses
wherein formerly they have walked, to the dishonor of God, Romans 2.24
the disgrace of their profession, 1 Pet. 2.12 Tit. 2.5.
yea, and to the increase of their own condemnation, if they continue in their
wickedness. 2 Pet* ^ 21
O blessed Lord, as it has pleased thee in the riches of thy mercies to call
me to the knowledge and the acknowledgement of thee, and to the profession of
thy glorious name, even of thy Christ to be called a Christian, and to stand
upon the privileges and royal prerogatives which belong unto those that are
indeed his redeemed ones, bought with his most precious blood: so I humbly
beseech thee, to make my life and conversation every way answerable to my
calling and profession. Let me consider often and seriously of the dignity and
excellency whereunto I am advanced above those that are aliants from thee,
strangers from thy covenant, Ephesians. 2.12
without Christ, without God, and without the name of Christianity and
godliness, children of the night 1 These. 1 5.5
and of darkness; and let me always be ashamed to do any thing, whereby I may
in any sort bring a stain upon that which is and should be my glory, or a
dishonor to that blessed and glorious name, after which I am called, causing
others through my folly and wickedness to speak evil of thee, and of thy
grace and truth; yea, let the very thought of this, that I should be so
overtaken at any time (as Lord thou know what my fraily and weakness is if
I be not continually strengthened and supported by thee) let it even cause me
to blush within my self, and to hang down my head with grief and sorrow; and
withal to stir up my self to walk more carefully, Ephesians. 5.15
and circumspectly all my days, striving and indeauoring, as to have the name
of a Christian, so to follow the example of Christ 1 Pet. 2.
to tread in his steps, and to walk as he has walked, setting him always
as a pattern and president before me; as to have the show, so likewise the
power of godliness in my whole life and conversation, and to walk worthy of
the vocation Ephesians. 4.1.
wherewith thou have honored me; shining forth as a light in this sinful
world, Phil. 2.14 1 Pet. 2.9.
and showing forth the virtues of thee my Lord and Savior, who have called me
out of the darkness of sin and ignorance, into that marvelous light of
thine, both of grace and of glory; that thus they that are enemies to thy
truth, and seek by all means to bring reproach upon that glorious profession,
with which thou have graced thy servants, having nothing concerning me to
speak evil of justly, thy great name may be glorified, thy Gospel adorned,
that worthy calling whereunto thou have called me beautified, my soul and
conscience comforted, and both body and soul eternally saved in that great
day wherein thou have appointed to judge the world in righteousness, by him
whom thou have ordained Lord of all things, Christ my righteousness; to whom
with thee O Father and thy blessed Spirit be all praise and glory both now and
for evermore. Amen.

A Christian, either the best or the worst of all men; most happy or most
miserable.
A CHRISTIAN is either the most happy of all other men, or the most miserable.
Most happy, if he has the truth of that which he bears the name of,
being a Christian not only in outward profession, but also in inward
affection, manifesting it self by action and outward conversation. Most
miserable if he want that which cannot be vvanting in any true Christian,
having only the title and outward badge of a Christian, and not the inward
indowments of those heavenly virtues and graces of Gods holy and sanctifying
spirit, Galat. 5.24
nor the outward ornaments of a godly and religious life, wherewith all that
are true Christians indeed, are beautified and adorned; miserable are such men
of all others if they could see it. Better were it for them to be Turks,
Pagans, and such as never heard of the name of a Christian: and easier shall it
be for the most rude and barbarous nation in the world that know not God nor
Christ; yea, for those vile and monsterous people, the wicked Sodomites (whom
the Lord branded with a note of perpetual infamy, 2 Pet. 2.6
and made spectacles of his wrath and vengeance to all ensuing ages) easier I
say (nay Christ himself has spoken it with his own mouth) shall it be for
that wicked and cursed generation, in the day of judgment then for them, even
those false and counterfeit Christians, which are the very stain of the name
and profession of Christianity and godliness, Math. 11 24
causing by the wickedness of their lives the name of Christ to be
blasphemed Romans 2.24
among the heathen, and by their unseemly actions and shameless conuersations
bringing this honorable calling into contempt and reproach among those that
are strangers from God and his Christ, and judge of the truth of our Religion,
not by that which is the true touchstone, and cannot deceive, ( viz. the
Scriptures and glorious word which we believe:) but by the lives and
carriages of those that are the professors of it, or bear the name of
Christians or Professors, concluding (though falsely) that that Religion cannot
be good nor to be embraced of any which they see to bring forth no better
fruits in those that are the professors of it, or have the name of such as are
professors of it (for they make no difference) yea, Tit. 1.16. 2 Pet. 2.2. Romans
8.9.
as, or worse then they see in that blindness of Turcisme or Paganism
wherein they live.

Fearful is the estate of such titular, and seeming Christians, or indeed
rather no Christians, (although they have a place in the Church, and live among
Christians, as the Chafe among the Wheat,) men of wicked and corrupt hearts
and lives, of which there be multitudes among us, (the shame and reproach of
the Christian world; yea, of Christ himself) fearful and wretched is their
estate and condition: of all, their condemnation shall be greatest; for so the
Truth it self has threatened against them, and will surely accomplish it in
due time. This is the Ioh. 3.19
condemnation, (that is, this is the cause of that great and fearful
condemnation,) that light is come into the world and men love darkness rather
then the light. Children of night and of darkness 1 These. 5.5.
; yea, of the curse and perdition, how think you ye shall escape the
vengeance that is to come, except as you have taken upon you the name of
Christians, so you live as it becomes Christians; except you change your
lives Mat. 3.8. Acts 3.19.
, and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life, not thinking it to be
sufficient to say, we have Christ to be our Savior and Redeemer; except you
show your selves to be such, as are redeemed from sin, and loosed from the
bands of Ioh. 3.8. Luke 1.75 John 3.36. Psalm. 2.12.
iniquity, the work of the Devil; which was the end of Christ's coming,
and which all that are redeemed by him, must find to be wrought in them. If
you believe and obey not, John 3.36 2 These. 1.8.
assuredly you shall perish, the wrath of God abides on you, and shall be
poured forth upon you in the day of the wrath, and of the declaration of the
just judgment of God. Christ shall no ways profit you; he shall not be a
Savior to redeem you, but a Judge to condemn you, and to render unto you
according to your ways Isay 3.11.
and works that ye have done. Hear this (you that have the name and show of
Christians and are not,) hear it, consider well of it, and tremble at it, and
learn at length to be Christinns, not in show and profession only (for that
will turn to your greater condemnaton) but in deed and in truth, which will
bring you much peace and joy here Romans 2.7
, and infinite and unspeakable happiness and glory hereafter, when as Christ
(that blessed hope of ours) shall appear in glory 2 These. 1 10.
, and be made marvelous in all them that have believed in him, and been
obedient to him.

Gracious Lord (who art the author and finisher of every good gift and grace,
which is wrought in any of thine,) perfect I beseech thee, that work of
grace which of thy free mercy and goodness it has pleased thee to begin in
me, O let me never be of the number of them that have a show of godliness 2 Timothy 3.5.
, but deny the power thereof; professing themselves to be Christians, and yet
live as those that are enemies to Christ, brutish and Heathenish people. Far
be this from me; for so I should heap the greatest measure of thy wrath upon
me, bring my self to endless vvoe and misery, having my portion among them
to whom Christ in the day of his appearance, in flaming fire 2 These. 1.7.9.
shall render vengeance, because they were not obedient to thy blessed Gospel;
but grant that as thou have vouchsafed me the title and honor of a Christian,
so I may walk worthy of that holy and glorious profession, endeavoring to keep
a good conscience always, both before thee and before men, and to live
righteously, justly, and unblameably, as it becomes one of those whom thou
have separated from this vile and sinful world, this naughty and crooked
generation, and called unto thy kingdom and glory, by the preaching of the
Gospel of thy Christ, that so being made like unto my Savior in
righteousness and holiness here, and seeking to glorify thee in all things,
I may hereafter obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, living with him in
those heavenly mansions (according to that promise of his, who is faithful
and true in all his sayings) and being made partaker with him of that felicity
and happiness 2 The. 2 14. Ioh. 17.24
which is endless and unspeakable; and that only through thy mercies in
Christ, in whom it has pleased thee to accept me; and to whom with thee and
thy good Spirit, be all praise now and for ever. Amen.

Another to the same effect.
THE sin of Christians is the greatest of all others, and so their punishment
likewise, God being always just to render vengeance Romans 6.2
according to the quality of the offense. First, that their sin is greatest,
will easily appear to him that rightly and thoroughly considers of it. and
yet no conscience to shun and avoid it, there is no pretenee, no excuse. Yea,
the more light and the greater knowledge that there is of the evil forbidden,
the more inexcusable does it make the committer thereof Luke 12.47 Ioh. 9.41.
, and the nearer does it come to the fearful sin of Presumption, yea, of
Contempt, which is a sin with a high hand, a crying sin, which calls loud
in the ears of the Lord for the fierceness of his wrath and vengeance to be
executed upon the offenders therein. Word, hearing of the same, mutual
exhortation, Hebr. 3.13.
good example of those that are true Christians, who shine as lights Phi. 3.17
and 2.16.
amongst them, so that they can not go aside into crooked paths with those
that walk in darkness, except they will of purpose shut their eyes, and be
willingly (if not wilfully) wicked. And to these add the joint prayers of the
Church, the fruit and benefit whereof cannot be so great to them that are
without, as to these that are in the bosom thereof, and for whom more
especially they are ordained Ephesians. 6.18.
: and therefore in this regard, their sin is increased above the sin of
others that want those means which they have. them unto good, as Christians
and those that live in the Church have, from the fear of the judgment to
come, the Act. 3.19 and 24.15.16. 2 Cor. 5.10. 2 These. 1.7.8.9.
resurrection of the Romans 2.7 1 Cor. 15.58. 1 Ioh. 3.2.3
just and unjust, the terror of that great and dreadful day, which is of
force (one would think) to persuade with any one that is not altogether
hardened and seared, as it were with a hot Iron; the hope of that great and
unspeakable glory which is promised unto them which do well 1 Ioh. 3.5.8.
in believing; the end of Christ's coming Gal. 1.4.
, even to loose the works of the Devil (which are sin) and to deliver men
from this present evil World, that so they might serve him in righteousness
and holiness all their days Luke 1.75.
. And (which is the maine and chief of all) the infinite and unspeakable love
of God in Ioh. 3.16 1 Ioh. 4.9.
giving Christ to be a Savior and Redeemer unto them, to free them from that
cursed and miserable estate into which they were fallen, and of Christ in
giving and offering himself to save and redeem them, and that with so great a
price 1 Pet. 1.19. Mat. 27.
, even the shedding of his most precious blood after his grievous Agony, and
most bitter Passion; the very remembrance and consideration whereof, does make
the heart of him that is a Christian indeed, even to melt within him, and
constrain him to burn in love toward Christ 2 Cor. 5 14.15 1 Pet. 4.1.2.23.
, and in love of him to abstain from all sin, which he knows to be so
displeasing and hateful to him, being that which caused his head to be crowned
with thorns, his hands and feet to be pierced with nails, and his side with
a spear till, water and blood gushed out. These things (which others either
hear not of at all, or at least a far off, without evident demonstration of
the truth thereof to the conuincing of the judgment, or effectual persuasion
to the moving of the affections by particular application) do continually sound
forth in the ears of them that are Christians, and children of the Church,
living within the bounds thereof. The Trumpet is daily blown, as it were,
among them, and with the shrill noise thereof so pearceth their ears, that if
they be not deaf, they can not but hear it; the Ministry of the Word is
ordained for this purpose, and therefore if all these do not prevail more with
them, and cause them to be more free from sin then others, their sin is the
greater, they are altogether inexcuseable, and worse then the worst of the
blind and seduced Heathen, who know not God, nor Christ. crimes of which the
Heathen are guilty and attainted in the eye of the world. And, no marvel:
For who is there that does not take it more to heart when he is ill dealt with
by him that professes himself to be his friend (though it be but once, and
in one matter) then if he were often and many ways wronged by him, that is his
open and professed enemy? Of the one he could look for no better; of the
other he had no cause to expect so bad, but better. Or, who is it that would
not take it more hainously that one that were his Servant (or in the place of a
Servant under him) should abuse him once, and that when he would seem to be
serviceable unto him, then if he that were a stranger and knew him not, should
offer him many abuses, many indignities which could not be well put up neither:
so it is between God and them that are Christians, at least in show and
profession, and even when they profess love and friendship unto him, yet show
by their works that they hate him; yea, whiles they seem to be worshippers of
him, yet do indeed worship the Devil, yielding themselves serviceable and
obedient to him in the things which he suggesteth unto them, and casting away
the Lords Commandments behind their backs. Oh their sin is a crying and a
provoking sin, it makes the Lords wrath and jealousy to burn like fire;
he Act. 17.30.
winketh at the sins of the Heathen, in a sort, (though with dislike, not
sparing them, but executing judgment upon them, according to the number and
measure of their trasgressions.) But he frowneth upon these, and takes notice
of them with an yrefull countenance, and writes them all with greater letters
Ier. 2.22.
in his Book of Account, that so he may call men to a more severe reckoning
for them, and in the fierceness of his wrath, and fury of his indignation,
pour out greater vengeance upon them, because he has been more dishonored
by them. Fotr, his is that which has turned to his greatest dishonor, for
this cause has his holy name been blasphemed, Romans 2.24.
and railed upon by the Heathen, and his Commandments and ordinances
contemned and despised; even those great things of his Law by this means have
been accounted as a vain Hos. 8.12
, nay as a profane thing. For how could the Heathen but open their mouths and
blaspheme the Name of the Lord, and the truth of Religion which he has
established, when they see the lives of them that take the profession thereof
upon them, as bad, or worse then theirs? O who is able to express how
exceedingly the Lord is provoked when he beholds this? How his wrath does
even burn within him till it break forth and consume them. For it is time for
him to look to it Psa. 119.126.
, when he sees that his Law is destroyed by them who were betrusted with it,
that through their means it might be kept and preserved from the injury and
violence of others, that either knew not the excellency of it, or else had no
love or regard unto it.

Think of these things, ye that have taken the name and title of Christians
unto you, but yet have nothing of Christianity or true piety and godliness in
you, but the mask and vizard thereof only: The sin of these days and
times, this last and worst age of the world, long ago foretold 2 Timothy 3.5
and prophesied of; verbal Christians and formal professors (for of these
only we speak) who have the name of Christians, and yet live like heathen
the badge of Christ's servants, and redeemed ones, and yet live like the
professed servants of sin and Satan, being in bondage unto many lusts,
chayned unto many sins, laden with many iniquities, yea, shamefully polluted
and defiled with many vile abominations, prophanations of the Saboth, oaths,
blasphemies, uncleanness, drunkenness, covetousness, oppression, malice,
uncharitableness, etc. to the dishonor of God, and the disgrace of their
profession. Isay. 1.4
Ah sinful and crooked generation, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children,
children of the adulteress that has gone a whoring from God while she made
show of love, and duty to him; such as have the false Church to be your
mother vvhiles you would be accounted the children of the true Church; Know you
not how great your sin and wickedness is, and how great the punishment
thereof shall be? how you are in worse estate then even the heathen themselves?
Are you so blind that you cannot see this; or willingly ignorant, that
although you know it, yet you will not understand 2 Pet. 3.5.
? Deceive not your selves any longer. Think it not sufficient to say we are
Christians, we live in the Church. The covenant and the promises belong unto us
and therefore (if it shall be well with any, it shall be so with us. No, no,
even this which should have been your glory and happiness, shall be the
increase of your misery. As you have been lifted Math. 11 23
up to heaven by your outward ptofession of Christ, and the means of grace and
salvation so plentifully offered unto you in the ministry of the Gospel, so
you shall be cast down to hell and receive the greater condemnation, for the
wickedness of your lives and conuersations in that you have not been
answerable to the grace vouchsafed unto you. I tremble to think of your
estate, though you are secure and regard it not, but think all is well, crying
out as the Jews were wont to do, the Temple of the Lord, Ier. 7.4.
the Temple of the Lord, we have the means of life and salvation, Christ
dwells amongst us, we are baptized into his name, we believe in him, and
hope to be saved by him. Lord do thou at length open their eyes, that they may
see themselves, and their sin and misery, and turn them unto thee, even as
many of them as thou have ordained to life and glory. O do thou cause all of
us that have taken upon us the names of Christians, to live as it becomes
Christians, to cast away the unfruitful works of darkness, and to walk as
the children of light, indeauouring always to be answerable unto the means of
grace which thou affordest unto us, increasing daily more and more in
righteousness, and holiness, and in all holy conversation and godliness, and
showing forth the virtues of thee our God and Savior, that so we may avoid the
misery that will come upon them that profess thee in word, but deny thee in
deed and in truth; and be approved of thee, and receive that blessing from
thee, which thou have promised, and wilt give unto all that call upon thy name
in truth and faithfulness.

God esteems of us according to our affections.
HOw graciously does God deal with his children, whereas he might justly
require of them exact obedience to his law, even in the rigor thereof, yet in
great mercy he does far otherwise. He deals with us as children; not as
servants. As long as he sees there is a sincere and unfeigned desire, any
entire affection in us to do that which he has commanded, although we are not
able to do it as it has commanded, he bears with us, and is well pleased
with us, he accepts our desire and endeavor for the deed it self, our
affections are actions with him, who looks chiefly at the heart, and if that
be good, spares us, as a father his weak children that desire to please him
in a better manner, then by reason of their frailty they can. He spares us,
and in a sort winketh at the evil, Mat. 3.17 2 Co. 8.21 Heb. 10.17 Psalm. 119 40
which we commit unwillingly.

Were it not that the Lord showed himself a father to us in this regard, and
not a Judge calling us in every thing to a strait and severe account, Psalm.
130.3. and 143.2
who were able to abide it? who could hold up his head in his presence or come
before him with any comfort or confidence, as notwithstanding we ought to do,
Romans 5.2 Heb. 4.14 and 10.22.
except we will displease him, and be disobedient to his heavenly voice, by
which he calls us hereunto. O Lord if I had not comfort in this, how
exceeding comfortless should I be? how often, and much dismayed, and even
covered with shame, and confusion of face, when in my secret thoughts and
meditations I look up unto thee; much more when I entered into thy presence, to
perform any duty or service unto thee; for lo I find my self to be a
sinful man, Romans 7.24
laden with many sins and iniquities, full of frailte and infirmities. The good
which I would, Rom 7.19
I cannot do, and the evil which I would not, that do I. Many ways do I
continually sin against thee, both in omission of the good which thou have
commanded, and in commission of the contrary evil; sin cleaves Heb. 12.1.
Romans 7.17 and 24
unto me in my best actions and performances, wherein I desire most to please
thee, and to approve my self unto thee; yea, it compasses me about on every
side, and holds me in a kind of bondage and thraldom under it, so that my
soul mourns many times secretly within me, and pants Psalm. 119.131.
after thee, desiring to be loosed from this body of sin, and to enjoy that
perfect liberty and freedom, and that full enlargement from this misery
which thou have promised unto thy Saints and servants. Have mercy upon me, O
most merciful Lord, have mercy upon me; and according unto thy free and
gracious promise look down upon me with the eye of thy fatherly compassion;
accept my vveake and inperfect desires, as if I were able to perform that
perfect obedience unto thee, which thy law requires. Deal with me as thou
use to deal with thy children. Behold I desire thy commandments, Psalm. 119
40
accept me according to that which I have, and not according to that which I
have not: Let the truth of my inward affection, be as the perfection of action
before thee; my desire to serve thee as if I did tender much better service to
thee then I do, or can do. Heal my infirmities, I humbly pray thee; and
quicken me every day more and more with thy grace and spirit, that so I may
walk before thee in all thy ways, with more cheerfulness and sincerity;
and howsoever I have cause to be discouraged, in regard of my self, and my
manifold im^erfections, when I enter into thy presence, yet having respect to
those sweet and gracious promises, which thou have made unto me in thy Christ
(in whom thou look always upon me, and in whose righteousness thou will
now and ever accapt me, covering all my infirmities with that perfect
obedience of his,) Let me always approach unto the throne of thy grace with
comfor and boldness, being assured that I shall find grace and mercy of thee,
who never faylest in any thing which thou have promised: but show thy
self to be abundant in goodness and truth above that we are able to ask
or think. To thee be praise for ever. Amen.

True love of God, how it may be discerned from that which is counterfeit and
hypocritical.
MAny there be, that in word profess they love God, but few that love him
indeed, and in truth. Will thou know therefore, whether his love be in thee or
no? whether thy heart be rightly affected toward him? Consider then what I
shall say unto thee, yea what God himself (who is the truth it self)
speaks unto thee, unto me, unto all of us. They that love him, do first
find that they are loved of him 1 Ioh. 4.19
. And this love of his, shed into their hearts, causes them to love him
again; and their love toward him, manifests it self, If ye love me, keep
my commandments Ioh. 14.15.21.23.24. and 15.14.
. And again, 1 Ioh. 5.3.
This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments.

They are not grievous or burdensome unto them, but they delight in them
concerning the inner man Romans 7.22
: yea, they are an easy yoke and a light burden unto them Math. 11 30
. Although they often fail (and cannot but fail) in the performance of them, in
regard of the relics and remainders of sin and corruption, which are in
them, and will be in them unto death, Heb. 12.1
cleaving as fast unto them as their skin does unto their flesh; yet as far
as they are regenerate, and renewed by grace, their hearts are set upon them
Psalm. 119 40. Hebr. 13.18.
; they find much sweetness in them, they desire and endeavor with all their
souls, to keep and observe them, not one, but all of them Psalm. 119.6.
; yea, it is their full resolution, and their constant endeavor to yield
themselves flexible and pliable thereunto in all things. They make holy vows,
and enter into covenant with themselves; yea, they bind themselves, as it
were, by a solemn Psalm. 119.106.
oath and promise to perform them to the uttermost of their strength and
power. Their heart Psalm. 119 verse. 20.
breaks in a manner for the earnest desire and fervent affection they have
thereunto; yea, like the chased and vvearied Hind, they Verse. 131
pant after them. Thus they that love the Lord, delight in all his
Commandments, both in knowing them, and in keeping and observing them; and
therefore they are careful in using the means whereby they may be furthered
herein, as, reading the Word, hearing the same preached, godly conference,
receiving the Sacraments, Prayer, etc. they joy herein, and make much account
of these and all other blessed ordinances of the Lord; they are precious in
their eyes, they esteem more of them then of their appointed food Job 23.12.
. Psalm. 97.10.
of all evil, which they know to be hateful and displeasing unto him above
all things: Having a sense and feeling of his love and favor toward them, yea
of the exceeding riches of his grace and kindness toward them in CHRIST
JESUS, they burn in love again toward him; and this love of theirs toward
him, in a special manner restrains them from all sin, and draws, yea
forces and constrains them to the contrary virtues. For they judge it a meet
2 Cor. 5.14.15. 1 Pet. 4.1.2
and most equal thing that seeing Christ, in love to them, has died for their
sins, that therefore they even in love toward him, should be dead unto sin
for which he died; and that as he rose again to manifest his victory and
triumph over sin and Satan, and to raise them out of the grave of sin, to
the life of righteousness and holiness; so that they also should live no more
unto themselves and to their sins, but to him who so loved them that he died
for them, and gave his precious blood to wash and cleanse Tit. 2.14
them from all sin and iniquity, and to make them a righteous seed, 1 Pet.
2.9.
a holy nation a peculiar people, that they should show forth the virtues of
him that has called them out of the darkness of sin and death, into that
maruailous light both of his grace here, and glory hereafter.

Thus the love of God entering into their spirits does purge and purify them
throughout; it does presently void out that filth and corruption both of
original pollution and actual transgression which was before in them; and
smothereth up their carnal, earthly and sensual love by a greater force, at
least, it strives so to do (for the old man will not be quite dead as long as
they live in this world.) It works mightily and very forcibly in them, and
is of marvelous efficacy for the clensing of them from all sin, and fitting
and preparing them both in body and soul to be temples and mansion-places for
the holy Ghost, the glorious spirit of God to rest and to dwell in.

What should I say? They having tasted of the bounty, and superabundant love of
God, in Christ their Savior toward them, and having in them the holy Ghost
testifying Romans 8.16.
unto them, and assuring them that they are the sons of God; yea, sealing
this unto their souls and consciences, have such a sincere, entire, and pure
love kindled in their breasts, that they do desire unfeignedly to abstain from
all sin which they know is so displeasing unto him, and to please him in all
things; and when they are solicited either by Satan or their own corrupt
nature, to the commission of any thing which is evil, they say with righteous
Joseph, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God, who has been
so good and gracious unto me? Has the Lord loved me with so great a love,
and shall I not love him again, and manifest my love toward him, by a care to
keep his Commandments? This is such a flame that it cannot but break forth
out of the heart into the life. This is such a fountain, as cannot but send
forth the streams of pure water into the actions of the life. This (in a
word) causes them to leave and to abhor that which is evil, and to cleave
unto that which is good, to desire and endeavor in truth and sincerity to
keep all the righteous Commandments of God. The love of God shed abroad into
their hearts, kindles and inflameth their hearts toward him, and so makes
them to hate evil, because he hates it, and to love righteousness because
he loves it; yea, their hearts are so heated and so inwardly affected with
the sense of the love of God, which the spirit of grace stirs up in them,
that they even melt in love and entire affection unto God, and desire
unfeignedly to please him in all things, and to show themselves zealous for his
glory, because he has so commanded them; even for the love which they bear
unto him, who have showed himself to be so loving and gracious a God, so kind
and tender a Father toward them in CHRIST JESUS: Nay, they desire that others
also should have experience of that which they have felt, even of the
unspeakable love of GOD in CHRIST toward those whom he imbraceth in him.
They desire with the Ioh. 4.28 29
woman of Samaria, that every one should taste of that which they have had so
comfortable experience of in their souls and spirits; and that others also as
well as they, might abstain from all kind of sin and wickedness; and they
mourn and groan within themselves, their hearts are grieved, and their eyes
Psa. 119.136.139.
drop down tears in abundance when they see it is otherwise. As they have no
Ioh. 3.4.
greater joy then to see God honored by the diligent keeping of his
Commandments, so there can be no greater grief unto them, then to see him
dishonored by the neglect and contempt thereof. Oh, this is a vexation, and
even a torment unto their souls, as it was unto righteous Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7.
when he beheld the abominations of the cursed Sodomites. It is, as it were,
a hell to them to be in the company of such as blaspheme the name of the Lord,
and set themselves to work wickedness, to the provoking of his glorious
Majesty. And hereby it does appear that they love God in truth, and not in
word and tongue only, as the most do. If it be thus with us, we have cause to
bless God, and to rejoice in the assurance of this that our hearts are sincere
and upright before him, and that we love him, and are Pro. 8.17
, and shall ever Ioh. 13.1
be loved of him. But if this be not in us (at least in some measure) our love
which we profess toward him, is but a counterfeit and hypocritical love,
which he hates; yea, if we be not thus affected, if we say that we love
him, we are liars, and thee is no truth in us; our words fight with our
actions, like unto them that struck CHRIST, saying, Ioh. 19.3
Hail Master: we are so far from loving him, that we do not so much as 1
Ioh. 2.4.
know him by an effectual and saving knowledge; neither are known or in any
sort approved of him: yea, he loathes us, and so much the more, as we dissemble
with the world, and make show of that love toward him, which is not in us.

O blessed LORD, how unspeakable is thy love, how unsearchable are the riches
of thy grace and mercy toward me in CHRIST JESUS, in whom thou have embraced
me with an infinite and an everlasting love before all worlds? yea, thou still
love me, and wilt love me unto the end (for thy love is, as thy self,
unchangeable Romans 11 29.
.) Every day thou Lam. 3.23.
renewest thy compassions upon me. Thou vouchsafest to give me many pledges
and sure evidences thereof; yea, thou sealest the same to my soul and spirit,
by the testimony Romans 8.16 2 Cor. 8.16
of thy blessed Spirit, and by that inward joy, whereby thou causest me to
rejoice even in the midst of mourning Psa. 94.19. 2 Cor. 1.4.
. Oh that thou would draw Cant. 1.3
my heart unto thee, and cause me to love thee again entirely, and
unfeignedly! O that thou would inflame these frozen affections of mine, and
cause me even to melt and to burn in love toward thee! O that it would
please thee to change all that carnal, that earthly and that sensual love and
affection of this world and the things thereof, which is yet remaining in
me, into a holy and spiritual love of thee, my GOD and Savior, my kind and
tender Father in CHRIST JESUS; that so I may love nothing but thee; or in thee,
and for thee. And let this love of thee cause me to hate all sin which thou
hate with so great and so infinite a hatred; to hate it, to abhor it, and
utterly to forsake it, though never so pleasing to my corrupt nature, never so
profitable or gainful to me in any respect; and to love all righteousness,
which thou love, and wherein thou delightest; that thus loving thee inwardly
in heart and soul, and manifesting my love toward thee, by the fruits and
effects of it in my life and conversation, I may every day have more full
assurance of thy especial love toward me, and comfortable experience of the
riches of thy grace and mercy sealed unto my soul and conscience; yea, I may
see by the fruits and pledges of thy love that thou love me, and delightest
in me, and wilt cause thy gracious countenance to shine upon me all my days;
yea, that thou will refresh my soul in the midst of my troubles, and cause my
fainting spirits to revive within me when death shall be ready to seize upon me;
and as soon as death shall put an end to this frail and sinful life, wilt
stretch forth thy hand to embrace me with thy arms, and to translate me
immediately by the ministry of thy Angels Luke 16.22.
into that blessed and glorious kingdom of thine, where I shall enjoy thy
presence, see thee face to face, and have the bright beams of thy loving
countenance shining always most clearly and comfortably upon me, to thy
endless praise and glory, and my unspeakable felicity and happiness for
evermore; and all this through the merits and mediation of thy blessed Son,
my only Savior and Redeemer, in whom it has pleased thee graciously to
respect me, and to whom, with thee, O Father, and the spirit of grace and love,
three persons, and one most glorious God, be all praise, dominion, and
thanksgiving from this time forth and for ever. Amen.

Love of the children of God.
IT is impossible to love God, and to hate his image; to love Christ who is the
head, and to hate Christians, who are his members. Nay, the more that any one
loves the one, the more must he of necessity love the other; and the more his
affection increases toward God, the more also it will increase toward those
that are the children of God, resembling him (in their measure) in the inward
graces and virtues of their minds, purity, righteousness, holiness, and the
rest of those divine Mat. 5.43
perfections, wherein he has set himself as a pattern and president to be
imitated and followed of them. He loves them entirely and unfeignedly, because
he sees that he is nearely tied unto them by many and strait bonds; as being
members 1 Cor. 12.27.
of one body; children of one father Math. 5.45. Ephe. 4.6
; brethren Mat. 12 50 Heb. 2.12.
of one Sa^^our; fed 1 Cor. 10 17.
at one table, where they have mutual communion and fellowship in one 1 Cor.
12.13 Ephesians. 4.4.
and the same spirit; nourished with the same meat in the word and Sacrament;
living together in one and the same family, which is the visible Church; Heb.
11.31. 1 Pet. 2.11
stangers together in this world, and traveling as pilgrims toward the same
country, that heavenly Canaan; 2 Timothy 4 7.
soldiers fighting together under the same banner, (the profession of the
same faith) Ephe. 4.5.
and against the same common enemy, (the deadly enemy of all mankind)
Satan, and his accomplices and confederates; partakers of the same grace of Gods
holy and sanctifying spirit; and ioynt-heires with Christ of the same glory
reserved for them and all the Saints in the highest heavens. Being so nearely
allied, and so straightly united mutually each to other, by so many bands, so
many Obligations, how can it be but that they should love one another with an
entire and Christian affection, in truth and sincerity without vanity and
flattery?

Shameless John 4.20
liars therefore they are, who glory in word that they are of God, and yet show
forth by their deeds that they have no love to his children, but hate and
despise them, or at least make little reckoning of them. If there were nothing
else, this were enough to convince them, that they are not yet admitted into
this fellowship, called to this brotherhood, but remain still as they were
bred and borne, Ioh. 8.44 1 Ioh. 3.27
the bastardly brood of Satan, unto whom, and to his impes they are joined in
the same league of friendship and familiarity, Pro. 29.27 1 Pet. 4.4.
hating and iniurying them who will not be Genesis 49.5.
brethren with them in iniquity and vanity. O Lord, knit my heart daily more
unto thee in an unfeigned love of thee my God, who have loved me so dearly, and
in an entire and Christian love and affection unto thy children, to whom thou
have linked and fastened me with so many bonds; let me love them, not in tongue
or in word only, John 3.18
but in deed and in truth, as it becomes me, and manifest my love toward
them, in seeking by all means, to the uttermost of my strength and power, to
procure their good every way: yea, the more that they do appear to be thine,
the more thy graces do shine in them, the more let my love and affection
increase toward them, the more let me seek to do them good. Hereby shall I
have a certain proof, and a sure evidence that I love thee unfeignedly, seeing
I love thine for thy sake; yea, hereby my heart shall assure me before thee,
that I 1 Ioh. 3.19.
am in the truth; I shall have a comfortable assurance, that I am one of thine,
one of that small number of thy adopted and chosen children, endued with thy
grace, and heir together with all thy Saints of the riches of that glory
which thou reseruest for them in that heavenly kingdom, which thou have
purchased so us by the death of thy only Son, and our alone Savior, in whom
thou have graciously accepted us, and to whom with thee and thy blessed spirit
of grace and comfort, be all praise and glory both now and ever. Amen.

How the hatred of the world is to be esteemed of the godly.
IF the world hate us, what marvel is it, seeing that it Ioh. 15.88.
hated and persecuted him to the death by whom the world was made, Heb. 1.2.
and who is the Lord of the world and all things therein, even Christ Jesus our
blessed Savior? Shall he that is the king of glory be content for our sakes,
to endure the cross, and to be Psalm. 24.7.
crowned with shame and dishonor, Mat. 27.29.
and shall we (sinful wretches worms of the earth) shall we be unwilling to
have shame and reproach fastened upon us for his sake? yea, rather how ought we
to account it our Mat. 5.10 11. 1 Pet. 3.14
blessedness, when men revile us, disgrace us, and say all manner of evil
against us, for his sake, falsely? how ought we to rejoice and be glad, when
we suffer such things at the hands of the world, which always has, and
ever will be in irreconciliable enmity, and in flat opposition unto Christ our
blessed Lord and Savior, who wills us to follow him Mat. 10.24.25. and 38.
in no other way then he has gone before us, not to drink of any other cup,
then he has first more deeply tasted of then we ever can do, although our
afflictions were mingled with much more gall and bitterness then either they
are, or have been?

O merciful Lord, let me be ready always with a willing, a patient and
cheerful mind to suffer rebuke for thy sake: let it not seem 1 Pet. 4.12.
strange or yrkesome unto me, though for thy name, I be hated Psalm. 44. and 64
3.
, reviled, slandered, and laden with many reproaches, yea, covered with shame
and ignominy, vvhiles the enemies of thy grace and truth speak cruelly,
despitefully, and disdainefully against me all the day long: yea, let me
rejoice herein, because hereby in some sort, I am made conformable unto thee
Col. 1.24 1 Pet. 4.13 2 Cor. 4.10
. When they speak bitter things against me, (being assured of mine innocence)
let me take them upon my shoulder, and bind them as a crown unto me Job
31.36.
. Yea, O Lord, seeing thou do not vouchsafe that honor unto me, which thou
have done to many of thy dear and faithful ones (whom thou have made glorious
by their sufferings) to undergo stripes, bonds, imprisonment Psalm. 44.22.
Hebr. 11.37
, and death it self for thy names sake, and for the profession of thy holy and
heavenly truth; let me account it a part of happiness unto me, and a special
favor of thine toward me, that I may suffer these lesser things for thee;
even the hatred, contempt, and reproach of the world (which always Mat. 16.24.
accompanyeth those that will be thy Disciples,) and let me labor by all
means, to prepare my self for the enduring of greater matters, even the loss
of all earthly commodities, and the shedding of my dearest blood, if it shall
please thee (who art the Lord of my life and death) to advance me unto that
high dignity, and to crown me with that glory and blessedness, to become
one of thy Witnesses, and to seal up my Profession by resisting unto blood.

Comforts for the afflicted: OR, A Preservative against impatience, or
coffeehouse in any kind of Cross or Affliction; consisting of diverse
branches: The first drawn from the eternal decree and good providence of the
Lord therein.
I.
ALL things come to pass by the Psalm. 103 19. Pro. 19.21. Eccle. 3.14 Isa.
45.7. Dan. 2.21. Amos 3.6.
ordinance of GOD, even as he has purposed and decreed. His divine providence
orders and disposes all things. There is not any thing which is done on the
earth or happens unto any man, but he foreseeeth it long before, determines
of all the circumstances of it; both when, Genesis 45.5. Exodus 21.13. Mat. 10.29
30.
by what means, and to what end and purpose it shall be effected; and when it
is brought to pass, either is the proper and chief agent in the doing of it;
or suffers it to be done by others, according to the determinate Act. 4.28
Job 30.27
counsel of his own will.

O righteous Father, the hour is come which thou did foresee, and
fore-ordaine from everlasting should come; that appointed time of thine is
come, wherein, as before thou have decreed, so now I see, it is thy will and
pleasure, that thy Servant should be exercised and tried with diverse
temptations, and manifold afflictions. Thy Psalm. 32.4
hand, Lord, is upon me, thou have cast me down, and humbled me; thou have
suffered me to be laden and oppressed with many sorrows and miseries. O give
me grace ever to look up unto thee, to see and acknowledge thy divine
providence in all things which befall me, and wholly to subject and submit my
self unto thy heavenly will and pleasure, 1 Samuel 3.18.
with a patient and cheerful mind, resting and staying my self upon this,
that thou do all things most righteously, and with great wisdom; yea, that
thou (who see and disposest of all things that come to pass in the world)
know that this present estate ( how Hebr. 12.11.
grievous soever unto the flesh) is most behouefull and most profitable for me,
and that the afflictions which are laid upon me, are and shall be for my
greatest good Romans 8.28.
, even the weakening of the power and strength of sin, and for the increase
of the 2 Cor. 4 16.
graces of thy Spirit in me. Behold Lord, I am in thy hands, deal with me in
mercy and goodness as it pleases thee 2 Samuel 15.26.
. I yield my self wholly unto thee, to bow and bend my crooked will, and to
rectify and make it conformable unto thy holy and blessed will in all things,
Correct and chastise me in thy fatherly love and compassion, and in such a
tender care over me, as I may see that thou seek to do me good, and that I
may find those things redressed that are amiss in me, and give up my self
with all humble submission to walk dutifully and obediently before thee all
my days, doing that which thou command, and following the rule and
direction, which thou prescribest unto me out of thy heavenly Word.

II. From comparison of the present afflictions with the glory to come.
ALL the miseries whereunto the godly are subject in this life (although they
be Psalm. 35.19. Act. 14.22
many and grievous) are nothing in comparison of that glory which is reserved
for them in the life to come; not so much, as a drop of water is to the maine
Ocean: For these, are 2 Cor. 4.17.18.
finite and temporal; that, infinite and eternal. How then should not any, at
the Lords appointment, endure all these things patiently and cheerfully in the
certain hope and assured expectation of that excellent and Genesis 15.1. 2 Cor.
4.17
exceeding great reward, that unspeakable felicity and happiness, which
after a while they shall be made partaker of for ever? How should they not rest
well content, though their cup were far more bitter then it is, yea, though
they were to drink nothing but gall and vinegar all their lives, and to be
fed with wormwood, even the greatest and most bitter afflictions that could
possibly befall a man in this life? How should they not most willingly and
joyfully undergo the Cross, and bear the burden that is laid upon them;
yea, though it were twice as heavy as it is, and did much more press them
then it does? seeing they are shortly not only to be eased of it, but also in
stead thereof to be crowned with such glory, as the heart of man is not able to
conceive of; and the sight, yea, the glimpse whereof, if it were now presented
unto his view, would wholly ravish, and overcome him with the admiration of it
Exodus 33 20.
. None know fully what it is, but only the Saints that are already glorified,
even the Citizens of that heavenly kingdom who have the fruition of it, and
wait and expect continually for the coming of those, unto whom it is
promised; that so being Heb. 11.40
consummate and the number of them fully accomplished, they may rejoice
together in most glorious manner for evermore. O blessed Lord, thou see what
a heavy yoke is now upon me; unto how many miseries and grieuances both of
body and mind I am continually subject by reason of my sins Psalm. 38.
. I am in a strange land, Exo. 2.22 Hebr. 11.13.14
where I have many enemies always warring against me, and even seeking to
oppress me with that bondage and servitude which they would bring upon me.
My days are Genesis 47.9.
few and evil, full of trouble and affliction, full of grief and sorrows;
many fears and dangers, many distracting cares and earthly vanities do breed
me continual annoyance, and great encumbrance, and would make this life of
mine yrkesome and burdensome unto me, if I had not hope of a better 1 Cor. 15
19.
. O do thou give me patience to vvait upon thee, and in expectation of the
accomplishment of thy free and gracious promise, to pass on the rest of my
appointed time in this vale of misery, cheerfully, comfortably, and
contentedly. Grant that I may set my face always toward heaven (the place
which thou have provided for me) and that I may continually lift up mine eyes
unto that crown of endless and unspeakable glory, which all the afflictions
of this present time, are in no sort to be accounted worthy of Romans 8.18.
; and which thou (that art the righteous God, infinite in mercy and truth, and
unsearchable in thy love and kindness toward thy elect and chosen ones) vvilt
in due time, 2 The. 1 6.7 1 Pet. 5.10
even after that I have suffered here a while on earth, freely vouchsafe to
bestow upon me, to the praise of the glory of thy grace, through the merits of
thy Son, and my only Savior, who with thee and thy Spirit, is blessed now
and ever, Amen.

III. From the benefit that comes thereby, it being Physic to the Soul.
WE will take down bitter pills, sour and loathsome potions, for the good
of our sick and diseased bodies, and for the procuring of our decayed health.
Is not the soul of more vvorth then the body? Is not the health, and good
estate thereof more to be respected, more regarded and sought after, then of
the other? Surely, I think there is none so void of sense and reason, but will
freely acknowledge it.

O merciful LORD, thou see what a sick and diseased Soul I have; how
exceedingly it is distempered, even in all the powers and faculties thereof. O
then, let no affliction (though never so bitter in it self, when I first taste
of it) seem grievous unto me, since thou sendest it for the health of my
Soul, which is so corrupted with sin; yea, let me willingly, cheerfully,
and thankefully drink down the bitterest cup which thou shall offer unto me,
knowing that for the present tartnes, I shall find much sweetness in the end
Heb. 12.11.
; yea, being assured that it, with all things else, shall work together for
my good Romans 8.28.
, even for the increase of thy grace in me, and for the furtherance of my
Salvation hereafter.

Another.
IF thy Physician cures thee of some dangerous disease, though he use many
sharp medicines, and puts thee to much pain for the while, yet thou both
thankest and rewardest him. We are all of us by nature sick most dangerously
Isa. 1.6.
; every one of us is diseased with a most grievous malady; the issue whereof
will be death Romans 6.21.23.
, if it be not looked to in time. If the Lord then (the sole and sovereign
Physician of our sick and diseased Souls) take the cure of thee upon him, if
he apply many sharp and bitter medicines, which although they be grievous and
smarting for the present, yet heal thee at length, when as thou art in so
desperate an estate that there had been no help, if this remedy had not
been used, vvilt thou complain, saying, that he deals hardly with thee,
and so become impatient and discontented, vvhiles thou art under so gracious
and merciful a hand? Is this the thankfulness which is due unto the LORD for
so great a benefit which he vouchsafes unto thee? for so great a cure which
he intends hereby to work upon thee? Is this the recompense? is this the
reward that thou give unto that good Physician, who tendered thy wretched and
miserable estate, and sought to heal thee of that grievous disease, which were
deadly if he should not cure it? O my God, who see how I am sore diseased,
how many and how dangerous maladies I am continually subject unto, have mercy
upon me, work thine own work upon me. Lo 2 Samuel 15.26
here I am: Cut me, lance me, give me the bitter potions of many troubles and
afflictions, and let me drink daily of them, rather then that I should not be
healed and cured, rather then that my disease should prove mortal and deadly. O
Lord, correct me, but in mercy, Iere. 10.24
not in wrath and indignation, deal graciously with me as thou art wont to do
with thy children whom thou love; and whatsoever it shall please thee to do
unto me (since I know it is and shall be for my good) let me with patience
subject and submit my self wholly therein unto thy gracious and fatherly care
and providence; yea, seeing that I cannot make any other recompense unto thee
for this mercy and goodness of thine toward me, grant that I may now and
always, return unto thee true praise and thankfulness, with faithful and
constant obedience, which are the things thou only requirest, and which I
unfeignedly desire to perform unto thee: Lord, help me in my weakness, and
strengthen me with thy grace, whereby I may be enabled for the performance of
them: for even this is thy gift also (who art the author and giver of every
good thing) all is from thee, to thee be glory for evermore. Amen.

A further enlargement of the benefit thereof.
THE benefit which Winter brings, is not perceived till it be past and over,
and the Spring approaching and drawing on; but then, when we see the herbs,
flowers, fruits and trees begin to revive and to recover their decayed life, to
wax green, and to flourish in most pleasant and delightful manner; then we
can easily say (as the truth is) that without Winter, this had never been
thus; that if there had not been such hard weather, such cold and nipping
frosts we should not have had such a goodly spring, nor that hope of a
plentiful harvest which now the earth promises, and we with joy expect. All
see this in natural things; few see or acknowledge it in those things which
are spiritual; and yet thus it is in them; yea, much more in them then in
these. Whiles affliction and adversity, like a cold winter pincheth men, they
complain much of the hardness and extremity thereof, and would gladly be
altogether freed of them forthwith; thinking that because they are for the
present grievous, therefore they are no ways profitable, but only hurtful
unto them: but afterward, when they are over, and the rigor and sharpness
thereof changed into a temperate and warmer spring (if they be such as God
loves, and as endeavor to make the best use of his dealings with them) then
they find that they have gained much, and received no small benefit by them;
even that they have caused the sweet Heb. 12.11
and quiet fruits of righteousness, of peace and true joy to budde, and to
sprout forth in them, more then ever otherwise they would have done, and to
give them good hope that they shall have a joyful and a more plentiful
harvest; so that they cannot but in the comfortable experience of the truth
thereof, say with that holy Psalm. 119 71
servant of God (whom the Lord exercised much with his chastisements, Heb. 12.6
because he loved him much) that it is good for them that they were afflicted.

O Lord, give me grace to endure thy fatherly corrections patiently and
willingly: yea, to bless thee, and to be truly thankful unto thee for them,
seeing thou bring them upon me in love, for my good; even that being pinched
with the extremity thereof for a while, I might thereby be the better rooted in
grace and godliness, and having received increase of spiritual sap and
moisture, bring forth ever after, more abundantly, the blessed fruit of faith,
of hope, and true holiness, to the glory of thy name, and to the peace and
unspeakable joy of mine own soul and conscience.

Another, to the same effect.
SEe the Husbandman, how great pains he takes in tilling, in sowing, and in
manuring his ground, and how long he Iam. 5.7.
waits, expecting the former and the later rain, hoping (howsoever for the
present he sees no fruit of his labor) yet that at length, even in the due
time, and season he shall be recompensed with a large croppe, and with a
plentiful harvest. Thus it is with us that are the children of God. This life
is our seed-time, our harvest in the life to come. What though now for a while
(how little a while Heb. 10.37
) we sow in tears, yet are we not to faint, but to trust in those gracious
promises which the Lord has made to us, and to rest in hope with patience,
Pro. 14.26
being assured that hereafter we shall reap in joy Psalm. 126 5
, even the fruits of righteousness and holiness, to our endless glory and
happiness. O merciful Lord, do thou teach me patiently to wait Psalm. 37.1
for the accomplishment of those rich and sweet promises which thou have made
unto me, and with full confidence to depend upon thee, always, in all things.
I have heard once and twice, yea oftentimes, of the patience of thy Saints 2
Cor. 6.7 James 5.10.11 Heb. 11.36 37
in their miseries and distress, and what end and issue thou gave unto them,
how exceeding gracious thou shewedst thy self unto them, after thou had for
a while tried and afflicted them, and found them faithful and constant. Lord,
let their example be always before mine eyes, that so following their steps
in faith, in patience and long sufferance in all those afflictions wherewith it
shall seem good to thee (who know what is best for me) to try and
exercise me for a season, I may be blessed Job. 5.17
, and receive with them the Pro. 16.10 Lamen. 3.25.26. Iam. 1.12. Hebr.
11.38.39.
promise, wherein I know thou vvilt not fail me, nor any of thine, that
withdraw not themselves from thee.

IIII. From the goodness of God in deliring his children out of them.
INto what depthes of misery Psalm. 69.1.2. and 34.4.19
have thou brought me, O Lord, and drawn me out of them again, in thy due
time, even in my greatest fears? Thou have showed thy self exceeding gracious
unto me, causing the light Psalm. 112.4. and 97.11 Job. 33.28 Psalm. 94.19
of thy countenance to shine upon me, and to refresh me; even when I trembled
to see that fearful darkness which was ready to ouerwhelme me, did thy
light, thy grace, and thy favor break forth, and inlighten me above that I
could either expect, or desire. Thou have suffered me to fall into many and
deep Ps. 88.15 16 2 Cor. 1.8.9.
waters, wherein I feared that I should sink, and rise no more, but thou have
caused me to swim out of them again 2 Cor. 7.6
; thy hand has drawn me out of those deep and raging waters which did even
run over my soul; thou have delivered me, and given me a joyful issue out
of all my temptations, even those whereby that cruel enemy and malicious
adversary thought to have prevailed most against me, and to have drowned me in
eternal perdition. O let my Soul never cease to sing praises unto thee, who
art my Savior and deliverer: Let me ever give that glory unto thy name, O my
God, which is due unto thee; and let me continually, in all my necessities, in
all my distresses, trials, and temptations, depend wholly and only upon thee,
who art my Redeemer, in whom I trust, and from whom alone comes salvation.
Thou have delivered my soul from a great death, thou have broken the net
wherein I was taken, so that I escaped in my greatest danger; thou do deliver
Psalm. 34.19.
me every hour, every moment; in thee I trust, that thou will 2 Cor. 1 10. Job
5.19.
hereafter deliver me: yea, this I know, that thou will suffer no evil to
come unto me Psalm. 91.10.15.16.
, but wilt free me therefrom, yea, save me, and bring me to glory and
happiness.

V. From the end and issue of them, in that they are the way to Heaven.
THe children of Israel could not come to Canaan, that promised Land, which
flowed with Milk and Honey, but they must first pass through a desolate Exodus
16 and 17.1.3. Number. 14.1.2. and 21.6.
and a dangerous wilderness, where they were exercised with many trials and
afflictions, being sometimes in peril of death by those flying and fiery
Serpents; sometimes in fear, and hazard of their lives, and ready to have
perished with thirst, and otherwise. And in like manner, it is with all the
children of God, his chosen Israel. They deceive Act. 14.22. Romans 8.17
themselves, if they look to come unto that celestial and heavenly Canaan,
and to receive the inheritance which the Lord has promised them in so good
and pleasant a Land, before they have passed through the troublesome wilderness
of this evil world; where they shall be 2 Timothy 3.12.
exercised with many trials and sundry kind of afflictions. Lord, since this is
the way to happiness, since by many troubles and afflictions we are to enter
into thy kingdom; let it not seem 1 Pet. 4.12.
strange unto me, though I be often and diversely thus exercised: let me not
faint Prou. 24.10
though I be stung with those fiery Serpents, Sin and Satan, or any other
adversary enmity; but let me ever lift up mine eyes, and look up unto thee my
Savior, that so I may be healed and comforted: yea, O Lord, set me patiently,
cheerfully, and thankefully suffer all those things which it has pleased
thee to appoint unto me in this world for the humbling and exercising of me,
knowing that hereafter I shall receive from thee, that exceeding great reward,
that most excellent and eternal weight of glory, in comparison of which all
these light and momentary afflictions, are to be esteemed as nothing, and no
ways worthy of it.

Afflictions, from whence they come.
THE LORD many times strikes, when men feel indeed the rod Mica. 6.9.
, and complain much of the smart of it; yea, grow impatient, but never see nor
acknowledge the hand of Job 5.6. Psa. 32.4. Mica. 6.9.
God that smites them for sin; either in Justice, if they be his enemies, to
scourge and punish them Mica. 6.13
(those light and temporary punishments being the beginnings and forerunners
of such as are far more grievous and eternal,) or else in Mercy, if they be
his children; either for their 1 Pet. 4.12
trial, or for Psalm. 119.67.71. Hebr. 12.10 Job 33.17.29.30.
amendment, or both. O merciful Father, though my sins (so many and
grievous) deserve that thou should deal with me in justice and judgment,
yet I know and am persuaded (such is thy goodness toward me) that even of
Love and Mercy thou do correct and chastise me, even because thou have a
favor unto me; and wilt cause all these light afflictions wherewith thou
exercisest me, to work together for the best, even for the increase of thy
grace in me in this life, and of my Romans 8.17
glory with thee, in thy kingdom after this life. O therefore, let me in all
thy chastisements, in all my afflictions, see and acknowledge thy hand that
strikes me, that so I may be obedient, patient Amos 5.13.
, and unfeignedly thankful.

Afflicting of the mind with needless distraction for things to come,
unknown.
MAny trouble themselves in vain, about their future estate and condition in
this world, building Castles in the Air, and needlessly distracting their
minds, and disquieting themselves, vvhiles they forecast such things in their
intended purposes and proiects, as either shall never come to pass, or at
least, not in that manner that they expected and hoped. O Lord, I know that the
vvayes of man are in thy Prou. 16.1.9. and 19.21. Ier. 10.23.
hand; they may purpose and determine, but it is thou that rulest, orderest,
and disposest of all things as it seems best unto thy heavenly wisdom. O
let me ever Psalm. 37.5. Prou. 16.3
commit my works and my vvayes unto thee, resting wholy upon thee for the
end and issues thereof: and then I know I shall be directed aright; I know that
thou vvilt bring that to pass which shall be most for thy glory, and my good.

The life of the wicked full of sorrows and distractions.
THose that do swim, and even bathe themselves continually in their sinful
pleasures and carnal delights; have many sorrows Psa. 32.10 Isay 57.20 21
Eccles. 2.23
with them. Much gall and sowrenesse is mingled with their sweetest and
daintiest delicates: much bitterness with their sweetest and most beloved
sins, even those wherein they are most delighted, and which they are Job
20.12 13
most loath to forgo. Yea, I doubt not, but that it may be truly said, that
the ungodly have more inward grief, more anguish and vexation of mind
oftentimes in their greatest prosperity and chief delights, then the
righteous have in the greatest of their worldly sorrows, in the greatest of
their outward miseries, and afflictions. For unto the godly and upright man,
even out of darkness, there does arise light Psa. 97.11
; out of sorrow, joy; out of bitterness, sweetness: Sampsons Riddle Judge.
14.12.
may not unfitly be applied unto them: Out of their strongest afflictions there
comes much sweetness, much comfort unto them. Even in sorrow their hearts are
joyful 2 Cor. 1.4 and 6.10. Psalm. 94.19
, and when they seem to mourn, yea, to have nothing but cause of continual
heaviness and mourning, yet then oft-times they are very cheerful, yea, even
filled with inward and spiritual rejoicing, such as none know, but they that
have tasted of it. But it is far otherwise with the ungodly. Even Pro. 14.13
Eccles. 2.2. Job 20.5.
in laughter their heart is sorrowful, and the end of their mirth is
heaviness: and vvhilest they are tickled with the pleasures of sin, and
drowned in the vanities of this life, they have many privy and secret nips and
stings within them, although they seek to conceal them, and keep them
close, as it were a poison, which lies fretting in their bowels. An evil
Spirit does haunt them as it did Saul 1 Samuel 16 14
, wheresoever they go, so that they are feign to seek for merry company, or
delightful Music, or such like means to drive it away (if it were
possible.) The Lord does oft-times strike their minds with sadness, with
great anguish, and much heaviness; he sends evil Angels, and casts his
darts, even fearful terrors among them Psalm. 79.49 Job 27.20
, so that their consciences are sore vvounded and pierced through, when as
outwardly Job 20.22 23
all seems to go well with them; they being unwilling that their grief
should be known, which they carry continually about with them, and smother in
their breasts, till the venime thereof drinks up their spirits; yea, little
do others think of that bitterness Pro. 14.10.
which they taste in their souls, and of that hellish spirit which does
oft-times so vex and molest them, that they can find no peace, no quietness;
yea, nothing but horror, and a dreadful amazement Job 15.20 21. and 18.11.
and astonishment within themselves. I appeal to the conscience of wicked and
ungodly men themselves, (even those that make it their pastime and recreation
to do wickedly, and that commit sin daily with greediness Ephesians. 4.19
and delight) whether they have not experience of this? whether they find not
that within them, which many times is such sour sauce unto their sweet meat,
that although it be pleasant in their mouth Prou. 20 17.
, yet it is as bitter as gall or Wormwood in their belly, and causes them to
find small comfort in their lives; yea, to become even a burden unto
themselves? O^ else whence comes it, (which we have both seen and heard of
in the woeful experience of many) that even those who have braued it out most
for a while, in mirth and iollitie, withholding themselves from nothing which
their eyes desired, nor withdrawing their hearts from any worldly joy, and
carnal or sensual delight, have not long after (when they could by no means
drive away that evil Spirit which so much vexed, disquieted, and tormented
them,) burst out into fearful words of extreme despair: yea, and some of
them (being weary of their lives, and feeling the Flames of Hell in their
souls,) Achitophell 2 Samuel 17 23 Mat. 27.5.
, or Iudas-like, laid violent hands upon themselves, and in a most unnatural
manner, became as it were, their own executioners.

O LORD GOD, keep my soul, I beseech thee, from taking any delight in the
sinful pleasures of the wicked Job 21.16
: let them not be sweet unto my mouth, nor pleasant unto my taste, lest I feel
the bitterness thereof in the end: yea rather, let me loathe them, and delight
in those things which are pleasing unto thee, my GOD: that so in my greatest
sorrows I may have much inward joy, and find comfort, when as outwardly I
taste of nothing but misery and affliction.

The carnal and wicked man wakened out of his sleep.
ALthough many who now lie steeping in the brine of this world, and even
soaking in their sins, live for the present, (at least in outward appearance
E 1 cles. 8.11. and 11.9. Luke 12.19
) as merry and iocund as any, thinking all is well with them, and so be at
rest and quiet within themselves, whiles they are settled upon their dregs; yet
when GOD shall once let loose the cord of their consciences, and give them a
sight of their sins, and the multitude and haynousnesse thereof, and setting
them all in order Psa. 50.21
before them, write sharp and bitter things against them for the same; then
they shall quickly find a strange alteration within them Romans 7.9 10.
. They shall startle as men suddenly awaked out of a dream, having most
fearful apprehensions and dreadful objects presented unto their minds,
which will make them to shiuer and tremble with great perplexity and
amazement. Their day shall be turned into night, their light into darkness,
their mirth into mourning, their joy into heaviness, their greatest solace
into extreme woe and misery. All their sweetest pleasures, wherein they were
wont to bathe and refresh themselves, shall become painful and bitter unto
them: their chiefest delights yrkesome, and most unpleasant, so that their
soul shall refuse all comfort; yea, they shall be troubled, dismayed, amazed,
terrified and affrighted exceedingly with the view of the huge mass of their
vile and abominable sins, which (though now they be hid from their eyes)
yet then in most ougly manner shall lie before their faces in open sight: even
the sins of their youth, the sins of their age: the sins which they have
committed alone in secret, which the eye of none was witness of, and which
they have committed either with others, or openly in the presence of others,
even all their most grievous and heinous impieties, which ever heretofore have
escaped them, and whereby from time to time they have provoked the Majesty of
the most high, shamefully defiled and dishonored themselves, and many ways
grieved and displeased others.

Then hell and destruction shall show themselves unto their souls, and a
dreadful and horrible fear take hold of them; yea, the sound of fear Job.
15.21
shall be continually in their ears, and great astonishment in their hearts,
so that they shall be ready to quake at the shaking of every leaf, and to
tremble at the hearing of every sudden noise (as that profane and heathen
Emperor, who was so terrified with every thunderclap that he sought for
corners to hide himself when he heard it coming:) and to fly when none
pursues them, Pro. 28.1
but only that evil and guilty conscience of theirs, which (being raised up
like a fierce and raging Lion, which has been a long time a sleep, and is
now suddenly awakened by the dreadful hand of Gods justice) will never leave
following and pursuing them, till it has brought them to their most deserved
punishment, even to final desperation in this world, and to eternal
perdition in that vhich is to come, where they shall drink of the cup, Job.
5.27.
even of the bitter cup of the fierceness of the wrath of the Lord for
evermore.

O merciful God, let me never lie carelessly and securely in my sins; let me
not at any time delight in any of them; let me not bless or sooth my self in
the least of them; but let me be always careful to keep my self pure and
unspotted of them, that so I may not only avoid those terrors, and that
woeful misery which shall surely come upon all the wicked and ungodly, either
in the time of their life, or in the hour of their death, or else in the day
of judgment, and after for evermore; but also that I may have that peace of a
good and quiet conscience, which may always rest and abide with me, and be a
comfort and refreshing unto me, both in life and in death, and in the day of
thy coming, even that blessed appearance of thy Son, which all thy Saints
daily expect and long for.

Worldliness, a fearful sign of one destitute of the true love of God.
See thou any that is very eagerly set upon any vvorldly thing, pleasure,
profit, honor or whatsoever else it be? thou may assure thy self that
whiles he is so much addicted unto these earthly things, the love of God is
very small, or not at all 1 Ioh. 2.15
in him. He that loves God unfeignedly, sincerely, and entirely (as he ought)
cannot (as long as that love of his abides in him) be greatly affected unto
any other thing, nor have an excessive desire and longing after the fading
vanities of this world; for God will wholly possess his soul, and satisfy
him abundantly, so that he shall find contentment in him Psalm. 73.25 Psalm.
119.57 Lamen. 3.24
, howsoever it fare otherways with him. Blessed Lord, kindle in me daily more
and more, I humbly beseech thee, a sincere and unfeigned love of thy Majesty,
who have always showed thy self so exceedingly gracious unto me; do thou
even inflame this cold and frozen heart of mine, that so loving thee with that
truth and earnestness of affection which ought to be in me, and having my
desires always toward thee, the love and desire of these vain and earthly
things may be daily abated and diminished within me; yea, I may banish far
from me all love which is not in thee, and for thee, unto whom only I am to
give my heart with all the affections thereof, and that absolutely, wholy,
and entirely.

The folly of the Worldling.
ALL would condemn him for a foolish and unwise man that would not exchange
silver for gold, Psalm. 107.43
lead and baser metal for pearls and precious stones. And yet lo, this is
the folly of the most in the world (even such as otherwise are men of
wisdom and understanding;) they will by no means forgo the earth, and the
sinful profits and pleasures of it which are but dross and vanity Isa. 55.2.
, for the enjoying of heaven and happiness it self. How has Satan bewitched
and besotted them? It is marvelous strange to consider that the reasonable
soul of man should be so seduced and deluded through the craft and wiliness
of Satan, who lies in wait to deceive and to bring men unto confusion. 2 Pet.
5.8
Blessed Lord, let the things of this world be vile and base in mine eyes in
comparison of the felicity of thy Saints, and the glory of thy kingdom. Keep
me now and always from the foolishness of the wretched worldling; and make me
wise to see the difference between those most excellent and glorious things,
and these which are but fading, and transitory.

Worldliness, mere dotage.
WE would wonder at him that would dote upon a Strumpet Pro. 7.7.22
, that sought his life. Such a one is every covetous worldling, or whosoever
else is enamoured with the things here below, pleasures, profits, honors. The
world, with the sinful and deceitful shows thereof, do secretly fight 2
Pet. 2.11
against the soul of man, yea, seek the utter ruin both of soul and body;
they are the Devils nets 1 Timothy 4 6.9.
and snares. And the worldling is strangely besotted with this inchantresse; he
very fondly doteth upon her, and is drawn away with her allurements to his
own destruction. And though he be often warned and admonished to take heed of
her baits, and to avoid the mischief which she (even vvhiles she laughs and
smiles upon him) seeks to bring him unto, yet he will not be drawn from her,
nor from her adulterous love, but runs a Hose. 2.5 Iam. 4.4.
whoring after her, and is so bewitched with her, that he will not leave her,
till she has wrought his utter overthrow.

Merciful LORD, let not this world, nor any thing that is in this world, ever
be able to prevail against me, so that I should perish with it. But be thou
powerful in me by thy Word and Spirit: draw my heart every day more and more
from these fading and perishing things, and cause it to be set wholly upon thee
Prou. 23.26.
, to whom of right it belongs Discover unto me daily more and more the 1 Timothy 6.17. Eccle. 1.14
deceitfulness and vanity of all things here below. Let me not with those,
whose eyes Satan has blinded with the false shows of this deceivable
world, dote upon any earthly thing, but let my love be set upon thee, my joy
and delight be only in thee, and those blessed and glorious things which thou
have prepared for me in the heavens; and in comparison of which, all the things
of this earth are but mere vanity.

A Christian must not live as one of this world.
A CHRISTIAN is not a man of this world; he is a soiourner and a stranger here
upon earth. So have Genesis 23.4. and 47.9. 1 Chro. 29 15. Psalm. 39.12 and 119.19.
2 Cor. 5.6 Heb. 11.13 Hebr. 12.22.23.
Abraham, Jacob, David, and other holy men of GOD, acknowledged themselves to
be. Heaven is his Country; there is his mansion and dwelling place, where he
shall have his abode for ever: there is his God and blessed Savior, his life
and hope: there are his best friends, his nearest kinsefolke, unto whom he is
linked with the straitest bonds of perfect love, and amity: there are his
chiefest riches and treasures, even that Ephesians 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.4.
glorious inheritance, that celestial kingdom, which shall have no end, no
change. Oh then, why do we not vveane our hearts more from this world? why
do we not show ourselves strangers here, by estranging 1 Pet. 2.11
our affections from these things here below, and lifting them up unto the
desire and contemplation of those excellent things, which are above Col. 3.2.
? why do we not live as Citizens of that heavenly Country? If we be
Christians, heirs of glory, why is not our Phil. 3.20
conversation in heaven, but on earth, as if we were men of this world, to
live here for ever, and had no better Heb. 11.16.
things provided for us, then those which the wicked of the world enjoy, and
which shall perish with them? Is our Savior in the Heavens, and do we lie
groueling on this Earth like mucke-wormes? Is our portion with the Saints in
glory, and do we in a base and servile manner fasten our affections unto this
world, which is but our prison, wherein we are detained till the time of our
liberty and redemption Romans 8.23.
come? O blessed Lord, as in the riches of thy unspeakable mercies, thou have
called me out of this world, unto the hope of 1 Pet. 1.3
glory, giving me some comfortable assurance of the full possession of those
glorious mansions Ioh. 14.2
provided for me, and all thy Saints, in the highest Heavens, so draw my
heart, I beseech thee, daily more and more unto thee. Raise up my soul, and
all the affections thereof, from Earth to Heaven. Let me use this world 1 Cor.
7.31
as if I used it not. Let me carry my self as a stranger, and one that is from
his own home, always ready and willing to depart from hence Phil. 1.23
; yea, ever in my thoughts aspiring unto that heavenly country 2 Cor. 5.2.
, desiring and longing to be with thee my God and Savior, and to have the
fruition of that glory and happiness which thou reseruest for me, and which I
am no ways worthy of; but that it has pleased thee graciously to respect me
in the merits and worthiness of thy Son, in whom, and through whom, thou
have done great things for me, and to whom with thee, and thy good Spirit, be
all praise and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Another.
IT ought to be the continual and earnest desire of every true Christian, that
his heart may daily be more and more alienated and withdrawn from the things
of this world Psalm. 73.25. 1 Cor. 7.31
, which are but shadows and mere vanities; and more nearly united unto God,
in whom alone that true comfort and happiness is to be found, which is not
elsewhere to be obtained. O LORD, increase this desire in me; and be gracious
in giving me to see the desire of my heart therein fulfilled and accomplished
unto me, and in me. O draw me from the inordinate love of this vain and
sinful world, wherevvith many are so much ensnared; let me find my
affections every day more estranged and separated from the same; and grant
that I may be wholly united unto thee, my GOD, delighting continually in thy
presence, and receiving from thee, that plentiful increase of the heavenly
graces of thy blessed Spirit, whereby I may be fitted and enabled in some sort
to walk worthy of thee, to whom I desire wholly to deuote my self, and
whatsoever is in me.

How to overcome the World.
HE that would overcome this World, must first overcome himself, bringing his
sensual appetite and desire in subjection unto his reason, and his reason unto
the will and word of God: If he can do this once, the victory and conquest
will be easy; otherwise impossible. Herein lies the valor and fortitude of a
Christian. O most mighty Lord GOD, the GOD of my strength, without whom I can
do nothing, in whom, and through whom all things; strengthen me with thy grace
and effectual power, that I may be able to subdue the corruption of my sinful
and rebellious nature, whenever it rises up against me, that I may lay the
axe close unto the root, and cut down and pluck up every secret sin that
has gotten any place in me, that so I may mortefie every inordinate affection
of my heart, which might be any hinderance to the work of thy grace in me;
that thus having power over my self, and that inbred enemy which lies
secretly lurking in my bosom, and in the inmost parts of my soul, I may with
less difficulty vanquish and overcome this present evil world, and all those
outward enmities which at any time shall oppose themselves against me, and
the powerful operation of thy holy and blessed spirit within me, which I
humbly and earnestly desire thee, that it may be renewed daily more and more,
and brought unto further perfection.

Ruling the affections, how necessary.
THE affections of man's heart, are endless and insatiable; they can never be
satisfied Eccl. 1.8.
; yea, the more that they are yielded unto, the more does the inordinatenesse
and distemper thereof increase. What a vanity therefore is it for any one to
give liberty unto his rouing and disordered mind, and by seeking to quench
that thirst, to make it the more vehement, as it is with those that are fallen
into the dropsy. LORD, give me wisdom, whereby I may learn rightly to
moderate all my affections, and not to follow the sway of them, nor to suffer
my self at any time to be carried or drawn away, whether the inordinate
motion and desire of them shall lead me; but so to restrain and rule them,
that I may live a quiet and contented life, free from those manifold
distractions Pro. 25.28.
unto which they are continually subject, who have not learned to keep
themselves within those limits which thou have prescribed and appointed to
them.

Affections must be made Servants, and not Masters.
AS the Schoolmasters is to his Scholar, or a Master unto his Servant, so
ought reason to be unto the affections of every one. It must always bear rule
over them, and have them at command, or else they will quickly be
disordered, and quite out of frame; yea, they will carry away a man headlong
with violence into much mischief and misery, as we see wild and fierce
horses often times run away with an unguided Coach or Wagon, to the overthrow
of them that are carried in it. O LORD, thou see unto how many unruly
passions and distempered affections I am continually subject, which make me
oftentimes less fit for the performance of good duties and holy exercises then
otherwise, through thy grace, I should be.

Let it please thee to give me the masterie and power over them: yea, grant
that I may always subject them to the rule of right reason, and to the
direction which thy Word gives, that so being well ordered and disposed, they
may not be (as they have been) lets and hindrances, but (as they should be)
serviceable and convenient helps, and furtherances, unto virtue, piety, and
godliness, even to all Christian duties which thou requirest of me.

How dangerous it is to be given unto the World.
HE cannot be a good Servant, that is addicted to his pleasures and delights,
or that is given to follow his own business overmuch, and does not
principally intend his Masters affairs. He can never be a good Disciple of
Christ, nor a faithful Servant of God, whose mind is set upon earthly things
Mat. 6.24
; who is carried away with the pleasures and delights of sin, or much
addicted to the profits and commodities of this vain and transitory world, or
otherwise wedded unto his own rouing and unstayed affections, and does not
wholly consecrate Romans 12.1.
and dedicate himself unto the Lord, and to his worship and service, with
restraint from all those things, which might be any hinderance or encumbrance
unto him in the same.

O my God, how unworthy am I to be called thy Servant? to call thee my Lord?
how unable am I to perform that duty and service which thou requirest of me?
O be thou merciful unto me, notwithstanding my unworthiness; pardon my great
unprofitableness heretofore: Enable me daily more and more for the discharge
of the duties of thy service, which thou have commanded, and whereunto thou
have called me. Let neither the sinful pleasures, nor the deceivable profits
and fruitles commodities of this fading 1 Cor. 7.31 1 Ioh. 2.17
and decaying world, cause me at any time to be slack, slothful, or any
ways unfaithful in thy business, in my calling; but give me grace ever to
renounce these things, even whatsoever may at any time, in any sort, withdraw
me from my duty, or be any hinderance unto me in the ready, vvilling, and
cheerful performance of that service which I owe unto thy Majesty; yea, let
me always deny Luke 9.23. Mat. 10.37. Luke 14.26
my self, and even hate e my dearest friends, and nearest acquaintance, (if
the matter stands so between thee and them) yea, even my life it self,
rather then be found willingly defective in my duty, or unfaithful in thy
service, who have every way been so good and gracious unto me, and freely
promised to reward me so f liberally, Psalm. 19.11. 1 Cor. 15.58. Romans 2.7.
Ioh. 12.26.
so plentifully, even with the riches of glory, honor, immortality, and
everlasting life and happiness in thy kingdom; yet not for the worthiness of
my works, but for the merits of my Savior, for whose sake thou crownest what
good thing soever it pleases thee Heb. 13.21
to work in me. To him, together with thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be all
praise and glory, now and for ever.

This world a Prison.
THis World is the godly man's Prison: he is continually laden with the chains
Heb. 12.1
of sin and misery, which lie heavy upon his soul, and cause him like a
distressed captive Romans 7.23.
, to sit mourning Psalm. 120.5. Romans 7.24
all the day long, and with great earnestnes and vehemency to call and cry
Romans 8.21 2 Cor. 5.2.4.8.
for relief. Yea, he is, as it were, in a dark dungeon 2 Cor. 5.7 Col. 3.3.4
, so that he cannot see the joyful light of that glorious Kingdom, nor enjoy
so fully the desired presence of his Creator, and his blessed Savior John
12.26.
and Redeemer, after whom his soul longs Can. 1.14 Phil. 3.23.
. Lord, when it pleases thee, ease me of these bonds, deliver me out of this
Prison, and set me at liberty among thy Saints in glory, that I may behold
the brightness of thy face, and enjoy that promised salvation, the very hope
and expectation whereof, is the stay and comfort of my life in this bondage of
sin and misery, unto which I am daily subject, Come Lord Revel. 22 17
Jesus: come quickly. Amen.

Christians in this world are unknown men.
THe life of the Children of God whiles they live in this world, is hid Col.
3.3.
with Christ in God: They are not known 1 John 3.
to the world, being masked, and shrouded under the veil of Romans 8.3.
weak and sinful flesh. Their natural life and outward estate is not
different from others. All things come alike to all Eccles. 9.
. Their Persons are exposed to contempt, disgrace Job 30.8.9.10.
, reproach, and many injuries, which the proud and disdainful world (who are
not worthy of them 1 Cor. 4.9.10.11. Heb. 11.38
,) do continually most unjustly offer unto them, delighting even to sport
themselves of them. Their bodies are subject to much misery 2 Cor. 4.7.8.9 10.
and 11.6.
, to ignominy and baseness, and for the most part to more sicknesses,
weaknesses, and infirmities then others, and in the end to death Genesis 3.19
Heb. 9.27.
as well as others. They dye like other men, and are covered with the same
mould, taking up their lodgings with the rest of the sons of Adam in the
dust, and in the chambers of darkness Job 10.21.22. and 17.13.14.
, having Corruption for their Father, and the Worm for their Mother and
Sister. The spiritual life also of their Souls (wherein all their glory Psalm.
45.13
in this life consists, the redemption of their bodies Romans 8.23. Phil. 3.21.
being wholly reserved for the estate after this life, even the day of the
general and glorious resurrection,) as it is not discerned of the world, so
many times of themselves neither, but very dimmely; and when it is in best
estate it is but weak 2 Cor. 12 9. Psalm. 119.4
, and needs the quickening grace of Gods Spirit, for the increasing and
confirming of it.

Blessed Lord, hasten that glorious appearance of thine, that so, this veil
being removed, I may be fully restored unto that promised light and liberty,
which my soul longs after; and live in thy sight for ever, receiving from
thee continually that accomplishment of grace and glory, which thou have
reserved for me in thy Kingdom.

Sabbath day; the religious observation of it how necessary.
IT is not the Law of Man, but the unchangeable decree and ordinance of GOD
himself, the chief Lawgiver, that the Sabbath Day, (which in the Apostles
days Acts 20.4.5.6.7. 1 Cor. 16.1.2.
, and of the Apostles themselves Olim certe priscis illis hominibus, in summo
precio Sabbathum fuit, quam quidem solennitatem Dominus in Diem Dominicum
transtulit. Athan. Hom. de Semente. Sabbathum est signum vt sciatur dies
Creationis. Idem in Mat. 11. Aug. Epist. ad Ianuar. 119. cap. 13. Idem, lib.
22. de Ciuitate Dei. cap. 30. Chrisost. in Genes. 2. Homil. 18. Hieron. contra
Pelag. lib. 3. Beza in Apocalypse. 1.10. -- Spiritu sancto procul dubio, illud
Apostolis dictante, pro prioris seculi Sabbatho sieve die septimo, assumptus
suit dies huius mundi primus, in quo etc. Vide Fulke Rhem. Test. in eund. loc.
Sect. 6. and Iun. praelect. in Genesis 2.3. and P. Mart. in Genesis 2. Bulling. in
Romans 4.5. Zanch. de operibus Dei. lib. 1. cap. 1.
, (no doubt) by authority from CHRIST, and by the direction of his Spirit John
14.26. Acts 1.3. 1 Cor. 11.23.
, guiding them therein as in all other truth, was changed, and called the
Lord's Day,) should be religiously observed of all, even to the coming of
Christ. He gives us a special watchword of remembrance, to stir up all to
the greater care and diligence hereof: Exodus 8.20
Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy, as if in no wise he would have
this forgotten at any time, or slightly regarded, as it is of the most.

This alone has a Preface prefixed, and both the affirmative and negative part
expressed (the like to be found in no other Commandment,) as if foreseeing
what liberty men would take unto themselves herein, he would of purpose set
bounds on every side, to fence, and to keep us continually within compass of
this Law.

command us, but also persuade, and yields a reason; yea, many and forcible
reasons and motives, whereby as with so many cords we might be drawn unto
this duty: from his own example and practice, from his hallowing of it to a
holy use, from the equity of the observation of it, since that he has given
us the other six days to our selves, and taken this one only to himself, as
his own due, which by no means he would have vvith-held from him.

They therefore, that make little or no conscience of the due and diligent
observation of this day, by absenting themselves from the public assemblies,
or by neglecting private duties, prayer, reading, conference, meditation,
examination of things heard in the public Ministry Acts 17.11
; much more they that openly profane it, by spending it either idly or
wickedly, in excessive drinking, gaming, or other unlawful courses; whatsoever
outwardly they profess in word, yet assuredly they are such as have forgotten
the Lord; they refuse to follow him: they transgress his law, and violate his
holy ordinance which he has appointed for their own welfare, if they could
see it. They remove the ancient bounds, within which he has enclosed them,
which who so does, shall be accursed Deuteronomy. 27.17
, (yea though they were but the bounds and limits which men had established.)
They cast away his yoke (a note of the sons of Belial Deuteronomy. 13.13
.) They sin grievously, and very dangerously. They are enemies to their own
good, friends to Satan; yea, they are fallen into the very snare of the Devil,
who both in the infancy and prime-age of the Church, and ever since (when he
could not root out the whole Christian faith, which spread it self into so
many nations) labored mightily the subversion and overthrow of this maine prop
and pillar thereof, by raising up men of heretical minds, who some, through
the pretended color of Christian liberty; others by the aspersion and false
imputation of Jewish superstition and bondage, and I know not what, have by
this means gone about to open a wide door to Atheism, licentiousness,
profaneness, and so by little and little, in an insensible manner, to
ouerturne all Religion and Piety. Tantum abest quin decorum and ordo nisi ista
politia and moderatione obseruari possit, vt praesentissima impendeat Ecclesiae
perturbatio and ruina si dissoluatur: j. In brief. The neglect of the Sabbath
day is the ruin of the Church. Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 8. sect. 32.
A notable polity of that wily serpent. And a marvelous either blindness, or
presumption in them who are so bewitched by him. For what God has hallowed,
how should man once dare to profane, or to account common and unhallowed? But
those whom God (who is the light of our eyes) has caused the light of his
saving grace to shine more clearly unto are otherwise minded, otherwise
affected. They acknowledge it not only a just and equal thing, that the Lord
should have one day of many dedicated and wholly devoted to his service (a shame
it were that any should deal sparingly with him herin who has bin so prodigal
to them) but also they account it a great argument and evidence of Gods
special care over them, and singular goodness toward them, who in this
estate of their frailetie and weakness has in mercy appointed so excellent a
help and so necessary a means for them to gather spiritual strength and
increase of grace, whereby to stand out against Satan their deadly foe, and
to walk on cheerfully, comfortably, and constantly, through the wilderness
of this troublesome world, to that promised rest, that heavenly Canaan; yea,
they rejoice greatly in it Isai. 58.13
, find much sweetness and delight in it, long for it before it comes, and
when it is come, solace themselves in it exceedingly. And no marvel: for they
see and find that it is the market day of their souls, wherein according to
Gods appointment, they gather that heavenly Manna, that bread of life, whereby
they are nourished and strengthened all the week after, and increase daily in
that spiritual life of grace and godliness, till they come unto that measure
which GOD has allotted unto them. They see, how hereby they recover
themselves from sins past, arm themselves against sin to come, grow in
knowledge, increase in faith, hope, patience, and all other Christian virtues,
have the inward man repaired; and in a word, whereas on other days their
minds are troubled and distracted with worldly business, this day they have
liberty to recall themselves as it were, to draw near unto the Lord, and
sweetly to repose themselves in him, who is their peace, rest, and happiness;
and therefore they joy and rejoice herein. Again, their Sabbath Day here on
earth, as it does express, Ambros. in Psa. 119. calls aeternam vitam magnu^
Sabbathum. and August. lib. 22. de ciuit. Dei. ca. 30. Sabbathum maximum: where
he says it prefigureth the rest of the body and soul.
so it does put them in mind of that eternal Sabbath which they shall
celebrate for ever in the heavens, that peace, that joy, and that perfect rest
and happiness which they shall shortly be made partakers of for ever in
those glorious mansions, those celestial habitations. It is, as it were a
map, or an Emblem to them of that Angelical life which their souls longs
after, and the very remembrance whereof does wonderfully refresh their
grieved minds, and languishing spirits vvhiles they wander in this wearisome
wilderness, where they have so many enemies continually assayling them, so
many difficulties with which they are continually encumbered. The sanctifying
of this day, does bring them, as it were, from Egypt to Canaan, and from
Babell unto Sion. Heb. 11.10.16
It calls them home to their own country, gives them a view of it (though a
far off) and affords them a taste of that spiritual and heavenly life which
afterward they shall live for ever in glorious manner. How therefore can it
be, but that they should rejoice in it, and in no wise think it burdensome
unto them, as carnal and worldly men do. O my God, forgive me that I have had
no more care of this duty heretofore, and teach me to be more mindful of it
hereafter. As thou have appointed this day to be wholly bestowed upon thee and
thy service, so I humbly pray thee, to guide me therein with thy grace and
spirit, that it may be my delight to consecrate it as Isa 58.13.
glorious unto thee. O let me not by any means pollute it, by doing mine own
ways, nor seeking mine own will, no not so much as speaking a vain word; but
let me give my self therein wholly to the duties Act. 16.13 Psalm. 122. Nehe.
8.8 Act. 17.11 Psalm. 92.1. and 145.5. Mal. 3.16. 1 Cor. 16.1.2
which thou requirest of me, both public and private, as hearing thy word
preached with all reverence and careful attention, reading the same, prayer,
meditation, and godly conference, and whatsoever else, whereby I may be
furthered, or a means to further or help forward others in the ways of grace
and godliness; that thus being obedient unto thy commandment, unto which I am
tied by so many bonds, thy blessing may be upon me, thy spirit may dwell with
me, I may daily more and more be built up in saving knowledge and true
holiness, I may grow strong in thy fear, finding the powers of sin and
Satan every day more and more weakened in me: and after that I have at thy
appointed times, endeavored to keep a holy, and religious Sabbath here on
earth, I may hereafter keep an eternal Sabbath with thee in the heavens,
praising and magnifying thee incessantly, and enjoying that perfect rest and
happiness which thou have promised, and I daily expect and hope for, and that
only through the merits of thy dear Son my blessed Savior, to whom with thee,
and thy spirit be all praise now and for ever.

Profaneness, how fearful the end of it will be.
THe Fig Tree Math. 21 19
was accursed because it had leaves only, but brought forth no fruit; how much
more they then that have cast away the leaves also, having not so much as the
show and outward profession of religion and godliness? It Is a heavy and
dreadful sentence which is to be pronounced against the unprofitable servant,
that has not improued the Lords talent which he gave unto him, and made the
best use of it for his masters advantage, so as might be most for his glory,
and the good and benefit of others, amongst whom he lived Math. 25 30
, Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness; there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. O then what shall become of those, that are not only
fruitelesse and unprofitable in their course, but profane and openly evil, so
as the world does point at them, and cri^ shame upon them, though they are so
hardened (many of them) that they never blush for it, Ier. 5.3. and 6.15
nor will be ashamed, but Hose. 7.10
glory in it; that do not only omit that which is good, setting themselves in
no good way, but also give themselves wholly to the practice of wickedness
Isai. 3.8.9 Phil. 3.19.
Hose. 4.1.2 Psalm. 55.9.10.11
and ungodliness, lying, e swearing, drunkenness, uncleanness, contempt of
the word, and blessed ordinances of the Lord, profanation of the Sabbath; and
many execrable impieties; making even a trade of these Iewde and vvretched
courses, sporting Pro. 10.23
themselves therein, and hating Psalm. 50 17.
them that go about to reclaim them from them. What shall become of them? My
heart trembles to think of the fearful doom which shall pass against
them in that great and terrible day of the LORD, when he shall come in
flaming fire 2 These. 1.8
, to give judgment Iud. 14.15
against them, and to render vengeance unto them, as they have deserved. My
heart trembles to think how woeful their estate and condition shall then be;
and me thinks, they should be amazed and astonished when they hear of it, or
enter into consideration of it.

For if the unprofitable servant shall be cast into utter darkness, then
doubtless they that have not been only unprofitable, and barren of the
works of piety and charity, but also openly malicious, (full of
wickedness, Romans 1.29.30
envy, deceit, backebiting, raylers, haters of GOD, doers of wrong, proud,
inuenters of evil things, and practisers of all kind of mischief in a
profane manner) they shall be cast into the outmost part of that utter
darkness, into the very depth thereof; they shall have the lowest part in
hell, the deep dungeon of Gods wrath. Their punishment shall be most fearful
and dreadful, and their end most wretched and miserable. As it was said of
Judas Mat. 26.24
, so it may be likewise of them. Isai. 3.9.11. and 5.
It had been good for such, that they had never been borne: VVoe be unto
their souls, or they bring evil upon themselves. VVoe be unto them, for they
shall eat the fruit of their ways, and of their works, vvherin now they
rejoice themselves. Let them know assuredly, that it shall be gall and
bitterness to Ier. 2.19
them in the end. Their sin is Ier. 2.22.
marked out before the LORD, and their vengeance sleeps not; when their
wickedness is come to the full growth, and ripeness, as the Ammorites was
Genesis 15.16
, then the Lord in his justice, will put to his sharp sickle, and cut them
down with a dreadful judgment, and cast them into the VVinepresse of the
fierceness of his wrath; yea, into the very bottom of that bottomless pit
of endless perdition and confusion, where they shall be tormented in fiery
flames for evermore, without all hope of recovery. This shall be their lot and
portion, Job. 5.27
if they continue in that estate, into which they have made so fearful an
entrance. Hear it, Psalm. 50.22 Mat. 4.7. Heb. 3.8
all ye that forget GOD; tremble at it, and seek in time to escape the
vengeance to come. Mat. 24.50 1 These. 5.3
Harden not your hearts, neither presume to go on yet further, lest it be too
late for you to return, and to avoid this woeful misery, which will seize
upon you sooner then you are aware of.

O merciful Lord, keep me, and all thine from the wickedness of the wicked.
Let us never delight to walk in the way that pleases them, seeing the end
and issue thereof is so fearful, Pro. 14.12
how soever it seem unto them; yea, let us be afraid once to set one foot in
it, and always most carefully avoid the occasions which might draw us unto
it.

Let not there be one profane person Heb. 12.16
amongst us that have taken the profession of thy glorious truth upon us; But
teach us now and ever to abound in the fruits of righteousness and holiness,
that so we may not be found unprofitable, but increase daily more and more,
seeking to please thee; that so when that day of our accounts shall come,
vvhiles the wicked shall stand trembling at the Bar, we may lift up our
heads with confidence, and hear that joyful sentence from thee Mat. 25.23
. It is well done good servants and faithful, you have been faithful in a
little, your glory shall be unspeakable. Enter into your masters joy; inherit
the kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of the world; unto which
bring us in thy good time, O merciful LORD, not for any merits or worthiness
of ours, but only for thy Sons sake, our blessed Savior and Redeemer, to
whom with thee and thy Spirit, be all praise and glory now and for ever.

The security of the wicked.
THou see how it is with people that lie sleeping in a Boat, whiles they are
carried down the stream; they make way apace, and come to their appointed place
before they are aware thereof. So it is with the wicked and ungodly, they lie
sleeping in carnal security, whiles Satan wherries them down amain, till
he brings them ( scarce thinking of any such matter) to the bottomless gulf
of endless perdition and confusion. Every hour, every minute, they are
hastening forward to their destruction in an insensible manner; and at length
they fall suddenly into the depth of it, without all recovery; and being
awakened out of that dead sleep into which they were cast, begin to wonder
at their former carelessness; yea, cry out, and send forth many fearful
shrikings and grievous Luke 16.24.
clamours, being as men amazed and even at their wits end, to see the woe and
misery, which they have brought upon themselves, and from which they can never
be freed, never released, though they had a thousand worlds to give for a
ransom. Lord suffer me not to sleep as others do 1 These. 5.6.
, lest I perish with them.

A soft and tender heart.
A Soft and tender heart, as it is the gift Ezekiel. 11.19. and 36.26.
of God, so it is a singular blessing, and such as the Lord bestows upon
those whom he loves best, and to whom he has a special favor, and purpose
to do them most good, both here and hereafter. Oh it is his delight to Isa.
57.15 Psa. 51.17 Isa. 66.1.2.
dwell with them, and in them, by the abundance of his graces, and by the
presence of his holy and blessed Spirit. He will revive them, and give life
unto them, and will never depart from them. Their sighs, and sobs, and tears
issuing from a heart contrite Mat. 12.20.
and broken for sin, are dear and precious unto him; they are as sweet
waters, which he keeps, as it were, in his glass Psa. 56.8.
, in his own closet. Happy Mat. 5.4
is the man that finds this in him: He has it under the Lords hand and
seal, that he will graciously respect him, and cause his soul to live before
him. But alas, how rare a thing is this? How few be there, that find a fleshy
and a melting heart and soul within their breasts? whose consciences are
bruised with the sight and remorse of their sins, whereby they have
displeased him, who has been so kind, and so gracious a God and Father unto
them? that have a sonne-like Heb. 12.28
and a reverent fear of his displeasure, and of his correcting hand; that
grieve, sorrow and complain often and much, for that they can be no more touched
for their sins, nor find that cheerfulness Psa. 119.4^ Heb. 13.1^
and delight in the duties of his service which he requires; that are very
fearful and scrupulous of doing any thing whereby he might be offended, or
his laws violated; yea, is it not even a strange and unknown language, as it
were, unto the most, ^o talk unto them of a broken and contrite heart? They
thank God, they feel all well within them; they have not such sick and
queasie stomachs as they see some have, nor would willingly be troubled with
their maladies. They feel it indeed and complain much, if sickness,
poverty, shame, or any such like outward evils seize upon them, but their
hearts never bleed within them, their consciences never strike them with the
sight or fear, either of sin, or of the punishment of it Gal. 3.10 Romans
8.13. Ephe. 5.5.6
threatened unto them from an angry and wrathful God, before whose face they
never learned yet to tremble. Yea, through custom and continuance in sin
they have quite lost the sense of sin Ephesians. 4.18.19
, and are become so hardened that they never see, nor sorrow, nor mourn for
it, nor for the judgments hanging over them for the same. There is a brawne,
and thick skin, as it were, drawn over their hearts, they are altogether
seared and obdurate. Nothing can move them, or at least make any deep
impression into them, piercing into their hearts, and wounding their souls.
They know not what it is to be Act. 2.37
pricked for sin, or to be pressed and harrowed with the rake of Gods just
judgments Psalm. 6. and 32.38.
, but go on carelessly, securely, and presumptuously in the wicked ways and
ungodly courses which they have taken unto themselves, and sing peace unto
their souls Luke 12.19. 1 These. 5.3.
. A fearful estate, if men could see it; and yet, the most far gone in it.
Not one amongst many that complains of it. Not one scarce amongst a thousand,
that to his own salvation, finds himself healed and cured of it, having his
stony and flinty heart turned into a fleshy heart, into mourning and lamenting
spirits, grieuing for sin above all things, and longing for the assurance of
the pardon of it, and the comfortable presence of God, and the riches of his
sanctifying grace; desiring still to be more satisfied and replenished with
those pure waters Ezekiel. 47.
of life and grace, which flow from his sanctuary. O LORD, give me not over at
any time, I humbly pray thee, unto that fearful evil Psa. 81.12
, which thou suffer in wrath to fall upon the wicked, and those who are
reprobates and utterly forsaken of thee. O do thou more and more soften and
mollify my heart. Take this stony heart of mine quite from me, and give me a
tender and a melting heart, which may bleed at the least blow, with which
thou strikest me, with the least prick of thy law when it threatens me; and
cause me to mourn for my sins, especially because they have been so
displeasing unto thee, my God, who have been so kind and so gracious unto
me. Let my mind be bruised rather with the taste and feeling of thy mercies,
then with the terror of thy judgments; but let me by both, be brought
always to walk humbly, and reverently before thee, desirous in all things to
please thee, and afraid in any thing willingly to offend thee, and thirsting
unfeignedly after a greater measure of thy heavenly graces; that so thou may
look graciously upon me, both now and always, and delight in doing me good,
according unto thy promise, wherein is my comfort.

We ought to be more affected with spiritual miseries then with bodily.
IF men be in some bodily distress, sickness, poverty, or any other outward
calamity, which lies heavy upon them, they sigh and even groan in
themselves, and seek by all means to be released from the same. But though
their Souls be in great misery and wretchedness, Reu. 3.17
poor, blind, naked; yea, sick unto the death, and exposed unto many, and
those most fearful Judgments, both in this life, and much more in the life
to come, they complain not, they are no ways troubled, they sigh not, they
sorrow not, they seek not to be recovered out of that woeful estate and
condition wherein they are. Oh, how has Satan blinded their eyes? how has
he wholly possessed them with a Spirit of slumber Romans 11.8
, that they should be so miserable, and yet see not their misery, nor have any
sense and feeling of their greatest evils? For, did they but see the misery
they are in; if they did but know how heavy a burden lies upon them, which if
it be not removed in time, will press them down to hell, they would then fill
every place they came in, with their plaints and mournings; they would sigh,
sob, and groan in spirit, and never be at quiet Acts 16.29.30.
, never at rest in themselves, till they saw themselves freed from the same.

O merciful LORD, as thou have showed thy self exceeding gracious unto me,
in showing me my misery and bringing me out of it, so I humbly beseech thee,
to Aands 26.18
open their eyes, which are yet closed up, and covered with that fearful
darkness, which Sin and Satan has brought upon them, that they may see their
estate; and touch their hearts, even of as many of them as thou have ordained
to life, that seeing it, and bewayling it, they may labor to come out of it.
And keep thy Servant both now and always, from that blindness of mind, and
deadness of heart, which of all evils are the most fearful, and such as thou
suffer to fall upon the reprobate, and those that shall perish for ever. Let
me grieve more for the decay of thy graces, the want of the comfortable sense
and feeling of thy love and favor, and the miseries unto which my soul is
subject through sin, then for sickness of body, loss of goods, poverty,
or any other outward calamity whatsoever, which may at any time befall me.

The conversion of others is to be sought for.
HE is of a malignant nature, that having wandered out of the way with the rest
of his company, and been thereby together with them, in great peril and
danger, and afterward finding the right way, walks therein alone, and
lets the rest go on to their destruction. So it is with those, that being
through the grace and goodness of God converted themselves from the crooked
and dangerous ways of sin and wickedness, wherein before they walked Tit.
3.3.
together with others, seek not to bring others into the right way with them,
that so they may both escape that danger which was ready to fall upon them.

Good LORD, as it has pleased thee in the riches of thy mercies to recall me
out of the by-pathes of sin and iniquity, wherein I have a long time
wandered and gone astray, and the end and issues whereof are death and
perdition; so give me thy Spirit I humbly pray thee, whereby I may be stirred
up daily as to renew my conversation and repentance, so also in a Jude 22.23.
Psalm. 51.13
compassion of others, to seek by all means to win them, and to bring them
out of the ways of destruction into the ways of life and salvation, by
laboring their speedy and unfeigned conversion unto thee, that so we may
jointly with one heart and Luke 15.31 1 Timothy 1.17
voice praise and glorify thee both now and evermore. Amen.

The miserable estate of a wicked and unconverted person.
O How fearful and miserable is the estate of every wicked and ungodly man,
both in life, in death, after death, and for ever? As soon as he comes into
the world, he is as a loathsome Leuit. 13.45 Job 14.4. Psalm. 51.5. Ezekiel 16.4
5.6.8.
Leper in the sight of God, stripped Romans 3.23
of all righteousness and holiness, and altogether stained and defiled with
the filth and contagion of original sin and corruption. There is no Esa. 1.6.
whole part sound in him. He is borne a Ezekiel. 16.3. Job. 11.12
limme of the old Adam; yea, the child of Ephesians. 2.3.
wrath, and of the curse; subject unto hell, death and damnation Romans 5.12.16.
. And the longer he lives, the more he increases this misery and
wretchedness of his wherein he was borne. Every hour adds moment thereto,
so that he becomes at length the child of the Devil Ioh. 8.44 and 1 John 3
8.
seauenfold more then he was before. The curse of the Law, and the wrath of
God seazeth more and more upon him Ioh. 3.36 Galat. 3.10
. His person is not Romans 8.8. Psalm. 5.5.
accepted of God; yea, he hates Pro. 15.8 and 21.27
him; nay, his best services, whereby he vainly thinks that he meriteth
much at his hands (as his Prayers, Alms, and outward moral virtues,) are an
abomination unto him; he loathes and abhorres them; they are as stinking Esa.
1.13.14
carrion in his nostrils, burdensome unto him. He has no right nor interest
unto the things of this Hosea 2.9.
world which he enjoys, but is an usurper and intruder into other men's 1
Cor. 3.21.22.
possessions, and stands indicted in the Court of Heaven for theft and robbery
(howsoever he be free in the Courts of men;) yea, and shall one day in the
presence of the whole world hold up his hand at the Bar of Gods
Iudgement-seate, and answer Luke 16.2
for the unjust use and possession of the things that were not his own, but
others, from whom he detayned them. He is a drudge unto the world, and a
slave and vassal Ioh. 8.34 Romans 6.20. 2 Pet. 2.19
to sin and Satan. He (even that cursed Fiend Ephe. 2.2
who rules in the hearts of the children of disobedience,) has set up his
Scepter in his heart, and rules and swayeth him altogether as it pleases him;
yea, in most woeful manner tyrannizeth over him, and lays many and heavy
bonds and fetters upon him, upon every part of his soul and body; and so
having dominion and power over him, leads 2 Timothy 2.26.
him as it were in triumph after him, as a most miserable thrall and bondslaue,
captiuated to every vile lust, wherewith it shall please him to ensnare him,
Pride, Covetousness, Uncleanness, Maliciousness, Envy, etc. Nay, there is no
thraldom, no bondage like unto that under which he is held by Satan, and by
the Ephesians. 6.12
Powers of darkness. The bondage of the Israelites of old, under that cruel
and hard-hearted Tyrant Exodus 1.11. etc. and 2.2.23. and 3.7.9.
Pharaoh, or of the poor captiuated Christians, now under the barbarous Turk,
is but a shadow thereof; yea, but a dream of a shadow in comparison of it. For
here, not the body only, but the soul also, and the whole man is bound; yea,
laden and pressed down with many heavy chains and irons, and that (which
makes his misery so much the greater) whiles he sees Isay 6.9.10. Romans 11.8
Reu. 3.17.
not, nor feels that misery and woeful estate whereinto he is plunged, but
rejoices, and Prou. 12.15. and 14.12.
glories in it, thinking himself to be as 1 Cor. 4.8. John 8.33.
free as any: yea, he thrusts himself daily more and more into the very
depth of bondage and misery, and (such is his extreme sottishness, wherewith
Satan has even infatuated him) thinking them to be his greatest 1 Kin. 21 20
enemies, who are his best friends, seeking to pull him out of the claws of
Satan, and to free him from the power of death and darkness, even from that
wretched bondage and slavery into which the prince of this world (that deadly
enemy of mankind) has brought him. He is a dead man whiles he lives; dead
in trespasses Ephesians. 2.1. Col. 2.13.
and sins, and lies rotting and putrefying in the grave of his corruptions,
neither hearing the lively sound of the voice of the Son of God, nor having
any 1 Cor. 2.14
taste or feeling of things spiritual and heavenly. He has no true sound
constant joy Job 20.5
or comfort in his life time, no Isay 57.20.21.
perfect peace, but only fl^shings of carnal and worldly joy, which is as the
crackling Eccles. 7.8.
of thorns under the pot; and the Prou. 14.13.
end whereof is heaviness, and much anguish of mind and spirit, yea, terror
of soul and conscience Job. 15.21. and 27.20.
, which is his hell in this life, and the forerunner of those infernal
torments, and hellish pangs which he shall endure for ever in that place of woe
and torment provided for him, even in the Prou. 21.16
congregation of the dead and damned, where he shall take up his restless
resting place for evermore. He lies open continually al to the plagues and
iudg^ments Prou. 24.20. Psalm. 27.9.30.
of GOD, and may well fear that the Lord will strike him dead every hour,
every moment, as he did Acts 5.
Ananias and Saphira; and make him a fearful spectacle of his wrath and just
vengeance unto others, causing either the waters to ouerflow and drown him, as
they did the old Genesis 7.
world; or the Earth to open the mouth presently, and to swallow him up, as it
did Corah, Dathan Number. 16
, and Abiram, and their accomplices and confederates; or Fire and Brimstone to
rain down from heaven and to consume him, as it did Genesis 19.
Sodom and Gomorrha, and those other Cities which the Lord made a
Looking-glass unto the world; or the Air he breathes in, to poison him, as it
did so many thousands, in those late contagious and infectious times (never to
be forgotten) when the Arrows of the Lord were scattered far and near, and
drunk up the lives of so many of all sorts with the venime thereof; or the
Hab. 2.11
House he dwells in to fall upon his head, as it did upon the Philistimes
Judge. 16.30.
, whiles they were sporting with Sampson; or evil Angels Psalm. 78.49.
to smite him, and to wound him to death immediately, as they did the
Egyptians, whiles they oppressed the people of GOD; or the Worms and Lice to
eat him up, and to consume him, as they did Acts 12.23
Herod when he was in the height of his pride and insolency; or the very
Meat and Drink which he takes for nourishment, to be come his bane even
deadly poison unto him (as Histories do report of some;) or a hair to choke
him. Yea, he may well fear that all the Creatures will band themselves
together, conspire his ruin, and work his utter and irrecouerable ouer-throw,
as doubtless they would (seeing they are enemies to all that are the Lords
enemies, and vvithall groan under the weight and burden of the sins of the
wicked,) but that the LORD restrains them for a time, that he may heap Genesis
15.16.
up the measure of his wickedness, and so after he has Romans 2.5.
treasured up wrath against the day of wrath, bring the greater destruction and
more fearful desolation upon him in the end, even that which shall press him
down into the very bottom of hell, and the lowest places of that deep and
darkesome dungeon, where after that dreadful sentence Mat. 25.41
passed against him in the day of Judgment, he shall lie bound and fettered
hand and feet in most grievous and unspeakable tortures Mat. 13.42 and 24.51.
and 25.30.46 Mark 9.44
and torments for evermore; having the worm of conscience continually gnawing
upon his soul, and fretting and vexing his conscience, and the fire of Gods
wrathful indignation and fury scorching him in most fearful manner; yea, the
full viols of the fierceness of the wrath of the Lord continually poured upon
him, so that he shall lie yelling, roaring, and crying continually, making such
fearful clamours and hydeous noyses, as would astonish the heart of the
hardiest and stoutest Champion on earth to hear; yea, affright him, and cause
him to be at his wits end. Nay, what shall I say? All this is but a shadow of
that woeful misery, and those grievous and hellish torments, which then and
there he shall endure for ever without any ease, any hope of intermission or
recovery; no, not though Ier. 15.1 Ezekiel. 14.14.
Noah, Job, Daniel, yea, all the Saints and Angels (which notwithstanding they
shall be far from, rather rejoicing in his misery, then pitying him, or
seeking to help or comfort him) though all they, I say, should in compassion
of his unsupportable misery, seek and sue unto the Lord for some release for
him, though it were after many thousand years. Oh, whose heart does not even
break within him, to think of this so vvretched estate and condition of the
wicked and ungodly Job. 20.29.
, although they be so blind that they see it not, or so secure and careless
that they regard it not, but go on with great boldness and presumption in a
strange manner, till they drink of the very dregs of that bitter Psalm. 11.6
cup, which is prepared for them. It was well said of One, that he would not be
in the estate of a wicked man half an hour, for the whole world. Who would,
that knows what it is, or wisely considers what has been said of it out of
those divine testimonies which the Truth it self has sealed?

Blessed be thy name O Lord, that it has pleased thee in the riches of thy
grace and mercy, through Christ my Savior, to draw me out of that woeful
misery, when I was as deeply plunged thereinto as others. O let me never
forget that unspeakable goodness of thine toward me therein; let me never
cease to bless and praise thy name for the same, and to testify my unfeigned
thankfulness unto thee by continual and constant obedience unto all thy holy
and righteous laws and commandments, and that even unto the end of my days
Psalm. 119 5
. And open the eyes I beseech thee of those that d^ ^ct lie in that natural
and co^^^^ estate of theirs, being for t^^ present in great misery and woeful
wretchedness, and yet see not their misery, but are covered with darkness,
and with the shadow of death. O let thy saving grace shine out unto them, that
so they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to thee
their God, and in the sense and acknowledgement of 1 Timothy 1 16.17
the great things thou have wrought for them, in delivering them from so
miserable and fearful a condition into that blessed and glorious estate of
thy chosen, together with all thy Saints and redeemed ones, return praise and
glory unto thee, both now and evermore.

Gods patience prouokes men to speedy* and unfeigned repentance and conversion.
THE patience and long sufferance of the Lord, should be a strong cord and
forcible means to draw Romans 2.4 Ier. 13.27 Hosea. 6.4. and 11.8
men unto repentance; yea, it ought even to constrain them presently to turn
unto him, and to cast away all their sins, whereby they have heretofore
offended him, and grieved his spirit which has striuen Genesis 6.3
so long with them, and yet is loath to depart from them, and to leave them to
themselves and to their own ways, the end whereof would be perdition and
everlasting destruction. Oh, that gracious dealing of his with them in bearing
with them so long, who have so often and so many ways provoked him; that great
and unspeakable kindness and goodness of his in continuing unto them life,
health, and all these outward blessings (and which is a far greater thing)
offering Prou. 1.21.22 2 Cor. 6.2. Heb. 3.15. 2 Pet. 3.9.
unto them from time to time the means of grace and salvation, and seeking to
bring them to heaven and happiness, whom he might long since have stripped and
utterly deprived of all these things, yea, cut them off from the face of the
earth, and cast them into hell to receive the wages Romans 6.23
and due deserts of their sins. This, this, it should even break their
hearts, make their souls to melt within them for their marvelous ingratitude
and undutifulness in dealing so unkindly, yea, so rebelliously with him who
has showed himself once, yea, often and that many ways so kind and gracious
unto them. Oh it should even enforce them to come Ier. 3.22.
unto him presently without all delays; it should win their hearts, and
cause them to refuse his grace no longer, to stand out no more against him, but
to bow and bend themselves wholy to his will in all things; and to desire by
all means to recompense their former unkindness and exceeding ingratitude and
unthankfulness toward him, with so much the greater care and conscionable
endeavor to walk humbly, dutifully and thankfully before him in time to come;
studying how to please him, and to return glory unto him. This effect it
should have in all of us. How sottish therefore are those that thereby become
the more obdurate Romans 2.7
and hard-hearted? who, the more kind and gracious the Lord is in bearing
with them for their sins past, do become the more unkind and rebellious
against him, not only continuing in their former sins and wickedness, but
also adding thereunto new and greater sins daily, and so growing every day
worse and worse the more that he extends his goodness and patience toward
them? O faithless and stiff-necked people, men of stubborn and rebellious
hearts and ears? Do you so reward Deuteronomy. 32 6
the Lord for his great mercy toward you when you were altogether unworthy of
it, yea, deserved nothing but that the viols of his wrath and fury should be
powered out upon you? Is this your kindness to your God who has so exceeded
in his grace, and bounty toward you? Is this your dutifulness, your loyalty,
your requital of his fatherly compassions over you? Do you so answer him? O
how fearful, yea, monstrous a thing is this, that men should be made worse by
the goodness of God? how miserable are they that will make the mercies of God
an occasion of their own misery? and how ungrateful are they, who, the more
kind the Lord is toward them, show themselves the more wicked and rebellious
against him? We would blush and be ashamed to deal so with men, and shall we
deal so with the everliving and most glorious God, that great God of the
whole world, who made us when we were not, and is able presently to cast us
both body and soul into hellfire, there to be tormented for evermore? Far
be it from me, O Lord, so highly to offend thy majesty. O let me never abuse
the riches of thy bounty and patience, least thereby I heap up unto my self
wrath against the day of wrath and vengeance, but let thy long-sufferance be
salvation 2 Pet. 3.15
unto me, even a means to mollify my heart, and to draw me daily nearer unto
thee, and to cause me to walk more humbly, dutifully, and obediently before
thee, yea as thou striuest continually by thy spirit to win me unto thee, and
even to overcome me with thy gracious and merciful dealing toward me, so let
me strive and endeavor with all my strength, and with all the powers of my
soul and body to return all thankfulness unto thee, and to testify the
unfeigned thankfulness of my heart by entire and constant obedience unto all
thy laws and commandments, and the more thy kindness is enlarged toward me,
the more let me increase in love and dutifulness unto thee; than thus I may at
length see that promised salvation of thine, in the hope and expectation
whereof, I do and will rest continually.

A looking Glass, whereby to see what our estate is; whether we be true
Conuerts or no.
THere be many that think they are converted, when indeed they are not Prou.
12.15. and 14.12.
, but lie still in the state of sin, of death, and of condemnation. So Ier.
17.9.
deceitful is the heart of man, and so guilefull that arch-enemie of mankind
Satan (who in a malicious and insatiable manner hunteth Job. 1.7. 1 Pet. 5.8
continually after the lives and souls of men) that often times he bleareth the
eyes of men, and deludeth them with counterfeit semblances, with vain
imaginations and shadows of things that are not, that so he may cause them to
rest carelessly, and securely in that fearful and dangerous estate wherein they
are, till in the end he makes a prey of them, so that none is able to deliver
them out of his hands, or to pluck them out of his jaws. It is good therefore
for every one to take sure trial of himself Lam. 3.40. 2 Cor. 13.5.
, and to see that he stands upon firm 1 Cor. 10 12
ground, lest otherwise he perish unawares, and fall down suddenly into the
pit of everlasting destruction, when he thought he was far off from it; and
find himself in the depth of hell, when as before he dreamed of no such
matter, but deemed himself to be in as good estate as any, though now (too
late) he bewaileth even with Luke 16.24. Hebr. 11.42
tears his great folly and marvelous security which has brought him to
that place of vvoe and torment, which he thought not of till he found
himself in it; and out of which he cannot now recover himself Luke 16.26.
, though he had a thousand worlds to give for his ransom. Lest therefore,
thou be (as others have been, who now groan in hell for it) beguiled by
the deceitfulness of thine own corrupt heart, and the subtilties and
illusions of Satan 2 Cor. 2.11.
, (who seeks nothing but thy ruin and utter overthrow) look diligently into
this Glass, which out of the Word of GOD I set before thee, whereby (if thou
have not a mist before thine eyes) thou may rightly discern, whether thou
art yet a true Convert or no, or else lie still rotting, and putrefying in
the corrupt estate of nature, not having as yet the work of grace wrought in
thee, howsoever heretofore thou have flattered thine own soul, and thought
that the way wherein thou vvalkest was right, when as the end and issue of it
is death and destruction Prou. 16.25
. First therefore, where true repentance is, and unfeigned conversion, there is
a true knowledge Psalm. 51.3
and sight of a man's sinful estate, and the wretchedness and misery
whereinto he is plunged; a knowledge of the sin wherein he was conceived
Psa. 51.5
and borne, viz. the sin of Adam imputed Romans 5.12.18.
to him as his own, and his own inherent Romans 7.24
and inbred corruption, together with his many and grievous actual
transgressions of the most holy and righteous laws and Commandments of GOD,
for which the curse of God has seized upon him, so that he is the Ephesians. 2.3.
child of wrath and perdition. He sees himself (of himself) to be most
wretched and miserable, being as soon as he came into this world as a most
loathsome leper in the eyes of God, altogether stained and Ezekiel. 16. Job
9.30.31.
defiled both in soul and body with the filth and contagion of that original
corruption and pollution which cleaves fast Heb. 12.1.
unto him, and covers him as the flesh wherewith he is covered on every side,
so that there is no sound part either in soul or body; yea, nothing but wounds
Isa. 1.6.
, and swelling, and sores full of corruption. He sees that as he was borne
thus sinful by nature, so that he has continued therein ever since he had
his being in this world; yea, that he is become every day more corrupt, Genesis
6.5. and 8.21. Job 15.16.
more vile and abominable, his whole life having been nothing else but a
multiplying of sin upon sin, and transgression upon transgression, by the
violating and breaking of the commandments of God. He sees himself hereby
to be accursed Gal. 3.10 Ioh. 3.18.
, having the Law continually thundering out that fearful sentence against
him, whereby he stands as a condemned wretch before God, subject to all
plagues and Deuteronomy 28.15.16 etc.
miseries in this life, and to everlasting Mat. 25.41. Ioh. 5.29.
torments both of body and soul in the life to come; yea, that he is pressed
down by that fearful and condemning sentence of that most just and righteous
law, even to hell-gates, and that the door is ready presently to be opened upon
him Job 21.13 Isa. 5.14.
, even as soon as the messenger (which continually attends upon him, ready
to execute the law of his Creator and most just Judge) shall knock at the
same by death, that so he may have entrance into that place of torment provided
for him (the congregation of the dead Pro. 21.16.
and damned) where he shall receive the wages Romans 6.23.
and due deserts of all his sins and rebellions against that infinite and
glorious Majesty for evermore.

brought to the knowledge and sight of his sins, and wretched estate by the
same, and that through the preaching Romans 7.7.8.9.10
of the Law, whereby it is discovered and made clear unto him, as in a Glass;
he knows vvithall (seeing the word of God, which shall stand for ever, has
sealed it) Exek. 18.4. Ioh. 8.24.
that if he die in that estate, he must needs perish and be damned eternally,
without all hope of recovery, and therefore is marueilously humbled in
himself, being cast down with the sense and feeling of his own wretchedness
and that woeful estate into which he is plunged, so that although heretofore
he rejoiced in it, and made a mock of it Pro. 14.9
, when he was put in remembrance of it by others, yet now he hangs down
his head with Romans 6.21 Ezra 9.6.
shame and sorrow, like a guilty and condemned person, ready to go to the
place of execution: yea, he is wholy possessed with the spirit of bondage
Romans 8.15. Isa. 66.2.
, which fills and strikes his soul with much fear, anguish, and exceeding
horror and amazement, so that his heart quaketh, his conscience is wounded
within him, and his flesh trembles for fear Acts 16.29. and 9.6.
of Gods wrath and vengeance, which every moment is ready to seize upon him:
yea, he groaneth under Matt. 11.28.
the heavy burden that lies upon him, and oppresses him in most grievous
manner. It causes him to grieve, to sigh, to sorrow, to mourn and lament for
the misery which is come upon him, and to desire Act. 2.37 and 16.30. Romans
7.24
above al things in the world to be freed from it, and to be let loose, as it
were, out of that hell into which in a sort he finds himself plunged, being
in his own apprehension as a forlorn and condemned wretch.

of his, hanging over him for the same, feeling himself to be as a damned
creature, dead and lost, and both confessing it Luke 15 21. Job 31.33 and
39.36.37. Pro. 28.13.
, and complaining of it incessantly, and seriously bethinking Luke 15.17.
himself how he might (if it were possible) come out of it; he hears by the
preaching of the Gospel, Luke 2.10.
of the means how to be delivered from that so miserable and woeful estate and
condition in which for the present he is inwrapped, and to be restored unto
full and perfect happiness, viz. Isa 53. Matt. 3.15.17.
the absolute obedience and satisfaction of CHRIST JESUS, the promised Messiah,
who being the Son of God, dear unto his Father, became Man Gal. 4.4. Romans
8.3.4 1 Pet. 2.24
, subject unto the Law, and fully satisfied the justice of God, by taking the
Gal. 3.13
curse upon him, and fulfilling the Law of God, and so delivered the prisoner
Esa. 42.7 and 61.1. Luke 4.18
out of the prisonhouse, and let them that were bond go free; by his death
freeing them from sin, death, and condemnation Romans 8.1 and 3.24. and 5.19. 2
Cor. 5.21. Hebr. 9.26 28. Ioh. 1.29.
, and restoring them to righteousness, life, and everlasting salvation and
happiness, so that nothing can ever after be laid unto their charge.

Act. 13.38 1 Ioh. 5.9.
and knowing that there is no other means to be saved Acts 4.12 Romans 8.3.
, there is bred in him a marvelous desire and vehement longing to be made
pertaker of the same; a hungring and thirsting Esa. 55.1 Mat. 5.6.
after Christ and his righteousness, and the redemption and salvation
purchased by his death and bloodshed, even as a man that were ready to die for
thirst v would desire drink, Judge. 15.18
or a man condemned to die some cruel death, would long for a pardon; and
withal a prizing Matt. 13.44.46.
of it at a high rate, far above all other things in the world whatsoever;
yea, Phil. 3.8.
a base account of all other things in comparison thereof, esteeming this the
only treasure on earth; that which if he may obtain, he would think
himself a happy man, and can never rest satisfied by any means till he find
that he, as well as others, has his portion in it; and therefore willingly
forsakes his sweetest sins, and denies himself Luk 9.23
that he may obeaine it.

faith in Christ, in and by whom this great benefit is received; an earnest
seeking and suing unto him for the obtaining of this grace and mercy at his
hand; that is, knowing what the promises of the Gospel are Matt. 9.13. Revel.
21.6 and 22.17 Isa. 55.1. Mat. 11.28 Ioh. 7.37.
, how that Christ calls and inuites graciously all (that feel the heavy
burden of their sins and misery, and labor and groan under them, sighing
and desiring in themselves to be freed and delivered from the same) to come
unto him, promising to ease and refresh them by taking the burden from their
shoulders, and laying it upon his own; hence, he is excited and stirred up
(casting away all confidence in himself) to fly unto him by a true justifying
faith, resting and relying upon his promise that he will receive him to mercy,
and ease and succor him: yea, he cleaues fast unto him and unto his word; he
builds upon it, and will sooner die then let go his hold which he has taken
Can. 3.2.3.4.
of him whom his soul loves and longs after above all things, as in whom
alone he sees his freedom from his former misery, and all perfection of
happiness to consist, when it can no where else be Acts 4.12
found.

joy and comfort Acts 2.46.47. Acts 16.34
in the sense and assurance of this wonderful benefit which by this means he
is made partaker of. His spirits are refreshed, and his soul rejoices within
him, as one that has found a great Mat. 13.44.
treasure which lay hid in the bowels of the earth, and could hardly be come
by, and which he would not part with for ten thousand worlds. Yea, he has
that peace Romans 5.1 and 11.
which passes all understanding, and that joy which cannot be expressed 1
Pet. 1.8.
, arising from this, that he knows that he is justified, Romans 8.33.
and stands as righteous in Gods sight, before whom he lay in former times as
a vile and loathsome leper Leuit. 13 45.
, that he is Romans 8.39.
loved of him, whereas before he was hated Romans 8.14.17.
and abhorred; that he is his adopted child l, dear and precious in his
eyes, whereas before he was an Ephesians. 2.12.
enemy, and an aliant and stranger from his covenant; and in a word, an heir
of grace, and all the good blessings of God in this life Romans 8.17. 1 Cor. 3.21
2^. Reu. 21.7.
, and of endless and unspeakable glory and happiness in the life to come in
that celestial kingdom which is prepared for him, and which he rests in
hope to have the full possession of for ever, as soon as this short and fading
life of his is ended, which he sees daily winding up apace.

unfeigned love of Christ, and of God in Christ, who has been so exceeding
kind and gracious unto him above all that he could expect or desire; the
coals of that affection wherewith he burns toward him, are fiery Cant. 8.6.7.
, and the flame vehement; nothing can quench it. And this love of his toward
him causes him 2 Cor. 5.14.17. 1 Pet. 4.1.2. Luke 1.75 1 These. 4.1. and 5.23.
2 Cor. 7.1. Psalm. 116.12.
to study with himself how to please him in all things, by walking before him
in all the duties of righteousness and holiness which he requires of him,
and that with a cheerful and willing heart and mind, rejoicing when he can
do the good he commands, and mourning when he is overtaken with the evil
which he has forbidden, grieuing with a godly and repentant sorrow when
through any occasion he falls into any sin, and striving by all means to live
as it becomes his redeemed Ones, to show 1 Pet. 2.9.
forth the virtues of him his God and merciful Savior, who has in so
wonderful manner called him out of darkness into that marvelous light of
his, that so (if it be possible) he may in some sort be answerable to that
great mercy, and to those riches of his grace and kindness vouchsafed unto him,
and walk worthy thereof in some acceptable measure.

ashamed Romans 6.21.
of his former vain and foolish conversation, wherein before he so much
pleased himself, that he wondered that others would not be like unto him
therein 1 Pet. 4.4
; yea, he abhorres it Job. 42.6 2 Cor. 7.11.
, and himself for it, and is ready to lie down in dust and ashes, to testify
his inward grief and sorrow for the same.

Set now this Glass before thee, and behold thy self in it with an impartial
view and right discerning. If thou find that it has been thus with thee,
that all these things, in their measure, have been wrought in thee, thou have
cause to rejoice, and to glory in the Lord; thou art a true convert; Salvation
Luke 19.9
is come unto thee; thy estate is most blessed and happy, though outwardly thou
be miserable, a despised and forlorn creature. But alas, how few be there
that can say in truth, it has been, or is thus with them? How small is the
number of such? For behold, so is it with the most. Although they vainly
suppose that they have truly repented as well as others, and are therefore in
good estate, yet indeed they either never saw their sins, and their
wretchedness and misery by reason of the same, but are of the Laodicean
temper, think themselves to be rich, and increased with spiritual goods Reu.
3.17 1 Cor. 4.8.
, and to have need of nothing, when as indeed they are poor, and blind, and
naked: or, if they had a sight at any time of it, they were not truly and
thoroughly humbled for the same, they had not a sense of their miserable and
woeful condition, they found not themselves lost, and ready to perish, they
grieved not for it, mourned not, lamented not, being much perplexed and
astonished in themselves, their hearts were never pricked and wounded by the
preaching of the Law. Or if they come thus far (which yet is not sufficient)
they attained not to a sound knowledge of the saving grace offered in the
Gospel, of the Redemption and Salvation by Christ, but remain ignorant
thereof, and rest themselves content in that ignorance of theirs, which has
covered their eyes, so that they cannot see the light which shines so
clearly unto them. Or else, if they have the knowledge hereof, yet their
hearts are not so affected therewith as they should be, they do not so
earnestly and so unfeignedly long after the receiving of this benefit; they do
not hunger and thirst after the righteousness of CHRIST JESUS, desirous above
all things to be satisfied therewith; they do not so highly prize it as they
should, accounting all other things as loss and dongue in comparison of it;
yea, their minds are altogether in a manner, taken up about other matters,
Psalm. 4.6.
pleasures, profits, honors; and this is the thing they least regard or seek
after, much less thirst after in such an insatiable manner. And therefore they
are not stirred up to come unto CHRIST, to labor by Faith to lay hold on him,
and to apply his merits and promises unto them, and to cast their burden upon
him, desirous to be unloosed, and to find ease, comfort, and refreshing in
him; but their hearts are even dead within them, and they are strangers from
this life of grace and Gal. 2.20
faith which is in Christ Jesus. And no marvel then that there appears in
them so little, or no love of him, so small desire to please him, and to
testify their love and thankefulnes unto him by their new obedience, and
careful and conscionable walking in his commandments, seeing they never
tasted fully of the sweetness and the exceeding joy and comfort arising from
that wonderful benefit and unspeakable mercy which is sealed up to the souls
and consciences of true penitent sinners, and such as have received Christ by a
saving faith to be their wisdom 1 Cor. 1 30.
, their righteousness, their sanctification and redemption.

O merciful LORD, how great is thy goodness and mercy toward me, that
whereas thou suffer many, yea, the greatest part of the world still to
wander in the ways of wickedness, and to sit in the shadow of death and
darkness, either not seeing their misery, and woeful, and most wretched estate
and condition; or else seeing it, to be so secure, so careless, and so
hard-harted as not to regard it, and to labor to come out of it, being
beguiled through the deceitfulness of their own hearts, and the craft and
delusion of Satan, yet in the unsearchable riches of thy abundant grace and 1 Timothy 1 14.17.
mercy toward me in Christ Jesus, have opened mine eyes, which before were
shut up as well as others, and turned me from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan, unto thee my blessed Lord and Savior, raising me out of the
grave wherein I was dead and buried, delivering me from the Kingdom of
darkness, and translating me into the Kingdom of thy dear Son, giving me
assurance of the forgiveness of my sins, and a comfortable hope and
expectation of that joyful inheritance provided for thy Saints and chosen ones
in the highest heavens: What shall I return unto thee, answerable unto so
great love, unto such fatherly compassions and unspeakable mercies of thine
toward me? Thou might have suffered me to continue in my blindness and
ignorance as well as others, to have been as careless, as secure, and as
hard-harted as any others, and so to have perished with them, dreaming that all
had been well with me, whiles I lay rotting in my natural and corrupt estate.
For what am I, or what have I been, that thou should respect me more then
others? Thou might for my sins (so many and so grievous) justly have
forsaken me, as thou have done them. But thou have not so dealt with me.
Blessed be thy name both now and evermore. O touch my heart with the due
meditation of this thy gracious goodness toward me. And teach me daily to
labor to feel this work of thine more and more effectual in me, by renewing
my repentance for my sins, whereby I have, and do daily and hourly
displease thee in the breach of thy righteous laws and commandments. Let me
see my sins and transgressions, and the misery whereunto they make me
subject; and seeing them, let me bewail them, yea, lament and mourn for them,
and be truly humbled with the consideration of them. Let me freely and
unfeignedly confess them unto thee, and that with shame and sorrow of heart:
And let them cause me wholly to renounce my self, to judge and condemn my
self, yea, to abhor my self, and to fly unto thee in the name of thy Son
my blessed Savior, in whom there is mercy and plentiful redemption Psalm. 130.7
: Let me hunger and thirst after his righteousness more then after any thing
else whatsoever; yea, let me highly esteem of it, and make more precious
account of it then of all the riches and treasures of this world, desirous
(though with the loss of all other things) to win Christ, and to be found in
him clothed and covered with those precious robes of his. And let me by the
hand of a true saving faith apply unto my self the merits of his death and
passion, his righteousness, his obedience, and his full and perfect
satisfaction, being certainly assured that all the promises of the Gospel
belong unto me. And let the knowledge and full persuasion hereof cause me to
rejoice, yea, to glory in thee, and in this vvonderfull and unspeakable mercy
of thine toward me, even with that joy of thy spirit which is most glorious; 1
Pet. 1.8
and fill my heart and soul with that peace which passes all understanding.
And with all, let it stir me up continually to walk before thee in all holy
obedience, desiring and endeavoring in all things to please thee, and to
approve my self and all my actions unto thee, dying daily more and more unto
sin, and living unto righteousness, and laboring by all means to be
cleansed from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and to grow up to full
holiness 2 Cor. 7 1
in thy fear, that thus I may have good evidence that I am thine, that thou
have wrought thy gracious work in me, and wilt perfect it daily more and
more, till thou bring me unto that glory which thou have prepared for me in
thy heavenly kingdom, through the merits of thy Son, my blessed Lord and
Savior, to whom with thee and thy Spirit, be all praise, power and dominion
both now and evermore. Amen.

The godly man, is always blessed, never miserable.
THe godly cannot but be always blessed, Job. 5.17.
yea then when he seems to be most miserable in the eye of the world, and to
sense and carnal reason. For when he is at the worst, he has those things
which he would have, (being contented with any Phil. 4.11
estate, which the wise and gracious disposer of all things sees fittest for
him:) yea, he cannot have better things (in regard of his present estate in
this life) then those things which he has and enjoys, even then when he is
laden and oppressed with many miseries. Is he humbled through afflictions?
this is that which he would have Ier. 10.24 James 1.2 10
; he had rather be continually under the Cross, then destitute of those
excellent graces of Romans 5.3
patience and humility Mat. 11.29 Ioh. 12.26
, without which he cannot be the disciple of Christ, nor approved of God, Psalm.
4.6. and 119.13.5
of whom above all things he desires to be accepted and favored. Is he poor?
he is well contented therewith, seeing he is largely recompensed with the
greater supply of those better riches, Phil. 4.19
those heavenly treasures both of grace and glory. He would not change his
portion with the greatest and richest Monarch in the world that abounds in
worldly wealth Psalm. 4.6.7
, and wants those spiritual and heavenly treasures which he enjoys, and
which shall never be taken from him, whereas the other shall corrupt James 5.2
and be cankered with rust and age, and consume, and come to nothing; Psalm. 119
96
he rejoices in his greatest infirmities and weaknesses, knowing that when
he is weakest, Christ is strongest in him; as also that his power is perfected
in his weakness, and that his grace is sufficient for him 2 Cor. 12 9. and
12.4.
, 2 Cor. 12 9. and 12.4.
and that even this infirmity of his is the mother and nurse of many graces
and virtues in him. Is he basely esteemed of, vile and contemptible amongst
men, or not had in that account and estimation which he sees others to be in?
Psalm. 131 1
Alas, of al things it is his desire, he might not be ambitious or haughty
minded, which he knows is a thing which the Lord so much abhors Pro. 6.16
, and then which nothing is more unbeseeming those that are Christians. He is
willing to let go the honor of the Court Heb. 11.25.26.
, and the sweetest pleasures of sin which he knows last but for a season,
rather then to leave following of Christ, or to follow him more faintly and
heavily. He seeks not for the honor that is from men, Ioh. 5.44
but that which comes from God. He knows that it is his duty to go before
others Romans 12 10
rather in giving then in taking honor, and to esteem better of others then
of himself, Phil. 2.3.5
framing himself to that pattern which Christ has given unto him in his own
example, which to imitate he accounts (as it is indeed) his greatest honor.
Yea, he rejoices and is exceeding glad when he is contemned, reviled, hated,
Math. 5.
and persecuted of the world, because hereby he is made conformable unto Christ
his head Romans 15 2 Heb. 12.2.
; blessed, whiles others curse him, and that his reward shall be the greater in
heaven, by how much the more he is contemned, despised, and molested on earth
for the profession of Christ and his Gospel. What should I say? It is his
unfeigned desire, with the blessed Apostle, to be crucified unto the world, and
to have the world crucified unto him, Gal. 2.19 20. and 6.14
that so Christ may live the more in him, 2 Cor. 13.4
whiles he lives in this world, and he may live for ever with Christ in the
greater glory when he shall depart out of this world. And in this regard, he
takes it not to heart, (as others do) how it fares with him in this world. He
as willingly undergoes shame, contempt, and reproach for Christ, as others
eagerly seek to fasten it upon him. Again, is he cast down with grief and
mourning; he is both blessed in his mourning, Mat. 5.4
and assured of comfort after his mourning Psalm. 126 5. and 97.11 Isai. 61.10
and 65.14 Ezech. 9.4
, yea, that according unto the measure of his grief and mourning, Ioh. 16
20.21.22
so shall be his comfort and rejoicing. The darkness of the weather, and the
ouercasting of the clouds which hinder that comfortable light from him for a
time, is but a means and a preparatiue for that gracious rain of Gods graces
and mercies which will afterward descend and shower down upon him in more
plentiful and abundant manner. To say no more: The godly and truly religious
man is always blessed, Psalm. 1.
yea, and then (many times) most blessed Eccles. 8 12 Isai. 3.10.
when he seems to others (yea, and to himself also sometimes) most miserable
and furthest off from blessedness. Lord, this is that which thou have revealed
in thy word to be the estate of thy chosen and holy ones. O Let me now and
always believe it, and have comfortable experience of it; that so I may never
envy Psalm. 37.1
at the seeming-prosperitie of the wicked, nor be danted nor discouraged by
means of any cross or affliction whatsoever shall or may befall me, at any
time, but knowing thy promises, and my privileges, be comforted, when as
outwardly I shall have cause of the greatest discomfort, being assured and
fully persuaded (seeing thou have said it) that it is and shall always be well
Eccl. 8.12
with me; yea, that even in misery I shall be blessed and happy, and at length
(having all tears wiped from mine eyes,) live with thee in fullness of glory
for ever in that celestial kingdom of thine, where there shall be no more
any of those changes, unto which I am now daily subject, and shall be till I
am perfected, and translated into that resting place of thy Saints and chosen.

The wicked man is always m^serable, never blessed.
THe wicked is miserable when he seems to others to be blessed and happy:
yea, then often times, most miserable, when he seems to be most happy, both in
his own eyes, and in the eyes of others that have not a right discerning of
things that differ. Marvel not at this, but weigh and consider it well, and
thou will find and can not but acknowledge it to be most true.

For suppose he has riches, pleasures, honors, friends, favor, and all that
can be desired in this world, who doubts but that he has great sorrow Psalm.
30.10
, much perplexednesse and vexation (as it were sour sauce) mingled with these
delicates which his greedy appetite so much longed for; and yet now that he
enioyes them, cannot be satisfied therewith Eccle. 1.8
, nor find contentment therein, but has the fire of hellish and inordinate
lust more kindled in him then before, so that no water can quench it. A hungry
and greedy worm continually lies gnawing upon him, so that he neither has,
nor can have any true peace Isai. 40.22
or sound joy. He that makes question of this, I will send him to no other to
learn this lesson then to wise Solomon, who has proclaimed it Eccles. 1.
to the whole world as a most certain and undoubted truth. Besides, these
things, wherein he thinks to find happiness and contentment, they become
rank poison unto him, bringing the curse Deuteronomy. 28 20
of God in more fearful manner upon him then ever before, and being the
occasion Hose. 2.8 and 13.6 James 4.3
of the increase of sinfulness in him, and so of wretchedness and misery
Hose. 13 7 Romans 2.4.5
which always follows the same as an inseperable companion thereof. O
therefore, who would ever delight in the estate of a wicked and ungodly man,
except he were an enemy to his own happiness, and longed to make himself
wretched and miserable, and that continually? O Lord, give me a right
understanding; cause me every day more clearly to see, and consider the
exceeding foolishness of the wicked, who wander from the ways of peace and
happiness; and make me wise to withdraw my self more and more from the things
that they delight in. Let me be careful always to turn my feet Pro. 4.14
from their paths, and to walk before thee in truth and sincerity, and in
singleness of heart, that so whereas they shall ever be wretched and
miserable, I may have assurance that I am and shall be blessed both now and
ever. Amen.

The godly life, the only happy life.
ALL things in this life are vain Eccle. 1.8.14
and come to nothing, riches, health, beauty, strength, glory, or whatsoever
the heart of man can desire, or which might seem to promise unto men the
greatest felicity and happiness. Who is so blind that sees not how fading
and transitory they are, even those that are of the greatest perfection and
excellency above others? They have an end and pass away as if they had never
been Eccle. 1.11 Psalm. 119.96
. But the fear of the Lord indureth for ever Psalm. 19.9 Psalm. 112.
. True Religion and Godliness they abide with us in life and in death, and for
ever. This is as the tree of life in the Paradise of God, which gives life
Pro. 12.28. and 22.4 and 19.23
and happiness to them that delight not only to taste, but also to feed and
fill themselves with it. This is as it were a clear fountain of living waters
Ioh. 4.14
, which spring up to everlasting life and glory in the kingdom of God. It
crowns a man with many graces Prou. 10 27 Deuteronomy 28.3. etc. Psalm. 1.19
, and blessings here, and hereafter will give him entrance into the fullness
and perfection of all blessedness; when all other things shall appear to be
(as they are) vain shadows, dreams, and fancies, that shall satisfy the
soul, with the abundance and accomplishment of all glory and happiness.

Oh then, how great is the folly of those that seek more after these fading 1
Cor. 7.31 1. Ioh. 2.27
and perishing things, then after that which is far to be preferred before
them? that labor more to be Psalm. 4.6
rich, healthful, strong, honorable, etc. then to be truly religious, men
fearing God and such as delight to walk conscionably before him in his ways;
that strive more to abound in the pleasures, profits, and preferments, of this
world (which are but as smoke, and soon vanish away Psalm. 49.17.18.19.20.
, leaving the owner of them never a whit the better) then in grace and
godliness, which has the promises of blessedness, both in this life, 1 Timothy
4.8
and in the life to come? O LORD, indue me daily more and more, with that
wisdom which is from above: discover unto me yet more and more the vanity of
all things here below. Let me consider how Psa. 82.7. and 146.3.4. Job 21.33.
Princes and the greatest men die, and how their favor and honor fades with
them: let me consider how one generation goes, and Eccl. 1.4.
another comes, and how even those things which are of greatest perfection
Psalm. 119.96.
, and in greatest account amongst men, perish and come to an end quickly,
though insensibly, to them especially that have not eyes to discern the course
of them. And on the other side, clear my dimmed sight, by the clear shine of
thy grace and blessed Spirit, that I may behold how great the reward of true
Religion and godliness is; what perfect and constant, yea, everlasting
blessedness there is in walking uprightly before thee in the vvayes which thou
have prescribed unto me, that so making a choice of the better part Luke 10.42
, I may be truly blessed of thee both in life and death, and for evermore.

The godly life is the only comfortable and contented life.
MAny are afraid to be religious for fear they should loose the comfort and
content which before they enjoyed in their sinful vanities Eccl. 11.9.
, and lead a more heavy, a dumpish, and discomfortable life, wanting those
sweet morsels with which they were wont to glut themselves, till they
surfetted on them. O vain man, that so fondly imaginest that thou shall find
comfort and happiness where it is not to be found Eccle. 1.14.
, and that thou should deprive thy self of it by taking that course whereby
thou only might attain unto it Eccl. 12.13.
. Why do thou suffer thine own heart thus to deceive thee; yea, Satan with
his sleights 2 Cor. 2.11.
thus to beguile and delude thee, causing thee to follow after shadows, and to
let go the substance, even that only which can make thee happy, and thy life
comfortable, and full of desired sweetness, whereas now for want of it thou
languishest in vain hopes, and restles pursuit of that which is elsewhere to
be found then thou dreamest; yea, even by those very means by which thou
fear thou should deprive thy self of it. Know at length thine error,
and learn to get true understanding, and a right discerning of those things
which concern thy Luke 19.42.
peace and happiness. The godly life only it is which is the truly
comfortable and contented life. If thou will not believe the Saints of God
Psalm. 4.4. Rom 5.1. 1 Pet. 1. Phil. 11.12
, who speak out of their own experience Ioh. 3.11.
, even those things which they have felt and tasted of, through the Spirit of
grace which dwells in them, having had proof also of both estates, even that
wherein thou ( who art yet a carnal and unregenerate man) now art, as also of
that wherein, through the mercy of God, they now stand, being sanctified and
regenerate by the Spirit of God, and such as would not return to their former
estate, wherein thou live, nor exchange the^r present comforts for their
former ^a^ities, though they might have (I say not with Balaam Number. 12.28.
) a house full of Gold and Silver, but the whole world; yea ten thousand
worlds (if it might be.) If thou will not I say, believe these, who
notwithstanding ought to be credited, being well acquainted with those things
which they testify; yet believe God himself, who has said and sealed it in
those divine Oracles for a certain and undoubted truth (which none except he
will proclaim himself to be a professed Atheist, one which denies God and
his Word, which is of infallible truth, dare ever deny, or once call into
question in any sort) viz. that the life of the wicked is nothing but vanity
and Eccles. 1.
misery, they being like a restless and raging Sea Isa. 57.20
, which casts out mire and dirt continually, their fear^s and sorrows Job
15.21
being many, and the evils Psalm. 32.10.
which attend upon them infinite; the godly on the other side, full of comfort,
heavenly solace, peace, Prou. 24 20. Romans 5.1.14.17. Psalm. 97.11 Pro. 15.15.
Phil. 4.4.
joy, and much sweetness, such as none know, nor can conceive of, but they
that have tasted of it 1 Pet. 2.3
, and which after they have once tasted of it they account the sweetness and
delight which they took in their former sinful pleasures to be (as they
are indeed) but bitterness, and are ready to say with wise Solomon, when he
had learned it upon sufficient experience, I said of laughter thou art mad, and
of joy what is it that thou do Eccl. 2.2. Pro. 14.13
Yea, doubtless, there is that peace which passes all understanding; that joy
which as the Apostle calls it (a glorious name indeed) is 1 Pet. 1.8
unspeakable and glorious; both in regard of their present glorious feelings
and apprehensions, which the Spirit of the Lord by an immediate hand, as it
were, and by a secret inspiration Luke 1.41
does work in them, and also in respect of those singular privileges, and of
those sweet and blessed hopes 1 Pet. 1.3
with which they are continually refreshed, even in the midst of mourning
Psalm. 94.19. and 112 4.
They taste daily (except it be sometimes when it pleases the Lord to
restrain that benefit) either for some grievous sin Psalm. 51.12.14
committed against him, or for the trial and exercise of his graces in them,
Faith, Hope, Patience, etc. or for the stirring of them up to Prayer,
Invocation, and other such holy and religious duties, whereby he conueieth and
continues that desired good unto them, which is the pledge and earnest penny
as it were of the accomplishment of all those excellent and gracious promises
which shalll, no doubt, in due time be performed unto them, and in them.)
They taste daily of that hidden and Heavenly Manna Reu. 2.17
which gives life to to their souls, yea, when they seem and are indeed
(in regard of these sinful courses, wherein others place all their
felicity) dead men to the world Gal. 2.19 20. and 6.14
and vvorldly things.

Oh these are such matters as the natural man is not Prou. 14 10
acquainted with; he wondereth at this, when he hears of it, being ready to
say with Nicodemus, when Christ spoke unto him of Regeneration, or the new
birth Ioh. 3.4.9. Psalm. 31.
; How can these things be? how can they be so filled with joy, who seem to be
as full of miseries as any others; yea, to go mourning Ezekiel. 9.4 Psalm. 119.136.
and drooping oft-times all the day long, hated also (many times) reviled, and
persecuted in the world 1 Cor. 4.12.13.
, yea, made as the filth of the world, the offscouring of all things (as even
those worthies, the blessed Apostles themselves were,) nay, a gazing-stocke
unto the world, unto Angels 1 Cor. 4.9
, and unto men: 1 Cor. 4 10.
fools and weak and simple ones? How can such as these are, who seem rather
to be the object of pity, then otherwise, dry and withered branches Isay 53.2
, worms Psalm. 22.6 Job 25.6.
, and not men, how can they lead such a comfortable and glorious life, in
comparison of which the pleasures and delights which we enjoy, are but smoke
and vanity, of no esteem in regard of them. Thus reasons the natural man,
who has no other then carnal eyes, and therefore judges of every thing by
the outward view and external object, not being able to discern the things of
the Spirit of God 1 Cor. 2.14.
, neither the gifts and graces themselves, nor the blessed fruits and effects
thereof, even those sweet and quiet fruits Heb. 12.12
of righteousness, which spring forth in the hearts of those that are truly
religious; but is like one that is purblinde 2 Pet. 1.9
, which cannot behold that which is too far removed from his sight, as these
things which are spiritual and heavenly are. Thus therefore he reasons and
cauilleth against this manifest and experienced truth, which to others is as
clear as the beams of the Sun, when it shines in his brightness. It is a
strange matter to him, which will not enter into his head, because he is
unacquainted with it, and thinks there can be no better delicates then that
Luke 15.16. 2 Pet. 2.22
draffe, which with the Swine of the world he feeds upon so greedily. Let not
any deceive himself any longer with such dreams and fancies; let not Satan
(who was a liar from the Ioh. 8.44
beginning, and enuies that unto others which he cannot attain unto himself)
be a means through his false suggestions to drive thee from that which should
be thy happiness. If ever thou would (as who would not?) live a truly
contented and comfortable life, labor to be truly and sincerely religious.
And the more this care and endeavor shall increase in thee, the more shall that
wished-for peace and comfort abound and be increased in thee. Believe this once
Phil. 1.25
, and take trial of it; and if thou find it not so, yea, above that which I
am able to express 1 Pet. 1.8
, or to declare it unto thee, return then unto thy former vomit again, which
upon this consideration thou had formerly disgorged, and fill thy self with
the husks and draffe wherewith before (for want of better) thou did feed
and stuff thy self, and that many times, till thou were even weary of them,
and soughtst for change, for the satisfying (if it might be) of thy restless
and insatiable mind.

Good LORD, fill me daily more and more with the comforts of thy Spirit.
Refresh my Soul with the sweetness of that hidden and heavenly Manna, which
the world is not acquainted with. Cause me with clear eyes to behold the
vanity and vexation of spirit, which is in the life of the ungodly, their
diverse and manifold distractions, with which they are oft-times even rent and
torn in pieces, and that horror of conscience which first or last seizes
upon them, as the forerunner of their future torments; and the felicity on
the other side of thy Saints, even that heavenly solace and contentment which
the godly life affords, and which arises from so many sweet springs and
pleasant fountains, viz. certainty of their Election, whereby they know their
names are written in thy Book of life Luke 10.20.
, before all worlds; sense and feeling of the forgiveness Mat 9.2. Romans 4.7.
of their sins, which thy Spirit seals unto their souls; knowledge of
their Adoption into the number of thy Children, which the same Spirit of Romans
8.16. 2 Cor. 1.22.
thine testifies unto them; assurance of thy love Romans 5.5 and 8.38.39
, which thou sheddest into their hearts; fellowship and communion with thee
Reu. 3.20
who art the fountain of all happiness; union with thy Son my blessed Lord
and Savior, and in him with thine own Majesty John 17.21.23.
, and participation of those divine 2 Pet. 1.4
and excellent graces wherewith their souls are decked 1 Pet. 3.4
and adorned, and which are the only desirable riches Prou. 3.13.14.
and treasures, far above Silver, Gold, Pearl, or whatsoever else the world
can afford unto them; and the continual hope and expectation of that future
and promised glory Ephesians. 1.18.
, which makes their souls to 1 Pet. 1.3
bless thee incessantly, who art so rich in grace Ephesians. 2.7.
and mercy toward them; besides those many other privileges which thou have
vouchsafed them, concerning their temporal life and outward estate: viz.
Protection of Angels, (those glorious Ministers,) which thou sendest forth to
be Attendants Psalm. 91.11. Heb. 11.14
on them; Promise of thy especial Providence 2 Chronicles. 2.5.8. and 4.10. Heb.
11.13.5.
over them, and a Mat. 6.26 32.3. and 7.11.
continual and fatherly care for them; from whence necessarily follows a
remouall Romans 8.28.
of all evil from them, and a supply of all good Psalm. 23.1 and 84.11.
even of all outward and earthly blessings unto them, which thou in thy
wisdom see to be convenient or necessary for them, for their comfortable
and safer passage through the Wilderness of this world, till they come to that
promised rest, that heavenly Canaan: that thus having mine eyes enlightened, to
behold those things which thy word so clearly teaches, and my heart rightly
seasoned with the serious consideration of them, I may daily be drawn nearer
unto thee with that sweetness which I find in thee, in comparison of which
all other things are bitter and distasteful to such as have true understanding,
and their senses rightly exercised Heb. 5.14
to discern between good and evil.

The frequent meditation of Death how necessary.
HE that has Death always before his eyes, will never have his thoughts set
upon any thing which is base, sordide, and servile, or desire any thing in
this world excessiuely and inordinately. This will make him to have a very
mean esteem of all these earthly vanities; this will cause him with an equal
mind to use prosperity and adversity Psalm. 90.12.
, and to be rightly disposed in either, being neither too much lifted up with
the one, nor too much cast down with the other, considering how short and
momentarie either the benefit and pleasure which is inioyed by this 1 Cor.
7.29. Heb. 11.25
, or the pain which is feared by that, will be. This will be a bridle, to
curb and restrain him from all things that are unlawful, and to make him use
those things which are lawful (if rightly used) with more moderation, and with
less excess, wherein many do much offend; which I am persuaded they would
not do, if they once acquainted themselves with this wholesome and necessary
Meditation, whereunto many are mere strangers, yea, enemies Isa. 28.19 Amos
6.3.
; they cannot abide to hear of it, or to call it to remembrance; nay, they
show themselves to be afraid to think on it deliberately, even then when it
puts it self upon them, as being that whereby they suppose they are brought to
meet their greatest enemy in the face, whom they most dread and fly from, and
the sight of whom (though a far off) they imagine would be very hurtful and
dangerous unto them, damping them in their resolved courses Lu. 12.19
, and scaring them from those sinful and pleasing vanities, wherein they now
delight themselves in excessive manner.

O blessed LORD, as Death is always, every where present and imminent, ready
continually to seize upon me; so grant that I may have mine eyes open to see it
standing near unto me; and that I may continually present the serious
meditation thereof unto my mind and all my thoughts, that thereby I may be
brought to suffer the greatest miseries which shall befall me in this world
patiently, quietly, and contentedly, knowing that they will come quickly to an
end; Heb. 10.37
and to make the right use of prosperity (if it shall please thee to send it)
not being too much addicted to the profits, pleasures, and delights of this
beguilefull and deceivable world. Especially, let me with the due meditation
hereof be wholly with drawn from the love and liking, the affecting and
desiring of all those things which are vile and sinful, seeing the remembrance
of these in death will be bitter, the sting painful, the smart grievous and
intolerable.

The resurrection of the good and bad in the last day, how different it shall
be.
glorious will the day of the Resurrection be? how comfortable to the godly?
how terrible to the wicked! The godly they shall rise by the mighty power of
Christ their Savior 1 Cor. 6.14
. He, who is the Head Ephesians. 5 23
being raised, all they being his 1 Cor. 6.15.
Members, and united unto him in a mystical manner, 1 Cor. 15 13.20.23. etc. 1
These 4.14.
shall be raised with him in their appointed time, by reason of that union
which is between him and them. But the wicked, they shall rise by the terrible
and dreadful John 5.28.29. 1 Cor. 15.52.
voice of Christ their Judge, summoning them to make their appearance before
him, that sentence may be pronounced against them, like as when a Malefactor is
brought out of the Iayle to the Bar that he may receive his deserved doom,
and be hastened to his execution.

godly they shall come out of their graves, wherein they have been a long time
held as prisoners and captives under death 1 Cor. 15 54.55.
; they shall come forth with great joy and triumph, looking up unto their
blessed Savior, whom they have so long expected and desired Romans 8.23 Luke
21.28 Reu. 22.20
. Oh what a comfort and refreshing Act. 3.19
shall this be unto them? who can express it? But the wicked on the contrary,
they shall start up like men scared, and suddenly affrighted, waking out of
some fearful dream (but it shall be no dream.) As soon as they begin to
look out of their graves, they shall behold the heavens on a flaming 2 These.
1.8. 2 Pet. 3.12
fire round about them, and Christ as a mighty GOD, and a most severe and
dreadful Judge, with a fiery eye, and a frowning countenance, looking down
upon them from above, even out of that great Throne Mat. 25.31.
, which shall have streams of fire issuing out from it on every side Dan.
7.9.10.
, so that they shall be amazed, and even at their wits end Mat. 24.30
, at the very appearance of him, and wish with all their hearts that the very
hills and Mountains would fall upon them, and Reu. 6.16
cover them from his presence, and from the fierceness of his wrath, which
shall seize upon them in most Luke 19.27
fearful manner.

godly shall rise in a glorious manner, being made incorruptible 1 Cor. 15
42.43.44.49.
, spiritual, heavenly, full of beauty, and excellency (far above that we
are able to conceive or think) their bodies (which have lain in the dust, and
been subject to much baseness John 11.39. Job 10.21 22. and 17.14.16.
and loathsomeness) being now even like unto the glorious body of Christ 1 Cor.
15 49. Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2
himself, unto whom then they shall be made conformable, shining as the
Stars Dan. 12.3
; yea, as the Mat. 13.45.
Sun in brightness for ever and ever. The wicked on the other side, shall
rise in a most base and ignominious manner, even to shame and perpetual
contempt Dan. 12.2
: They that have had the greatest beauty and excellency here (being not
inferior to proud and aspiring Absolon, like unto whom in all Israel there
was not any for goodly feature: from the sole of the foot unto the crown of
the head there being no 2 Samuel 14 25.
blemish in him,) shall there be abhorred of GOD Isa. 66.24.
; and of all his Saints and Angels. There can be no greater deformity then
that wherewith their bodies shall then be covered, that they may be loathed of
all, yea, of their own selves, being altogether disfigured with the ugly Image
of Satan, so that they shall not be able to lift up their heads for shame, but
stand like Genesis 4.6.
Caine (or worse) with flaited, hellish, and dejected countenances, even
confounded in themselves, and wishing that they were cast presently into the
darkest corner of Hell, where they might not behold themselves, much less
either see or be seen of others, especially of those bright eyes of that
glorious Judge, who is so Hab. 1.13
pure, that he cannot behold evil without great detestation. Oh who is able to
conceive the shame and confusion with which they shall then even wholly be
overwhelmed?

finally, whereas the godly shall be made partakers of everlasting life Ioh
5.29 Romans 2.7.
and happiness, in the highest heavens, they shall be delivered up to
everlasting death and condemnation Mat. 25.46 Psalm. 11.6 Reave. 21.8
in the lowest part of hell, where they shall be tortured with endless and
unspeakable torments for evermore, being banished for ever from the blessed
and comfortable 2 These. 1 9
presence of the Lord. Gracious Lord, teach me daily more seriously to consider
with my self of the great difference that shall be between thy children and
those that are servants to Satan and corruption: Seeing that the one shall be
raised up in the last day to that joy, glory, and happiness which is
unspeakable; the other to end less wretchedness and misery. O therefore let
me be stirred up to endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience
toward Act. 24 15 16
thee, and toward men, and to abound every day more and more in the works
which thou have appointed, 1 Cor. 15 58
knowing that my labor shall not be in vain in thee. And never let me envy
Psalm. 37.1
at the flourishing estate and vain supposed felicity of the wicked in this
world, seeing the day is coming and hasteneth on a pace 1. Pet. 4.7
, wherein they shall be clothed with shame and dishonor, and cast out of thy
presence for evermore, receiving according to that which they have done in
their bodies 1. Pet. 4.7
, and eating the fruit of their own ways 2 Cor. 5.10
, which they shall find to be more bitter then death it self; Isai. 3.9.11
howsoever now the remembrance of these things) by reason of their ignorance 1
Pet. 3.5
, blockishnesse, and cursed infidelity) does little or nothing at all affect or
move them.

The second death, how exceeding fearful and dreadful it is.
MANY, eye the first death much, and are flaited and almost affrighted at the
sight, yea, at the thought of it; it strikes a fear and a terror into them.
But they look but seldom, and scarce with half an eye upon the second death
Reave. 21 8
which begins where the other ends, and is far more dreadful to all those
that have a right discerning and true apprehension of it. Alas, that, is
nothing to this, no more to be compared to it, then a little spark to a great
flame, or a small drop of water to the whole wide and vast Ocean. For the
first is of the body only; the second both of the body and soul. Math. 10 28
The one for a short time; the other without all end of time, of as long
continuance as eternity Math. 25 41.46
it self. The one, oft-times, not so grievous as the fits and pangs of many
diseases; the other more dolorous and painful then all the sicknesses and
diseases in the world, though they were all laid together upon one man. In
brief, the one is finite, and such as many have sustained 1 Samuel 15.32
with undaunted courage and resolution; the other infinite and unsupportable,
not able to be borne or endured of any creature without hellish misery. Will thou behold the ghastly face of this dreadful enemy yet more clearly and fully
discovered unto thee? Hear then, hearken, and believe that which the word of
GOD (which shall endure for ever 1 Pet. 1.25
) has sealed, and which all must believe that will not show themselves to be
no better then the heathen, and infidels. In this second death, first there is
a separation of the soul, yea of the whole men, both soul and body, from the
gracious presence 2 These. 1.1
of that glorious God, without whom there can be no true blessedness; an utter
separation and banishment from him Math. 7.23. and 13.41. and 25.41
, and from that joyful and comfortable society and fellowship of all his
elect Saints and Angels; a final deprivation of all hope of entrance into that
heavenly Canaan, that new and celestial Jerusalem, the City of the everliving
God, of which so glorious things are spoken; and the loss whereof will not
less vex and torment the soul of the damned (as that ancient and
golden-mouthed Father not vainly supposed) then all the pains and tortures of
hell. Chrysostom.
Be sides this, there shall be pains and torments unspeakable, insufferable,
such as may dampe the stoutest champion, and the most yron-hearted wretch in
the world, if he shall but enter once into a serious and through consideration
of them; if either he regard the place of torment where that woeful misery is
to be endured; the pangs and tortures themselves; the company with whom they
are to remain in the suffering and enduring of them; Or lastly, the time which
they shall endure them. Every one of them is enough to strike a terror into a
man, and to make his heart to quake to think of them. Esai. 14.9. and 34.9.10
Reave. 1.18 and 20.13.14


1 First, the place is no other then that deep prison, Deuteronomy. 32 22 Pro. 7.27.
and dark dungeon of Gods wrath appointed for the execution of his dreadful
vengeance upon all the children of disobedience, who would not know him, nor
what should be their happiness; that dark and dismal place, that burning
lake, that fiery furnace Mat. 13.15
, and bottomless gulf of deep despair, the pit of hell, that Tophet
prepared of old for them, large and deep (according to that Isai. 30.50
prophetical description thereof,) in brief, a place of unspeakable horror
and terror, worse then the most stinking prison, or the most loathsome dungeon
in the world (there is no comparison:) the sight, yea, the very thought of it,
were enough to flait a man. The darkness of Egypt was fearful, and full of
amazement and astonishment, yet nothing to this.

The pains and torments there to be endured, are shadowed out unto us in
Scripture by Psalm. 11.6 Mat. 13.42 and 25.41
fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, the worm that never dies Esai. 66.24
Mark. 9.46
, chains of darkness 2 Pet. 2 4 Iudde. 1 Mat. 8.12. and 22.13
, and blackness of darkness. All fearful and dismal names, and yet but
semblances (it may be) and shadows of those more grievous tortures, and that
dreadful and hellish misery, which then shall be powered out both upon their
bodies and upon their souls, and all the several parts and members thereof in
unspeakable and most woeful manner. Tribulation Romans 2.9
, anguish, and great astonishment shall seize upon every one of them, and wholly
possess them, yea, swallow them up, as it were, with open mouth. They shall
have a hell without them, and a hell also within them, even their own guilty
and disquieted consciences, which like a worm Mark. 9.44.
shall continually lie gnawing upon their souls, with the remembrance of
their fearful sins past, the great blessedness and glory, which through
their folly they have deprived themselves of, and the extreme woe and misery
into which they are plunged; yea, their consciences shall vvound them in most
fearful manner; the nips and pangs thereof shall be worse then the bitings
of the venomous Cockatrice, or the stingings of the poisonous Scorpion; yea,
worse then death it self. We see how that even in this life, when the Lord
sometimes does but suffer that worm to begin to nible Pro. 18.14. Esa.
57.20.21.
at the souls and consciences of wicked men, and cause them but as it were,
a far off, to behold the flashings of hell fire, with which afterward they
shall be tormented for ever, that even this which is but the beginning and
forerunner of their sorrows, does make them to rore out; nay, drive some of
them to make away themselves, either by hanging their own selves (as that
great politician 2 Samuel 17 23.
Achitophel, and that covetous and treacherous Matt. 27.5.
Judas did,) or by drowning themselves, or cutting their own throats, as
others have done, (as we have known by woeful experience.) Oh then, how
woeful and how grievous shall it be unto them when that worm of conscience
shall continually lie fretting upon them, and biting in sunder, as it were,
their very heart strings; nay, gnawing in most fearful manner upon the most
inward and tenderest parts of their souls, vvhiles they shall lie frying in the
fiery flames, being scorched on every side with the fury of Gods wrathful
indignation which then shall be kindled against them, and burn to the bottom
of hell. Then doubtless, they shall desire to die, but death shall fly far from
them. They shall curse and banne themselves, and those that were companions
with them in wickedness, by whose means a greater measure of wrath is powered
out upon them; they shall cry out against their former sottishness and
security, that they had no more care to keep themselves from coming into
that place of torment Luke 16.28.29.
, though they were so often admonished and forewarned of it by others, who had
more pity of them then themselves. O the remembrance hereof, it will cut
their hearts, it will pierce their souls, it will cause them to curse
themselves, and the day and hour wherein they were borne, and the time wherein
they forsook GOD, and gave themselves over to the service of sin and Satan;
yea, it will cause and constrain them to cry shame upon themselves, and their
folly and madness, in suffering themselves to be so deluded, so deceived
through the deceitfulness of their crafty and deadly enemies, who now (when it
is too late) they see in all those pleasing courses wherewith they delighted
them, sought nothing but their utter ruin and overthrow. Never did Job 3.
Job (in that weakness and extremity of his) curse the day of his birth, as
they then will the day of their birth and entrance into the world; nay, as
they shall the time wherein they lived in the world, and wherein they gave
themselves to the service and slavery of sin and Satan, (who has now
rewarded them Romans 6.23.
to the full) as they were often before told that he should, except they looked
to themselves in time, and (shaking off all society and fellowship with him)
returned willingly, speedily and unfeignedly unto the Lord. O the depth of
misery, which then shall come upon them! Their countenances shall wax pale
and wanne, their hearts fail them, and their souls even rend in pieces with
horror and amazement, whiles they shall lie howling, crying, and shriking, and
in vain pouring out their mournful complaints: Woe, woe is us Esa. 33.14
; Who is able to dwell with this devouring fire? Who is able to endure these
fearful burnings?

But to lead thee on yet further to the viewing of their companions, with whom
they shall abide in that place, in those torments. Their company what shall it
be? None but hellish ghosts and damned creatures like themselves, who as it
were so many furies, and barking hell hounds, appearing each to other in
dreadful apparition, shall send forth such fearful and hideous noises, such
horrible outcries, such yellings and rorings, as shall make that hollow vault
(that infernal prison) to shake, and their hearts to tremble within them; yea,
even to break in sunder with the most dreadful apprehension of their hellish
misery. If the very appearance but of one of those damned spirits (as we have
heard of some) is sufficient to affright a man, and to scare him out of his
wits: Oh then, how fearful, how woeful will their estate be, when they shall
be thrust into the company of Satan, and constrained to dwell, remain, and to
lodge, as it were, with him, and the rest of that hellish crew and viperous
brood, even all the Devils, reprobate, and forlorn wretches, the number of
whom cannot be numbered Mar. 5.9.
?

To this, add the time, how long they shall endure such woeful misery in that
place of torment, even for ever, (a fearful word) for ever Esa. 66.24. Matt.
25.41.46. 2 These. 1.9.
; without any intermission, any ease, or hope of recovery. It will not be for
a year, a hundred, a thousand; no, nor a hundred thousand years that they shall
endure those torments, but for ever; yea, for ever and ever. It swallows up my
conceit when I think of it. If they might endure them but so many years as
there be sands on the shore, Fishes in the Sea, Stars in the Firmament, or
grass piles upon the ground, it were some comfort, though (God knows) very
small, considering the grieuousnesse of the torment in that time to be
suffered; the bearing of which but one hour, one moment, were enough to
quail the greatest Champion that ever was, and to dampe the stoutest courage
in the world, though never so hardy; but yet when so many thousands of years
and ages are passed over, their torments (alas) shall be as fresh and new to
begin as ever they were, and as far from an ending as at the first
beginning. For there shall be no end of them, but as long as the Sun and
Moon lasts, as long as Heaven and Hell lasts; yea, as long as God is God,
so long shall they endure those torments in that woeful place of vvoe and
torment. If it were not for hope (we say) the heart would break. Sure then,
their hearts may break well enough, for they shall be out of all hope,: It
will be in vain for them ever to look for any ease, any comfort, any
succor; no, not for the least refreshing that may be, were it but so much as
that rich glutton Luke 16.
desired, even one small drop of water to cool their tongues, which together
with all the parts of their bodies and faculties of their souls shall be for
ever tormented in that flame. Though they should never cease crying, Matt. 7.22
Lord, Lord, they could not obtain it at his hands, for then the Lord will be
deaf to them Prou. 1.28.
, he will not hear them, he will not be entreated of them. Nay, I say yet
more; though Ezekiel. 14.20
Noah, Job, Daniel, yea, all the Saints and Angels in Heaven should with one
consent put up their earnest suite, and make continual supplication for them,
(which notwithstanding they shall be far from, rather Psa. 58.10 and 64.9.
rejoicing in the vengeance that shall be powered out upon them for evermore)
yet if it could be imagined they might be brought to do this for them, they
should nothing prevail for the release or recovery, no not for the mitigating
of the pains of some one of them, in the least manner: but after thousands
thousands years gone and past, they should still lie frying in that Mat. 13.42
fiery furnace, that scorching fire (in comparison of which our fire is but a
painted fire, yea, no fire) lie bound and fettered hand and foot Mat. 22.13
, having the flames of Gods wrathful indignation scorching their souls, and
the worm of conscience lie gnawing upon their consciences for evermore; their
pangs, horror, and misery rather increasing every day, and growing to greater
extreamities, then any wise abating or diminishing in any manner. Yea, so far
shall any be from helping or succouring them in that woeful condition into
which they shall be plunged, that there shall be none to pity them, or to take
any compassion of them. If children should cry to their parents, who whiles
they lived with them on earth were most tenderhearted toward them (being no
less affected with their miseries then with their own) yet then they should
be moved with no pity, toward them. And if Parents should make their moan
unto their Children, they would not once be touched with it, they would not
regard it; for 1 Cor. 15 24.44.
nature and all natural affection shall then be quite taken away; there shall
either be no knowledge, or at least no respect of Parents, Children, Brethren,
Sisters, Kindred, Friends or Acquaintance, (as they are such) but Gods glory
shall be only eyed and regarded of all those that shall be made partakers of
his glory in the heavens. They shall have no pity, no compassion toward
those, who though they were their friends in this world, and near unto them in
many respects, yet now they see to be Gods enemies Luke 19 27.
, such as having before cast him off, are now justly separated from him, and
cast out of his presence for ever, and therefore not loved, but hated of him,
and all that are his, who shall love only where he loves, and hate where he
hates: yea, so far shall any be from pitying them, or being affected with
their misery, that they shall be laughed at on all hands. God shall laugh them
to scorn Psalm. 2.4. Prou. 1.2^
, and have them in exceeding derision. The Angels shall laugh at them. All the
Saints shall laugh at them, and Psalm. 58 10
rejoice in their misery, seeing the glory of Gods Justice shining forth in
their just and deserved condemnation. O fearful and lamentable estate and
condition! And if it be so fearful to hear of these things which shall befall
the wicked, when they shall be cast into that place of torment, provided them
in the congregation of the dead and damned; how dreadful shall it be for ever
to endure them? Tremble at this, O ye careless and secure ones. Be amazed and
astonished at the very remembrance of it O ye profane and ungodly wretches,
that live and wallow in your lewd and sinful courses, blasphemies,
prophanations of the Sabbath, contempt of Gods ordinances, adulteries,
uncleanness, or any other wickedness whatsoever unrepented of. Tremble and be
amazed at it, as doubtless ye would, if your eyes were not blinded by the
deceitfulness of Sin Heb. 3.13.
, and your hearts hardened through the suggestions of Satan, and your souls
even bewitched and enchanted by that evil Spirit, which drives you on
headlong to that woeful place of endless torments, never letting you see the
dreadfulnesse of it, till you be plunged so deep into it, that there is no
hope for you of any recovery out of it. What will you do when these things
shall come upon you, yea, like a raging Sea, with great violence rush in upon
you to your everlasting confusion? Of all the wonders in the world, this (me
thinks) is the most strange and wonderful, that men (men otherwise of
wisdom and understanding,) knowing and considering with themselves (as the
word teaches) that there are such things provided and prepared for the wicked
and impenitent, live notwithstanding as if they never feared any such matter,
but boldly and most presumptuously continue in their former ungodly vvayes,
delighting in sin, and wickedness, and even hastening forward unto that
place, unto those torments, the very thought of the enduring of the least of
which (if it were but but for one hour,) were enough to amaze and astonish a
man, and to make his heart to quake within him for the greatness of the
horror thereof. Hear, O ye foolish, ye of stiff necks and stony hearts;
how long will you be thus blinded? how long shall your own wicked hearts
deceive you Ier. 17.9.
? how long will you suffer your selves to be deluded by Satan that deadly
enemy of yours, who seeks to make a prey of you for ever? how long will you
suffer your selves to be so bewitched and enchanted by that envious Mat. 13.28.
and malicious Spirit, that the remembrance of these things should no more move
you, no more affect you, work no more upon you then it does? Are you afraid
of the first death, and do you not much more fear this second death, which of
all evils is the most fearful, the most dreadful; yea, in comparison of
which the other is scarce a shadow of death, though a forerunner of it, and a
way and entrance unto it, to those that shall perish? Does that astonish you,
and shall not this much more? Are you so secure, so stupid, so senseless?
Assuredly, a very strange thing it seems unto me, (and may well be so
esteemed of all that consider of it,) how profane, graceless, and ungodly
persons, when they hear, or when they think of these things, should not be
terrified and affrighted with them, and drawn with the fear and dread thereof
from all their wicked and sinful courses, which heretofore they have lived in;
the Swearer from his oaths and blasphemies, with which he has pierced the
heavens, the Drunkard from his drunkenness, (that brutish and sottish vice,)
the Prophaner of the Sabbath from his prophanations thereof; the filthy person
from his filthiness and uncleanness, and shameful pollutions; the covetous
Usurer and Oppressor, from their covetousness, usury, and oppression of their
poor Brethren and neighbors, among whom God has placed them, to the very
Deuteronomy. 5.11. Mat. 26.11
end that they should show mercy and compassion unto them, and not cruelty and
rigor: in a word, every impenitent sinner, from the sin and wickedness
wherein they have heretofore lived and delighted, and continued from time to
time, carelessly, securely, boldly, and presumptuously, as if all were well, as
if there were no cause of fear, no such danger imminent or ensuing, and ready
every moment to seize upon them (for nothing holds them up from falling into
the depth of that bottomless gulf, but only the small twine-thread of their
fading and uncertain life, which is ready to be cut in sunder every minute,
every breathing while. O that they were wise Deuteronomy. 32 29. Hosea 14.10.
to understand and consider of these things!

O merciful LORD, (who art mighty in power, and terrible in thy Judgments,)
do thou strike their hearts with the horror of thy wrath and vengeance to
come. Smite their souls, that they may tremble before thee, and fall down
groueling upon the earth in the apprehension of the greatness of their misery
that is to come upon them, if they do not convert and turn unto thee. Those
that will not be drawn with the cords of thy mercy, patience, and
long-sufferance to come unto thee by true and unfeigned repentance, do thou
even constrain and compel them, and drive them forward with that rod of iron,
even with the fear of thy most fearful and yet most just and righteous
Judgments. O do thou give them a sight of that dreadful and woeful misery,
which shall ouer-whelme the wicked for ever. Let them have a right discerning
and a true apprehension of it: Let them believe it, and tremble at it, and be
drawn thereby to turn out of all the ways of wickedness, wherein
heretofore they have vvalked, being deceived with the deceitfulness of sin
and Satan: let them so fear it, that they may prevent it, fly from it, and
be preserved from perishing in that great deluge with the world of the wicked,
whom thou have ordained Romans 9.22
of old unto destruction, and everlasting confusion. And raise up the heart of
thy servant both now and always, I humbly entreat thee, to unfeigned
thankfulness, for that thou have in some measure touched my heart with the
consideration of thy judgments prepared for the wicked, and have caused the
fear and dread of them to be 2 Pet. 3.15
salvation unto me, humbling me thereby, and causing me to stand in awe of
thee, and to fly from the wrath and vengeance to come, unto the throne of thy
grace and mercy in Christ Jesus my Savior and Redeemer, who has given
himself to death for me, to free and deliver me from that death and hell. O
do thou continue still good and gracious unto me: Let thy mercy and
unspeakable kindness so freely vouchsafed unto me in thy beloved Son, be
the principal motive even to force and constrain me to hate all sin, and
to abandon all iniquity; but let me also be mindful of thy dreadful
judgments to be inflicted, yea, powered forth upon them that forget thee Psalm.
9.17
, and are disobedient 2 These. 7.8.
unto thee, and to that heavenly voice of Heb. 3.7.8.
thine, whereby thou daily call them (if they had ears to hear, or hearts
to understand:) let me always fear the second death, which is the death both
of the body and soul, more then the first death, which is the end of this
short and transitory life: and yet let me live so, as I may not be in a
slavish fear of either; not of the first death, because it shall be no death
unto me, but an end of my misery, and wretchedness, unto which I am, and
shall be continually subject as long as I live in this valley of tears, this
place of mourning, as one in exile and banishment out of his own Country; and
a means of entrance into life and glory, even of that glory which is endless
and unspeakable: Not of the second death, because through the riches of thy
grace and mercy, I am already passed from it Ioh. 5.24 and 8.51. Romans 8.1. Ephesians.
2.5.6.
; that so howsoever it may show it self unto me in a dreadful shape, yet it
shall never have power over me, being one of thy redeemed ones, to whom death 1
Cor. 15.57.
and Hell it self is subject.

The blessedness of the life to come, how much to be desired.
THE life present how sweet does it seem unto men? how much desired is it of
the most? how loath are men to part with it? what will they not do that they
may preserve it? But the life to come, how little is it affected of the greater
sort? how faintly desired? how willingly parted with for every sinful lust,
every fruitless vanity, the deceitful pleasures and transitory profits and
commodities of this fading and perishing world! Oh the sottishness and
bruitishnesse of men (the wicked offspring of profane Esau Genesis 25.35 Heb.
12.16
) that for a small portion of these temporal things, sell away all their hopes
unto that eternal inheritance, those glorious possessions in that heavenly
Canaan; and so that they may enjoy the life present according unto their own
desires, altogether neglect the life to come, and show themselves to be every
way regardlesse of it. How has the world blinded them? How has Satan
bewitched them? And who does not even wonder at them and at the strangenes of
their folly and simplicity herein, or rather dotage and extreme madness? For
what comparison is there between this life and that which is to come? This, is
an earthly life 2 Cor. 5.1.2 1 Cor. 15.48.49
, that a heavenly. This life, is frail, momentarie, (we have no certainty, no
assurance of it James 4.14
one hour one minute:) that, everlasting 1 Pet. 1.4
, and subject to no change. This sinful Job. 14.4. and 15.16
, and full of much impuritie and manifold pollutions: that, free from all kind
of contagion Ephe. 5.27
and impuritie whatsoever. This, painful Job. 14.1 Mat. 6.34.
, and full of grief, sorrows, and much misery and wretchedness; every day
brings his grief, his burden; grief of body, of mind, from within us,
without us, and on every side of us. Who is there that complains not of it?
That, not only void of all grief, sorrow, anguish and misery Isai. 25.8
( all tears being clean wiped away, and the days of mourning past and gone)
but also abounding with all kind of joy, spiritual delight, heavenly solace,
and endless and unspeakable bliss and happiness. The night is gone, the
Sunns risen, all darkness scattered, and the former bitterness swallowed up
with the sweetness of that heavenly Manna, wherewith the Saints are
continually refreshed, enjoying pleasures Psalm. 16.11
at the right hand of God for evermore. Shall I set before thee more evidently
the brightness of that glory, and the full and absolute perfection of the
blessedness of that immortal and never fading life of the Saints of God in
that glorious kingdom prepared for them? Oh that we had ears to hear it,
eyes to see it, minds to understand it, and hearts duly and rightly to
consider of it. Doubtless, it would even ravish our hearts and souls, and
draw us, as it were, out of our selves, and above our selves. It would raise up
our affections, and make us far more heavenly affected then we are, or use to
be; yea it would cause us to grow weary of this world, and to aspire and long
after that life of the Saints in glory; nay, even to sigh Romans 8.23 2 Cor. 5.2
4.8
and breath after it incessantly with restless desires. For, what is there in
this heavenly life, which may not even wholly affect us, and cause us to sigh
earnestly and continually after it? First, the place in which they that have
attained unto it do live, is most glorious and excellent; the City of the
great God, the royal palace of the glorious king of heaven and earth, where
there are innumerable Ioh. 14.2
mansions prepared for many thousands of elect men and Angels; yea, it is the
glittering chamber of presence where the king of glory and majesty sits
continually in his throne, accompanied and attended with the whole court of
heaven. A paradise of pleasures having streams of water of life flowing in
every place of it, and trees of life, ever budding, ever blossoming in it (
that earthly Paradise Genesis 2.
, was but a shadow of it, and there was no meeter place in earth to shadow it
out unto us then that, where nothing was wanting that might be for the delight
and refreshing of the inhabitants thereof.) The streets, gates, yea, the whole
frame and and building thereof are nothing but gold, pearl and precious
stones, shining and glittering in most glorious manner: Nay, so great is the
glory and excellency thereof, that all the purest and finest gold (if it were
that of Ophir) the choicest pearl, and the most costly and precious stones in
the world are nothing in comparison of it, scarce so much as a show or a
resemblance of it. For it pleases the Divine spirit by speeches borrowed from
things which are most glorious in the eyes of men, and of greatest esteem in
the world, to shadow out the glory of that place unto us, and to teach us
thereby in this our frailty, in some sort to conceive of those excellencies
which no man is able fully to conceive or to apprehend. The glory of that
heavenly City far passes and surmounteth all such terrene and earthly
things, though never so highly accounted of amongst men. And no marvel, for
if the suburbs, Psalm. 19.1
as it were, of that City be so specious and goodly to behold (as our eyes are
daily witnesses) what then must the City it self needs be? If the works Job.
37.14
of God which we see here below be so wonderful and glorious (as who is there
that knows any thing that does not admire and and wonder at them?) what then
shall we think of those that we see not 2 Cor. 4.18
, and which shall be revealed only unto the Saints and Angels in the highest
heavens, in that heavenly mansion where the Lord dwells Psalm. 103 19
in majesty and glory? what should I say? Gloririous things are spoken of
thee, O thou City of God Psalm. 87.3
. If the Psalmist might say that truly of that earthly Jerusalem, how much more
may it be said of that heavenly Jerusalem, unto which the other (though a type
and figure of it) was nothing comparable? Wonderful and glorious things are
spoken of it; and yet all that has been or can be spoken thereof, is not the
one half of that glory and excellency which the Saints shall find there, when
they are once entered into it. For, as the Queen of Sheba said when she saw
Solomans Court 1 Kings 10.5.7
; so, and much more shall they say when with their eyes they shall behold the
Court of heaven, where a greater then Solomon (even the great God of the whole
world) shall sit in his throne having thousands thousands ministering unto him
Dan. 7.10
, and ten thousand thousands of glorious creatures, men and Angels waiting and
attending upon him. They shall acknowledge (and account themselves happy in the
acknowledgment of it) that the report which they heard thereof, with their
ears, whiles they lived here on earth, as it were strangers Heb. 11.13
and a far off, was inferior unto that which they now see with their eyes,
and rejoice whiles they see it with joy that cannot be uttered. O how amiable
are thy dwelling places, O Lord of hosts Psalm. 84.1
? Thus did the Prophet admire at the glory of the Tabernacle of the Lord at
Jerusalem. How much more may we in a holy admiration and wonderment, speak the
same concerning that glorious and heavenly Palace, which is prepared for the
Saints in the heaven of heavens? O how amiable, how excellent and glorious is
that celestial mansion, the kingdom of glory, in the which the Lord of glory
dwells in the fullness of his glory and majesty. There is no night, no
darkness in it, but the brightness and glory of the Lord does shine
continually most gloriously in it, yea, far more brightly then the Sun,
when it is in his greatest strength. Nay the glory and shining beauty thereof
is so great, that the resplendent brightness thereof does as far excel the
brightness of the Sun and Moon, as they do exceed a little candle at noone
day. Our eyes (as now they are) were not able to behold one glimpse thereof
Exodus 40 34.35
, but would be dazeled presently, and overcome with the shine and luster of it.
We cannot see it and live. We see how glorious the outward Court Job. 37.18
or pauement of it is, in which those celestial bodies, as so many burning
lamps Job. 38.7 Psalm. 148.3
do shine forth most clearly with their glittering and radiant beams, and
cause the diligent beholder to stand Job. 137 14
as one amazed, wondering at the skill and marvelous wisdom of the maker of
so curious and glorious a workmanship, so excellently adorned and garnished in
every part, more then if it were all sprinkled with the most bright shining
pearls or precious stones that the whole earth can afford: how much more
glorious then, (think you must the inward Court needs be? Besides, who is
able to consider how large and spacious that glorious mansion is? who can mete
out the breadth, the length, or compass of that heavenly City? If one star
(as the learned do in that Art affirm) be many times greater then the whole
earth, what is the firmament, in which there are so many stars, and some of
them of greater magnitude? and if the firmament be so large, what (may we
think) is the heaven of heavens, which compasses in all the other as a
lesser circle? It passes man's understanding, both for glory, and greatness. O
how blessed and happy are they that shall be Citizens of such a Kingdom, that
shall live in such a glorious place for evermore, even in the presence chamber
of the Lord of glory. Assuredly, this world is but a barren wilderness, a
wearisome prison, yea, a dark dungeon, in comparison of it.

But to give thee yet a further view of that heavenly life. As the place where
they shall live is wonderful glorious; so the company with whom they shall
live in that place, is no less glorious, yea, far above it. It does exceed
it by many degrees. For what company shall they have there? Even the blessed
society of all the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Adam,
Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, Job, David, Daniel, etc. Heb. 11. and 12.22
Even all those worthies and renowned ones that have been from the beginning
of the world to this present, or shall be to the end thereof; the beholding of
some one of whom is greatly desired of us, and would wonderfully content us.
They shall be companions of Princes; yea, the least and meanest of their
company shall be greater then the greatest Prince in this world, (for they
shall all be crowned Kings Reave. 1.6
and triumphant Emperors, set upon heavenly thrones Ephe. 2.6 Reave. 2.26 27.
and 3.21
.) These are their familiars and companions; and with these, together with that
innumerable multitude of the elect and chosen Angels, (those celestial and
heavenly creatures) shall they continually live and converse, each ioying and
delighting in the company and society of the other, as being partakers of the
same glory; and truly loving and entirely affecting one another, more then
ever Jonathan did David (whose love notwithstanding was wonderful 2 Samuel 1.26
hardly to be patterned.) Being knit among themselves by the band of one spirit
into a holy communion, they shall have as it were one soul, willing the same
things affecting the same things, and re, ioycing mutually and continually in
him, who is the fountain of all their joy, glory, and happiness. The joy of
one shall be the joy of all, and the glory of one, the glory of all. Nay,
(which is far far greater matter) and the thought whereof may even ravish
our souls) they shall enjoy the sweet and heavenly company of their blessed
Savior and Redeemer Ioh. 12.26. and 17.24
, Christ Jesus, the Prince of peace Isa. 9.6. 1 Timothy 6.15
, the King of glory, yea, the glory of heaven and earth; the image of his
Father Coloss. 1 15 Heb. 1.3. John 1.9.
, in whom those things which are invisible are seen; the brightness of the
everlasting light, the undefiled mirror of the majesty of God; the desire of
all nations Haggai. 2.8
, whose name is Wonderful, whose power unspeakable; the beholding of whom
(even whiles he was here on earth in the state of his frailty and humility)
made good old Simeon to rejoice exceedingly Luke 2.28
, and would have gladded the hearts of many Kings and Prophets Math. 13 16.17
that were before him, who desired and longed after this, and would have
accounted themselves happy in the enjoying of it. They shall enjoy his company,
whom the Angels do reverence and adore Heb. 1.6. Psalm. 97.7.
, and the very sight and appearance of whom will be an exceeding refreshing
Act. 3.19
unto them, yea, cause their hearts to spring within them, Luke 1.41
as the babe did in Elizabeth's womb at the salutation of the blessed Virgin.
Oh how shall their hearts be ravished with joy, when they shall see the Lord of
the family, the heir of the whole world, the Prince of glory, clothed with
their nature, Luke 12.37. and 13.29
and sitting down at the same table with them, and speaking most sweet and
comfortable words unto them. Eat Can. 5.1
, O friends; drink, and make you merry, O well-beloved. They shall have
fellowship, familiarity and acquaintance with him, (as one brother with
another Mat. 12.49. Hebr. 2.11
) to their unspeakable comfort, the very consideration whereof, makes their
righteous souls now in the time of their absence 2 Cor. 5.6.
from him to cry out as Paul did Phil. 1.23.
, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, for that is best of all. And
with the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 8.14.
O my well-beloved, flee away, and be like unto the Roe, or to the young Heart,
upon the Mountains of spices: and with the Spirit and the Bride in the
Revelations, Revel. 22 7.20.
Come, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Oh that we may once see thy face, and
behold that brightness of thine, who art so wonderful in thy Saints and
redeemed ones. Here is their hope, their joy, and their rejoicing. And, with
him they shall enjoy the gracious and most comfortable presence of the blessed
and glorious Spirit, yea, of the Father of Spirits Heb. 12.9
, even the whole Trinity, that great and glorious God, the splendour and
brightness of whose Majesty is so great, that the eye of no mortal creature
1 Timothy 6 16
now, were able to behold the same: Hence, when Moses (not thoroughly vveighing
his own weakness) besought the Lord to see his glory, he received this
answer from the Lord Exodus 33.18.20.
, Thou can not see my face: for there shall no man see me and live. But they
then shall see his face, that is, the fullness of his glory, as far as the
nature of man is able to comprehend the same (for neither man, nor any creature
else can perfectly discern his whole nature; for that is infinite, they finite
and limited with certain bonds which they cannot pass.) They shall see him,
not as in a glass 1 Cor. 13.12.
, (as they do in the time of this life here upon earth) darkely, obscurely,
and as it were a far off; but even as he is 1 Ioh. 3.2.
: yea, they shall have his name written upon their foreheads Revel. 3.12. and
22.44
; they shall live with him in that glorious mansion, having (as far as their
nature is capable) fellowship and communion with him, rejoicing in his
presence with joy unspeakable and glorious; nay, Revel. 3.20. Ioh. 14.23
dining and supping with him, in a manner, at that heavenly table, being
continually fed with that pleasant Manna, the food of Angels; and refreshed
with those pure waters which flow incessantly from the throne of God;
wondering at the glory, the might, and Majesty of their Creator; yea,
wondering and admiring at their own blessedness, which is far above that
the heart of man 1 Cor. 2 9.
now is able to conceive, or the tongue to express. Our understandings are too
shallow to comprehend these things. It is a light which our dim and weak
eyes are not able to behold without dazeling. All earthly things are but toys
and trifles, and dreams of imaginary fancies, compared thereunto, yea, vain
vanities Eccl. 1.1.
. The Queen of Sheba 1 Kin. 10 8
counted them happy that might stand ever in the presence of king Solomon: Oh
then, how blessed and happy are they that stand continually in the presence of
that glorious God, seeing and admiring his wisdom, his glory, and
unspeakable Majesty; yea, living, reigning, and triumphing with him in
fullness of joy and happiness for evermore? who does not wonder at their
blessedness? If Peter was so ravished when he saw Christ in his
transfiguration on the Mount, with those two worthees of his, Moses and Elias
attending upon him, that he forgot his home, his wife, and family, breaking
forth into that speech, Master, it is good for us to be here; Mat. 17.4
Lets make this our mansion place, Let us here build us Tents and Tabernacles
to dwell in: How much more must all the Saints needs rejoice, yea be even
swallowed up with joy and admiration, when they shall behold the divine and
glorious Majesty of the Son of God; yea, of the whole Trinity, the great
God of Heaven and Earth? not only have a glance or glimpse of his glory, but
fully behold it, as much as the nature of man is able? when they shall enjoy the
presence of that glorious Majesty; when they shall have such heavenly company
and society, even the company and society of God himself (the Father of
lights Iam. 1.17
) of Christ Jesus their Savior, of the Holy Ghost their comforter, of all the
Saints and Angels their fellow-brethren Revel. 22 9.
, yea of the whole Court of Heaven, who together with them make up one family
Ephesians. 3.15.
? What a life is this? Who does not admire at it? What a change is this from
the estate wherein before they were? For whiles they continued here upon earth
as Pilgrims and Strangers Heb. 11.13.
from their own Country, they were constrained to live amongst the wicked of
all sorts, Satan's imps, children of Beliall Judge. 19.22.
, who did continually vex and molest them Prou 6.12.14. 2 Pet. 2.8.
with their profane and ungodly courses, being (as the Cananites were to the
Israelites) pricks in their sides, and thorns in their eyes, making their
hearts to ache within them, and causing them to complain with the holy man of
God Psa. 120.5.
Woe is me that I dwell in Meshec, and that I have my habitation among the tents
of Kedar: Or with that other who was led by the same spirit Ier. 9.2.20
Oh that I had in the Wilderness a cottage of wayfaring men, that I might
leave this people, this naughty and crooked generation Phi. 2.15
, and be gone far off from them. Oh, that I might once leave this dry and
barren wilderness, wherein there be so many cruel and savage beasts on every
side, Lions Nahu. 2.11. Psalm. 22.13 2 Timothy 4.17.
, Tigers, Wolves Mat. 10.16.
, Foxes Luke 13.32.
, Pro. 17.12*
Bears, etc. which are ready to prey upon me and to devour me. Thus it was
with them whiles they lived in this wretched and sinful world 1 Ioh. 5.19.
Mat. 13.41 1 Cor. 5.10.
, where there is a mixture of all sorts. But now it is far otherwise with
them, in stead of these, they are received into the company and fellowship of
all the Saints and Angels, yea of God himself Psalm. 16.11.
, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore.

I might lead thee further, to a more full and distinct view of the manner of
that blessed and glorious life which the Saints together in the presence of God
shall enjoy in that place of glory and happiness, into which they are to be
received; yea, I might even wilder both my self and thee, whiles I wander with
thee in the variety and plenty of matter which here does offer it self unto
me, and put me to a stand knowing better where to begin then to end. To keep
within some limits. The life which they shall there lead is marvelous
glorious in regard of the exceeding glory which shall be put both upon their
bodies and upon their souls. They shall be glorified in both.

First, their bodies (to let pass the fruitless and uncertain speculations
which some have broched with more curiosity of speech then evidence of truth)
their bodies no doubt shall be very glorious, far above that our hearts now
are able to conceive; yea, so glorious, that if now whiles we are in the
flesh, we should see the glory of one of them (even the meanest of them as it
shall then be) we could not be able to look upon it, but we would be amazed
at the beholding thereof, as the Israelites were at the shine which was upon
Moses face, when he came from the Mount, after that God had talked with him
Exodus 34 29.30.
. For, they shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, Dan. 12.3.
as the Stars, yea as the Sun it self Mat. 13.43.
, when it shines in his greatest strength, and dazeleth the eyes of all the
beholders; Nay, as the Sun of righteousness Mal. 4.2
, CHRIST JESUS himself. We know how glorious his body was in his
transfiguration upon the mount Mat. 17.2
, when he gave those three Disciples but a glimpse of that resplendent
brightness wherewith his body does now shine most gloriously. Such as was
then, yea, such as is now the glory of his body in the highest heavens, such
then also shall theirs be. For their bodies shall be made conformable unto his
Phil. 3.21
. Now we are the sons of God (says that beloved Disciple of Christ.) Now we
1 John 3.2.
are the sons of God, (even all the faithful) but yet it does not appear
what we shall be: But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like
him. They shall be made like unto him in glory, though not equal; They shall
have the same kind of glory put upon them, though not the same degree, and
measure. As their bodies were some-wayes comformable unto his (in his humility
and abasement) in regard of their sufferings (as the Apostle speaks of
himself Gal. 6.17
, I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus;) and in regard of their
manifold weaknesses and infirmities, whereunto they are now continually
subject: so then they shall be made conformable unto his glorious body, being
beautified with the same glory, and shining with the same brightness. Such as
is the Head, such shall be the members.

Sun gives light unto all the other Lights of heaven: so shall CHRIST unto
all the Saints, by communicating his own glory unto them. Air being
enlightened by the light of the Sun, is so transformed into the brightness
thereof, that it seems not so much to be lightened, as to be light it self:
so the bodies of the Saints being enlightened with the beams of the glory of
GOD, and his Son Christ Jesus, which shall shine unto them Ioh. 16.22
and in them, shall be even transformed into the glorious Image of God, shining
clearly with the brightness of that glory which is in the Son of God himself.

glory of the Lord reflected upon Moses vvhiles he was with him certain days
upon the Mount, it made his face to shine so brightly (as it was formerly said)
that the people could not behold him, but were afraid to come near him for the
glory of his Exodus 34.33. 2 Cor. 3.7.13
countenance, so that he was feign to put a covering upon his face, and to
veil himself, because otherwise they were not able to talk with him, and to
hear that Message which he had unto them from the Lord: Oh then how glorious
must not only their faces but their whole bodies be, who shall not be certain
days or years, but continually in the presence of God in his heavenly
Mountain, where he shall cause all the beams of that unspeakable
brightness and glory of his to be ever reflecting, ever shining upon them!
Adams body, in his integrity, was glorious, and had a kind of Majesty upon
it, so that all the Creatures stood in awe Genesis 2.19 20. Psalm. 8.6.7.
and reverence of his presence: much more shall theirs, when living in that
celestial Paradise, they shall be made like not that earthly, but that
heavenly Adam, CHRIST JESUS, our blessed Lord and Savior, whose Image they
shall then 1 Cor. 15 48.49.
bear. The Sun (that glorious creature) would not so much dazzle our eyes if
we should look full upon it in the greatest brightness thereof, as the bodies
of every one; yea, of the least of the Saints would, if we should now behold
them in the glory wherewith then they shall be invested in a wonderful manner.
What should I say more? The tongue of man is not able to express the
greatness of their glory.

In brief then (to enlarge this no further:) whiles the bodies of the wicked
(like loathsome carcasses,) shall be vile, contemptible, inglorious, full of
shame and confusion, yea, an abhorring to all flesh Isa. 66.24
; theirs shall shine in that brightness of glory which is unspeakable, and
rather with comfort to be expected, then with words sufficiently expressed.
They only who shall be made partakers of it shall know what it is.

bodies shall be made thus glorious, so, much more their souls. Nay, the glory
hereof shall as much exceed the other, as the Soul it self does excel the
body (which they that are of any understanding will grant to be exceeding
much.) Great, yea, marvelous great shall the glory thereof be. They shall be
changed and renewed, and of a far more excellent condition, then they now are;
changed, I say, not in regard of their essence, (for that shall remain the
same, without any difference, any alteration; but in regard of their qualities,
which shall be refined and much altered from that they were before; of a new
stamp and impression as it were; enriched with new endowments, new ornaments;
yea, the glory of them shall be wonderful, far above that we are able to
think or conceive of them. More particularly: The Image of God Ephesians. 4.24 Col.
3.10.
and of Christ, which now through sin is much defaced in them, shall then
shine forth in them, in most glorious manner. It is begun in them here 2 Cor.
3.18.
, it shall be perfected there.

Understandings shall be enlightened to know whatsoever may make for their
happiness. Whereas now they are ouer-shadowed with much darkness, then they
shall shine most clearly, most brightly. They shall understand perfectly, the
whole Mystery of 1 Timothy 3.16.
Godliness. They shall know God; yea, see him as he is, even face to 1 Cor.
13.12
face, as much as the nature of a finite and humane creature is able to
comprehend the glory of so infinite and so glorious a Majesty. There shall be
no darkness of error or ignorance in them; for they shall live always in the
light; yea, where he that is the Father of lights Iam. 1.17
, shall continually cast forth his shine upon them, illuminating and
inlightning their understandings with the bright beams of his Spirit, and
making them partakers of the rich treasuries of all heavenly wisdom, and
true spiritual knowledge and understanding. Great was the knowledge which Adam
had in Paradise before his fall, when as at the first veiw he was able to give
unto every Genesis 2.20
creature (both Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Field,) a name according
unto their nature; but it was not so great as that which the Saints shall have
in Heaven. I list not here to feed the curious Reader with nice speculations
of things not revealed Deuteronomy. 29 29.
; as whether the Saints in glory shall know one another, the father, the son;
the mother, the daughter; one neighbor another, or one friend the other, etc.
So much only I will say (having ground for it out of the Scriptures) that no
manner of knowledge shall be wanting unto them, which may make for the
increase of their happiness; neither shall the knowledge of this be wanting unto
them if it will make them the more happy. But to proceed.

Wills also shall be perfectly sanctified, so that they shall will only that
which is good, that which God wills, and not possibly be once moved or
inclined unto that which is evil, that which GOD wills not. They shall not
only have a will not to sin, but also an impossibility of willing that
which is sinful; otherwise then it was with Adam in his greatest perfection.

Affections shall be rightly ordered and tempered; yea, in an excellent frame
and harmony, without any unpleasing discord. They shall only affect that, love
that, joy and delight in that which is pleasing and acceptable unto God, and
making most for his glory; and so much the more joy and delight in it, as they
shall know it to be more pleasing and delightsome unto him. Yea, they shall
have that measure of holiness infused into them, both into their Wills and
Affections, and all the faculties of their souls, that they shall be holy
(according unto the capablenesse of their nature) even as God himself is holy,
pure as he is pure, righteous as he is righteous. For, then is the time, (and
not before as some foolish Heretics have fondly dreamed) when the Church
(that glorious Spouse of Christ) and every member thereof shall be without spot
or wrinckle Ephesians. 5.27
, without stain or blemish, as it becomes the undefiled Spouse of that
heavenly Bridegroom, the Lambs wife Reu. 19.7
. Their souls shall be so purified, so purged with those clean waters which
flow out of the Sanctuary, that they shall not only be free from all sin;
but (which is more) not so much as once subject to the least sin, nor any fit
subject for sin to work upon. They shall be pure and Angelical. In brief,
they shall shine most gloriously, glistering with all heavenly graces of the
divine Spirit; for they shall be made partakers of the divine nature 2 Pet. 1.4
, in more full manner; not, that the divine essence shall be infused into them,
but that those divine and heavenly qualities of wisdom, glory,
righteousness, holiness, purity, etc. (wherein the Image of God consists)
shall be communicated unto them in plentiful and abundant manner, so that if
their bodies (as the Truth it self has said) shall shine as the Sun, then
their Souls shall shine no doubt far more gloriously. O how excellent shall
the brightness thereof be? who is able to conceive it? Blessed are they that
shall be partakers of it. Thus the Saints shall be glorious in their bodies,
glorious in their souls; yea, both in body and in soul they shall be clothed
as it were, with long white Reu. 3.4.5. and 7.13.
robes of glory and dignity, having Palms in their hands, in sign of victory
and triumph over Sin, Satan, Death, Hell, and Damnation; and Crowns on
their heads in sign of royalty; sitting also with Christ Jesus in his throne
Reu. 3.21
, even as he sits with his Father in his throne. They shall live like kings;
yea, reign and triumph like Emperors, having conquered the World 1 Ioh. 5.4.5.
, and the Prince of the World John 12.31.
, Satan, and his infernal host 1 Cor. 15.55.57. Romans 16.20 Keu. 20.13
. There shall be glory without measure in the presence of that glorious God;
yea, all the glory of the most glorious things in the world is nothing unto it.
All the pomp, royalty, and magnificence of all the most Princely Potentates,
and mighty Monarchs in the whole earth, with all their glorious and glittering
show (though every one of them were as glorious, yea, more glorious then
Solomon was when he was at the height of his glory) were nothing unto that
glory, but even as dust; no more to be compared to it then brass to the finest
Silver, or Copper to the purest Gold. To be brief, for words cannot express
these things to the full. Paul, when (being rapt into the third heavens) he
had a view thereof, said that he saw things 2 Cor. 12.4.
that cannot be uttered; where that great Apostle is silent, who can speak? To
be brief, therefore, so glorious shall their estate then be, that in an holy
admiration they shall even wonder at it; for indeed marvelous and wonderful
it shall be far above that which they expected whiles they lay crawling like
Worms upon this lower earth, and had their habitation in these baser cottages,
these houses of clay; yea, as Luther (that hammer of Antichrist) said of Abel,
so it may be said, and shall be verified of every one of them. They shall be in
better estate and condition then if they had the possession of a thousand
worlds, with all the riches and glory thereof. And hence to lead thee on yet
further with me (for I am as one in a Maze, I know not where to get out, such
variety offers it self on every hand in this divine Meditation, for the
mind that is heavenly affected to exercise it self in) Hence, I say, from the
fruition and apprehension of the greatness of that glory and happiness of
theirs, shall arise, and spring forth unto them and in them, abundance of peace
and joy. They shall be filled and replenished with true peace and with
spiritual and heavenly joy, even that joy which shall ravish their hearts and
souls. They shall live a heavenly and an Angelical life, singing and
rejoicing, having that new song continually in their mouths, which they with
the rest of that celestial quire, even all those blessed Angels and glorious
spirits shall continually sound forth. Haleluiah, praise and glory, and
wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might be unto our God for
evermore, Amen. They shall have fullness of joy in the presence of God, and be
even satisfied with those pleasures of his right hand for evermore Psalm. 16.11
; yea, all pleasures and delights which this world can afford are but vain
shadows, smoke, trifles for children and babes; yea, no pleasures, no
delights, in comparison of those sweet pleasures and delights wherewith the
Saints shall be refreshed in that glorious Kingdom. They shall feed daily upon
that Manna Revel. 2.17
of divine and heavenly consolation, and all spiritual comforts which the
heart of man can desire, nay more then the heart of man can think of. They
shall drink down the cup of salvation and gladness, Isai. 12.3.
and draw waters of life out of the river of his pleasures, which shall flow
forth abundantly unto them. Then they shall indeed taste Tim. 2.3 Psa. 31.19
how sweet and how gracious the Lord is unto his chosen and beloved ones: Their
hearts shall rejoice and glory in him. And no marvel that they shall have
such peace and joy in the presence of God. For if they find now such inward
spiritual joy in their souls and consciences, in the place of their exile and
banishment, yea, in their prison, as it were, (even this valley of tears) when
God lets some bright beam of his gracious countenance shine upon them
through the thick clouds of many temptations and afflictions wherewith they
are continually exercised; when by his word and spirit he gives them but a
drop of that divine and heavenly comfort (as they alone know what a
refreshing this joy is unto them who have truly tasted of it Pro. 14.10
, others are strangers to it) how great then must their joy needs be, when
(being taken up into heaven, the place of their glory, those celestial
mansions) God shall cause the light of his countenance to shine fully upon
them? when he shall reveal himself perfectly unto them; when he, (who is the
God of all true comfort and consolation) shall power out himself unto them,
and open wide, as it were, all the fountains of his rich grace and mercy
toward them in Christ Jesus, and cause them to taste of the plenteousnesse of
his house Psalm. 36.1
, and to drink down abundantly the waters of his divine and heavenly
comforts? If the poor distressed Saints of God, whiles they endure many
miseries and afflictions in the world, and of the world, yet notwithstanding,
have that peace Phil. 4.7
which passes all understanding, (a continual feast Pro. 15.51
) and rejoice with that joy which is unspeakable, and glorious (as the
Scripture testifies 1 Pet. 1.8
) even whiles they are absent from Christ, not seeing him with bodily sight, 2
Cor. 5 7
but only believing in him, and looking upon him with the eyes of faith in the
promises of the Gospel; how great then and wonderful shall their joy be,
when being freed from all these miseries whereunto they are now subject, they
shall be present with Christ their Savior, whom so long before they expected
and desired, see him with their eyes 1 Ioh. 3.2 Job. 19.25 26
, yea, live and converse with him in familiar manner, and be made partakers
with him of the same glory Ioh. 17.1 22.24
into which he is exalted, that in his time appointed he may draw them up unto
him Ioh. 14.3
, and make their hearts to rejoice in him, and in his salvation? If their joy
wherewith they now rejoice, (even in this valley of misery, this place of
mourning) be unspeakable and glorious and passing all understanding (as the
word of truth teaches, and the Saints by comfortable feeling and experience
do well know, and thankefully acknowledge) what then (I beseech you consider
of it) what shall it be in that place of triumph, that Paradise of pleasures,
that glorious and celestial kingdom, where they shall keep a continual
Sabbath, and being clothed and arrayed with the rich robes of holiness,
righteousness and glory, and shining as Stars, yea, as the Sun in the
brightness thereof, shall have their hearts filled with rejoicing, and their
mouths with himnes and joyful Haleluiahs, even heavenly ditties of praise and
thanksgiving unto him that sits on the throne. O that we had hearts to
conceive aright of these things.

the time which they shall live in so blessed an estate in that glorious place.
If this blessedness and glory of theirs were mutable and changeable (as all
things here below are) it were not so great, and so much to be admired as it
is; (for nothing is perfectly happy that is not permanent and everlasting:) But
it is otherwise; it admits no change, no alteration. All things which any can
enjoy in this life, Eccle. 1. 1 Cor. 7.31 1 Ioh. 2.17
are transitory and fading, riches, pleasures, strength, health, beauty,
honor, or whatsoever else in this world is most made account of, and seems
to have the greatest perfection in it Psalm 119.96
: but that happiness and felicity of the Saints in light shall never fade.
It Is an inheritance immortal 1 Pet. 1.4 2 Cor. 4.18
, undefiled and ever continuing in the heavens. The measure of it shall be in
a manner infinite; the continuance of it infinite altogether. The time thereof
shall be without time, for time then shall be no more; there shall be neither
days, months, nor years as now there are. There shall be no end of it, no
decaying of it, no diminishing or abating of it: But it shall continue as long
as the heavens, yea, as long as God himself shall endure, without any ceasing
or intermission, any change or alteration, or the least shadow of change of the
excellency of that estate wherein they shall at the first be. As the hell of
the wicked, so the heaven of the godly shall be perpetual. O blessed and happy
estate where there shall be nothing but peace, joy, glory, happiness, and
felicity, and that not for a time, but for ever, even as long as eternity it
self lasts. O life, to be desired far above this corruptible, this vain
and transitory life, which the most do so much make of, yea, prefer it
before the other, loath to leave this that they may attain unto that. O the
brutishness and sottishness of the men of this world, that are so strangely
and so fondly affected, as to neglect so great salvation, so glorious a life,
for the enjoying of the vain and sinful pleasures and profits of this life,
which last but for a season. How has the Devil bewitched them? How do their
own wicked and corrupt hearts blind and deceive them that they should even
prefer a dunghill of earth as it were, before the glory of that heavenly
palace? or, that they should be unwilling to forgo the earth and to forsake
their pleasing or gainefull trade of wickedness, that they may enjoy Heaven
and the happiness of Gods Saints and chosen ones? Oh these things are hid from
their eyes 1 Cor. 2.9. Luke 19.42.
, they perceive no more what the glorious life of the Saints is, then a bruit
beast discernes of the life of a man; or, if they know them in some measure,
and yet are regardlesse to seek after them, how great is their folly and
madness? who would not wonder at them? yea, who is not amazed to think of
them? Assuredly, such as have wisdom and understanding to discern of these
things aright, and faith to believe them as they ought, will not be kept back
from them with a thousand worlds, 2 Cor. 4.18.
(if there were so many, and they were offered unto them) seeing all glory,
pleasures, profits and commodities of this world are nothing comparable
thereunto. But, whence is it that if the estate of the life to come be so
excellent and so much to be desired, that men (even such as look to have a
share therein as well as others) are so little affected with it, so loath and
unwilling to leave this poor and wretched life of theirs to attain unto it?
Blush and be ashamed of this, you that have any assurance indeed of that
glorious and everlasting life, that you should once be so much overtaken as to
be unwilling to depart out of this world, and to go unto the other, which is so
much Eccles. 7.3. Phil. 1.23.
better, to make exchange of Brass for fine Silver, of Copper and baser
Metals for the purest and most refined gold; in a word, of a miserable, and
sinful, and uncertain life for that most blessed, incorruptible and
immortal life, reserved for the Saints in the highest heavens? O the
marvelous infidelity of ours, if it be thus with us! What should I say? A
wonderful thing undoubtedly it is, that any one that has any understanding to
know these things any measure of Faith to believe them, should be so carnal,
so earthly, so sensual 1 Cor. 15 19
, as to regard this wretched life here upon earth, more then that blessed life
in those heavenly and glorious mansions. Whom should not the consideration of
it alienate and estrange from this world, withdraw their affections from it,
and weane altogether from the sinful and inordinate love of it, and cause
them as it were, with Eagles wings to soar aloft in the often and serious
contemplation of that blessed and glorious estate, and in the earnest and
ardent desire to be made pertaker of it, being taken from Earth to Heaven, from
vanity and misery to that endless and unspeakable felicity and happiness?

O blessed LORD, forgive me my dullness in this regard, strengthen my faith,
and hope, and affect my heart, I humbly pray thee, more and more daily with an
unfeigned desire and longing after that celestial and heavenly life. Let me not
be glewed to this world, nor to any thing in this world, which is but vanity,
dreams, and fancies; but having mine eyes opened to see what the riches of the
glorious inheritance of thy Saints is, let me sigh and breath after the same
incessantly, as thy servants have done Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 5.24.8. Phil. 1.23.
, and long continually for the time when with these eyes of mine I shall see
the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice with the joy of thy people, in that
blessed and glorious kingdom, which thou have promised unto me, and wilt in
due time give unto me for thy mercies sake in thy well-beloved, in whom it has
pleased thee to embrace me before all worlds. Let me rejoice always in all my
afflictions wherewith thou shall exercise me, under the hope of that glory Romans
5.2. and 8.18. Iam. 1.2. Heb. 10.37.
with which shortly thou will crown me for ever; and esteem the best things
of this earth, as dung in comparison of it, and all the glory of this world but
as withering grass. Let me be willing always, Isa. 40.6.7. 1 Pet. 1.24
at thy call, to depart hence, having before laid a sure foundation, and
endeavored to keep faith, and a good conscience in all things; yea, rejoice
unfeignedly when thou shall send thy messengers (those heavenly Ministers) to
take me into their arms, 2 Timothy 4 7.8.
and to convey me into those celestial mansions, there to live and reign
with thee, and all thine elect and chosen ones, in that glory which shall have
no end; and that only through the merits and mediation of thy Son, my
blessed Lord and Savior, to whom with thee, and the Spirit of life and grace,
be all praise and glory, both now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
DEVT. 30.19.
I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose
life.

Soli Deo gloria.
Faults escaped.
Page. 11. line 13. of read in. p. 16. l. 22. goodly r. godly. p. 17. l. 9.
holy r. holily. p. 32. l. 15. what r. most. p. 85. l. 9. desert r. defect. p.
122. l. 22. sins r. sinners. p. 150. l. 7. after neither, add the. p. 176.
l. him. r. them.

The rest are of lesser moment.


