A TRVE DESCRIPTION of unthankfulness: Or an enemy to Ingratitude.

Compiled by Nicholas Breton Gent.

AT LONDON: Printed by Thomas Este. 1602.

M.
M MORE worth then Virtue, can no creature know,
A A Phaenix in the world there is but one:
R Rare is the Bird, and though there be no mo,
Y Yet may you find her when you are alone.
G.
G GREAT is the Grace that in the spirit lives,
A And such a life is worthy honors love:
T The perfect good that heavenly mercy gives,
E Elected Virgins in the heavens above.
To the Right Worshipful, Virtuous, and Noble minded Gentlewoman, Mistress
Mary Gate, Daughter to that true worthy Knight of Honorable remembrance Sir
Henry Gate of Semer. N. B. wishes all happiness on Earth and Heaven
hereafter.
A Virtuous mind can not be without her honor, nor, an ungrateful spirit
without a burden of Conscience: the first in your self is made manifest to
many, the second, in my self, I wish not to live to be touched with, but yet,
not able to requite those your Honorable favors that I have received yet
undeserved, give me leave in this little fruit of my labor, to present you
with this token of my thanckfulnesse, wherein treating only of the vile Nature
of Ingratitude, I hope not to be found guilty in that offense. And so,
wishing you your desert of Honor, of the best minds, and the ungrateful, the
plague of an unquiet Conscience, or amendment of their evil conditions, in
continual prayer for your hearts ever Contentment, I rest.

Yours bounden to command Nicholas Breton.

To the Reader.
HE that is unthankful for a good turn, shows the venime of a vile Nature,
and he that is kindly grateful, is worthy to be beeloued: if you be of the
last condition, I commend you, if of the first, God amend you: What you are I
know not, but I hope the best, the worst I desire not to hear off. And
therefore, in brief, the Treatise being short, I will not trouble you to
long, but as I find your kindness, will rest in thankfulness.

Your friend Nicholas Breton.

Ingratis seruire Nefas.
OF all the sins that ever reigned,
Since wickedness her world began:
That Natures beauty most has stained,
Within the wretched heart of Man:
And nearest does to hell allude,
Is that of foul Ingratitude.
It kills the Eye of Reasons sight,
With foul obliuions foggy mists:
And makes the spirit to delight,
But in the harms of had I wists:
And mires the soul in sins foul flud,
While lack of grace, can see no good.
It studies only to destroy,
A gentle spirit with despite:
And knows no part of Heavenly joy,
That pleads so in the Devils right:
It is a hagge, that heavens do hate,
And, dwells, but with the Reprobate.
It brings forth such shameful Evil,
Out of the shameless wicked mind:
As by suggestion of the Devil,
Makes Nature go against her kind:
When Men that should be Virtues friends,
Become but Machauilian fiends.
There is no thought can be so vile,
Nor word can sound so ill a worth:
Nor cursed state, so ill a style,
As can Ingratitude set forth:
Which was the curse of Adams seed,
And never since did better deed.
Where it does once infect the heart,
The Son does wish the Fathers death:
The Wife does seek the Husbands mart,
The Brother stops the Sisters breath:
The Neighbor, and the nearest friend,
Will plot each others speedy end.
It makes the Servant to forget,
His duty to his Masters love:
The Subject all his wits to set,
Rebellion to his Prince to prove:
The Villain for a Comfortlent,
For to beetraie the Innocent.
It makes Man forget his God,
In whom alone he has his being:
His Comfort and his Mercies Rod,
Whereof his Soul can have no seeing:
Until to late in hell he finds,
How God does hate ungrateful minds.
Oh what it does, or does it not?
That may agrieue an honest mind:
To see the power that Sin has got,
Upon the curse of humane kind:
While Comfort, Kindness, Care, and Cost,
Upon unthankfulness are lost.
Oh Hellish Worm, that eats the womb,
Wherein it lay, to look abroad:
And plots the Mean to make his Tomb,
Whose house had been his chief aboade:
While faithless friends make hellish fiends,
God send all Iudasses such ends.
A King that on a time ordained,
A punishment for every vice:
Was asked, why he did refrain?
On this to set down his device:
It is quod he, beeyond my wit,
I leave to God to punish it.
As who should say, the sin were such,
As did all other so exceed:
That were the torment nere so much,
It were no more then it did need:
That all the world might warning win,
To fly the thought of such a sin.
Oh, how much worse then any Beast,
It makes the shape of Man to prove?
For shape is most, and Man is least,
That so does swerve from Natures love:
And in the hate of honors Nature,
Becomes the worst of any creature.
Fie, fie, upon Ingratitude,
The Sin of Sins that ever was:
That does the soul to much delude,
And brings the world to such a pass:
That lack of loves Gratuitie,
Has almost worn out Charity.
Of Worms, the Viper is the worst,
That eats the Bowels that did breed him:
Of Birds, the Cuckoe most accursed,
That kills the Sparrow that did feed him:
And is not Man more half a Devil?
That so requiteth good with Evil?
A poor Man going to a wood,
Within the Snow an Adder found:
When, wishing how to do it good,
Did take it up, from off the ground:
And fearing of no future harm,
Did in his bosom keep it warm.
But coming home unto the fire,
No sooner he had loosde his Coat:
But, to requite his kind desire,
The Adder bit him by the throat:
Now whereto does this tale alude?
But only to Ingratitude:
There was a Lion as I read,
Who had a Thorn got in his foot:
Which in his travail fore did bleed,
While to his heart the pain did shoot:
With which, unto his Den he came,
And fell to licking of the same.
When, as he stood he spied a Man,
Who had been thither fled for fear:
And in his heart, with grief beegan,
To mourn his hapless being there:
Yet, seeing how the Lion stood,
Adventured to do him good.
And feeling softly where it stuck,
So cunningly did beat about:
As with his mouth first fell to suck,
Then, with his Teeth, did get it out:
And after did such help apply,
That he was eased by and by.
And when the Lion felt such ease,
He reached him out a Princely Pawe:
As who should say to such as please,
I carry comfort in my Clawe:
And to requite his kindness then,
He led him forth out of his Den.
And brought him through a wilderness,
Into a high way, near a town:
When in a Princely gentleness,
Before his face, he sat him down:
And with his Pawe as Poets tell,
Did give a Kingly kind farewell.
Now shortly after it befell,
This Lion was by hunters caught:
And as the story seems to tell,
Unto an Emperor was brought:
And with great Joy and Iolitie,
Presented to his Majesty.
Which Lion kept, as others are,
That so are caught, and so are brought:
To seed upon such hungry fare,
As, tamnesse had his stomach taught:
Did live such Traiterous hearts to tear:
As to such death condemned were.
Whete Long this Lion had not been,
But that the Man that healed his wound:
Whose Eye had never Treason seen,
Nor Spirit such a thought had found:
Injuriously was apprehended,
And unto such a death condemned.
Who being brought unto the Den,
Whereas the Lion fiercely stood:
To tear in pieces, those ill men,
That fed him with their poisoned blood:
Before his face did kindly stand,
And pawde and lickt him on the hand.
The lookers on amazed to see,
The Lion thus the Man entreat:
Did wonder what the cause should be,
His love to him should be so great:
And to the Emperor did tell,
What all before their Eyes beefell.
Who coming thither to behold,
The truth of that he thus had heard:
And seeing still the prisoner hold,
His place with him: a great reward
Did promise him, the cause to show,
That made the Lion use him so.
When, of the Lion, taking leave,
With kissing of his Kingly foot:
To make his Majesty conceive,
The truth of all even from the root:
He ripped up all that he had done,
Whereby this Lions love beegunne.
The Emperor well pleased to hear,
How every point and part did grow:
Before his presence made appear,
The wretches that had wronged him so:
And threw them in his wrathful power,
Unto the Lion to deuower.
Who spared none but slew them all,
The Man was Royally rewarded:
The Note to this effect did fall,
That thanckfulnesse was much regarded:
The Lion still remained his friend,
And so the story made an end.
Oh Lord that ever Man should live,
In hate of loves forgetfulness:
And that a Lions love should give,
Such notes of Noble thanckfulnesse:
Which all in one do but conclude,
The Princely grace of Gratitude.
Then, show no Vipers venum vile,
To gnaw the bowels, that did breed thee:
Nor Cucko like, do love beguile,
To kill the Sparrow that did feed thee:
But Lionlike do thanckfull prove,
To him that has deserved thy love.
Remember what thou have Receu'd,
Of whom, why, how, and what, and where:
And, let it be, as well perceu'd,
Thou doste return thy kindness there:
That perfect thanckfulnesse may prove,
The Nature of the Lions love.
If that thou find thy Mistress kind,
Dishonor not her quality:
If that a noble friend thou find,
Skoffe not his liberality:
If mean men buie thy company,
Requit them not with villainy.
If that thy Father do commend thee,
Be thou not bad to show his blindness:
And if thy friend a saddell lend thee,
Steal not his Horse to quite his kindness:
But chiefly do not seek his blood,
Whose love has lived to do thee good.
Forget not God, that gave thee life,
Defame not him that is thy friend:
Be not unfaithful to thy wife,
And hold on honest to the end:
For when the Knaves be all discarded,
A poor small tromp may be regarded.
Do not with Connies undermine,
The Castle where thy Captain lives:
Nor Counterfeit with a Divine,
To cheat the Charity he gives:
Least when the world does see thy shame,
Both God and Man do hate thy name.
Leave not a Man to seek a beast,
A Monster is nor flesh, nor fish,
And where thou have receu'd a feast,
Return not home a poisoned dish:
Least they that find thy hellish Nature,
Do hold thee for a hateful Creature.
In sum, for all let this suffice,
To warn thee from Ingratitude:
Beehold it with your inward Eyes,
And let it not your soul delude:
For Truth does write that Time may reed,
It is a graft of Graceless seed.
Which grows but in a wicked ground,
And bears no fruit but Infamy:
And many times is blasted round,
With Hellish breath of Blasphemy:
Yet with ill humors moystned so,
As makes it wickedlie to grow.
But from this wicked Hellish thing,
That so infects the mind of Man:
And with a most infernal sting,
The woeful state of Life beegan:
And does abuse good Creatures thus,
Good Lord of such deliver us.
FINIS.

