THE SECOND PART of the true watch, CONTAINING THE perfect rule and sum of
Prayer: So plainly set down, that the weakest Christian, taking but the
least pains, may in a very short space, learn to pray of himself, with much
assurance and comfort: both to get strength to observe the Lords watch; and to
help to turn away, or at least find comfort in the evils that are to come.

Luke 21. 36. Watch and pray continually, that you may be accounted worthy to
escape al these things that shall come to pass, and that ye may stand before
the Son of Man. Esaias 62. 6. 7. Ye that are the Lords remembrancers, give him
no rest. AT LONDON Printed F. K. for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Church yard, at the sign of the Bul-head. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY singular good Lady, L. ELIZABETH Countess of
Huntingdon.
OUR Savior has not without good cause, ( Right Honorable) so often called on
us to watch and pray, Mark. 13. 33. and 14. 38.
joining these two together; and warning his Disciples in their greatest
dangers to watch and pray, that they might not fall into temptation; and also
charging us al to watch and pray continually, that we may be accounted worthy
to escape all the evils that shall come to pass, Luke 21. 36.
and to stand before the Son of man: because we can neither watch unless we
pray, to obtain strength from the Lord by it; nor pray with any comfort or
power unless we watch; nor ever get assurance to escape the evils that shall
come on the world, much less the temptations of Satan, and damnation of hell,
and appear with boldness before our Savior, unless we both watch and pray. In
regard whereof, first my duty to the Majesty of God, who prepared the watch
against so needful a time; and after so graciously caused my poor desire
therein to be accepted in his church, has encouraged me to endeavor to adioine
unto the watch, this short direction for prayer, as a second part and
inseperable co^panio^, for the further good of his servants, of who^ sundry
have desired it at my hands. And secondly, your Ladyships most favorable
acceptance of it, being dedicated unto my Honorable Lord, persuading me of
your Honors unfeigned desire both to observe the same, and walk in all the ways
of the Lord, have imboldened me to presume to offer this unto your Honorable
Ladyship: both to testify my dutiful and thankful affection to your Honor
also: and withal my fervent desire that you may both walk hand in hand all
your days, in the selfsame narrow way of eternal life; as being of the same
heart and holy accord; enabled thereunto by the spirit of the Lord, obtained by
continual and instant prayer. That so ye may shine as glorious lights together
in the earth, and after in the heavens above the brightness of the Sun for
evermore.

This shall be in the mean time your key into the palace of the Almighty,
Mat. 7. 7. 8 and 21. 22.
and to the presence chamber of his glorious Majesty: Psalm. 135. 18.
whereby you may be admitted at al times James 4. 8.
to most familiar conference; receive immediate answers from his Highness: Esaias
65. 24
obtain the riches and pleasures of his house, with the most precious jewels
of his treasury, to adorn you far more gloriously then all the pearl and
precious stones of all the Princes of the earth: all which shall utterly vanish
as the dimmest star, when the brightness of your glory shall appear. Genesis 32.
28. and 1. 2.
You shall as Israel prevail with your God; Hebr. 1. 14.
have his Angels and all the hoasts of heaven at your desire; James 47.
all being at a perpetual league with you: Ephesians. 6. 18.
vanquish the devils and put them to slight: Job 22. 27. 28. 29.
overthrow the plots of the wickedest, and be accepted for the Church: subdue
in your self each corruption: bring every thought into an holy obedience:
find the Comforter at hand in all your trials; the sweet voice of the Spirit,
making you with confidence to call him Abba, oh Father; Romans 8. 15. 16.
and giving you most strong assurance of a kingdom, and the life of the Angels
in the very terrors of death. And in a word, you shall thus most happily
redeem the days of our vanity, and treasure up in heaven abundantly against
the time of the perfect accomplishment of your eternal triumph and felicity.

Whereunto according to my perpetual bounden duty I shall always strive
during my life; both by my incessant prayer, and all other holy means, which
the Lord shall in mercy vouchsafe unto me his poor and unworthy servant.
And in this study toward your eternal glory and happiness I rest my self;
nothing doubting of your like honorable acceptance of this my poor endeavor,
howsoever penned in a most plain and familiar style; not to delight the
curious with an hours reading, (which I leave to others) but to help the
honest heart that is desirous to learn of our Savior how to pray, Luke 18. 1.
and con^inue therein in this life without fainting, Esaias 65. 13. 14.
to rejoice and sing with the Angels for ever after; when all others shall
weep and mourn, and never find any comfort or release.

Your Honors in the Lord ever to be commanded. JOHN BRINSLEY.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIan Reader, containing a large and plain direction
to all the simpler sort, how to use this aright; and an earnest exhortation to
all sorts to give themselves instantly to watching and prayer.
IT has bin wished (Christian and loving Reader) that as I have gone briefly
through the Commandments and Articles of the faith, to set down the true
watch; so I would take some pains in like manner to go through the Lords
Prayer, to set down the rule and sum of prayer, for the further perfecting
and our better performing the same watch. Whereupon notwithstanding my great
inabilitie, in respect of many of my brethren, yet considering the Lords former
mercy, who shows his power in weakness; and that by this motion of diverse, he
seems to require my poor labor in this also, I have attempted likewise to
make trial herein: the better to enable the simpler sort, and to stir up all
sorts to this holy duty of prayer; that we may obtain strength from the Lord
to keep his watch more faithfully, with innumerable other benefits procured by
the same. And the rather waying well into what dangerous times we are fallen;
wherein the greatest part (as it is much to be feared) in such a declining to
Atheism, and generally to extreme coldness or luke-warmenes, do seldom or
never pray privately; unless perhaps they use the Lords Prayer without
understanding. And of those who use to pray, some although they pray much, yet
they do it very superstitiously, to the provoking of the Lord, and hurt of
their own souls, instead of receiving any true comfort therein; as all our
popish sort do. Others have a desire to pray, but want ability or leisure; as
all our young and weak Christians. A third sort droope in their troubles,
temptations and fears, and are at their wits end, as Jacobs sons, not knowing
what way to take, and so continue fretting and vexing themselves, or attempt
unlawful means for their relief and comfort. A fourth are afraid to use the
Lords Prayer as a prayer, because they cannot comprehend the power and meaning
of it in so short a form. A fifth have gone forth with our Savior into the
garden, promising and beginning to watch and pray, which yet through our long
peace, ease and prosperity, are fallen a sleep. Anoother sort live in
monstrous sins, as in oppression and unmerciful dealing, deceit, secret
uncleanness and the like, without repentance; and yet imagine that they do
pray, that their prayers are accepted, and that they shall be heard in the day
when they cry, deceiving their own souls. A last sort, and those one only
and scarce to befound abide therein with our Savior, in watching, cries and
tears; wrestling and weeping as Jacob for the deadly malice and bloody
threats of Esau; and holding up their hands with Moses against Amaleck, and
also to pacify the Lords wrath, that it may not be powered out upon his people,
for all our grievous prouocations. To witness my love therefore yet further to
all these, and all other the Lords people, I have thought it my duty, to offer
this weak labor also unto the Church of God, commending the success unto him
who is only wise, and works by what instruments it pleases him, and above
all that we are able to conceive: yet not before I had first communicated it
unto some, much reverenced of all, for their learning and piety. Now I only
crave pardon to speak freely, to each of these sorts particularly.

And first to you that pray not at all, Harken you that pray not at all.
and consider well in what state you stand until you both can and use to pray;
that you are in state of damnation, having all things accursed unto you, and
working your perdition; and that you but only tarry for the execution of Gods
vengeance; and then if God open your eyes to see your selves and your danger, I
shall not need to call upon you: for, I know you will give no rest unto your
eyes, until ye both can and do practice this duty: nor that you will ever
let day pass hereafter, but reserve some part of it from your pleasures and
profits, to bestow on the Lord in prayer, at least a morning and an evening
sacrifice.

You that pray man unknown tongue.
be advised to spend no more labor in vain, deceiving your own souls: but
learn of your Lord and Savior to pray according to that heavenly pattern,
wherein all true wisdom and comfort are to be found, and which he has
prescribed unto you to use, if you be any of his disciples; warranting you,
that if you so ask you shall have; and then shall you find him to answer to
your hearts desire, and carry you into all his saving truth.

You that desire to pray.
I have chiefly intended your good, both to direct you for the things which
are principally to be begged of us, contained in the Lords prayer, the sum
whereof I have endeavored to set down plainly in these short forms, applying
them to the times; and also to help you for the manner of uttering your
requests; aiming at this specially, that by daily practice and meditation
herein, you may better attain to the true vndersta^nding of the Lords prayer,
and ever have it in fresh memory: which being the true perfection and pattern
of all holy prayer, does in the infinite wisdom of God comprehend whatsoever
we can ask. That so you having first gathered by wise observation in the
watch, a true catalogue of your own special sins and wants, together with
the maine sins and wants of the Church and Land, may be able of your selves
both for matter and words, to make a most holy confession of sins, and power
forth your supplications according to your necessities, with comfort and
assurance. I have set them down in two forms, both containing the same
matter, as they are one set against the other: the one more shortly, because of
our weariness in the best things, and chiefly in this duty of prayer,
(though of all other most necessary) the other somewhat more largely, for the
fuller understanding of it; and the heads of both in the margent, for the
better remembering thereof, or conceiving the like. Not intending to tie any
necessarily ever to use one of these, (though it were much better to use them
or the like, then not to pray at all, or to pray vnprofi^ablie) nor to use the
whole ever at large; although all the things therein comprised, are to be begged
daily for our selves, or our brethren; but to use those most which chiefly
concern our special necessities, and the necessities of the Church and our
Land; all which may be referred to one of these six petitions; As when we
would pray for the glory of God, or to kindle the zeal of it in our hearts,
or that he would show his glory in the preservation of our King and Realms,
to use the first. For the Church of God and perfect unity therein, and against
the proud enemies thereof; or to get more assurance that we are true members
of it, to use the second petition. The third for cheerefulnes in doing Gods
will or submission to the same. The fourth for dependence on God, for the
things of this life, and against all worldly cares. The fifth for forgiveness of
sins. The last against dangers or fear of temptation, or any evil whatsoever.
I have labored to set down the heads so plainly in the margent,
distinguishing them by figures, that every one that is desirous to learn,
having but the several parts of the Lords prayer in his mind may meditate of
them happily at his work, or as God gives any leisure; first marking how many
things are chiefly to be learned in the Preface; then in each petition; so in
the conclusion: and withal laboring to feel the need that he has of them,
our misery without them, and our happiness in inioying them; stirring up his
heart to a vehement desire of them: and then at time of prayer, to try how he
can pray of himself according to the same order; using in the mean time, the
help of one of the prayers set down, to get fit words; and withal a daily
meditation of his particular sins, (chiefly those following his nature and
course of life, with his principal wants, dangers, chastisements and mercies
received;) which will be the speediest teacher to the simplest to pray with true
feeling and power. If you would yet wish further direction for the general
confession of sin, you may use the first and second helps in the watch of
the miseries and hainousnes of sin, Edit. 2. p. 5. l. 9. If for an increase in
holiness, the third help of the blessings following a holy conversation, page..
11. If for true comfort and thanksgiving; you may use the help of the rules
for direction and comfort in our examination, page 13. All which with the
graces we have obtained in the Law, and promises we are assured of in the
Gospel, must needs cause the simplest to send forth most sweet prayers and
thankesgiuings unto the Lord. And so much for you that are desirous to pray.

Now to you that droope and faint under your several troubles and temptations,
You that faint in your troubles.
the Lord has here showed you plainly what you should do. Learn of Eliphas
in Job: Job 22. 21.
Acquaint your selves with your God, search your sins by the true trial; Make
peace with him; 26.
then you may lift up your face to God, make your prayer unto him, and he will
hear you: 28.
And his light shall shine upon your ways. When others are cast down you
shall be lift up, 29.
and God will save the humble person. Therefore continue in prayer, wrestling
with him, let him not go before he have blessed you, he will certainly do it:
Prove and see. Only, wait upon the Lord in the way of righteousness until he
send you comfort; using all holy and warrantable means to help herein, to
serve his divine and fatherly providence; but be afraid of so much as ever
thinking of any indirect course (as to do but the least evil to obtain never
so great a good) and much more of rebelling against the Lord or his anointed,
and that authority which he has set over you; lest above all other your
miseries, you bring upon you the terrors of an accusing conscience, Romans 13. 2.
and procure unto your selves most certain w^e and endless damnation. And
thus much also for you that faint in your trials. If you desire further advice,
look the watch, page 127.

You that are afraid to pray, using the You that are afraid to use the Lords
prayer.
because you cannot comprehend the meaning of it in so few words: and for that
the multitude abuse it; accept my earnest endeavor to knit our hearts in one,
both by assisting you, that you may have the sum of the chief heads ever in
fresh memory, as before your faces; and that those who abuse it without
understanding may learn a more holy use thereof. If yet you say, that you
cannot so comprehend the full meaning of it, and all things contained in it,
the like you may say (as I take it) of every several petition thereof, and so
we should use none of them in our prayers at all.

For you beloved that sometimes were You that are fallen asleep.
but now are cold and heavy, or altogether fallen asleep; I say not unto you
awake; Behold from whence you are fallen, and the danger wherein your selves
and the Church of God stand continually; seeing our experience teaches us,
that there is but a hair breadth between us and death; especially if ever the
Lord should leave his anointed, our Josiah, the breath of our nostrils, for one
minute, into the enemies hand. But only ^ put you in mind of the speech of our
Savior to his drowsy Disciples; Sleep hencef^^th and take your rest. I
beseech the Lord that I may never see that day. But what mean all our
prodigious signs? and above all the worst, that almost all are I desire to
awake you by often beating upon this point.
fallen asleep in the midst of such inueterate and deadly malice, with all
sorts of grievous sins, increased to the uttermost, to provoke the Lord: after
so many bloody practices, and terrible forewarnings given so often, and
graciously to prevent the fierce wrath of the Lord; with such sudden and
insolent over flewings; some of them in the midst and highest part of the
Land, where the people were altogether secure, as not having the least thought
of any danger by water; which together with the former, (principally of the
raging seas) all must needs acknowledge to be the finger of God. If our sins
had been so increased in the days of popish blindness, they had been nothing in
respect; but now in such a glorious light, wherein all of us have been conui^ced
so many ways; and subscribed in our hearts to the truth of God; and also do
generally still justify the good ways of God; and yet for most part set our
selves to trample all under our feet, hating or scorning all that so walk,
how gracious, dutiful and blameless soever they be; this must needs make our
sins immeasurable sinful, and above the sins of all other people.

And you that imagine you pray, and are accepted of the Lord, and yet live in
your unmerciful oppression, or any other such heinous sin; may it not well be
demanded of you, as the Lord does of the people before the Captivity: Ier. 7.
9. 10.
Will you swear, lie, dissemble, oppress, build your houses with blood,
commit adultery, drink the blood of souls and all other evil, and yet cry,
the temple of the Lord, we are the servants of the Lord, and call upon his
name? Will the Lord take a wicked man by the hand? Can the hypocrite call on
God in the day of his adversity? No, no, you deceive your own souls; until
you have made peace with God by unfeigned repentance, and by Zacheus restitution
peace with men. Nay although you commit not half these sins, Ezec. 18. 11.
but live in any one of them, or any other like, has not the Lord said you
shall surely die for it? What good then can your prayers do, when the Lord
turns away his ear (as from that which Prou. 28. 9.
is abominable,) Prou. 1. 24. 25. 26.
and will laugh at your destruction; because you would not first harken unto
him to turn from your evil ways, while he stretched forth his You that still
continue with our Savior.


Therefore unto you (my dear brethren of all sorts and degrees) who have
continued with our Savior hitherto, in watching, prayers and tears, and yet
at length begin with Moses to faint, with long holding up your hands, or are in
danger thereof; I unfeignedly desire of the Lord, that I may be as Aaron or
Hur, to help to confirm your weak hands and weary knees. Deuteronomy. 20. 1. 2. 3*
Let not your hearts faint. 2. Chr. 25* 2.
The Lord our God is with us while we are with him. Let us continue wrestling
and weeping, and become so much more instant and importunate as the sins and
dangers increase; urging him ever with his own glory, the pride of his
enemies, and their blasphemies, if ever they should prevail: together with his
gracious promises, love and former mercies, both to all his own people in all
ages, and especially toward our selves, declared hitherto in all our peace,
prosperity, miraculous deliverances, with continuance of the Gospel beyond
all expectation. Oh that all in the Land fearing the Lord, Three things wished
at the hands of all fearing God.
and the tokens of his displeasure, had hearts to perform but these three
duties to his heavenly Majesty.

Each to know and amend our special faults.
together with the sins and wants of the Church and Land, and so to consider
each night how we prevail in reforming our selves; and then frame our prayers
and thanksgiving accordingly: for each of our particular and principal sins,
are as Satan that stood at Iehosuahs right hand, that our prayers cannot go up
unto the Lord. And of all others, that every one whose conscience do accuse
them of cruelty toward their brethren, would take away that crying sin of
oppression, crying louder for vengeance then all the sins of the earth besides,
which brought the flood of waters, when the earth was filled with cruelty; and
brought in the fierce Babylonian, to oppress and spoil the great men in
Judea, and to make those goodly houses desolate, Esaias 5. 8. 9.
which had formerly been built by the oppressions and spoiling of the poor:
which makes the poor to sigh being weary of their lives, Psalm. 12. 5.
whose sighs the Lord must needs hear and avenge, Exodus 22. 22. 23.
when man regards them not: Deuteronomy. 9. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
which will so shut up the bowels of the Lords mercy and compassion, that he
will show us no more mercy, but, reject all our prayers, because we would have
no mercy of the poor; no, though Noah, Job and Daniel were amongst us; Ezekiel.
14. 14.
that they should but save their own souls; and so must needs bring a
fearful desolation upon our sinful nation, unless it be speedily
redressed: besides the blasphemies of the Idolatrous enemies of the Church of
God, and their braggs of their works of mercy and pity; thereby moving the
people to a discontentednes, and to dislike of the religion of the Lord, as
being the breeder and nourisher of all such cruel and unmerciful dealing;
though even in this same bloody sin, they be as deep as any other.

To learn of our Savior to pray.
I have this consident hope, that the weakest Christian amongst us having a
good heart, My hope of the simplest.
although he have never been able to utter his requests to God for himself or
Gods Church, Learn but the chief heads of the margents and try, making them
your morning meditation.
would in few weeks (but following this poor direction) learn to pray in
feeling with much comfort: and those who want good hearts, would by this
practice obtain them.

Thirdly, that we would all join to pray according to the two first
petitions, To pray according to the two first petitions chiefelie.
and against all the enemies of them; for then undoubtedly we should neither
need to fear the practices of the Popes Seminaries nor devils, The fruit
hereof.
nor yet all the enemies of the world; but only stand still with Moses, and see
what the Lord would still do for us. Happy shall they be, whom the Lord
singles out unto this work, to be if it were but as one of Gedeons three
hundred, for the perpetual preservation of the Church of God and their
country. But for the rest, although they escape the Bear, yet a Lion shall
tear them in pieces; for being delivered with Gods s^ruants from the temporal
judgment, the eternal wrath of God does certainly remain for them. Wherefore
give me leave to speak a little further A further pressing the exhortation to
prayer.
unto your souls in this important business, if I may awake but some of you.

You that spend your lives in pleasures, To them that live in pleasures.
hours in this heavenly work, to talk with God for the saving your own
souls and the people of the Lord? Oh that you knew the unspeakable sweetness
that herein you should find; whereas in your vain pleasures what can you
look for, but intolerable bitterness in the end? will not all these increase
the wrath against us? whereas the changing them into prayers, with fasting and
tears, would be as the sacrifice of Noah, wherein the Lord would certainly
smell a savor of rest; and as the repentance of Niniuie, that he that had
compassion on the poor ignorant heathen, would much more cause his face to
shine still more bright, upon us, whom he has vouchsafed so long the
profession of his name. Know it for certain, as the Lord has given any of you
mo of his outward blessings, and with them more time and means to serve him,
so he looks for so much more time at your hands to be spent in instant
prayer, then of any other of the earth, and so must your account be. Do not the
popish sort that live in your bosoms observe, besides your extreme
irreligiousnes, how you never use to pray privately, or with any devotion? and
are they not hereby hardened to like far better of their own blind
superstition; wherein they spend so much time in prayer? How will you answer
your God for the blood of so many souls as hereby perish? If you could be
persuaded (which you will one day feel, either in this life, or when it is
utterly too late) that these and all other your sins, wherein now is your
felicity, will be as so many swords to pierce your poor souls, and so many
devils to torment you eternally; and your repentance and death altogether
uncertain: you durst not let one minute pass, but would fall into bitter
mourning for all your sins, and for your time so ill spent, and be warned by
our Savior to begin to watch and pray, that you might escape all these
miseries, that will certainly come upon you.

You also that have filled your houses with their cries, the cry of your
sins is gone up into the heavens, that the Lord threatens to be avenged
forthwith. Let the counsel of Daniel to Nabuchadnezar be acceptable unto you,
Dan. 4. 24.
if you will escape the decree that is coming forth against you. Break off
your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by mercy toward the poor.
Esaias 1. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
Repent and make restitution while you may* Cease to do evil, learn to do
well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless and defend
the widow, as the Lord bids you by his Prophet. Then you may pray, and your
prayers shall be heard: though your sins were as crimson (that is, most bloody
sins) yet they shall be made white as snow. If ye consent and obey, ye shall
eat the good things of the Land: but if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall
be devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Your
oppressio^s which have pressed down the poor unto the ground, will one day
crush you into the bottom of hell, and will be a load heavier then the whole
earth upon you: that you would give all the world, if you had it, to be
disburdened of them; and at your death the judgment threatened unto Iehoiakim
shall surely light upon you, Ierem. 22. 18. 19.
that none shall lament or mourn for you, to say, ah Lord, ah his glory; but
all shall rejoice that the earth is eased of you; and your remembrance shall
remain most vile and loathsome to all posterity, as the memory of other
oppressors does before.

And for you that would never spare so much as one hour from your worldly To
the worldling.
when God opens your eyes to discern the true profit hereof, above the other,
and that hitherto you have been merely of the world, and utterly without God;
howsoever you look to your worldly business, you will look to this business
of the Lord, and set your selves times of prayer, which the gaining of the
world cannot make you to forget.

To all that cannot pray of themselves, nor regard to learn.
and make any request for this present life, for whatsoever you need; and yet
could never utter so much as one speech, no not in secret to your Father in
heaven, nor make any one supplication for any heavenly thing with feeling; how
can you think that ever you were touched with Zeal of Gods glory or his
kingdom? or how can you imagine that you can be the children of the heavenly
Father, or have any interest in the Lord and his kingdom; or be any thing but
mere worldlings, savoring only the world, and it alone your portion, having a
world of miseries and torment remaining for you for ever? Learn therefore to
pray above all; you will find this a treasure ten thousand times better then
all the wealth and pleasures of the world. For what you would have, this will
undoubtedly procure you, as far as shall be good; and whereas all the honors,
pleasures, riches and friends in the world, can never give you any true
contentme^t, nor add one minute unto your life; this only will fill your
hearts in heavenly contentation, with abundant joy and gladness, and make you
live and reign with Christ for ever in the heavens.

Now so many as acknowledge that thus indeed you ought both to watch To all
that acknowledge the truth and necessity hereof.
and yet but only give these the reading, without care to learn the practice
of them, or happily having some good motions or purposes, to put them forthwith
in practice, or it may be, have begun well, yet through your pleasures or
worldly business, or at least a carnal sloth and security leave them off,
and return to your old courses, be warned from the Lord; for this will
certainly be one further witness and conviction against you, then ever
formerly you received, and much better it had bin for you, that you had never
seen this way of life, thus plainly and easily set before you, and how you may
either help to preserve the whole, or at least escape your selves from the
evils to come; then after you have known it, and subscribed in your hearts to
the truth and necessity of it, and happily put your hands to the plow, to
look back again. Remember Lots wife; if you be out of Sodom hie for your
lives, until you be safe in Zoar; and being safe your selves, learn to be as
importunate with the Angel of the Covenant, when you but think of the sins of
the Land, as faithful Abraham was: comforting and encouraging your selves in
this, that you are not alone but many with you, and the Lord has yet his ten
righteous left, in all quarters some, that mourn and cry for all the
abominations. If in this attempt I have failed of that I desire, I humbly
crave pardon; and also that my good will may be accepted, in this endeavor
intended chiefly to help the simple. Vouchsafe me your better direction, and
I shall willingly follow it. My desire is to labor herein also to bring this
together with the watch to more perfection, if I shall find it accepted, and
that it may bring the least good to Gods Church; in which I desire not to live
one day longer, then I may be some way profitable. I have so often made
reference to the watch as to a maine ground of prayer, and for that this is as
a second part, and an inseperable companion thereof, Ephesians. 6. 13. 14. 18.
(as the Apostle makes them Ephesians. 6.) and also that I need To them that are
not persuaded of such present necessity of prayer, but think me over
fearful.
same things.

Concerning the present necessity hereof, (that I may neither seem over bold,
not yet to fearful of some grievous judgment without cause) I desire of all
sorts that you would examine it between the Lord and your own consciences (to
whom I appeal, and which I know will witness with me, when I shall stand
before the great tribunal) your consciences I say, not asleep in this deep
security, but either thoroughly awaked by the law, or as they were upon the
instant of the discovery of the gunpowder plot; or at any time before any of
our great deliverances, fully accomplished in the midst of our extreme
dangers. Remember but whether your hearts wear not then as my heart is now;
that if God had done with us as he then threatened, he had not been most
righteous, and we justly deserved it. Did not all hearts tremble in the
acknowledgement of the truth of his Majesty's sacred speech in the Parliament
house at that time? And who would not have confessed in any of these dangers,
that it had not been full time for each to have betaken himself to this
armor; to have run to God by instant supplication, and stood up in the breach;
and for every one to have learned to watch and pray? And must not our case
since be far more desperate, we having received thus our third most terrible
admonition, together with so many mercies still heaped upon us? Let us but
think what we have done since that time, to secure us from the final
execution of his vengeance: have we not most fearfully increased the
transgression, going still many degrees backwards, running from the Lord, and
suncken deeper in our rebellion, instead of turning to him according to our often
promises, and his infinite mercy? Besides our impudency in sinning; and our
eating up one another in every corner and degree, racking al things to the
uttermost farthing, and all commonly to maintain pride and all excess;
countenancing the lewdest in every place, disgracing and treading upon the
upright, that he that abstaines from evil makes himself a prey: Let but the
shamelesnes of that one sin of quaffing, condemned by the heathen, in Assuerus
Court in their greatest pomp and excess that ever we read of, and registered
in Gods book for that cause, be witness: although we cannot imagine that ever it
was practiced in half so odious a manner, as it is ordinarily with us every
where, in scorning the Lord to his face, and sacrificing to Satan. Our cloakes
of Ciuility will prove but Adams figleaues. Inquire of your own hearts, whether
this be not the general verdict of all whom God has touched, or who retain
any of their ancient feeling; yea whether the very blind may not grope it; that
there was never such a declining to all loosenes, open prophanenes and even
Atheism heard or read of in any age, where the Gospel was professed, nor that
sin was practiced with so high a hand. And then answer plainly, whether the
Lord may not justly get himself glory of us, in the declaration of his
justice, and the power of his wrath against our sins; seeing the riches of his
mercies in sparing and delivering us, have made us so far to exceed, as to
deny the tokens of his wrath, and despise him to the face; scorning and hating
nothing so much as a holy care to serve him according to his will. Or what
follows amongst men (eue^ the most equal and merciful) after the third
admonition at most, but the due execution and final expulsio^? And whether we
have not just cause to fear and seek to pacify his wrath? Or whether he may
not most righteouslie cause his own children to cry in feeling the miseries
which have not cried out in seeing the abominatio^s, and seeking to pacify
him: and also whether he may not justly pluck the world from us, which has so
bewitched and plucked us from him. And to conclude, whether it be not much
better that we each awake and meet him in time with entreaty of peace, because
he is so merciful, the^ to be awaked of him and cry day and night (as his
people in the Captivity) when it is too late, and he will show no mercy until
his work be accomplished upon us. Thus having presumed this second time, to
testify my heart to al, and my earnest desire of a heavenly union, and all
happiness to Gods Church, and this our nation, I take my leave; with my instant
prayers that al Gods servants may have their eyes open, to see the necessity
of this work above al other, and their hearts prepared to set themselves
forthwith hereunto, (which has made me the longer in persuading unto it.) The
whole success I leave to his heavenly Majesty, whose this work is, and who
has long called us al unto the practice of it, looking and wondering that so
few have come to help, Esaias 6. 3. 5.
and whose only arm has helped us hitherto Ezekiel. 22. 30*
and will for ever, Judge. 5. 23.
if we but only cry to him.

THREE PRINCIPAL points to be first learned and felt of every poor Christian,
that intends to help in this work of prayer; the sum where of being in our
hearts, will be as a continual spur and preparatiue to prayer, and as the
life and soul thereof. 1. The necessity of prayer. 2. The special properties
of them that can pray. 3. The power of prayer rightly performed.

The necessity of prayer.
1 WE can never come to any assurance that we are in the favor of God, Without
this co^sta^t practice, we can neither be assured that we are Gods children,
nor that we have right to any creature.
or his children, before we make conscience to practice this duty daily: for
the spirit of prayer, (which makes us to pray with sighs and groans) is the
earnest and seal of our adoption; and is given unto us so soon as ever Christ
is made ours by faith; and therefore in the mean time we stand in state Romans
8. 15. 16.
of damnation, Gal. 4. 6.
and are thieves and usurpers of that which we have.

2 We can have no comfort, But have all things work to our damnation.
that the things which we enjoy shall be to our salvation; but to increase and
seal up our condemnation; seeing they are only sanctified by the word and
prayer; 1. Tim. 4. 5.
and for that we receive them without giving the Lord his due glory. Prou. 16.
4.


3 We cannot look to obtain any one thing as a blessing, We cannot look to
obtain any thing as a blessing, nor turn away any evil.
of al those things which our Savior has taught us to pray for, nor to turn
away any one evil but by prayer: for God has ordained this to be the only
hand hereunto, Mat. 7. 7.
saying, Iam. 4. 2. 3.
Ask and ye shall have.

4 Seeing every worldling can speak to his friend, Nor be any thing but mere
worldlings, feeling no want, nor able to speak of any thing else.
for worldly things; and every child can and uses to run to his loving father
making his moan and requests for whatsoever he would have; how can we imagine
that God is our heavenly and tender Father, or we any thing but merely
earth-wormes and worldlings, Romans 8. 5.
until we use to run unto him daily to beg of him heavenly things, which we
continually and principally stand in need of.

5 If we will be saved we must pray, Otherwise we cannot be saved.
seeing our Lord and Savior, (who will save only those that obey him, and
destroy all the rest,) has so often charged us to pray, and to pray continually,
as the importunate widow; teaching us also, Luke 18. 1.
so plainly how to pray; Matthew. 6. 9.
leading us by the hand, if we will be guided by him; and made us such gracious
promises if we will pray; Psalm. 14. 4.
and contrarily describing the accursed Atheists to be such as call not upon
his name. Ier. 10. 25.


6 Lastly, The Lord calls us al to step into the breach with Moses.
the Lord our merciful God, at this time especially calls us all that are in any
favor with his Majesty, to step up into the breach to stay his hand for
being avenged, Ezec. 22. 30
for the general ouerflow of iniquity in all estates; concerning which all
natural men could say long ago, that God must needs bring some terrible
plague upon our nation, without speedy repentance; which indeed he had done
sundry times since, (but At the intended invasion.
thrice above all other, never to be forgotten) had not his hand been
wonderfully stayed: and we notwithstanding since instead of repenting, The
death of Q. Elizabeth.
have grown much worse in every kind of iniquity, being now become not only
secure, The gunpowder plot.
but also hardened in all our evil courses, to make but a sport of sin, and a
scorn of al those who make any conscience to walk in the ways of the Lord; so
that hereby our sin must needs be increased to the uttermost, and much more
considering the Lords most miraculous deliverances of us; his continual
threatenings and admonitions by his servants proclayming his wrath; warnings
from heaven and earth; a continued pestilence for so many years together,
visiting every corner of our Land; the raging of the winds and waters, to such
a terror and desolation: the sword set to our very hearts; the grave prepared
for us by our enemies, yet we delivered, and sundry of them thrown in as our
ransom. Now after all this, and that in the clear light of the Gospel, with
innumerable mercies besides, and sundry promises of our amendment we waxing
still worse and worse, and now without all hope of recovery; how can it be but
the Lord must needs wax weary with forbearing; or what comfort can be left
us but only the instant prayers of Gods faithful servants, Read with
reverence the Prophet Jeremy, with the rest who lived hard before the
captivity even in Iosiahs days, and compare times with times, and it will
make us cry insta^tly to God, day and night.
either to stay his hand still, or to secure us to be hid in the evil day? If
all this cannot awake us, yet this one thing well considered, will undoubtedly
rouse us, as the certainest evidence of vengeance approaching, that those
enemies by who^ he has so often threatened us to avenge his quarrel, and whom we
al know by long experience to thirst most greedily after our blood, are again
increased in number, pride and malice, after the time that we had thought them
quashed for ever rising, or once daring to show their faces again: that
knowing their holy father, the bloody positions, Machiauellian plots and
practices of their cursed religion in all countries, we must needs see our
selves in imminent danger of utter destruction every hour, more then that
mighty arm shall still protect us, which we see to be justly stretched out
against us for our sins, and the power of prayer which hitherto has stayed
it, to be fearfully abated.

THE SPECIAL PROperties of them that can pray: (for as Iosuah told the people
they could not serve the Lord, Ios. 24. 19.
so every one cannot pray) Prou. 28. 9.
and these evidently grounded out of the Lords Prayer.
1 WE must be the children of GOD, We must be children of childlike
affections toward our heavenly Father, and able to call him Father.
borne anew by his Word and Spirit, having some assurance of his favor, and a
desire to grow therein; carrying always childlike affections to his Majesty:
for we must come to him as to our dear Father, and be able by the Spirit of
adoption to call him Abba, oh Father.

2 We must ever come unto our Father only through his beloved Son, Romans 8.
15.
by whom we are reconciled, Coming in faith only in Christ and in a true sense
of our own unworthiness.
made his children, and kept in his favor; and withal in a true sense of our
unworthiness to be called his children, or make any request unto him: and so we
must make our petitions only in the name of this our Lord and Savior, in whom
alone our Father is well pleased: begging in faith (that is) in full assurance
to be heard for Christ's merit, in whatsoever we request of our tender Father.

3 We must come in all humility before his heavenly Majesty, In all
humility, being but dust and ashes; yet with our hearts lift up to heaven.
remembering we are but dust and ashes; yet full of heavenly affections; able to
lift up our hearts unto him, and to be only conversant with him in the heavens
for the time of prayer principally; having all our thoughts separated from the
earth, and all earthly cogitations; because we speak to our Father which is in
heaven.

4 We must be brethren of brotherly and tender hearts toward all the children
of our heavenly father, We must be brethren tenderly affected toward all the
children of our heavenly Father.
(that is, all those who soundly profess the Gospel of Christ in word and
conversation) because our heavenly Father will have us hereby both to declare
and increase our love; praying all one for another, and in the name of all, as
dear brethren and feeling members; crying earnestly for all: Our Father.

5 We must be such as are zealous for the glory of our heavenly Father; Zealous
of our Fathers glory above all things in the wo^ld.
desirous both to behold his glory, shining brightly in all his works, and
chiefly in his heavenly word; and laboring to draw all others to a like
reverend admiration thereof; making this the end of all our endeavors, that our
heavenly Father may be honored; and casting all our thoughts which way we may
gain him any glory; more afraid of dishonoring him any way, or offending him,
but even in our thoughts, then any evil that can befall us in the world; and
such as use to mourn for all the dishonors done unto God his heavenly
Majesty; that we may ever both truly begin and end our prayers with this
fervent desire; That his great name may be glorified, because all kingdom,
Seeking first the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof.
power and glory are only his for ever.

6 Such as first seek his kingdom and the righteousness of it; that is, the
inlargeme^t of the Church wherein Christ reigns and is magnified, and so the
spreading of his true religion, and of all the means belonging to the
conversion and saving of his elect; with the utter overthrow of all false
religion and ungodliness, whereby Satan and Antichrist do reign, using all
diligence for saving ourselves and others:) that being here partakers of his
kingdom of grace, we may ever after reign with him in glory: and also such
as long and wait for the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Otherwise how can we pray in truth: Let thy kingdom come?

7 We must be of an holy conversation, Making conscience of every tittle of
the will and word of the Lord.
as the loyal subjects of this heavenly kingdom; striving to know the will of
our heavenly Father, in all things which concern us; and such as make
conscience of every tittle of his word, as Noah and Moses: who in all things as
the Lord bad them, so did they: able to say as David, I am here Lord to do thy
will, I am desirous to do it as cheerfully as the Angels in heaven; ready
with Abraham to leave all at the Lords commandment, and offer up whatsoever is
dearest unto us in the world; and to receive any trial with patience and
thankfulness, and with Paul, not only ready to be bound, but to die at
Jerusalem for the name of Jesus. Or else we can never pray in sincerity, Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

8 Such also as labor to depend wholly upon the Lords fatherly providence,
Laboring to depend wholly upon the Lords providence and protection.
and watchful protection, for this life, and all the comforts of it; in a
feeling of our own natural frailty, that if he but take away our breath we
are gone, and cannot of our selves continue one minute; and withal, that we
are neither worthy of, nor able of our selves to get the least crumme of
bread, much less to cause it to do us any good; and therefore such as use to
beg it every day from our heavenly Father, and that as well for the poor as
for our selves, being lively touched with their miseries; desirous to employ
that which he bestows upon us, to his glory and the good of his children;
laboring (as Jacob and Paul) if we have but bread to be therewith content:
such as neither trust in the abundance of means, nor faint in the want of
them; but only use all means appointed to serve his divine and fatherly
providence, casting all the care for the success upon him alone, being assured
that he cannot fail us, nor forsake us of that that shall be best for us; (so
far as may stand with his own glory and the good of us his people) at least
so long as we endeavor to honor him, walking as his obedient children: without
this we can never pray aright; Give us this day our daily bread.

9 We must be such as use to travel under the burden of all our sins,
Traveling under the burden of our sins.
especially presumptuous and scandalous; in the sense both of the multitude and
haynousnes of them, and also our misery by them, until we be thoroughly washed
from the^ in the blood of Jesus Christ; as having no other means of delivery
or satisfaction: feeling with Paul the corruption of our nature, and our daily
infirmities to be as a death unto us; and hereupon using to cry instantly in
the ears of the Lord: Forgive us our trespasses; never giving him over until
we obtain this assurance.

10 We must be void of malice, Void of malice, using to pray for our enemies.
and such as use to pray for our very enemies; and are ready to do them any
kindness, whereby to gain them to Christ, or leave them more without excuse;
because then we have this assurance to be forgiven, and not else; neither can
we say in truth Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us: but pray for a curse upon our selves.

11 Having a continual sense of the danger we stand in, Fearing always, and
watching, lest we should fall into temptation, so suspecting all our ways.
of falling into some sin every hour, to the dishonor of our heavenly
Father, and provoking his displeasure, with innumerable evils following
thereupon; through the deadly malice and subtlety of Satan, who has the
advantage of our corrupt nature, and all things in the world to beguile us:
fearing always lest for our sins the Lord should leave us in his hand; and
thereupon such as are careful to keep our ranks, and the watch of the Lord.
That we may continually pray in feeling, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil.

12 Carrying always a reverent and thankful acknowledgement of his absolute
kingdom, Acknowledging ever his sovereignty, and how he disposes al for his
own glory, and the good of his elect.
power and sovereignty over all creatures, that he ouerrules both the rage of
men and devils, and all other things in heaven and earth, disposing all to his
own glory, and the salvation of his obedient subjects and children; that we
may be ever able to sound forth with thankfulness, For thine is the kingdom,
power and glory for ever and ever.

13 Lastly we must be such true believers, Able in true faith with
tha^kfulnes to say Amen.
as being assured that he will grant all that we beg, as shall be most for
his own glory, and the greatest good of his elect, do rest our selves wholly
upon his fatherly love, being able in thankfulness ever to say: Amen; Lord let
it be so as we do assure our hearts it shall be.

THE POWER OF true Prayer.
1 WHen we are such sound Christians, To give us assurance of Gods favor.
and use to pray in this manner, we shall have a certain assurance that we
are Gods children, Romans 10. 12.
and in his favor, Romans 8. 15. 16. 26.
and such as shall be saved undoubtedly: for this is the Lords seal and the
earnest of our inheritance. 2 Cor. 1. 22.


2 We shall have a comfortable and sanctified use of all things we enjoy. To
have all things sanctified unto us.
1. Tim. 4. 5.

3 We shall be sure to obtain whatsoever he has taught us to pray for; To
obtain whatsoever we so pray for.
so far as shall be for his own glory and our good; for the very form of
prayer contains a most gracious promise; that so asking we shall obtain:
otherwise our Savior would never have taught us to pray so; assuring us that
if we ask in faith we shall have, and that according to our faith, it shall
be done unto us.

4 The seruent prayers of a few of us, For the turning away any judgment from
our Land, or procuring any blessing.
being such as are described, shall do more for turning away any judgment
from the Church; discovering and overthrowing the deepest plots of Gods
enemies, or for procuring any blessing to our Land, then many of our valiantest
soldiers and wisest politicians; or then many thousands of our enemies, and
hundred thousands of the wicked joining with them to provoke the Lord by their
sins, can do to bring a judgment upon us. For we know how many times that
one Moses stayed the Lords hand, that he could not destroy his people; and also
that Eliah was the Chariots and horsemen of Israel; yet were they men subject
to like passions that we are: for our God is still the same of infinite
compassion; and therefore look what Gods servants have been formerly able to
do by their prayers, the same shall we do still, so far as shall be
necessary, if we strive to walk in their steps. So that we have no cause to
fear, since one of them alone could so far prevail with the Lord, but that
many of us joining as an a mie to compass the Lord about with our prayers and
tears, may much more overcome his heavenly Majesty, if our hearts and hands
be steadie with Moses; especially he having showed such tokens of his
compassion and love toward his chosen flock amongst us, as never in any age
more: Ezech. 22. 30.
and now calling us also to stand up in the breach, Job 22. 30.
having assured us that the innocent shall deliver the Island. Therefore all of
us that fear the Lord, must cheerfully each encourage one another to this
duty, Deuteronomy. 20. 1. 3. 4.
confirming the wea^^e hands and weary knees; Heb. 12. 12.
being certainly assured of this at least, that though the Lords decree should
be gone forth against us for all our exceeding prouocations, and that he
would not spare the whole at our prayers, (whereof notwithstanding we may have
gracious hope to the contrary, if we can but find our hearts fervently set to
this duty of prayer) yet we shall save our own souls, Ezekiel. 14. 14.
and the Lord will be unto us as a sanctuary, whereas otherwise, if such a
judgment come upon us, as has been so often almost fully executed, (which the
Lord in mercy still save us from) we are all accessory to it, who have not
sought in time to turn it away, and accursed with Meroz, Judge. 5. 23.
because we came not to help the Lord against the mighty: and so shall find
nothing but fear and an evil conscience to chase us: Prou. 28. 1.
whereas on the contrary we shall be strong and courageous as Lions
whatsoever come to pass; knowing that even in the midst of the fire there he
will be with us, Esaias 43. 1. 2. 3.
that the flame shall not so much as kindle on us (more then he will dispose to
his own exceeding glory and our endless comfort) and also in the floods that
they do not ouerwhelme us.

A MOST Heavenly and sure rule according to the whole Lords Prayer in order:
whereby we may grow to strong assurance and much power in Prayer.
Live always as an obedient child, in the eye of thy heavenly Father; humbled
in the reverence of his most holy and glorious Majesty, and in the sense of
thine own vileness and unworthiness to be called his child; longing until he
take thee unto himself into the heavens; studying what way thou may Let the
desire of the two first petitions be ever in thy heart, and beg al other things
for them only as being the end of all, then shall thou be each way most
blessed, and ask what thou will so, and thou shall receive it.
honor him most in the mean time: and that first by yielding all obedience to
the laws of his kingdom, and gayning more thereunto: attending continually
what his divine will and pleasure is concerning thee, chiefly in thy
particular calling, and the charge committed unto thee: and then thou shall
surely find him God all-sufficient unto thee, more tender over thee then ever
was father or mother, performing unto thee all his promises according to all
thy petitions, for this and for the better life; and sealing unto thee a
plentiful assurance of the free pardon of all thy sins in the blood of his
Son Jesus Christ; and that he will save thee from the tempter, and all evil
that they shall not hurt thee: That thou shall be able with all joy and
thankfulness to acknowledge upon happy experience, his absolute kingdom and
power, and so to give him continually with all his holy Angels, all glory,
praise and dominion, resting thy self most fully satisfied in his only love
and favor for ever and ever.

THE SVMME OF all in other words, most plainly; for the understanding of the
simplest.
Observe diligently the Watch of the Lord; growing daily in the practice of
every Commandment, and faith in all his promises: and keep in thy heart a
Catalogue or short sum of thine own chief sins, wants and infirmities,
together with the maine sins and wants of the Land, and tokens of the Lords
wrath due thereunto (gathered by wise observation according to the rule of the
Watch) and withal set before thee the infiniteness of the Lords love and
compassion toward his, with his special favors toward thy self: and then
pray fervently in faith to thy heavenly Father, looking steadfastly at Jesus
Christ thy Savior; crying only in zeal for his glory and kingdom; and thou
shall be able to pierce the heavens; to prevail with God as Jacob, and much
more with men; and find by good experience the truth of that promise, Esaias 65.
24.
that before thou call God will answer; and whilst thou speak he will
hear.

THE PERFECT RVLE AND SVMME of Prayer.
Our Father] Oh Lord most holy and glorious, terrible to all the wicked, but
most gracious and full of compassion toward all that desire to obey al thy
Commandments: we that are but dust and ashes, children of wrath by nature,
and most rebellious of all thy creaturs, dare not of our selves once lift up
our eyes to heaven.

Father.] Yet nevertheless seeing it has pleased thee to receive us for thine
own children by grace, through thy Son Jesus Christ, by who^ thou have purchased
and ordained us to eternal glory, and given him to be our mediator; we come
before thee, (oh Father) in his name; magnifying thee for this favor, being
the greatest happiness that ever could befall us.

Increase in us daily this assurance, by making us to grow in repentance and
faith; and framing us to the image of thy Son, in all knowledge* love and
obedience; wholly changing and renewing us, that we may be no longer
strangers from thee, but may delight to be ever in thy presence, hearing thy
voice or speaking to thee in prayer, crying, Oh Father.

Our] And that it may be more evident that thou art our Father indeed, give
us grace to love thy children above all other for thy sake: and each so much
more, as they more excel in virtue, and are more dear unto thee, that we may
daily remember them in all our prayers, saying; Our Father: And delight in their
companies only, as those with whom we shall live for ever. Knit our hearts in
brotherly love, that we may tenderly comfort and edify one another, afraid
of grieuing or hindering, and much more of turning any one out of the way of
life.

Let our holy agreement in all the substance of thy truth, with our joint
profession to walk together in the path of life, be of more force to unite us,
then all the trash of the world, or cunning of Satan to divide us.

Are we not all that so walk, thine own children, and coheires of thy
kingdom; notwithstanding all our imperfections and some less diversities which
must acco^panie us while we are in the earth.

Co^fou^d therefore all devices working this division, to thy dishonor and
rejoicing to our enemies, who thus conspire to work our shame and ruin, if it
were possible.

Let us never rest until we find these hearty affections toward al thy
children, that hereby we may know certainly that we are translated from death
to life, when we can pray, Our father.

Which art in heauen*] And whereas thou raignest in the heavens where thou
have provided throns for us, humble us still more, in the sense of thy greatness;
seeing we are but poor worms crawling in sin.

And yet so lift up our hearts unto thee, yt we may be with thee, esspecially
in all our prayers; lo^ging to behold thee face to face: and let our
conversation be so heavenly, that the world may see that we are thy heavenly
children traveling toward thee, and our selves may grow up to a full
assurance that heaven is ours, reserved by our Lord and Savior for us, and all
creatures ever to do us good.

Hallowed] And seeing thou have vouchsafed us only this honor, to be the
heirs of thy kingdom, whereas thou might justly have left us with the
wicked to everlasting perdition.

Give us grace ever to testify our thankfulness, seeking in and above al
things to honor thee. Open our eyes to behold thy power, wisdom and goodness
shining in all thy works, and much more in thy heavenly word chiefly in all
thy judgments upon thine enemies, and mercies toward thy children, still
showed every day.

Make us able to consider of, and set forth the praises belonging to thee
therein, both in word and deed; yt by us thy great name may be known in all
the world. Above all in that wherein thou have bin magnified before our eyes,
in showing thy fatherly care for us, and wrath against our enemies: how for
dishonoring thee in abusing thy Gospel, and al thy blessings bestowed on us
above all people; thou have not only corrected us tenderly with thy milder
rods, but have also sundry times raised up most cruel enemies, threatening not
only to take away the Gospel, but our utter destruction also, and brought
them to the very execution of it, because we would not hearken and turn unto
thee according to thy mercies: yet ever when we have cried unto thee, thou have
plucked the^ back in the instant, and taken vengeance for us: so as we have
often thought yt they durst never have attempted the like again: and so, as if
the most barbarous nations had received but the least of our deliverances with
our means they would have repented long ago, as we have often promised.

Oh gracious Father make us ever to acknowledge this, and to see that thy anger
is again more fearfully kindled, for that these our enemies, (as our sins)
do still increase in number and malice, without hope of leaving off their
practices, until they have wrought either ours or their own endless ruin.

Good Father, let this token of thy wrath, (together with the arming of the
dumb creatures, both winds and waters so often threatening our destruction, for
the ouerflow of all iniquity in every place) prevail so mightily with us,
that we may all presently seek to appease thine anger. Did thou not before
ye bloody and fiery conspiracy warn us all from heaven (as thou did
Jerusalem) enclosing us in a fiery tent with pillars of darkness, of fire and
blood (foreshewing us as by yt which followed we may justly deem) yt bloody
destruction which was toward us?

Did not many of our hearts tremble at that sight, causing us to seek more
earnestly to turn away the future evils?

And feared we without cause? Had it not bin effected indeed, and we all
enclosed in the most dark, fiery and bloody tent that ever ye world heard of;
if you had not heard the prayers of thy poor children, in the very instant,
and remembered us in mercy?

And shall we remain senseless still in the midst of the tokens of thy
wrath, making the whole land to tremble at the report of the^? Save us from
that the heauiest judgment that ever fell upon the heart of man, whereby not
only the Egyptia^s, but also thine own people were prepared for their final
desolatio^, so often threatened by our Savior, that by seeing we should see and
not perceive, but have our hearts more full (by all ye means used for our
repentance) lest we should convert and be spared.

Open our eyes to see our fearful estate, and how far this judgment has
seized on us already. Convert us and we shall be converted, and not harden our
selves against the tokens of thy wrath, thy word and servants.

Oh leave us not unto the^ whose mercies are cruelty, to cause them to
blaspheme, but let us still fall into thy hands who pitiest us when thou
smitest us, and in wrath remembrest mercy.

Though our sins be heinous to anger thee, yet let the cry of thy servants
still prevail.

Have thou not said it, that the innocent shall deliver the Island? and do
thou not call us to stand up in ye breach, because thou would not destroy us?
Have thou not been wont to pardon whole nations at the prayers of a few of thy
servants?

Therefore we thy remembra^cers (knowing that thou art still the same, as to
thy servants in former time, and we as dear unto thee; and that thou can
deny us nothing which we beg in thy Sons name, according to thy will, for
our good) do humbly entreat thee, to glorify thy mercy in pardoning our
sin, and turning us speedily unto thee; but make thine enemies to feel thy
hand, and those chiefly, who have as Balaam caused us to provoke thee so
grievously, that we have been so often in so fearful danger, by our
backslidings and rebellio^s.

Get thy self glory upon the^ as upon Pharaoh, that when thou have delivered
us and overthrown the^, as fundrie times thou have begun, we may sing
praises, and ever keep a remembrance of thy mercy.

Let us be afraid of obscuring any part of thy glory; and much more of
seeking our own honor, or taking any part of thine honor to our selves, being
proud of thy gifts. But above all, keep us from dishonoring thee, by our
sinful lives amongst the wicked, to cause them to blaspheme.

Let this be our honor to honor thee, and contrarily our greatest dishonor.

Stre^gthen us to walk so uprightly, that others seeing our good works, may
glorify thee, and we may wear the reproach of the wicked as a crown.

So kindle the zeal of thy glory in our hearts, that we may be grieved
continually for all the dishonors done unto thee. And that insteede of being
ashamed of thee, or any part of thy truth, we may ever profess it with all
holy wisdom, and boldness as our chiefest glory; that our Savior may
acknowledge us before thee in the presence of men and Angels, to be the heirs
of thy kingdom; when he will deny all other, as those whom he never knew, to
their endless confusion.

Thy kingdom come]

And whereas thou (oh Father) art chiefly glorified in the increase of thine
own people which obey thy word, amongst whom only thou raignest, and
especially when thou causest thy religion and people to prosper against all
the power of hell: Grant thy Gospel whereby thou conquerest and rulest, to be
sincerely preached every where, and make it so powerful that it may destroy
the kingdom of Satan and Antichrist; and gather all thine unto thee, that so
thou may hasten thy glorious kingdom.

And to this end, raise up Kings and Queens to nourish us with the word of
life, and preserve us from the rage of all our cruel enemies, especially that
bloody Antichrist: and for those that are such already, make the^ ten times
more, accounting this their greatest dignity to have the bringing up of ye
heirs of thy kingdom committed unto them.

And as it has pleased thee to settle this kingdom in so great peace amongst
us, delivering us from that blood thirsty whore of Babylon, and to continue
the same beyond all former expectation under our dread Sovereign, so indue him
with such an abu^dant portion of thy Spirit, according to that high dignity
laid upon him; and with such tender affections toward thy children, that in
token of true thankfulness for all his dominions, and chiefelie the wonderful
deliverances of his Majesty and his, (and of all us thy people principally by
him) he may set himself with Iehosaphat and Ezechiah, and other worthy Kings
of Judah, to enlarge thy king dome, and promote thy pure religion, destroying al
ungodliness; and to procure each way the good of us thy poor children committed
to him; that al we being still more loyally affected, as toward our most
happy nursing father under thee, and as all the good people were toward David,
may ever sound forth thy praises for him, and pray earnestly for his
preservation, and of our Queen with all their royal progeny, that his
kingdom may be established until Christ shall come, to resign up this
earthly scepter and reign with thee eternally.

Give all our Rulers ye same heart, yt they may be as the hands of thine
anointed in every place, for this purpose.

And as thou have ordained chiefly to finish thy kingdom by the preaching of
thy Gospel, which thou did dest first spread by thy holy Apostles subduing the
world thereby, so we pray thee to send forth such powerful preachers into
every congregation, which may not cease to admonish every one with tears:
framing themselves by all holy means to win all; afraid of the least offense,
which might hinder the salvation of any one. Awaken at length all sorts of
vnco^scionable ministers, dru^ke^ with ye blood of their people; that
remembering the cry of Abels blood, they may be think themselves in time what
to answer when Christ shall come: and either give the^ repentance and care for
their peoples salvation, or free them from the^, and commit the^ to such by
who^ they may be brought into obedience to the laws of thy kingdom; that
thou alone may reign as Lord amongst them, Antichrist being cast out
utterly, with all things whereby he has kept any of thy people under his
slavery, or seeks to pull them into Babylon.

Deface (oh Lord) all the prints of his Idolatry, and cut off all hopes of
ever building up Babel again.

And seeing the chief glory and safety of thy kingdom, is in the unity of
thy subjects; take away, good Lord, all causes of contentions. Confound all the
plots of cursed Balaam, who knowing that no kingdom divided can stand, seeks
to rend thy Church in pieces, the easier to prevail against it, when thou art
also departed from it; as ever Satan has been wont. Grant yt we may buy this
peace, with the loss of all, except thy favor, that al sorts seeing our holy
agreement, may join themselves unto us, and come into the bosom of thy
Church. And moreover, since thou will have every one to help to build up thy
kingdom, and to save others by bringing them thereunto, grant us more care,
not only for our charges committed to us; but for every one tied unto us by
any special bond that we may take every first occasion for gaining them unto
thee, by all holy means.

Let us not rest before they be safe. And that we may prevail the more, give
us (oh Lord) a sweet feeling what a blessed thing it is to be of thy kingdom,
and partakers of thy glory: even to be Kings and Priests unto thee; and what
happiness there is in living such a holy conversation, and how wretched the
state of all other people is, being bo^dslaues of Saran, and reserved for hell.

Grant us to live in all things, as thy obedient subjects, that we may pass
from this kingdom of grace into thy glorious kingdom.

Make us to fear the occasions of backsliding, that we never so much as once
look back unto the world, but hie fast toward heaven where our Savior keeps
possession for us. Destroy in us all our corruption, whereby Satan preuailes
against us. Haste^ that day when the difference shall appear between us and
the^ that fear thee not, when we shall reign with thee for ever.

And because we now live by faith, and not by sight, the wicked often
flourishing when thy children are afflicted: Oh Lord increase our faith in all
thy sweet promises, yt through the comfort of it, and power of godliness, we
may grow up to a full assurance, that we are the true heirs of thy kingdom
and overcome all hindrances, that being faithful to the death, we may have the
crown of life. Fill our hearts with such peace and joy, with all the fruits of
righteousness, that all may see to what kingdom we belong, and we feeling ye
beginning of it here, may enter into thy heavenly joy. Thy will be etc.] And
that our childlike affections, with our zeal and tha^kfulnesse, may more
appear to all ye world; quicken us to do thy heavenly will, chiefelie wherein
thou have showed us how thou will have us walk, that we may do it
cheerefullie, as the Angels.

Accept our will for the deed. Let it be our chief desire to stand in thy
presence, to enquire by all holy means what thy divine pleasure is: and ever
so soon as thou have made it known unto us, give us David's Echo, to say I am
here Lord to do thy will, thy law is within my heart.

And whereas it is thy decree, that through many troubles we must enter into
thy kingdom; (good Father) subdue our corrupt wills to thy holy will, that
hu^bling our selves under thy hand, we may try and reform our ways
immediately, without once whispering against thee: knowing yt in love thou so
workest our good in all our trials, and wilt give us a happy issue in thy due
time.

And if it shall be thy good pleasure to call us to suffer for thy name; keep
us that we may suffer as thine own children for righteousness, and then to take
up our crosses with thankfulness, reioicing that thou countest us worthy that
honor, looking steadfastly at our Lord and Savior, who having* first trodden yt
way before us, sits for ever in glory at thy right hand. But keep us that we
never do any thing against thy revealed will, to procure thereby never so great
a good; seeing thou can and wilt effect whatsoever is best without our sin.
That we may ever truly pray; Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

Give us this day etc.]

And thou (oh dear Father) when we are such; that ye world may see thy tender
care over us, and how thou fulfillest thy promises unto us, and that we may
the better attend the seeking of thy glory and good pleasure; vouchsafe us the
co^forts of this present life. Show us thy love in providing for us in due
time. Direct us to use all painfulnes and holy wisdom, chiefly in our
particular calling, with all the means to serve thy providence: avoiding
whatsoever may hinder our comfort, or hurt our estate. Grant us to hide our
selus under thy watchful protection, knowing that our times are in thy hand, to
continue as pleases thee; and to consider that of our selves, we cannot
prolong our lives one minute, nor have any power to get one morsel of bread,
unless thou both show us the means, assist us to use the^, and give a
blessing to them. Humble us here in, that we are not worthy the least crumme
of bread, which we are taught to beg daily: and that we are but usurpers of
it, and of whatsoever else we have, unless we be in Christ; because we having
lost all, can have no right to any thing until it be restored unto us in him
who is Lord of all. Increase our assurance that thou have given him unto us, yt
we may have a true title to whatsoever we enjoy. Bless thy good creaturs to
nourish and comfort us.

Give us contented hearts though we have but bread, acknowledging thy
fatherly providence as well in want as plenty, and that thou will make even
bread sufficient when other means fail.

And if we shall come to have no more but for the present day, nor any means of
succor; then strengthen us to cast our selves upon thee without fainting, and
to show that we live not by bread only, but by thy power and tender care and
blessing Certify our consciences, that though wicked men may be
hungerstarued, yet thou will never let any of us that serve thee, being heirs
of thy kingdom, to want any thing that is good for us, but wilt work
extraordinarily causing our enemies to feed us, or the fouls to bring us
meat, rather then we shall want. Keep us therefore from carking cares
aforehand, for provision for us or ours, and much more from murmuring, whereby
thou art dishonored and provoked. Make us able to sanctify thee, using only
the means for thy protection and providence, commending our selves wholly unto
thee, being certainly assured that thou can not fail us. And when thou do
bestow thy gifts upon us, make us to behold thy good nesse in them, using the^
holily, and never abusing them to satisfy our lusts, or to puff us up, or
set our confidence and love upon the^; but that we may employ them to
maintain thy worship and service, and perform all holy duties, especially
for the relief of thy children, for whom we are to pray daily, and to whom
thou have given an interest in the use of them; that so we may show our
tha^kfulnesse to thy heavenly Majesty, love to thy children and chiefelie the
most excellent, and therein the true practice of the Communion of Saints,
waiting for the joyful sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
kingdom prepared for you etc.

Forgive us our trespasses.]

And whereas our sins only do hinder, and turn from us all these blessings
which we have begged* and bring innumerable evils upon us, insteede of the^,
and so make us most unhappy, whereupon thou have taught us to cry every day,
forgive us our sins;

Pardon (good Lord) and remove all our sins out of thy sight. And to ye end
that we may never give thee rest until we have gotten this assurance; teach us
that herein is all true happiness, and without it we are most miserable, and
without all hope of comfort.

Show us also the haynousnesse of sin, declared in the fearful punishment
of thy most glorious Angels, the excellentest of all thy works, whom for one
sin thou did throw down unto hell to be reserved in chains of darkness
to the judgment of the great day. And after wards in our first parents cast
out of their happy estate accursed in themselves and all their posterity,
even al us, until we obtain deliverance by laying hold of our Lord and
Savior. Make us able yet more plainly to behold the same, not only in the
general destruction of the old world; turning Sodom into ashes; preparing
hell for an everlasting punishment to all unbelievers and impenitent sinners;
but also in thy severity against thine own children, as in cutting off Moses
(only for that he did not sanctify thee at the waters of strif) that he
could not enter into Canaan, after he had led thy people forty years and now
brought them to the borders of it.

And besides the heavy punishment of David and his house all his life long, and
the fearful judgments on many of thine own faithful servants. Teach us to
conceive aright of the vileness and danger of sin hereby, that the least sin
of thine elect could never have bin ransomed, but by the sacrifice of thine
own dear Son; and how thou did power out upon him the full viols of thy
wrath, to cause him to cry, my God why have thou forsaken me.

Give us a continual meditation hereof, and of the innumerable evils which
every sin brings on thine own children, unless they be prevented by
speedy repentance, especially depriving us of all true comfort and power in
prayer, so long as we remain therein without repe^ta^ce, besides ye loss of
many extraordinary favors. Show us withal how our sins increased, being
committed not only against thy glorious Majesty, but also against our high
calling, and all thine abu^dant mercies with so strong means to restrain us,
besides so many vows and promises of amendment, and that after pardon formerly
obtained and sealed unto us.

Grants us some sight also of the multitude of our sins, not only in breaking
thy Commandments, in thought, word or deed, but even in omitting any part
thereof, or doing it without all our heart; besides the sin of our first parents
whereof we are all guilty; and the corruption of our sinful natures whereby
we are so infected with sin, that we are inclined unto evil co^tinaully; and
unable to think any thing but that which is sinful; so little moved by thy
judgments or mercies, to make any right use thereof. Give us such a lively
sense hereof, and of our daily frailties, in^rmities and noisome lusts,
flowing from this loathsome sink, that in the feeling of this bondage of our
corruption, we may ever sigh, desiring to be delivered therefrom.

Set before our faces also the grievous sins of our youth, and much more those
which we have committed since our high calling, contrary to our consciences,
and whereby we have dishonored thee to the reproach of thy Gospel, grief of
thy servants, or hindering the salvation of any soul: that by all these we
beholding the infinitenes of our debt, and our great misery thereby, that we may
run continually to the fountain of thy Sons blood, which is open to all
the house of Israel for sin and uncleanness, crying, Wash me thorowlie from my
sin, purge and purify me. And yet that the vgelie view of them may not utterly
dismay us, as though we could not be purged from them; comfort us in the
infinite worth and merit of thy Sons blood which is all-sufficient to cleanse
us thoroughly, although we had all the sins of the world upon us, so long as we
can cry to be washed therein. But yet seeing thou admittest none to this
fountain, but only them that come in true fainth, and vnfaied repentance for
all their sins, resolving to live a new life, and crying after this fountain:

Make us able in the sense of our vileness by nature, and our particular sins,
to mourn bitterly when we look at thy Son who^ we have pierced thereby, and
so to hate sin, that we may be afraid of ever defiling our selves again,
sinning against that precious blood.

Help us to try our repentance and faith to be such as are sound, and have
been wrought in us by the preaching of the Gospel, and do continually
increase, which are the certain evidences thereof.

Grant us grace to judge our selves daily, yt we may not be judged of thee.
Remember us also, we entreat thee again, for our sinful Land; though even
the earth be corrupt, and the cry of the sins exceeding great, yet let the
cry of us thy children in every corner prevail against ye cry of the sins,
that thy mercy may be magnified in all the world. As we for give etc.] And
as thou have taught us to pray only so to be forgiven, as we forgive others;
assuring us that if we do forgive we shall be forgiven, and otherwise we
shall never be forgiven. Change our malicious and proud hearts, that although
we hate ye sins and company of the wicked, and rejoice in the execution of thy
righteous judgments, and pray daily for the confounding of all the wicked
practices and devises of the enemies of thy Church; that yet we may seek the
salvation of al sorts: and for them that are our enemies but upon private
respects, give us grace to pray earnestly for the^ that they may repent and
obtain mercy.

And that we may seek to pacify them, by offering them full satisfaction,
and doing them any good, so far as may stand with their salvation, and the
credit of the Gospel, to heap coals upon their heads, either to gain them
or leave them more without excuse; and to seal up to our selves a full
remission of all our sins thereby.

Lead us not into temptation.] And seeing our deadly enemy seeks hourly to
tempt us to sin to dishonor thee, and become his vassals, yt thou might
leave us in his hand to execute his malice upon us, and bring upon us all the
evils which follow sin, whereupon our Savior has taught us to pray, Lead us
not into temptation: Open our eyes (good Father) to see our continual danger;
and first for the multitude of damned spirits ranging up and down as roaring
Lions to devour us. Teach us to know that they are able to bring us to as
fearful sins as ever were committed, and to destroy us utterly in a moment
with all that we have, if thou give them leave. Acquaint us with their
subt^lties in fitting their temptations to our particular estates and
dispositio^s which they know, by dogging us ever, and taking their advantages
to solicit us to those sins, whereby they have most prevailed against us
formerly or against other thy servants; and how they are wont also to draw us
on by degrees, as first to yield to some smaller matters which are accounted
no sins; or to thrust our selves carelessely or with our warrant into the
danger and occasions of temptation, neglecting the calling laid upon us, as
David to lie on his bed in the afternoones insteede of looking to the affairs
of his kingdom.

Make us able to consider how they have all the baits of the world, both the
credit, riches and pleasures thereof, which they ever hold forth unto us, if
we will follow their counsel; and otherwise threaten not only the loss of all
these, but also of all comforts, with hatred, disgrace and many other evils
which we must suffer from malicious me^, if we will make such a strict
conscience of all our ways, to the very least duty that thou have commanded.

And whereas we are ordinarily secure in ouerweening of our own strength;
Show us (oh Lord) the vileness of our corrupt natures, which are ever ready
to conspire with Satan to our utter perdition, and to swallow every bait which
he lays for us, without any fear of danger; so that we have no strength,
more then thou reachest forth thine hand to help us. Reveal unto us also the
danger we stand in from thy glorious Majesty, lest you should leave us up
unto the power of the tempter, and our own corruption; to awake us from our
security, for our neglect of thy watch, and careless using the means of
grace, or at least for te^pting thee, in not avoiding each occasion of
temptation.

And seeing the tempter in all his temptations, hides the danger and vglines of
sin, showing only the fair side of it, that is, the go^d that we shall get
thereby, and chooses the subtillest and fittest instruments to serve his
purpose, as the counsel or example of men of chiefest reputation, sometimes
cha^ging himself into an Angel of light, never coming like himself; whereby
he deceiues all the world, and often preuailes with us thine own children, at
least to presume to sin, because thou art so merciful;

Good Father set before us a continual view hereof, and of the sundry evils
which by every sin we have upon our heads; especially the wou^d of conscience
which will certainly come on us unless it be prevented, and which none can
bear. Make us to know that howsoever reprobats may wallow in their filth, and
escape unpunished here, being reserved for hell, and fatted for destruction: yet
thou will not suffer any of us thy children, who have begun to make a
profession of thee according to thy word, to commit the very least sin, but
wilt make us feel the smart of it, unless we prevent thee speedily by
repentance, because thou will not be dishonored by us, nor have us condemned
with the world; and that the wicked may see thy hatred against sin, and what
plagues remain for themselves for evermore. Yea (oh holy Father) let us fear
always lest thou should leave us never so little, and suspect all our
ways, in as much as Satan more maliceth us, the^ any other of the world, and
therefore seeks hourly to provoke thee to leave us in his hand, and for that
our sins will cause moto blaspheme, hardening the^ to perdition, than the sins
of any other: whereupon very few of thy worthiest servants have escaped to the
end; without some grievous wounds, the scarres whereof they have carried to
their graves, to the blemishing their profession, the grief of themselves and
all the godly. And therefore as thou have given us this only remedy to watch
and pray that we enter not into temptation, so make us able to keep this thy
watch, and by it to be better acquainted with our selves, and our particular
infirmities, that we may always wear the complete armor, chiefly the
shield of faith, and thy Word ever in readiness against each temptation, which
w^l put Satan to flight; that being stre^gthned by thy Spirit, we may stand
fast in the evil day, and get the conquest without any grievous wounds; to
thy greater glory, and our own greater honor in the heavens: We do not pray
against temptations altogether, knowing the profit that we reap thereby; but
that we may endure fighting valiantly and conquering, until thou set the
crown upon our heads.

For thine is the etc.] We have been bold to beg all these things of thee (oh
holy Father*) because all kingdom, power and glory are only thine;
acknowledging that we have received all from thy heavenly bounty; and being
assured th thou will grant us all these things for thy Sons sake, and
whatsoever else is good for us, so far as shall be for thine own glory,
seeing thou art absolute Lord and King in heaven and in earth, and do
dispose, guide and ouerrule all things, as shall make most for thine own
glory, and the greatest good of us thine obedient subjects and children;

That we may set forth the glory of thy dominion, and happiness of thy
Kingdom, living as thy loyal subjects; to which we hereby bind our selves for
ever; and so return all possible thanks and praise to thy heavenly Majesty,
saying ever, Ame^.

Be it so (oh Lord holy and true) as we fully believe it shall be. Even so
Amen: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Our Father which art in heauen] 1. We must come trembling, because of Gods
glorious Majesty:
Oh Lord most holy and most glorious, whose brightness the Angels are not able
to behold, so terrible to all the ungodly, as they shall wish the mountains to
cover them, that they may never appear in thy presence; and yet a most
gracious and tender Father to all thy children that desire to obey all thy
Commandments: And our own vileness by nature.
we that are but dust and ashes, and by nature through the fall of our first
parents, children of wrath in state of damnation, bond-slaues of Satan, and
most rebellious of all thy creatures, dare not presume of our selves, once to
lift up our eyes to heaven; 2. Yet in confident boldness, as to our Father in
Christ.
yet nevertheless seeing it has pleased thee of thy free mercy to adopt us to
be thy children by grace, through thy Son Jesus Christ, and have chosen us
hereunto, bought us with his precious blood, called us by thy Gospel, sealed us
with thy Spirit, and given him to be our perpetual mediator at thy right
hand, bidden us to come to thee as to our tender father, and call thee father
through him; oh dear Father we present our selves before thy divine Majesty
only in his name, 3. Only in the name of Christ our Mediator.
magnifying thy mercy that thou have 4. With thankfulness for our happiestate
in him.
vouchsafed us this blessed estate to be thy children, Watch. ed. 2. p. 1. l.
1. 2.
and to have thy favor, being the greatest happiness that ever can befall mortal
creatures. 5. Begging an increase of our assurance.
Give us hearts (most gracious Father) to seek daily to increase this
assurance, by growing in repentance for all our sins and faith in thy sweet
promises; frame us every day more and more to the image of thy Son, By more
conformity to Christ in knowledge. Watch. page 88 lin. 6.
in all knowledge of thy heavenly Majesty; And al childlike affections.
being affectioned to reverence, love and obey thee as our most dear Father,
wholly changed in all the parts and qualities both of our souls and bodies;
that we may be no longer strangers from thee, as all the wicked are, who bid
thee to depart from them; but may take our chiefest delight to be ever in thy
presence, Delighting in the presence of our Father.
to hear thee to speak to us in thy heavenly word, and to utter all our wants
and our whole heart to thee in our prayers, crying, Oh Father.

Our] And that it may be more evident, 6. And an increase of our love to al
Gods children:
not only to our selves, but to all the world, that we are thine own children
indeed, give us hearts to love all thy children, being our brethren and
sisters, above all other for thy sake alone: and every one so much the more, as
they more lively carry thy image in all holiness excelling in virtue, Chiefly
as they more excel in virtue:
and so are more dear unto thy heavenly Majesty; that we may every day in all
our prayers remember them as our selves, begging alike for them all, saying, By
praying for them as for our selves, and delighting in their companies.
Our Father: And that we may delight in their companies only, as those with
whom we shall co^uerse together for ever in the heavens. Knit all our hearts in
this firm bond of brotherly love, Begging most instantly our heavenly union to
be shevved in all duties:
that we may tenderly exhort, relieve, help, comfort and support the
weaknesses one of another, seeking by all means the edifying of others,
afraid of giving the least offense to grieve, and much more to hinder the
salvation or turn any one out of the way of life. Confirmed by all bonds of
agreement:
Let this happy brotherhood and holy agreement in all the substance of thy
truth, which is able undoubtedly to save our souls, together with our joint
profession to walk hand in hand, in all the narrow way of life, have more
power firmly to unite us, then all the trash, pomp or pleasure of the world,
with all the cunning of Satan or Antichrist can have to divide us.

Are we not all that so walk, And common interest.
thine own children, having thy Son our Savior, thy Spirit our co^forter and
earnest for our joint inheritance and glory; notwithstanding all our
infirmity and imperfections, with some less diversities in judgment, which
must accompany us until we be perfect in the heavens?

Confound therefore all the devices of thine enemies, And all contrary devices
of our enemies confounded.
that work this evil among thine own children, to so great dishonor to thy
heavenly Majesty, whereby our enemies insult over us, who have conspired thus
to work our shame, and to provoke thee against us, Which by our di^isio^ seek
our ruin:
to leave us into their hands to our utter ruin, if it were possible. Dear
Father, let us never think our state to be good, until we carry these
hearty affections to al thy children, That we may never think our state good.
studying to knit this bond of love, being able truly thus to pray, Our father.
For hereby we know that we are translated from death unto life, Until we
love the brethren.
because we love the brethren, and until this time we abide still in death. 1.
John 3. 14.


Which art in heaven 7. To grow in reverence to our heavenly Father.
And whereas thou our Father art highly exalted in the heaven of heavens, and
there also have provided thrones for us thy children after we have suffered a
little; humble us evermore in the sense of thy greatness, together with our
own baseness and unworthiness, being but poor worms crawling upon the
earth, and laden with innumerable sins. And yet withal lift up our hearts
always unto the heavens, 8. And in heavenly affections:
there to be conversant with thee our heavenly Father, minding heavenly things*
especially in all our prayers; longing there to behold thee face to face: and
that in the mean time while we abide here below, And conuersations:
we may be of such heavenly conuersatio^s, so using ye world, as if we used it
not, that the world may see that we are not of it, but pilgrims and strangers
here, and thy heavenly children: To declare our selves his children.
and that our selves also may hereby grow up to a strong assurance that heaven
is ours, Watch. page 90. lin. 9.
and all the joys thereof reserved for us by our Lord and Savior, And heaven
ours, and all creatures at a league with us for our good.
and all the creatures in heaven and earth at a league with us to do us good,
so far as shall stand with thine honor and our salvation, ever ready to help
in time of need.

Hallowed be thy name] And seeing thou (oh tender Father) have vouchsafed us
this honor above the greatest part of the word, For this honor that God has
vouchsafed to us to be his children.
to be thine* own children and heirs of thy glorious kingdom, whereas thou
might justly have left us in our sins with all the wicked to everlasting
shame and perdition. 1. To seek his honor in and above al things.
Give us grace (good Father) to testify our love and thankfulness all the
days of our life, VVatch. p. 78. lin. 17.
in studying in and above al things which way to honor thee. 2. To have our
eyes open to behold his glory, shining in all his works, as his Creatures:
Open our blind eyes to this end, to behold the glory of thy wisdom, power,
goodness and righteousness shining in all thy works, even in the basest creature
in heaven or earth; and much more in thy heavenly word; Word: Judgment:
chiefly in all thy terrible judgments executed upon the enemies of thy
Church therein reueiled, Mercy:
with mercies toward thy children, Watch. page 31. lin. 17.
and which thou still show every day, especially toward our selves. Make
us ab^e to take every occasion to consider of aright, 3. To be able to set
forth his praises belonging to him therein, and have a holy use of them.
and set forth the praises belonging to thee therein, and have a holy use of
them both in word and deed, yt by us thy great name may be known and magnified
in all the world. Above all, 4. Chiefly his glory manifested in our days, for
us and against our enemies.
set ever before our faces (good Lord) that wonderful glory wherein thou have
been magnified in these our days, and before our days, in the evident
declaration both of thy displeasure against us of this sinful nation; and
withal of thy mercy and tender care for us, and wrath against our enemies; how
for dishonoring thee, First for us, in ab^ndant mercies.
by abusing thy Gospel which thou have given us with such peace and
prosperity, as never nation known before, thou have not only corrected our
grievous transgressions and security, And then correcting us fa^herly for
abusing his mercies to his dishonor: So to bring us to amendment:
as a tender Father with thy milder rods of dearth, pestilence and sundry the
like, to bring us to amendme^t, and cause us with more cheerefulnes to embrace
thy Gospel, and bring forth the fruits of it: After threatening us by cruel
enemies, to take away all:
but also raised up against us sundry times, most cruel enemies, threatening
not only the taking away thy Gospel, but our utter destruction also, Bringing
them to the execution:
and brought the enemies to the very execution thereof, because we would not
serve thee with good hearts, according to all thy mercies bestowed upon us: and
yet ever when we have cried unto thee, thou have heard us, Yet ever delivering
and auenging us, when we have cried unto him:
as thou did thy people Israel, and as thou did hear Iehosaphat
against the Moabits, and Ezechiah and Esaias against the proud Assyrian; and
plucking them back in the instant, have taken vengeance for us: that we have
often thought that they durst never have risen against us any more: So as it had
been enough to have converted the most barbarous nation.
so as if the most barbarous nations of the earth, had received but the least
of our deliverances, with our means, they undoubtedly had repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes; as we for the present have promised unto thee. Oh
gracious Father, 5. To pray for grace ever to remember and acknowledge this.
enable us always to remember and acknowledge this, and to see moreover that
thine anger is not yet turned away, but more fearfully kindled against us, And
to see moreover his anger kindled again, by increase of our sins, with these
bloody enemies, and their malice.
for that as our sins and prouocations are multiplied, so these our bloody
enemies insteede of decreasing, or joining themselves unto us, do still
increase daily; and their malice is become much more deadly against us thy
poor children, without hope of leaving off, Without hope of leaving off;
until they have their wills.
until they have wrought either ours, or at least their own utter ruin, which
in time they must needs effect.

Good Father cause this principal token of thy displeasure, And also witnessed
by many fearful signs:
together with all other signs thereof showed from heaven and earth, Arming
winds and waters against us:
(as the arming of the dumb creatures against us, both winds and waters so
strangely and furiously in so many places, threatening utterly to sweep us
Threatening to sweep us away:
away in our deadly security, For our ouerflovv of iniquity, that we may be
awaked, and seek to appease his wrath in in time.
for the great ouerflow of all iniquity every where) cause this to work so
mightily, that we may all be presently awaked out of our deepest security,
and seek by all means to appease thy wrath. Oh Lord, did thou not before
that most secret, That remembering our former warnings from heaven, and what
follovved the fiery tent spread over our heads.
bloody and fiery conspiracy, warn us all from heaven, (as thou did
Jerusalem before her last destruction) by a fiery tent directly over our
heads, enclosing us all, with pillars of most horrible darkness, pillars of
fire, and pillars of blood, foreshewing us (as by that which followed we may
justly deem) that bloody darkness and fiery destruction that was toward us?
Did not the hearts of many of us tremble in the beholding thereof, and in
fearing some grievous judgment that was to come, causing us to fly to thee, to
seek to hide our selves under thy wings? And did we fear without just cause?
Had it not been effected indeed, and we all, chiefly our dread Sovereign with
all our heads and rulers, enclosed in the most dark, fiery and bloody tent,
that ever the world heard of; in that most unnatural and accursed massacre, if
thou our gracious and most tender Father had not heard the prayers of thy
poor children, which both before and at that very instant were humbled before
thee, and so thought on us in mercy? And shall we now be senseless still in
these signs, and tokens still entering in upon us, as fearfully as ever any of
the ten plagues upon the Egyptians, We may not be senseless in these tokens
of his wrath, seazing upon us as fearfully as any of the piagues of Egypt.
making the whole land to tremble, at the very report of them? Save and deliver
us from that judgment, Chiefly to be saved from that heauiest judgment:
of all other the heauiest that ever fall upon the heart of man: and whereby
not only the Egytians were prepared for their final overthrow in the sea, but
also thine own people Israel, both before the great captivity, Whereby both
Egypt and Israel were prepared for ^estruction.
and also before the last and utter desolation of that nation, so often threatened
by our Savior: (that by hearing we should hear, That we should be worse for
all the means sent to call us to repentance, until the judgment come, that
we may s^e our estate and turn:
and not understand, and seeing we should see, and not perceive; but have our
hearts made more fat and senseless (by all the means sent to call us to
repentance) lest we should be converted, and thou should spare us. Oh open
our eyes that we may see in what state we stand, and how far this judgment
has seized upon us already. Convert us and we shall be converted; and never
let us, (as those whom thou have utterly destroyed) harden our selves against
the evident tokens of thy wrath, And not harden our selves against the Lord.
denying or making light of them, much less to oppose our selves against thee,
thy word, and servants. Preserve us from the outrageous ouerflowings of the
multitude, which thou may justly arm against us in their ignorance, like
the furious waves of the raging seas, for lack of our care and conscience to
see the^ taught, to know thee and thine ordinances, and to fear thy great and
mighty name. Let not the floods of iniquity swallow us up. Above all, That we
may never fall into the bloody enemies hands:
never leave us in their hands whose very mercies are cruelties, that they
should blaspheme thy great name, to say where is now their God; but let us
still fall into thy hands, But still into the Lords.
and deal with us as it pleases thee, for with thee is mercy, and when thou
smitest us, yet thou pitiest us, Because he pitieth us when he smites us.
ever in wrath remembering mercy. Though our prouocations be more heinous, then
we are able to express, yet Lord hear the cry of thy servants, and let them
still prevail 6. To pray instantly that the cry of his servants may prevail:
with thee to stay thy hand. Have thou not said it, and many a time made it
good, even unto this very day, As hitherto according to his promise: Since he
calls us now to stand in the breach, as Moses to stay his hand: to declare the
riches of his mercy: saving us still at the prayers of a fevv.
that the innocent should deliver the Island? and do thou not call for us thy
poor servants, to stand up with Moses in the breach to stay thy fierce wrath,
because thou art a God of mercy, and would not destroy thy people? most
declaring the riches of thy grace, in pardoning and saving whole nations at the
prayers of a few of thy poor servants, and giving the wicked for their
ransom? Therefore (oh good Lord) we whom thou do call to be thy
remembrancers (knowing that thou art still the same good God to thine, as thou
wast to Moses, Abraham, And seeing he is still the same to us, as to Moses and
Abraham:
and Samuel; and being assured that through thy Son we are as dear unto thee,
as the apple of thine own eye, that thou can deny us nothing And we so
dear to him that he can deny us nothing:
which we beg in his name, which may make for thine own glory and good Which
may make for his glory, and our good:
of thy people) do humbly entreat thee to glorify thy mercy, that it may
shine to all the world, To entreat him to magnify his mercy in pardoning and
turning our hearts to meet him:
in pardoning the sin of our Land, turning the hearts of all sorts speedily
unto thee, to meet thee with an entreaty of peace: but make all the
unplacable enemies of thy Church to feel thy hand; But to make his enemies to
feel his hand, who have bin the causes of our sin by their wiles:
and those chiefly who have as Balaam and the Midianites, caused us with their
wiles to provoke thee to so fierce a wrath, wherein we have bin so often and so
lately almost utterly consumed, through our backslidings and rebellions against
thee. Get thy self glory upon them as upon Pharo, To get himself glory upon
them, as upon Pharaoh.
in the heart of the sea, that when thou have delivered us, and overthrown
them (as sundry times thou have begun, As he has begun and promised to
accomplish to his everlasting praise.
and promised to accomplish) we may sing the song of Moses thy servant: and all
ages keep a remembrance of thine endless mercy.

Let every one of us be afraid of defacing or obscuring any part of thy glory,
7. That we may be afraid of obscuring his glory:
and much more of seeking vainly our own glory, Seeking our own glory, or
taking his honor to our selves.
especially of robbing thy Majesty, by taking any part of thine honor to our
selves as Herod; being proud of thy gifts, whereunto our sinful natures are
strongly inclined. But above all, keep us from dishonoring thee by our evil
example, 8. That we may not dishonor him by our sins:
amongst the wicked and ungodly, to cause them to blaspheme that glorious truth
which we profess. Make us to account it our greatest honor to honor thee, But
account it our greatest honor to honor him; and contrarily.
and the greatest dishonor and evil that ever can befall us, so much as in
show to dishonor thee. Strengthen us to walk so uprightly, 9. To honor him
by our holy ensample.
that others seeing our good works, may glorify thee our heavenly father; and
that we may stop the mouths of all the wicked, To stop the mouths of the
wicked.
bearing their reproach as a crown upon our heads.

So inflame our hearts with a zeal of thy glory, that our righteous souls may
be vexed from day to day, for all the abominations, 10. To have the zeal of
Lot against the abominations of our age.
whereby thou art dishonored by Atheists, Papists, and all sorts of godless
men. 11. With a bold acknowledgement of the Lord, and every part of his truth:
And let us be so far off from dishonoring thee, by being ashamed with Peter
of thee and thy religion, or any part thereof, where we ought to profess it,
that in all places we may show it forth, with all wisdom and boldness, as
that which is our chiefest glory, As being our glory:
gracing it with a holy conversation: that our Lord and Savior may acknowledge
us before thee our heavenly father, That we may be acknowledged of him before
all the world: to our own everlasting honor:
in the presence of thy glorious Angels, and of the whole world, to be thine
own children, and heirs of thy Kingdom; when he will most justly deny all
the fearful and unbelievers, as those whom he never knew, to their endless
horror and confusion.

Thy kingdom come.]

And whereas thou (oh Father) art chiefly glorified when thy kingdom comes,
Seeing Gods glory is in the enlarging his kingdom, and doing his will.
and thy will is done; that is, in the increase of thine own Church and
people, which obey thy word, amongst whom alone thou raignest as Lord and King,
and especially when thou do enlarge thy dominions against all the subtlety
and power of hell, causing thy religion and people to prosper and increase: 1.
To pray for a free course to the Gospel, which is the scepter of his kingdom,
and that it may be powerful every where.
Good father give thy Gospel (which is the scepter of thy kingdom) whereby
thou conquerest and rulest, a free course to be sincerely preached in all the
world, all impediments being utterly removed; and make it so powerful in all
places that it may utterly throw down the kingdom of Satan, and Antichrist;
converting and speedily gathering all thine elect unto thee, that so thou
may hasten thy kingdom of glory.

And to this end, whereas thou have ordained Kings and Queens, to be nursing
fathers and mothers to thy poor 2. For Kings and Queens, to be nursing fathers
and mothers to the Church:
Church, to nourish us thy children with the word of life, and to preserve us
from the rage of that bloody Antichrist, Chiefly to preserve is against the
rage of all cruel enemies, and to account this their chiefest dignity.
and of all other cruel enemies; oh almighty and dear Father, raise up such
for us in all the countries of the world, and those which are such already make
the^ ten times more, that they may account this their greatest dignity, to have
the bringing up of thine own children and heirs of thy kingdom, committed to
their care and faithfulness.

More specially as thou have settled this thy kingdom among us, of this nation
in much peace and prosperity, under our late tender nursing mother, 3.
Especially to pray for our sovereign, raised up for us, in place of our tender
mother.
delivering us from the tyranny of that bloodthirsty whore of Babylon, and
continued the same still most miraculously, and beyond all former expectation
under our gracious Sovereign, whom thou have raised up for a foster father in
her place; so we beseech thee to enlarge the heart of thine anointed servant,
That he may have an abundant portion of Gods Spirit:
with such an abundant portion of thy Spirit, both of wisdom and zeal for thy
glory and kingdom, and tender affections toward thy children, According to
his high dignity and charge:
according to that high dignity laid upon him; and the charge committed unto
him, that in token of true thankfulness for all his dominions and great honor,
and much more for the admirable deliverances given unto him and his, (and above
all that thou have made him twice, cheifely so wonderfully in our eyes, thy
principal instrument, And the deliverances of the Church by him, he may set
himself to advance Christ's kingdom and Gospel: Watch. page 43. lin. 2.
in saving us thy poor Church) he may set himself much more earnestly then
ever did Cyrus, or Darius, even worthy Iehosaphat, and Ezekiah, to advance thy
glory, in enlarging and furthering this kingdom of thy Son, and in promoting
thy pure religion with all his power, destroying whatsoever is against it, and
discountenancing all vngodinesse; and to procure each way both by godly laws,
Procure the good of Gods servants, repressing the wicked:
and all other holy means, the good of us thy poor people committed unto his
trust, repressing all the wicked; that we may live a quiet life in all
godliness and honesty, That we may live in all peace and godliness without
fear, affected toward him as the good people were toward David:
fearing none but only thy heavenly Majesty: that all we thy children being
affected toward him, thine anointed, more and more, as toward our happy
nursing father under thee, and as all the good people were toward thy servant
David, may evermore accordingly sound forth thy praises for him, Sound forth
his praises:
and cry continually unto thee, for the preservation of his Majesty, And pray
for him and his, to reign for evermore.
with our noble Queen, and all their royal progeny, that the throne of his
kingdom may be establihed until Christ, the King of Kings shall come: then to
resign up the scepter into his hands, and to be taken up into his throne to
reign with thee for evermore.

4. For our Magistrates to have the same hearts.
Good Lord give all our Magistrates and Rulers under him the same heart, that
they may be as the hands of thine anointed in every place, for the
accomplishment of this work.

And withal as thou have appointed to build up thy kingdom, 5. For our
Ministers to tread in the steps of the holy Apostles. Watch. p. 45. l. 11. 12.
chiefly by the sincere preaching of thy sacred Gospel, whereby thou did
first spread it so speedily, subduing all the world by the Ministry of thy
holy Apostles; so we pray thee send forth such faithful Preachers, into every
congregation, which being furnished with gifts, Seeking to save every soul.
and tenderly affected with the care of every soul, committed unto their
charge, may not cease with Paul, By word,
to admonish every one both publicly and privately, day and night with tears;
going before them in all holy conversation, And conversation.
and framing themselves to all, to win all; afraid of giving the least offense,
either to harden, or any way to hinder the salvation of any one of them. To
awaken all our unconscionable Ministers:
Awake^ at length (oh Lord) all our blind guids, and all sorts of
unconscionable Ministers, who are drunk with the blood of souls, that they
may but remember, They may remember the cry of Abels blood:
how the blood of one Abel did cry for vengance from the earth, and think
where they will appear, And Christ appearing.
when Christ shall come to take an account for every soul: and either give
them repentance for that bloody sin, And either to repent and become
profitable, or the people may be committed to such, as by whom Christ may
reign, and they saved:
that they may save themselves, and those committed to them; or else utterly
free thy people from this heavy judgment, and set such in their places, by
whose faithful Ministry thy people may be brought every where, into a holy
obedience to thy heavenly Gospel, to their everlasting salvation; that thou
alone may reign as Lord and King, Antichrist cast forth: and whatsoever
belongs to him, or whereby he has deceived the people of the Lord:
and Antichrist cast out utterly, with all that appertains to his bloody
religion, and whereby he has vpholden his throne and tyranny, and kept any of
thy people under his flauery, or at least seeks to bewitch them, to pull them
into Babylon again. Good Lord destroy all the very prints of that cursed
Idolatry, And the very prints of his Idolatire utterly destroyed.
and whatsoever may put his fauorits in hope of ever repayring the ruins of
their Babel.

And seeing (oh Lord) yt this is the glory and safety of thy Kingdom, 6. To
pray for a holy unity in the Church, chiefly amongst the leaders: And to take
away all causes of contention, confounding all Balaams devices.
when all the subjects of it, especially the leaders of thy people, live in a
holy unity under thy laws: take away we beseech thee, all contentions from
amongst us, with the causes thereof. Confound we pray thee, all the plots of
that cursed Balaam of Rome; who knowing that not thine own kingdom, if it be
divided, can stand, seeks day and night by all his agents, to rend thy Church
in pieces, the easier to prevail against it when it is divided, Who seeks by
our divisions, to prevail against us.
and thou departed from it: as Satan has ever prevailed by his instruments in
all countries. Grant we may buy this peace with godly Abraham, with the loss
of all things, And that we may buy this peace with the loss of all.
except thy favor; that all sorts seeing our holy agreement may come forth of
Popery, That all sorts may join themselves unto us.
and profanenes unto us; and our brethren departed, may turn into the bosom
of thy Church again. 7. That every one of us may have a care to save others.
Wat. p. 57. l. 14. 15.
And whereas thou have appointed that every one of us should labor to build up
thy Kingdom, by bringing others thereunto, that they may be saved; give us
hearts to have a special regard, Especially all committed to our charge:
not only of all those committed to our charge, to bring them in obedience to
the laws of thy Kingdom, With all knit unto us by any special bond:
but even all who are tied unto us by any special bond, that we may take every
first occasion which thou offerest for procuring, Taking all occasions to save
them by all means, being as the Angels for Lot.
or furthering their salvation, and so gayning them unto thee, by all good
admonitions, exhortations and examples. Let us be as the Angels unto Lot, never
resting before we have gotten them safe into Zoar. 8. That we may have a
feeling of the happiness of this kingdom.
And that we may be able to persuade others more effectually, Lord give every
one of us a sweet feeling, what a blessed thing it is to be the subjects of
this thy Kingdom; VVatch. p. 11. lin. 2. p. 114. 115.
to have all the privileges thereof, and to be partakers of thy glory, And of
the revvard of holiness:
even Kings, and Priests unto thee; and what reward and happiness, there is in
living such a holy conversation; and how wretched and unhappy, And how
vvretched the state of all other is. VVatch. p. 56. 7. 8. 9.
the state of all other people is, seem they never so happy in this world,
being but bondslaues of Satan, reserved for the chains of eternal darkness.
9. That we may live as the subjects of this kingdom:
Oh heavenly King, grant us to live in all things, as the subjects of thy
Kingdom, that so we may pass from this Kingdom of grace, into that thy
Kingdom of glory. Fearing the causes of backsliding. Watch. page 122. lin. 8.
Make us to fear the causes of backsliding, that we may never so much as look
back with Lots wife, toward this evil world; but ever hie fast toward thine
heavenly Kingdom, having our eye at our Lord and Savior, Hying fast toward
heaven, looking at our Savior.
who fitteth at thy right hand, keeping there possession for us. Destroy in us
every corruption, whereby Satan keeps us any way in his slavery, 10. To
destroy all our corruption.
or at any time gets the dominion over us. Hasten that glorious day, 11. To
hasten the day of the appearing of our glory and triumph.
when the difference shall appear between us thy subjects, and those who serve
thee not; when we shall wholly reign in glory with thee, free from al our
enemies, and from ever offending thee any more. And because in the mean time,
12. And in the mean time seeing we live by faith.
we thy subjects live by faith, and not by sight in this world, where all
things usually seem to go out of order; the wicked flourishing in their
ungodliness, when we often weep and mourn: To increase our faith:
Oh Lord increase our faith, in all thy gracious promises, that through the
comfort and power of godliness wrought in us thereby, we may grow up to such a
full assurance, That we growing to full assurance, may overcome the world.
VVat. 116. lin. 20. 117. lin. 7.
that we are the true heirs of thy kingdom, that we may easily overcome all the hindrances of the world, and having the patience of Saints, we may be
faithful to the death, until thou set the crown upon our heads. And remain
faithful to the death.
Fill our hearts with such peace of conscience, and joy in thee, 13. To be
filled with peace, joy and righteousness: That al may see of what kingdom
we are:
with all the fruits of righteousness, incoraged by thy sweet promises, that
all others may see to what Kingdom we belong, and we our selves may feel
daily, the beginning of it in our selves, And we feel the beginning of it in
our selves, so entering into our joy.
so entering into thy heavenly joy.

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. And that our childlike
affections toward thy heavenly Majesty, 1. To pray that we may declare our
childlike effections, zeal and thankfulness, ^y doing his heavenly will:
our zeal for thy glory, and thankfulness for thy Kingdom, may be more
manifest to all the world; quicken us to do thy heavenly will, and
commandments, chiefly those with which thou have fully acquainted us, As
cheerfully as the Angels.
how thou will have us to walk, and keep thy watch; 2. That he will accept
our will for the deed.
and that with as much readiness as thy Angels in heaven: 3. That we may
delight to stand in his presence, to inquire his will by all means:
and wherein we are too short accept (good Father) our will for the deed. Let
it be our delight to stand ever in thy presence, to inquire thy divine
pleasure, both by reading and hearing thy heavenly word, and asking of others;
and ever so soon as thou have by any means made known unto us, what thy good
will is, Having David's Echo, I am here Lord:
give us forthwith David's Echo, that without consulting with flesh and blood
we may say forthwith, I am here Lord, to do thy will, yea thy law is within
my heart: that so all our service may be free will offerings unto thee. That all
our service may be freewill offerings.
And whereas it is thy decree, that through many troubles we must enter into
thy heavenly Kingdom; 4. To prepare for troubles, and humble our selves under
them, as his obedient children* Making right use of them:
(good Father) frame our corrupt wills unto thy heavenly will, and give us grace
both to look for them, and ever to humble our selves under thy hand as thy
obedient children, seeking always to pacify thee, searching immediately, and
amending whatsoever is amiste, Without whispering:
without once whispering against thy divine Majesty: Assured that God does all
of love for our good, and will give a happy issue.
being assured that thou still love us, even when thou correctest us most
sharply, and art working our good; and wilt in thy due time give a happy end to
all our troubles, and cause thy loving countenance to shine on us again. 5. To
take up our crosses, not suffering as evil doers, but only for righteousness:
And if it shall be thy good pleasure to call us to suffer for thy name, keep
us that we may not suffer as evil doers, or busy bodies for meddling in things
without our calling, so to bring crosses on our selus, but as thine own
children for righteousness; and then make us to take up our crosses, With joy
and thankfulness.
with all ioyfulnesse and thankfulness, that thou accountest us worthy that
honor, looking steadfastly at the great reward holden forth unto us, in ye hand
of our Lord and savior, Looking at our Savior.
who having trodden that way before us, is there highly exalted to reign for
ever. 6. That we may never do any thing against his revealed will, to obtain
never so great a good, which we imagine.
But keep us that we never go against thy revealed will, whereby thou have
convinced our consciences, under pretense either to honor thee, or do any
service unto thy Church, or for never so great a good: seeing thou can and
wilt maintain thine own honor, and save thy Church, effecting whatsoever is
best without our sin. That we may ever truly pray, Thy will be done in earth,
as it is in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread.] And then (oh dear Father, when thou have
given us such hearts thus to seek thy will; To the end that all may see the
Lords tender care for us, and that we may attend the doing of his will.
that the world may see the tender care that thou have for us, and how thou
do fulfill unto us all thy promises, and that we likewise may wholly attend
the seeking of thy glory, 1. To pray for the comforts of this life.
in the enlargement of thy Kingdom, Watch. page 51. lin. 6.
and doing thy will; vouchsafe us graciously all things meet for the comfort
of this present life: 2. That he would show his f^therly providence for
necessaries, and to direct us to the means to serve his providence. Watch. page
65. lin. 15.
Show us thy fatherly love, providing sufficiently for all our necessities in
thy due time: Direct us to use all the holy means, which thou have appointed to
serve thy divine providence, both painfulnesse, thrift and godly wisdom,
Chiefly in our particular calling, avoiding the contrary.
chiefly in our particular calling; avoiding as warily whatsoever may any way
endanger us, make our lives uncomfortable, or hurt our estate. 3. To commit
ourselves wholly to his protection, depending on him without fear.
Grant us grace also evermore, in all humility to commit our selves unto thy
Fatherly protection, not fearing what man can do unto us; remembering that our
times are in thy hands, to continue so long as it pleases thee; and that
likewise unless thou who have given us our lives do preserve them, 4. To know
our own frailty,
we cannot continue one moment. And inability to get a crumme of bread, or to
see or use the means.
Make us to know that of our selves we have no power to get one morsel of
bread, unless thou both show us the means, and after enable us to use the
same, and give a blessing to them. To be humbled in the sense of our
unworthiness of bread:
Humble us in the sense of our vileness, that we are so far off from
deserving eternal life, that we are not worthy of the least crumme of bread,
which thou have taught us to beg daily: and grant us grace to know, that when
we have it, we are but thieves and usurpers of it, And that we are usurpers of
it* and of all other things,
and of whatsoever else we possess, and to make a dreadful account for it,
unless thou give it us in Jesus Christ; Until they be given us in Christ,
having lost al in Adam.
because we having lost al through Adams transgression, can have no right unto
it again, until it be restored unto us, 5. To get more assurance of our title
in Christ.
in our Lord and Savior. Vouchsafe therefore to increase our assurance that
thou have given us thy Son who is Lord of all, that in him we may be
certain, that we have a true title to whatsoever we enjoy. 6. For power to the
creature to nourish us.
Give withal both power and strength, to thy good creatures, to norish and
comfort us.

Bread.] Bestow upon us 7. For contentation with our estate.
contented hearts, with the estate wherein thou set us, VVatch. p. 66 lin.
12. And to see the Lords providence in bread alone.
though we have but bread; and grace to see, and acknowledge thy wise and
tender providence, as well in want as ple^^y, being undoubtedly assured that
thou can, and wilt make bread alone to satisfy us abundantly, when other
means fail.

This day.] And when we have but for the day, nor any means.
And if thou shall ever bring us into that strait, that we shall have no more
but for the present day, nor any means of succor in the world; To be able to
cast our selves wholly on the Lord without fainting. VVatch. p. 21. lin. 7.
the^ strengthen us to give thee glory, by casting our selus wholly upon thee,
without impatience or fainting; that we may be able even then, to show our
confidence in thee, and how we live not by bread only, but by every word
proceeding out of thy mouth. Certify our consciences aforehand, 8. To pray for
assurance that the Lord will never let us want that is good:
that howsoever wicked men, be they never so rich, may starve with hunger
before they die, yet thou will never let us thine own obedient children, and
heirs of thy Kingdom, to want any thing that shall be good for us; but that
thou will rather work extraordinarily, But work extraordinarily:
when ordinary means fail, causing our enemies to feed us, When ordinary
means fail.
if our brethren forget us, the very fowls to bring us bread, and the heavens
to pour us down a blessing. 9. To be afraid of dishonoring the Lord, by
carcking cares aforehand, or impatience in trials.
And therefore (good Father) let us always be reuere^tly afraid of
dishonoring, or grieuing thee by carcking cares aforehand, for provision for us
or ours: and much more of murmuring, or impatience in any such trials,
whereunto our sinful natures are extremely inclined. 10. When we used only
the means to refer the blessing to the Lord.
Make us able to sanctify thy great name, in using only the means for thy
protection and providence, referring the work and whole success unto thy
heavenly Majesty alone, being certain that thou will do that, that shall be
best, and that thou can not fail us nor forsake us. 11. To have a holy use
of all Gods gifts to our salvation:
And when thou do bestow thy gifts upon us, give us a holy use of them;
that both they may further our salvation; and that we may see thy goodness in
them; and never abuse them to satisfy our sinful desires; Never abusing them:
or puff up our proud hearts; or make the^ our gods, putting our confidence or
felicity in them; But employing them to the ends appointed, as first and
chiefly, to maintain Gods religion, and relieve his servants:
but that we may employ them to the maintenance of thy religion, with all the
holy ends which thou have ordained them for: and especially for the relief and
comfort of our poor brethren, for who^ thou have taught us to pray daily as
for our selves; and to whom thou have given an interest in the use of our
goods. Esaias 58. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. etc.
Give us bowels of compassion toward the poor and needy, that we may take off
every heavy burden, relieve the oppressed, deal our bread to the hungry
souls, that their backs and bellies may bless us, and that thou may
remember us in the day of our adversity, and we lay up a sure foundation
against the time to come: that therein also we may show forth our homage to thy
divine Majesty, So to show our homage to God:
that we hold all of thy goodness; and declare the love we bear to thy
children for thy sake, and chiefly to them that most excel in thy graces, and
so the true practice of the Communion of Saints, And the communion of Saints:
waiting for the joyful sentence.
waiting for that joyful sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
Kingdom prepared for you, for when I was hungry, you gave me meat.

Forgive us our trespasses.]

And whereas our sins only do hinder our assurance, And seeing our sins
only do hinder all these things which we have begged:
that we are thy children, and cause us that we can neither behold thy glory,
nor feel the power and happiness of thy Kingdom; neither yet have that full
security for thy fatherly providence, and protection from all evil, which
otherwise we should find, and do moreover bring all contrary evils upon us, and
therefore thou have taught us to cry every day, 1. To pray for pardon of all
our sins:
forgive us our trespasses: Pardon (good Lord) and remove all our sins, that
keep away these good things from us. And that we may cry more earnestly for
forgiveness, never giving thee rest, until we have attained it; Because
herein alone stands all true happiness.
teach us that herein alone stands all true peace and blessedness, when we have
this full assurance sealed in our hearts, that our sins are pardoned; and that
all they whose sins are not remitted, are most accursed and unhappy. 2. To
this end to see the haynousnes of sin:
And to this end show us (good Father) first the heinousness of sin, by
making us to consider aright thy wrath, declared against it from heaven, In the
fearful punishment of the Angels:
in the fearful punishment of thy most excellent creatures the Angels, whom
for that one sin, even because they were not content with their estate, thou
have cast down into hell, to be reserved in chains of darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day; then to be damned to endless torments: and
afterward in our first parents, Our first parents:
cast from their happy estate, for eating ye forbidden fruit, and for whose sin
alone, all the curses of this life and that to come, fell not only upon
themselves but also all their posterity, even all of us, being wrapped under
the same condemnation, until we be delivered by Jesus Christ. Open our eyes to
see this thy wrath against sin yet more fully, not only upon the wicked in
the general destruction of the old world, and in turning the filthy Cities of
Sodom and The old world.
Gomorrah into ashes, to remain as eternal monuments to all posterity; Sodom.
and in preparing the lake burning with fire and brimstone, for an everlasting
punishment to all unbelievers, Hell prepared for the wicked:
and impenitent persons; but even against the sins of thine own dearest
children, And in the punishment of Gods dearest servants: As Moses:
as in y^ heavy punishment upon thine own faithful servant Moses, for so small a
sin in our account (as not honoring thee before the people, in believing and
auouching thy power and truth) that thou did cut him off for entering into
Canaan, which of al earthly things he must needs most desire, being the land
of promise, the type of heaven, and also after that he had led the people,
forty years toward it. And besides the punishment of David, And David.
and his house for that one sin, that thy hand did so pursue him and his, all
his life long; and so thy sharp corrections, laid upon all other thy dearest
servants, registered in thy book; Lord teach us yet more rightly to conceive
the vileness of sin by this one thing chiefly, And chiefly that upon our
Savior himself.
that the least sin of thine elect, could never have bin ransommed, but by
the unspeakable torments of thine own beloved Son, the Lord of glory,
taking our nature to become a sacrifice to appease thy wrath, and to satisfy
thy Justice: and how thou did pour out upon him, the full viols of thy
wrath, to cause him to sweat drops of blood, and to cry out; my God my God,
why have thou forsaken me. Give us thy children some true sense hereof, 3. To
have some sense of the innumerable evils, which each sin brings p. 5. l. 22
23. p. 6. 7.
and withal this grace to keep a continual remembrance of the innumerable
evils, which every sin brings even upon us, thine own children in our souls
or bodies, Upon Gods own children:
goods, name or friends, unless we prevent them by speedy and unfeigned
repentance; Unless they be prevented, especially depriuings us of Gods
protection and providence, and al power in prayer.
especially how thereby we are left wholly destitute of thy protection and
providence, and deprived of all comfort and power in prayer, so long as we
remain therein; and also of many extraordinary experiments of thy bounty,
which otherwise we should find. Make us able in some sort to comprehend the
greatness of sin, 4. To be able to comprehend in some sort the greatness of
our sin, how it is increased by circumstances, being ^om^mitted against the
infinite God: our high calling:
by the infiniteness of thy glorious Majesty, against whom each sin is
committed: and how our sins are increased hereby also, that they are
committed against our high calling to be Christians, and heirs of thy
Kingdom: with such abundant mercies, both ordinary and extraordinary; All
mercies:
and so many and strong means to restrain us; Means:
besides sundry vows and covenants renewed, Vows:
and that after mercy obtained, and pardon formerly sealed, After pardon
obtained.
upon our promise of amendment. Open our blind eyes to have some sight also of
the multitude of our sins, 5. To have some sight of the multitude of our
sins.
how they are more in number, then the stars of heaven, seeing they are every
breach of thy divine will, Being every breach of Gods Commandment, in thought:
revealed unto us in thy law and Gospel, and that not only in thought, word or
deed, Or in omitting the very least duty:
but even in omitting of any part thereof, or doing it without all our heart,
and all our strength; Besides Adams sin.
besides the sin of our first parents, whereby we are all the children of
wrath, and under thy curse; and also besides the corruption of our sinful
natures received from The corruption of our nature:
thence; whereupon we are so wholly inclined unto evil, that all the thoughts
of our hearts, Being wholly carried to evil:
are only evil continually; so as we cannot of our selves so much as think,
much less will any thing but that which is sinful; and hence also the
hardness of our hearts, And the hardness of our hearts.
that we are so little moved, either at the hearing of so many judgments, or
the inioying of so many mercies, to make any right use of them. 6. For a
continual feeling of ourdaily fraulties:
Vouchsafe us such a lively, and continual sense hereof, together with a
feeling of our daily slips, wants, frailties, infirmities, imperfections and
noisome lusts, issuing from this filthy puddle of original corruption in us,
that we may be weary of this body of sin, Traveling under them, Desiring
to be delivered.
groaning under the bondage of this our corruption, and sighing to be delivered
from it. 7. That we may see our most grievous sins, both before our calling
and since.
Show us also our most grievous sins, not only of our youth and ignorance,
but those much more which we have committed, since thou have called us by thy
grace unto so high a dignity, and convinced our consciences; chiefly our open
and scandalous sins, Chiefly our scandalous sins.
whereby we have most dishonored thee, causing thy Gospel to be evil spoken
of; grieved thy children, or any way hindered the salvation of others; that by
all these we may see what debtors we are, 8. That by all these we may see
what debtors we are:
and how unable to pay the least part, but to lie in hell for evermore; that we
may cry continually with David, And may be driven to cry for forgiveness, and
to run to the fountain of Chrisis blood.
Lord forgive us our sins, and blot out all our offenses; wash us thoroughly,
purge and cleanse us; thus running every moment, to the fountain of thy Sons
blood, which is open to all the house of Israel, for all sins and
uncleanness. And yet that we may find comfort in the al-sufficiencie thereof.
And yet withal that we may not be utterly overwhelmed, by the ugly view of the
multitud or lothsomenesse of our sins, as though they could not be pardoned,
nor we purged from the^; comfort us in this that thy Sons blood is of
infinite merit, and all sufficient to wash us from all our sins (though they
were the most heinous sins, that ever were committed; yea although we had all
the sins of the world upon us) so long as in a true feeling of them, we ca^
desire to be washed therein. 9. To the end that we may not be deceived in the
forgiunes of our sins.
But because we are all very ready to deceive our selves, imagining that we
are washen, when we remain still in our filthiness; seeing thou neither
call, nor admitst of any to this fountain, but them that come in true
repentance for all their sins, To pray for true repentance and faith, which
are the inseperable companions of forgiveness.
fully purposing amendment; and in a lively faith in thy sweet promises,
desiring to grow therein; Oh grant us grace, truly to see our particular
sins, and the vileness of them, and make us able in the sight of them, and
the sense of our estate and danger by them, to mourn bitterly for them,
looking at thy Son, whom we have pierced thereby; and so to hate and abhor
them, that being once purged in this Lauer, we may be ever afraid of defiling
our selves again, or of sinning against that precious blood. And to try them
both by the word, to be sincere. Wat. page 2. lin. 8.
Help us to try both our repentance and faith, by the holy rule which thou
have given us in thy law and Gospel, that we may know them to be such, as will
abide the trial, and not hypocritical; and which also have bin first wrought
in us, And such as have been wrought in us, by the Gospel, and do increase
and grow.
by the powerful preaching of thy Gospel, and do continually increase and
grow: which are the infallible evidences, yt they are sound and sincere. 10.
That we may continually examine and judge our selves.
Give us hearts to be daily examining, and judging our selves that we may escape
thy judgment. We entreat thee also again for our sinful Realms, 11. To
pray again for pardon of the sins of our land.
to pardon all the fearful prouocations thereof, and to be pacified at the
instant prayers of thy faithful servants, As the instant prayers of Gods
servants by the blood of Christ.
crying unto thee in all places by the blood of thy Son, which speaks better
things then the blood of Abel; Let that cry still prevail against the cry of
the sins, that thy mercy may be magnified in all the world.

As we forgive them that trespass against us.] Whereas we must pray to be
forgiven as we forgive.
And whereas thou (oh holy and gracious Father) have taught us ever to pray to
be forgiven, as we forgive them that trespass against us, telling us plainly
that if we forgive others for thy cause, thou will also forgive us; and
contrarily that if we will not forgive others, 1. To pray against all
maliciousnes and desire of revenge:
we shall never be forgiven: Change (good Lord) the wickedness of our sinful
hearts, which are most strongly bent to malice and revenge, that howsoever we
hate the sins and company of the wicked, That though we hate the sins of the
wicked and rejoice in the execution of Gods righteous judgments on them:
and whatsoever else is in them, whereby they dishonor thee, or show
themselves to be thine enemies: and although we also rejoice in the execution
of thy righteous judgments, whereby thou gettest thy self glory upon the
proud enemies of thy Church; and do also pray daily for the confounding of all
their wicked practices and devises; And pray for confounding their evil
practices:
yet Lord grant us hearts to seek the salvation of all sorts, Yet that we may
pray for and seek their salvation.
because we know not whether they belong to thine eternal election; and for
them that are but our enemies upon private respects, 2. For them that are our
enemies on private respects, to pray their sin may be pardoned:
give us grace that insteede of seeking revenge, we may pray earnestly for
them, that they may see their sins, and have their hearts changed, and so
obtain pardon for it: And moreover that we may seek to pacify them, And that
we may seek to pacify them and gain their love:
by offering them reconciliation or full satisfaction, doing them good or
gratifying them by any kindness, so far as may stand with their salvation and
credit of thy Gospel, even when they hunger to feed them, and when they thirst
to give them drink, to heap coals on their heads:
to heap coals upon their heads as thou have commanded; either to gain them
by our Christian kindness, or to leave them more without excuse; And get full
assurance of forgiveness to our selves.
and to seal up to our selves a most plentiful assurance of a full remission
of all our sins thereby.

Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.] Seeing Satan seeks
continually by temptations to draw us to sin to provoke the Lord against us
and bring some evil upon us.
And seeing (oh tender Father) that our deadly enemy seeks hourly by his
temptations to draw us to sin against thy heavenly Majesty to dishonor thee,
making us his vassals to do his will, so to strippe us utterly both of thy
protection and providence, and to cause thee to leave us in his hand, to bring
upon us thy wrath with all the evils following upon sin; whereupon our Savior
has taught us to pray always, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil: 1. To pray we may see the danger we stand in each hour.
Good Lord open our eyes to see the danger wherein we stand continually, and
first for the multitude of those damned spirits that range For the multitude of
damned spirits*
up and down day and night with a deadly malice seeking to devour us. Teach us
to know (oh holy Father) what their power is against us, 2. For their power to
tempt and destroy us in a moment.
if thou do not restrain it; that they are able to bring us to as fearful
sins, as ever they brought any of thy servants unto, and to destroy us utterly
in a moment both souls and bodies, with all y^ ever thou have given unto us, if
thou preserve us not. Acquaint us with their deep subtilties, 3. Because of
their subtilties:
both in fitting their temptations to our particular natures and dispositions,
Whereby they knowing our dispositions:
to our conditions, callings and occasions which they know perfectly; always
dogging us at the heels, and watching us, Mark and take all advantages:
and their meetest opportunities; whereby they take their fittest advantage to
overcome us, as against Eve and David, To solicit us to those sins wherein
they are most like to prevail, drawing us on by degrees, to yield first to
smaller matters which the world accounts no sin:
chiefly by soliciting us to those sins, wherein we have bin formerly
overtaken, or whereby they have most prevailed against thy dearest servants: and
that also in drawing us on by degrees, as first either to yield to some
smaller matters which the world accounts no sins, but trifles, or too much
precisenes; as Eve to eye the forbidden fruit, and to reason with the Serpent
about the temptation: Or not to avoid the occasions of temptation or neglect
our calling.
or else not to avoid the danger and occasions of the temptations, but thrust
our selves into them carelessely without any warrant, neglecting the calling
laid upon us; as David to lie idly on his bed in the afternoones insteede of
looking to the great affairs of his kingdom. 4. For their innumerable
allurements and baytes of this world:
Make us able yet more fully to conceive of our perpetual danger, through
their innumerable allurements and baits to deceive us both of the credit and
estimation of the world, with the riches and pleasures thereof; which they ever
hold forth and proffer unto us, Which they proffer.
if we will follow their persuasions; 5. For their threatenings if we will be so
precise as to make conscience of each of Gods Commandments.
and otherwise threatening not only the loss, or at least the hazarding of all
these, but more also the hatred, disgrace and reproach of the world, with
depriving us of all comforts, the loss of our goods, with many other evils,
which we must be sure to look for daily at the hands of malicious men; if we
will be so strict as to make conscience of every one of thy comma^dements, so
as we will not do the least thing forbidden, nor omit the least duty commanded
us. And whereas we are ordinarily secure in an ouerweening of our own strength
and ability to resist Satan; Show us (oh Lord) even in our hearts, 6. For the
vileness of our nature ready to conspire with them:
the vileness of our corrupt nature, which is ever ready as a bond slave of
Satan's, and a traitor against our souls to conspire with him presently to our
utter perdition, and as ready to run after and swallow every one of his deadly
temptations, And to swallow every bait:
as ever fish the bait: Without all strength to resist.
so as we have no strength in the world to help our selves, but all against our
selves, more then that thou graciously reachest forth thine hand unto us,
strengthening and delivering us. 7. For Gods displeasure, to leave us in their
power for our security.
And herein we pray thee also to reveal unto us that great danger which we
stand in continually from thy glorious Majesty, seeing we have no warrant of
protection, or any aid from thee (but rathe just cause of fear that thou
should give us up wholly into the power of the tempter, and our own
corruption) longer then that we make conscience to observe thy watch, walking
carefully in every one of thy Commandments; using diligently every means of
grace, and avoiding as warily each least occasion of temptation. 8. For
Satan's cunning in hiding all this danger, and the ugliness of sin:
And moreover seeing the subtle te^pter in all his temptations, uses all his
cunning to hide all this danger with the vglines of sin, and the misery that he
knows it will bring upon us; showing only the fair side of it, Showing
only the faireside of it what we shall get by it, and using the fittest
instruments to effect his purpose:
as the safety, credit, pleasure or gain which we shall get by it, and also
uses the fittest instruments to persuade us hereunto; as the counsel or
example of the wisest, learned, or wealthiest and of chiefest reputation, and
sometimes of those who have a name for godliness, so changing himself into an
Angel of light, Never co^^ing like him self to tempt,
and never coming like himself, (unless to drive poor souls into utter
despair) whereby he not only deceiues the world, Whereby he deceiues all the
world:
but even us thy children, either to make us to think sin to be no sin, And
often times Gods own children, making sin to seem no sin.
or at least to presume to sin, because thou art so merciful, or for that thou
do not punish presently. Cause us (good Father) 2. To pray we may have a
continual remembrance of the several miseries of each sin, Watch. p. 5. 6.
7.
to keep a continual and fresh remembrance hereof, and withal of that
fearful misery which we hale upon our heads by every sin; especially the
wound of conscience, which no creature was ever able to bear, Chiefly the
wounds of conscience which none can bear: and will come unless it be
speedily prevented:
and which will certainly come upon us, unless it be prevented by speedy
repentance. And howsoever the reprobate and the ungodly may wallow in their
filthiness, and yet seem to be more free from punishment the^ any other, That
although wicked men escape here, who are reserved for hell, the Lord yet will
not suffer us so:
because thou reseruest them for hell, and therefore fattest them for the day of
slaughter: yet make us to know that thou will not let any of us thy children
(who have specially given up our names to thee, to make a more sincere
profession of thy Gospel) to commit the very least sin, but that thou will
surely make us feel the smart of it, unless we prevent it presently by
unfeigned repentance: Especially when our sins are scandalous:
and that thou will do openly when our sins are heinous or to the offense of
others; because thou will neither be dishonored by us, Because he will not be
dishonored by us, nor let us be damned:
nor let us be condemned with the world; but wilt surely correct us to let all
the wicked see with what a perfect hatred thou hate all sin, And that the
wicked may see his hatred against sin, and what remains for the^ for ever.
when thou do punish it so severely in thine own children, and what plagues
remain for them eternally. Yea (oh gracious Father) make us to fear always, 3.
To pray we may fear alvvay lest God should leave us never so little, because
of Satan's most deadly malice against us who dreescaped from him:
lest thou should leave us never so little; and to suspect al our ways, in
as much as Satan carries a more deadly hatred against us, To provoke the Lord
against us:
who are escaped from his tyranny, then against any other people of the world;
and therefore seeks every hour to provoke thee against us, to leave us in his
hand, And for that our sins will more dishonor him, and harden more to
perdition then of any other:
and also because he knows that our sins will more cause thy glorious name
to be blasphemed, and harden more to utter perdition, than the sins of any
other; Whence so few have escaped to the end,
whereupon very few of thy worthiest servants through his continual dogging
them, have escaped to the end of their lives without some grievous foiles and
wounds, Without some grievous foiles.
the scarres whereof they have carried with them to their graves, to the
blemishing their profession, and wounding their consciences, with the grief
and shame of the godly, and insulting of the wicked. 4. To learn to vvatch and
pray as the remidie against all temptations:
And therefore as thou have taught us this as the remedy against every assault
of the enemy, to watch and pray that we enter not into temptation; so make us
always able to observe this thy watch which thou have set before us, And to be
better acquainted without selves:
and to learn to be better acquainted with our own selves and our estates,
knowing our particular infirmities, And weaknesses:
and wherein we are weak, that we may put on daily the complete armor, To put
on the complete armor, chiefly the shield of faith:
chiefelie the shield of faith, and brestplate of righteousness to save us from
his fiery darts, And to have the word ever in readiness:
and withal to have thy holy Word ever in readiness against every temptation,
That stre^gthned by the spirit and continuing in prayer we may stand fast:
which is the sword of thy Spirit, able utterly to vanquish him, and put him to
flight, that being stre^gthened by thy holy Spirit, obtained by continuing in
instant prayer, And preserve our selves without any grievous wounds, until
we have gotten the final conquest.
we may be able to stand fast in the evil day, and so finish our course,
until we have gotten the final conquest, without any grievous wounds or
foil; to thine everlasting glory, and our own greater triumph and honor in
the heavens. 5. That we pray not against all temptation:
We do not pray that we should not be tempted at all; for thou have taught us
to account it exceeding joy, when we fall into diverse temptations, knowing the
good that comes thereby; but that we may endure temptation, But only that in
them we may overcome:
fighting valiantly and ouercomming, So to receive the crown of glory in the
end.
that when we are tried we may have the crown of glory set upon our heads.

For thine is the kingdom, power and glory, We have begged all from the Lord:
for ever and ever: Amen.] We have been bold (oh gracious Father) to beg all
these things from they heavenly Majesty, 1. Because all kingdom, power and
glory are his, and we have received all from him.
because all kingdom, power and glory belong only to thee; acknowledging
that whatsoever good things we enjoy, we have received them all from thy rich
and fatherly bounty; 2. Because he will grant us all good things, above all
that we can ask:
and being certainly assured that as thou have bidden us to pray thus, so thou will grant us all these things which we have begged in thy Sons name, and
whatsoever else is good for us, even above all that we are able to ask; So
far as shall be for his glory and our good:
so far as shall be for thine own glory (seeing thou art absolute Lord and
King in heaven and in earth, and do by thy mighty power and wisdom
dispose and guide all things, Seeing he guides and ouerruleth all things to
serve hereunto:
ouerruling the very counsels and rage of all wicked men and devils, as shall
make most for thine own glory and the greatest good of us thine own obedient
subjects and children) and have assured us that asking thus in faith, And has
assured us that asking in faith, we shall have:
we shall receive; That we may set forth by good experience the glory of
thy dominion and power, with the happiness of thy Kingdom, That we may set
forth the glory and happiness of his kingdom:
to all succeeding ages; to which we do hereby bind our selves all the days
of our life, and to live as the loyal subjects of this thy Kingdom, Whereunto
we bind our selves, and to live as his subjects all our days:
to thine everlasting glory; and so return all possible thanks, praise and
dominion to thy heavenly Majesty, And so return all praise and thanks,
saying, Amen.
saying ever, Amen, Be it so (oh LORD holy and true) as we do fully
believe that it shall be. Even so Lord Jesus.
Even so Amen. Amen, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

FINIS.

