ENGLANDS Parnassus: OR The choysest Flowers of our Modern Poets, with their
Poetical comparisons.

Descriptions of Bewties, Personages, Castles, Palaces, Mountains, Groves,
Seas, Springs, Rivers, etc.

Whereunto are annexed other various discourses, both pleasant and profitable.

NL

printer's device of N. Ling

Imprinted at London for N.L.C.B. and T.H. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Thomas Mounson, Knight.
ENglish Maecenas, bounties elder brother,
The spreading wing, whereby my fortune flies;
Unto thy wit, and virtues, and none other,
I consecrate these sacred Poesies.
Which whilst they live, (as they must live for ever)
Shall give thy honor life, and let men know,
That those to succor virtue who persevere,
Shall conquer time, and Laethes ouerflow.
^pickt these flowers of Learning from their stem,
Whose heavenly Wits and golden Pens have chac't
Dull ignorance that long affronted them.
In view of whose great glories thou art placed,
That whilst their wisdoms in these writings flourish,
Thy fame may live, whose wealth does wisdom norish.
Your Worships humbly at command. R. A.

To the Reader.
I Hang no Iuie out to sell my Wine,
The Nectar of good wits will sell it self;
I fear not, what detraction can define,
I sail secure from Enuies storm or shelfe.
I set my picture out to each man's vewe,
Limd with these colors, and so cunning arts,
That like the Phaenix will their age renew,
And conquer Envy by their good deserts.
If any Cobbler carpe above his shoo,
I rather pity, then repine his action,
For ignorance still makes much adoo,
And wisdom loves that, which offe^ds detraction.
Go fearles forth my book, hate cannot harm thee,
Apollo bred thee, and the Muses arm thee.
R. A.

A Table of all the special matters contained in this Book.
A
ALbion 348 Angels. Page 1.2 Ambition 3 Affliction 7. vid. poverty. Art 9
Audacitie 8 Avarice 10 August 369 Autumnus 368 Apollo 372 Acheron 504 Assault
375 Adam 372 Astonishment 462.446 Astrology 345 Arithmeticke 345
B
Beauty. 13.385.465 Banishment 21 Bashfulnesse 21 Bliss 21 Bounty 23
Battle 345 Beasts 498.486 Byrds 487
C
CAre 24 Charity 25 Chastity 26 Children 28 Christ 28 Cyprus 353 Cynthia 355
Cupid 357 Ceremony 379 Ceston 407 Confusion of languages. 384 Clamor 457 Care
of children 462 Change 29 Chance 30 Counsel 31 Combat 347 Concord 32
Conscience 33 Craft 36 Country. Commonweal. 37 Content 38 Court 41 Courtier
effeminate 352 Courage 39.448 Courtesy 45.439 Cruelty 46 Custom 47 Calm
weather 359 Company 452
D
DAlliance 423 Danger 47 Dearth 346 Death 49.453.445 Dread 49 Delaie 54 Deluge
352 Desire 56 Destenie 57 Despair 60 Discord 64 Dissimulation 67.428 Division
of the day natural. 324 Diliculum 326 Description of Mammo 256 Diana 555
Discontent 377 Doubt 381 Description of Beauty and Personage. 385 Descript. of
Pall. Cast. etc. 466 Descrip. of seas, Rivers, etc. 478 Drunkards 450.352
Devil 92 Disdain 345
E
EArth. 68 End 68 Envy 70 Error 73.434 Eden 349 Egypt 349 Echo 503 Eagle
504.505
F
FAith 75 Fame 75 Famine 85 Fate 86 Fear 88.431 Feeling 264 Fortitude 91
Felicity 93 Folly. Fools 94 Fortune 96 Friendship. Friends 103 Frugalitie 106
Fury 107 Fight 454 Furies 502 Flight 433 Fishes 487
G
Geometry 343 Gentleness 109 Gifts 108 Graces 496 Gentry 110 Gluttony 110 Good
name 113 Goodness 113 God 114 Good deeds 120 Greatness 121 Gallicinium 325
H
HAte 129 Hargabush 382 Heaven 125 Heart 128 Hearing 262 Haste 132 Horse 382
Hell 133 Honor 133 Hope 136 445 Humility 140 Hypocrisy 141 Heat 373 Host
376 Herbs 491 Harpyes 352 Jerusalem 349
I
IEalouzie 141 Intempestanox 337 Ignorance 146 Impatience 147 Joy 458 Infamy
147 Ingratitude 147 Innocence 148 Inconstancy 150 Ill company 450 Injustice
151 Justice 152 January 368 July 370
K
KIngs 155.451 Kingdoms 158 Knowledge 159 Kisses 344
L
Labor 161.460 Learning 162 Leachery 163 Laws 165 Liberty 166 463 Life 167
Love 170.429 Lovers 380 Logistillaes Castle 466 Logic 342
M
Magic 192 Man 193 Marriage 198 Malady 201 Misery 203 Melancholy 205
Miscellanea 496 Memory 205 Mercy 206 Mischief 206 Mind 208 Murder 210 Muses
211 Music 215.343 Mediae noctis inclinatio 324 Mane 327 Meridies 331 Morpheus
370 Multitude 464 Majesty 442
N
NEpenthe 503 Nature 216 Nobility 217 Noctis initium 339.334 Noctis concubium
335 Neptune 371.372 Night 451 Nilus Nilus
O
OLdage 219 Opinion 221 Opportunity 222 Occasion. 222
P
Passion 225 Parents 226 Palmer 352 Peace 227 Pleasure 229 Poesy 231 Poets 234
Poetical descriptions 340 Plenty 238 Policy 239.459 Poverty 241 Prayer 242
Praise 242 Providence 243 Pride 244 Paradise 354 Phoebus 372 Poetical
comparisons 420 Phaenix 506 Princes 246 People 344 Proteus 371 Posterity 385
Proper Epithites, etc. 482
Q
Quietness 249
R
RAge 439 Reason 294 Renown 381 Repentance 252 Rest 254 Revenge 254 Riches
Rhetoric 345 Rainbowe 353 Rome 373
S
Sacrilege 258 Secrecy 259 Silence 259 Senses 260 Sight 260 Smelling 263
Sin 265 Slander 267 Solis ortus 330 Solis occasus 331 Spring 364 Sleep 269
Solitariness 270 Soldiers 271 Soul 271 Sorrow 278.424.426 Suspicion 281
Summer 368 Skirmish 376 Sorrows 424 Satires 489
T
Tasting 26^ Tears 281 Temperance 282 Thoughts 283 Thetis 371 Time 284 Truth
287 Theology 340 Treason 288 Trees 492 Tyranny 289 Thirst. 347.374 Tempests
35^
V
Vacation 379 Virtue 290 Vice 293 Victory 294 Understanding 295 Vows 295
Virginity 296 Victory 452 Use 297 Vesper. 333 Venus 356
W
War 297.461 Will 301 Wit 304 Woe 306 Words 307 VVomem 310 Wrath 316 World
318 Winds 349.493 Winter 367
Y
Youth. 321.
FINIS.
Errata.
Which for with 27. eurse, curse 28. but will, but who will 50 frown, frowning
33. rhyme time 37. Stouer Storer 38. Prophets Prophet 57 shrid third 58. Title
of Envy left out 70. ardeus ardens 78 euesit euexit 7^. angury augury 90
amists mists 90. brine bring 91. guilt gilt 92. aquersitie adversity 106.
Basis Rasis 112. beine being 122. title of pain, 124. for 225. stary star
128. wear wears 136 tode trod 140, fierer feicer 105 seut set, 177 Dictynua
Dictynna 181. for natures of magic 192. shoot-fire, shot free. floe sloe 233.
flay stay 231. quiue^'s quire's 24^. presbitie presbitrie ^52. infancy injury
ibid. paron pardon 253 her hell 257. sosophist, sophist 28^. art heart, 290
Fitz Griffon F^^z Ieffrey, 304 Murston Ma^ston 32^. harkenger harbenger. 326.
chearing checkering 328. Soles solis 330. hunnid humid 334. nidnight midnight
338. dreadly deadly 338. grow grows 352. Camus Cadmus 468. twindring twining
480 Spanie Spaw 465. Gauges Ganges 486. Guylon Gyhon 493. Phyton Physon 493.
Hector Nectar 493. neues done Neroes doom 494.

THE CHOYSEST FLOWers of our Modern English Poets.
Angels.
Fair is the heaven where happy souls have place,
In full enioyment of felicity,
Whence they do still behold the glorious face
Of the divine eternal majesty.
More fair is that where those Idees on hie
Enraunged be, which Plato so admirde,
And pure intelligences from God inspirde.
Yet fairer is that heaven, in which do reign
The sovereign powers and mighty Potentates,
Which in their hie protections do contain
All mortal Princes and imperial states.
And fairer yet, whereas the royal seats
And heavenly Dominations are set:
From whom all earthly governance is fet.
Yet far more fair be those bright Cherubins
Which all with golden wings are over dight,
And those eternal burning Seraphins
Which from their faces dart out fiery light.
Yet fairer then they both, and much more bright
Be the Angels and Archangels, which attend
On Gods own person, without rest or end.
Ed. Spencer. The first composing of the number nine,
Which of all numbers is the most divine,
From orders of the Angels does arise,
Which be contained in three Hierarchies,
And each of these three Hierarchies in three,
The perfect form of true felicity:
And of the Hierarchies I spoke of erst,
The glorious Epiphania is the first,
In which the hie celestial orders bin
Of Thrones, of Cherubs, and of Seraphin:
The second holds the mighty Principates
The Ephionia, the third Hierarchy
With Virtues, Angels, and Archangels be.
And thus by threes we aptly do define,
And do compose this sacred number nine:
Yet each of these nine orders grounded be
Upon some one particularitie.
M. Drayton. Out of the Hierarchies of Angels sheene,
The gentle Gabriell God called from the rest:
Twixt God and souls of men that righteous been.
Ambassador he is for every blessed.
The just commands of heavens eternal king,
Twixt skies and earth he up and down does bring.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. Our walls of flesh that close our souls, God knew how
weak, and gave
A further guard, even every man, an Angel guide to save:
And men for us be angels, while they work our souls to save.
VV. Warner. -- If Angels fight
Weak men must fall, for heaven still gards the right.
W. Shakespeare. Ambition.
Ambition is a Vultur vile,
That feeds on the heart of pride,
And finds no rest when all is tried.
For worlds cannot confine the one,
The Other lists and bounds has none.
And both subvert the mind, the state
Procure destruction, envy, hate.
S. Daniell. Ambition, fie upon thy painted cheek,
(Woe worth the beauty sleeps not with the face)
For thou art hateful, foul, vnfaire, unmeet:
A poyson-painted pleasure* mads men chase.
Thou reasonlesse desire that makes men seek
To kiss the same, whilst fire does thee embrace.
Thou only strong disordered, rulest passion,
Thou marst men's minds, and pu^st them out of fashion.
I. Markham. The golden chain of Homers hie devise
Ambition is, or cursed avarice:
Which all gods haling being tied to Jove
Him from his settled height could never move.
Intending this, that though that powerful chain
Of most Herculean vigor to constrain
Men from true virtue, or their present states,
Attempt a man, that manlesse changes hates:
And is enobled with a deathlesse love,
Of things eternal dignified above:
Nothing shall stir him from adorning still,
This shape with virtue and his power with will.
G. Chapman. -- The greedy thirst of royal crown
That knows no kindred, nor regards no right,
Stird Porrex up, to pluck his brother down:
Who unto him assembling foreign might,
Made war on him, and fell himself in fight:
Whose death to avenge his mother merciless
Most merciles of women, Eden hight:
Her other son fast sleeping did oppress,
And with most cruel hand him murdered pitiless.
Ed. Spencer. A diadem once dazeling the eye,
The day too dark, to see affinity:
And where the arm is stretched to reach a crown,
Friendship is broke, the dearest things thrown down.
M. Drayton. -- Realme-rape, spares neither kin nor friend.
I. Higgins. Mir. of Ma. Who fight for crowns, set life, set all to light,
Who aim so hie, will die, or hit the white.
Doctor Lodge. One rises by an others fall, and some do clime so fast,
That in the clouds they do forget what climats they have past
W. Warner. The Eagle minded minds that nestle in the sun,
Their lofty heads have leaden heels, and end where they begun.
Idem. O, fatal is the ascent unto a crown,
From whence men come not down, but tumble down
S. Daniell. Like as the heaven two Suns cannot contain,
So in the earth two Kings cannot remain
Of equal state: so does Ambition crave,
One King will not another equal have.
Tho. Hudson. Transl. Whom so the minds unquiet state vpheaues,
Be it for love or fear; when fancy reaues
Reason her right, by mocking of the wit,
If once the cause of this affection flit,
Reason prevailing on the unbridled thought,
Down falls he, who by fancy climbd aloft.
I. H. M. of Magist. Desire of rule within a climbing breast
To break a vow, may bear the buckler best.
G. Gascoigne. In some courts shall you see Ambition
Sit peecing Dedalus old waxen wings:
But being clapped on and they about to fly,
Even when their hopes are busied in the clouds
They melt against the sun of majesty,
And down they tumble to destruction.
Tho. Dekkar. Better sit still men say then rise and fall.
High state the bed wherein misfortune lies.
Mars most unfriendly, when most kind he seems:
Who climeth hie on earth, he hardest lights,
And lowest falls attends the highest flights.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. As highest hills with tempest be most touched,
And tops of trees most subject unto wind,
And as great Towers with stone strongly couched,
Have many falls when they be vnderminde,
Even so by proof in worldly things we find,
That such as climb the top of hie degree,
From fear of falling never can be free.
I. H. M. of Magist. Ambition with the Eagle loves to build,
Nor on the mountain dreads the winter blast:
But with self soothing does the humor guild
With arguments, correcting what is past.
Forecasting kingdoms, dangers vnforecast:
Leaving this poor word of content to such,
Whose earthly spirits have not fiery tuch.
M. Drayton. -- The ambitious once inured to reign,
Can never brook a private state again.
S. Daniell. -- Warlike Caesar tempted with the name
Of this sweet Island never conquered,
And envying the Britons blazed fame,
(O hideous hunger of dominion) hither came.
Ed. Spencer. -- Ambition
In princely palace and in stately towns,
Does often creep, and close within conuaies
(To leave behind it) damage and decaies:
By it be love and amity destroid.
It breaks the laws, and common concord beats.
Kingdoms and realms it topsie turuy turns.
G. Gascoigne. Be not ambitiously a king, nor grudgingly decline,
One God did root out Cis his stock, and raise up Iesses line.
VV. Warner. The aspirer once attained unto the top,
Cuts off those means by which himself got up.
S. Daniel. Haughty Ambition makes a breach in hills,
Runs dry by sea amongst the raging scills.
Th. Hud. Affection.
Affection is a coal that must be coolde,
Else suffered, it will set the heart on fire,
The fire has bounds, but deep desire has none.
VV. Shakespeare. Affection by the countenance is descri'de,
The light of hidden fire it self discouers,
And love that is concealed, betraies poor Lovers.
Th. Marlowe. -- Most wretched man,
That to affections does the bridle lend,
In their beginning they are weak and wan,
But soon through sufferance grow to fearful end,
Whilst they are weak, betime with them contend.
For when they once to perfect strength do grow,
Strong wars they make, and cruel battrie bend,
Against fort of reason, it to overthrow.
Ed. Sp. Affliction.
If so Affliction once her war begin,
And threat the feeble sense with sword and fire,
The mind contracts her self and shrinketh in,
And to her self she gladly does retire.
As Spiders touched seek their webbes in most part,
As Bees in storms unto their hiues return,
As blood in danger gathers to the heart,
As men seek towns when foes the country burn.
I. Dauies. If ought can touch us ought, afflictions looks
(Make us to look into our selves so near)
Teach us to know our selves beyond all books,
Or all the learned schools that ever were.
Idem. This makes our senses quick and reason clear,
Resolves our will and rectifies our thought:
So do the winds and thunder cleanse the air,
So working seas settle and purge the wine,
So lopt and pruned trees do flourish fair.
So does the fire the drossie gold refine.
I. Dauies. Audacitie.
What need we creep the cross to give unto a begging saint,
Tush, tush, a fig for book love, none be fortunate, that faint.
W. Warner. Things out of hope are compast often with ventering,
Chiefly in love, whose leave exceeds commission:
Affection faints not like a pale faced coward,
But then woes best, when most his choice is froward.
W. Shakespeare. Blushing and sighing Theseus never strove
To woo and win Antiope his love.
I. Weeuer. -- When all is done that do we may,
Labor we sorrowing all the night, and suing all the day,
The female faulty custom yields less merit, greatest pay:
And ventrous more then virtuous means does bear the bell away.
W. Warner. Art.
Art has a world of secrets in her powers.
M. Drayton. Art curbeth nature, nature guildeth Art.
I. Marston. Things senseless live by Art, and rational die,
By rude contempt of Art and industry.
G. Chapman. Art has an enemy called ignorance.
B. Johnson. Arts perish, wanting honor and applause.
D. Lodge. -- Arts best nurse is honors chaste desire,
And glory sets all studious hearts on fire.
Tho. Storer. Art must be won by art and not by might.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Valor and Art are both the sons of Jove,
Both brethren by the father not the mother:
Both peers without compare, both live in love,
But Art does seem to be the elder brother,
Because he first gave life unto the other.
Who afterward gave life to him again,
Thus each by other does his life retain.
Chapter Fitz. Ieffery. Art is nobilities true register,
Nobility Arts champion still is said:
Learning is fortitudes right calender,
And fortitude is Learnings saint and aid,
Thus if the balances twixt both bewaide,
Honor sheelds Learning from all injury,
And Learning honor from black infamy.
Idem. Vain is the Art that seeks it self for to deceive.
Ed. Spencer. Avarice.
-- Greedy Avarice by him did ride,
Upon a Camel laden all with gold,
Two iron coffers hung on either side,
With precious metal, full as they might hold:
And in his lap a heap of coin he told,
For of his wicked pelf his god he made,
And unto hell, himself for money sold
Accursed usury was all his trade,
And right and wrong alike in equal balance waied.
Ed. Spencer. Forth of a Desert wood an ugly beast
There seemed to come, whose shape was thus defined,
Ears of an Ass, a Wolf in head and breast,
A carcass all with pinching famine pined,
A Lions grisly iawe, but all the rest
To fox-like shape did seem to be inclined,
In England, France, in Italy and Spaeine,
Yea all the world this monster seemed to rain,
Where ere this cruel monster set his foot,
He killed and spoyld of every sort and state:
No height of birth or state with him did boot
He conquered Kings and crowns all in like rate.
Yea this beasts power had taken so deep a root,
It entered in Christ's Vicars sacred gate,
And vexed Cardinals and Bishops chief,
And bred a scandal even in our belief.
S. I. Harr. Python whom Phoebus killed with thousand darts,
Was monster less then this by thousand parts.
Idem. Eriphilaes Armor.
In vain it were for to declare in Verse,
How sumptuously her armor all was wrought,
All set with stones, and set with Indian Gold,
Perfect for use, and pleasant to behold.
Mounted she was, but not upon a steed,
In stead whereof, she on a Wolf did sit:
A Wolf whose match Apulia does not breed,
Taught to obey, although she vs'de no bit.
And all of sandy color was her weed,
Her arms were this, for such a Champion fit,
An ugly toade was painted on her shield,
With poison swollen, and in a sable field.
Idem. -- Avarice, all armed in hooking ^enters,
All clad in birdlime, without bridge she venters,
Through fell Charibdis and false Syrtes Nesse,
The more her wealth, the more her wretchedness,
Cruel, respectlesse, friendlesse, faithless else,
Those foul base figures in each dunghill poole,
Like Tantalus starved in the midst of store,
Not that she has, but what she wants she counts,
A well-wing'd Bird, that never lofty mounts.
I. Syluister. Transl. Regard of worldly mucke does fowly blend,
And low abase the hie heroike spirit,
That joys for crowns and kingdoms to contend.
Ed. Spencer. We aged carke to live, and leave an overplus in store,
Perhaps for spend-alls: so amidst abundance live we pore.
W. Warner. Those which much covet, are with gain so fond,
That what they have not that which they possess:
They scatter and unloose from their bond.
And so by hoping more, they have but less,
Or gaining more, the profit of excess
Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
That they prove banckrout in this pore rich vain.
VV. Shakespeare. Those that will all devour, must all forgo.
Tho. Dekkar. Content thee with vnthreatned mean, and play not Aesops dog
The gold that gentle Bacchus gave, did greedy Mydas clog:
Commit not treasure with thy child to greedy minded men,
Thou leauest Polydor a spoil to Polymnestor then.
VV. Warner. Beauty.
-- Sacred Beauty is the fruit of sight,
That courtesy that speaks before the tongue:
The feast of souls, the glory of the light,
Envy of age, and everlasting young:
Pitties commander, Cupids richest throne,
Music entraunced, never duly sung:
The sum and court of all proportion.
And that I may dull speeches least afford,
All Rhethorickes Flowers, in less then in a word.
G. Chapman. -- Beauty borne of heavenly race.
Beauty (daughter of marvel) o see how
Thou can disgracing sorrows sweetly grace,
What power thou show in a distressed browe,
That make affliction fair give tears their grace.
What? can vntressed locks, can torn rent hair?
A weeping eye, a wailing face be fair?
I see then artlesse feature can content,
And that true Beauty needs no ornament.
S. Daniell. -- Beauty is the bait which with delight
Does man allure for to enlarge his kind,
Beauty the burning lamp of heavens light,
Darting her beams into each feeble mind,
Against whose power, nor God nor man can find
Defense, reward, the danger of the wound:
^ut being hurt, seek to be medicinde,
Of her that first did stir that mortal wound.
Ed. Spencer. -- Beauty is woman's golden crown,
Man's conqueresse and feminine renown:
^ot ioind with love, who dear yet ever sold it?
^or bewties cheap, except loves eye behold it.
I. Weeuer. -- Beauty is an adamant to all.
^ewtie, natures Iuie-bush each passenger does call.
W. Warner. ^eldome wants guests where Beauty bids the feast,
^ens eyes with wonders nere are satisfied,
At fairest signs best welcome is surmised,
The shrine of love does seldom offering want,
Nor with such counsel, clients never scant.
M. Drayton. All Orators are dumb where Beauty pleads.
W. Shakespeare. Beauty it self does of it self persuade
The eyes of men, without an Orator?
What needs then Apollogies be made,
To set forth that which is so singular?
Idem. Naught under heaven so strongly does allure
The sense of man, and all his mind possess,
As Bewties lovely bate that does procure
Great warriors often their rigor to repress,
And mighty hands forget their manliness.
Driven with the power of an heart-robbing eye,
And wrapped in flowers of a golden tresse.
That can with melting pleasance mollify,
Their hardened hearts enured to blood and cruelty.
Ed. Spencer. O how can beauty master the most strong,
And simple truth subdue auenging wrong?
Idem. No armor can be found that can defend,
Transpercing rays of crystal pointed eyes.
S. Daniell. Hard is that heart which Beauty makes not soft.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. -- Who so young that loves not?
Or who so old that women's Beauty moves not?
W. Weeuer. A spark of Beauty burns a world of men.
Idem. O what is Beauty if it be not seen?
Or what is it to be seen and not admired,
And though admired, unless in love desired.
Never were cheeks of Roses locks of Amber,
Ordained to live imprisoned in a Chamber.
S. Daniell. Nature created Beauty for the view,
(Like as the fire for heat, the Sun for light)
The fair do ever hold this pledge as due,
By ancient charter to live most in sight,
As she that is debarred it, has not right:
In vain our friends from this do us dehort,
For Beauty will be where is most resort.
Idem. All excellence of shape is made for sight,
To be a beetle else were no defame:
Hid Bewties lose their ends, and wrong their right.
G. Chapman. Heaven made beauty like her self to view,
Not to be lapt up in a smoakie mewe:
A rosy tainted feature is heavens gold,
Whilst all men joy to touch, all to behold.
M. Drayton. The ripest corn dies if it be not reapt,
Beauty alone is lost too early kept.
Chapter Marlowe. It has been through all ages ever seen,
That with the praise of arms and chivalry,
The praise of Beauty still has joined been,
And that for reasons special priuitie,
For either does on other much rely,
For he me seems most fittest is to serve,
That can her best defend from villainy,
And she most fit his service does deserve,
That fairest is, and from her faith does never swerve.
Ed. Spencer. -- Beauty is more bright and clear.
The more it is admired of many a wight,
And noblest she that served is of noble Knight.
Idem. Rich Beauty, that each Lover labors for,
Tempting as heaps of new coynd glowing Gold,
(Rackt of some miserable treasurer,)
Draws his desires, and them in chains enfold,
Urging him still to tell it and conceal it:
But Bewties treasure never can be told,
None can peculiar joy, yet all must steal it.
O Beauty, this same bloody siege of thine,
Starues me that yield, and feeds me till I pine.
G. Chapman. O Beauty, still thy Empire swims in blood,
And in thy peace, war stores himself with food.
Idem. O Beauty Syrene fair enchaunting good,
Sweet silent Rhethoricke of persuading eyes:
Dumb eloquence, whose power does move the blood
More then the works, or wisdom of the wise.
Still harmony whose Diapazon lies
Within a brow, the key which passions move
To ravish the sense and play a world in love.
S. Daniell. Beauty enchasing love, love gaining Beauty,
To such as conflict Sympathies enfold:
To perfect riches does a sounder duty
Then all endeavors, for by all consent
All wealth and wisdom rests in time content.
More force and art is beauty joined with love,
Then thrones with wisdom, joys of them composde,
Are arms more proof against any grief we prove:
Then all their virtue scorning misery,
Or judgments grave in stoicke gravity.
G. Chapman. Beauty a beggar, fieit is too bad
When in it self sufficiency is had:
It was not made to please the wandering eye,
But an attire to adorn sweet modesty.
If modesty and women once do sever,
Farewell our fame, farewell our name for ever.
M. Drayton. O Beauty that betraies thy self to every amorous eye,
To trap thy proud professors, what is it but wantons try?
Where through it sildom haps the fair from mean deceits to fly.
W. Warner. This Beauty fair, is an inchauntment made
By natures witchcraft, tempting men to buie
With endless shows, what endlesly will fade,
Yet promise chapmen all eternity.
But like to goods ill got a fault it has,
Brings men inricht therewith to beggary,
Unless the enricher be as rich in faith
Enamourd, (like god self-love) with her own
Seen in an other then it is heaven alone.
G. Chapman. -- Beauty is a baine
To such as feed their fancy with fond love,
That when sweet youth with lust is overthrown,
It rues in age.
R. Green. Where Venus strikes with Beauty to the quick,
It little vailes safe reason to apply:
Few are the cares for such as are love sick,
But love.
Idem. Truce, war, and woe, do wait at Beauties gate,
Time lost, laments, reports and privy grudge:
And last, fierce love is but a partial judge,
Who yields for service shame, for friendship hate.
D. Lodge. The bees of Hybla have besides sweet honey smarting stings,
And beauty does not want a bait that to repentance brings.
W. Warner. -- Fair colors soonest soil,
Things of best price are subject most to spoil.
Chapter Middleton. The fairer cheek has oftentimes a soul
Leprous as sin it self, then hell more foul.
Th. Dekkar. All men do err, because that men they be,
And men with Beauty blinded, cannot see.
G. Peele. Beauty, heaven and earth this grace does win,
It supples rigor, and it lessons sin.
G. Chapman. Naught is under heavens wide hollownes,
That moves more dear compassion of mind:
Then Beauty to unworthy wretchedness
Through enuies snares, or fortunes freakes unkind.
Ed. Spencer. -- Nothing ill becomes the fair,
But cruelty which yields unto no prayer.
S. Daniell. Like as the Sun in a Diameter
Fires and inflames objects removed far,
And heateth kindly, shining laterally,
So Beauty sweetly quickens when it is nie:
But being separated and removed,
Burns where it is cherisht, murders where it loved.
Chapter Marlowe. Simples fit Beauty, fie on drugs and art.
M. Drayton. -- Fair words and powre-attractiue beauty,
Bring men to want on in subiectiue duty.
I. Weeuer. -- Wayward Beauty does not fancy move.
A frown forbids, a smile ingendreth love.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. -- What else is form, but fading air?
Yea often, because assaulted of, it hurts to be fair.
VV. Warner. Full soon the fairest face would cease from being such,
If not preserved curiously from tendering more then much
That wondrous pattern where soever it be
Whether in earth laid up in secret store,
Or else in heaven that no man may it see
With sinful eyes, for fear it to deflore:
Is perfect Beauty which all men adore.
Whose face and feature does so far excel
All mortal sense, that none the same may tell.
Ed. Spencer. O Beauty, how attractiue is thy power?
For as the lives heat clings about the heart,
So all men's hungry eyes do haunt thy bower:
Reigning in Greece, Troy swumme to thee in art.
Removed to Troy, Greece followed thee in fears,
Thou drewest each syrelesse sword, each childlesse dart
And puldst the Towers of Troy about thine ears.
G. Chapman. Variety of Beauties.
The harbingers of lust his amorous eyes did walk,
More clogd with change of Beauties the^ K. Midas once wit^ gold
Now this, now that, and one by one he did them all behold.
This seemed fair, and that as fair, and letting either pass,
A third he thought a proper girl, a fourth, a pleasant less.
Lovely the fifth, lively the sixth, the seventh a lovely wench,
The eight of sweet complexion, to the ninth he alters the^^^
That mildly seemed maiesticall, tenth modest looks and tongue
The eleventh could sweetly entertain, the twelft was fresh and young
The next a gay brownetta, next admired and young.
And every feature so intic't his intricate affection,
As liking, all alike, he loved confounded in election.
W. Warner. Banishment.
No Banishment can be to him assignde,
Who does retain a true resolved mind.
M. Drayton. ^n exile, every man or bond or free
Of noble race, or meaner parentage:
^s not in this unlike unto the slave
That must of force obey to each man's will,
And praise the peevishness of each man's pride.
G. Gascoigne. Transl. Bashfulnesse.
-- So respected
Was Bashfulnesse in Athens it erected
To chaste Agneia, which is shamefastness
A sacred temple, holding her a goddess.
G. Chapman. Preferment sildome graceth Bashfulnesse.
Idem. Let soberness be still thy wisdoms end,
Admitting what thou can not comprehend.
I. Syluester. Transl. Bliss.
These days example has deep written here
Deep written in my heart with iron pen,
That Bliss may not abide in state of mortal men.
Ed. Spencer. Does sorrow fret thy soul? o direful spirit,
Does pleasure feed thy heart? o blessed man.
Have thou been happy once? o heavy plight.
Are thy mishaps forepast? o happy than:
Or have thou bliss in eld? o bliss too late:
But have thou bliss in youth? o sweet estate.
E. of O. -- Hard it is
To immitate a false and forged bliss,
Ill may a sad mind forge a merry face,
Nor has constrained laughter any grace.
G. Chapman. -- Bliss not in height does dwell.
Idem. -- Quiet Bliss in no state lasts long.
Assailed still by mischief many ways,
Whose spoiling battery glowing hot and strong,
No flowing wealth, no force nor wisdom stays.
Her smoakelesse powder, beaten soldiers slaies.
By open force, foul mischief often preuailes:
By secret slight, she sild her purpose fails.
I. H. of Magist. Blessed the man that well can use his bliss.
Ed. Spencer. We think no greater bliss, then such to be, as be we would,
When blessed none, but such as be, the same, as be they should*
VV. Warner. Our bliss consists not in possessions,
But in commanding our affections.
In virtues choice, and vices needful chase,
Far from our hearts for staining of our face.
Tho. Kid. Bounty.
O sacred Bounty, mother of content,
Proppe of renown, nourisher of Arts:
The crown of hope, the root of good event,
The trumpe of fame, the joy of noble hearts,
Grace of the heavens, divinity in nature,
Whose excellence does so adorn the creature,
M. Drayton. -- On the other part was to be viewde
His virtues, each one by it self distinct,
Prudence and temperance,, and Fortitude,
And Justice, and a fifth unto these linckt
So nie, that who with it is not endued?
The rest may seem blotted, or quite extinct,
Bounty, employed in giving and in spending,
A special grace to all the other lending.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Augustus Caesar was not such a Saint,
As Virgill makes him by his description,
His love of learning scuseth that complaint,
That men might justly make of his proscription^
Neither the shame that Neroes name does taint,
Confirmed now by a thousand years prescription,
Be e'ne as it is, if he had had the wit,
To have been frank to such as Poems writ,
Idem. -- This reason is the chief,
That wits decay because they want their hire,
For where no succor is, nor no relief,
The very beasts will from such place retire.
Idem. -- He is mad and worse,
That plays the nigard with a Princes purse.
M. Drayton. Care.
-- Another shape appears
Of greedy Care still brushing up the knees,
His knuckles knobd, his flesh deep dented in:
With tawed hands, and hardy tanned skin,
The morrow gray no sooner has begun
To spread his light, even peeping in our eyes,
When he is up and to his work yrunne,
But let the nights black mistie mantels rise,
And with foul dark never so much disguise
The fair bright day, yet cease he no where,
But has his candles to prolong his toil.
M. Sackuill. Rude was his garment, and to rags all rent,
No better had he, ne for better card:
With blistered hands among the cynders brent,
And fingers filthy, with long nails vnpared,
Right for to rend the food on which he fared.
His name was Care; a black Smyth by his trade:
That neither day nor night from working spared.
But to small purpose iron wedges made,
Those be unquiet thoughts, that woeful minds invade.
Ed. Spencer. Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And where Care lodges, sleep will never lie:
But where vnbruiz'd youth with vnstuft brain
Does couch his limbs, there golden sleep does rain.
W. Shakespeare. Care and suspicion are fair Bewties dower.
M. Drayton. Care the consuming canker of the mind,
The discord that disorders sweet-hearts tune,
Th'abortiue bastard of a coward mind,
The lightfoote lackie that runs post by death,
Bearing the leters which contain our end:
The busy advocate that sells his breath,
Denouncing worst to him is most his friend,
H. Constable. Charity.
^he was a woman in the freshest age,
Of wondrous beauty, and of bowntie rare,
With goodly grace, and comely personage,
That was on earth not easy to compare,
^ull of great love; But Cupids wanton snare
As hell she hated, chaste in work and will,
Her neck and breast were ever open bare,
That aye thereof her babes might suck their fill,
The rest was all in yealow robes araied still.
A multitude of babes about her hung,
Playing their sportes that ioyed her to behold,
Whom still she fed, while they were weak and young,
But thrust them forth still as they waxed old,
And on her head she wore attire of gold:
Adorned with Gems and Owches wondrous fair,
Whose passing price uneath was to be told,
And by her side there sat a gentle pair
Of Turtle-doues, she sitting in an Iuorie chair,
Ed. Spencer. Due Charity in loving does prefer,
Her neighbors good, fore her utility.
I. Syluister. Transl. Who may but will not help, does hurt we know, and
curious they,
That dribling alms by art, disband well me^t from well done pay,
And he that questions distress and does not help endeavor,
The^ he that sees and nothing says, or cares is less deceauour*
W. Warner. It is a work of Charity God knows,
The reconcilement of two mortal foes.
Chapter Middleton. -- Charity brings forrh but barren seeds,
And hatred still is sown in so great store,
That when the fruits of both came to be reaped,
The tone is scarce, the the other ouerheaped.
S. I. Harr. Chastity.
O Chastity the chief of heavenly lights,
Which make us most immortal shape to wear^,
S. Ph. Sidney. -- Chastities attire,
The unstained veil which innocents adorn,
Th'vngather'd rose defended with the thorn.
S. Daniel. O Charity, the gift of blessed souls,
Comfort in death, a crown unto the life:
Which all the passions of the mind controlles,
Adornes the maid, and bewtifies the wife,
That grace, the which nor death, nor time attaints.
Of earthly creatures making heavenly Saints.
M. Drayton. -- A Woman cannot take upon her,
With beauty, riches, nor with hie nobility,
To claim the true deserved praise of honor,
If Chastity do fail by her fragilitie,
This is the virtue that defends her honor.
S, I. Harrington. Who does desire that chaste his wife should be,
First be he true, for truth does truth deserve,
Then he be such as he his words may see,
And always one credit, which her preserve
Not toying kind, nor causlesly unkind.
Not stirring thoughts, nor yet denying right,
Not spying faults, nor in plain errors blind,
Never ^ard hand, nor ever raines to light,
As far from want, as far from vain exspence:
The One does enforce, the other does entice,
All owe good company, but drive from thence
All filthy mouths that glory in their vice.
This done, thou have no more, but leave the rest
To nature, fortune, time, and woman's breast.
S. Ph. Sydney. Penelope in spending chaste her days,
As worthy as Ulysses was of praise.
S. I. Harrington. Of Christ.
The brooser of the serpents head, the woman's promiz'd seed
The second in the Trinity, the food our souls to feed.
The vine the light, the door the way, the shepherd of us al,
Whose manhood joined to deity, did ransom us from thrall
That was and is, and evermore will be the same to his,
That sleeps to none, that wakes to him, that turns our curse to blis,
Who^ yet unseen the Patriarks saw, the Prophets had foretold
The Apostles preached, the Saints adord, and Martyrs do behold
The same ( Augustus Emperor) in Palestine was born
Amongst his own, and yet his own did curse their blis in scorn,
W. Warner. Augustus quailing Anthony, was Emperor alone,
In whose vnfoed monarchy our common health was known
The bruizer of the serpents head, the woman's promisd seed
The second in the Trinity, the food our souls to feed.
The vine the light, the door the way, the shepherd of us all,
The same ( Augustus Emperor) in Palestine was borne,
Amongst his own, and yet his own did curse their blis in scorn
Idem. Children.
Riches of children pass a princes throne,
Which touch the fathers heart with secret joy.
When without shame he says, these be mine own.
S. Ph. Sidney. This pattern good or ill our children get,
For what they see, their parents love or hate,
Their first caught sense prefers to teachers blows,
The cockerings cockerd, we bewail too late,
When that we see our offspring gayly bent,
Women man-wood, and men effeminate.
Idem. -- What children apprehend,
The same they like, they follow and amend.
D. Lodge. There is no love may be compa'rd to that,
The tender mother bears unto the child,
For even so much the root it does increase,
As their grief grows, our contentation cease.
G. Gas. Change.
All is but fained, and which oaker died,
That every shower will wash and wipe away,
All things do Change that under heaven abide,
And after death, all friendship does decay,
Therefore what ever man bear worldly sway
Living, on God and on thy self rely,
For when thou die, all shall with thee die.
Ed. Spencer. All suffer Change, our selves newborn even then begin to die.
W. Warner. -- The ever Changing course of things,
Run a perpetual circle, ever turning.
S. Dan. Change lives not long, time faints, and time mourns,
Solace and sorrow have their certain turns.
M. Drayton. All Change is perilous, and all chance unsound.
Ed. Spencer. -- Seldom Change the better brought,
Content who lives with tried state,
Need fear no Change of frowning Fate:
But will seek for unknown gain,
Often lives by loss, and leaves with pain.
Idem. What does remain to man that can continue long?
What sun ca^shine so clear, but clouds may rise among?
G. Gascoigne. No flower is so fresh, but frost can it deface,
No man so snre in any seat, but he may loose his place
Idem. Most true it is, as we do daily prove.
No good nor ill, can stand still at one stay.
S. I. Harrington. The man that of himself is most secure,
Shall find himself most fickle and unsure.
Ed. Spencer. Men change the air, but seldom change their care.
M. Drayton. Chance.
What should we think of signs? they are but haps,
How may they then be signs of after-claps?
Does every Chance foreshew, or cause some other?
Or ending of it self, extend no further?
As th'ouerflowing flood some mount does choke,
But to his guide, some othet flood it yoke,
So if that signs thy sins once join, beware
Else-whereto Chances tend do never care.
M. of M. True it is if fortune light by Chance,
There fortune healpes the boldest to advance.
G. Gascoigne. Counsel.
Sacred Counsel, true heart suppling balm,
Soule-curing plaster, true preserving blis,
Water of life in every sudden qualme,
The heavens rich storehouse, where all treasure is.
True guide, by whom foul errors due we mis,
Night burning-beacon watch, against mishaps,
Foresight, avoiding many after claps,
M. Drayton. -- Every straw proves fuel to the fire,
When Counsel does concur with our desire.
Idem. What eld has tried and seeene good counsel is.
D. Lodge. -- Counsel still is one.
When fathers, friends, and worldly goods are gone.
Idem. Counsel that comes when ill has done his worst,
Blesses our ill, but makes our good accursed.
M. Drayton. Vain sounds of pleasure we delight to hear*
But Counsel iarres as discord in our ear.
Idem. A King that aims his neighbors crown to win,
Before the fruit of open wars begin,
Corrupts his Counsel, with rich recompenses,
For in good Counsel stands the strength of Princes.
I. Syl. Transl. A Kingdoms greatness hardly can he sway,
That wholesome Counsel did not first obey.
M. Dr. Even as by culling fruitful Vines increase,
So faithful counsels work a Princes peace.
D. Lodge. Concord.
-- Concord,
Mother of blessed peace and friendship true,
They both her twins, both borne of heavenly seed,
The which her words divine right well do show,
For strength and wealth, and happiness she lendes,
And strife, and war and anger does subdue,
Of little, much, of foes she makes friends,
And to afflicted minds, sweet rest and quiet sends.
Ed. Spencer. The richest Jewel of all heavenly treasure,
That ever yet unto the earth was shown,
Is perfect Concord, the only perfect pleasure,
That wretched earth-borne men have ever known*
For many hearts it does compound in one,
That what so one does, will, or speak, or do,
With one consent, they all agree there too.
I. Dauies. By her the heaven is in his course containd,
And all the world in state unmoved stands:
As their almighty maker first ordaind,
And bound them with inviolable bands,
Else would the waters ouerflowe the lands,
And fire devour the water, and hell them quite,
But she them holds with her all-blessed hands,
She is the nurse of pleasure and delight
And unto Princes grace the gates does open right.
Ed. Spencer. O blessed concord bred in secret breast
Of him that guides the restless rolling sky:
That to the earth for man's assured rest,
From height of heavens vouchsafest once to fly:
In thee alone the mighty power does lie.
With sweet accord to keep the frown stars,
And every Planet else from hurtful wars.
G. Gascoigne. Transl. When tract of time returns the lusty Ver,
By thee alone the buds and blossoms spring:
The fields with flowers be garnish^ every where,
The blooming trees abundant leaves do bring,
The cheerful birds melodiously do sing.
Thou do appoint the crop of summers seed
For man's relief, to serve his winter need.
Idem. Conscience.
-- Within the ports and jaws of hell,
Sat deep remorse of Conscience, all besprent
With tears: and to her self often would she tell
Her wretchedness, and cursing never stent
To sob and sigh, but ever thus lament
With thoughtfull care, as she that all in vain
Would were and wast continually in pain:
Her eyes unsteadfast rolling in her head:
Whurld on each place, as place that vengeance brought,
So was her mind continually in fear,
Tossed and tormented with tedious thought
Of those detested crimes which she had wrought.
With dreadful looks and cheer thrown to the sky,
Wishing for death, and yet she could not die.
M. Sackuill. So gnawes the grief of Conscience evermore,
And in the heart it is so deeply grave
That they may neither sleep nor rest therefore:
Ne think one thought, but on the dread they have,
Sill to the death sore tosled with the wave
Of restless woe, in terror and despair
They lead a life continually in fear.
Idem. The fear of Conscience enters iron walls.
M. Drayton. No armor proof against the Conscience terror.
Idem. A guilty conscience never is secure,
Idem. No means at all to hide
Man from himself can find
No way to start aside,
Out from the hell of mind,
But in himself confinde,
He still sees sin before,
And winged footed pain
That swiftly comes behind
The which is evermore
The sure and certain gain
Impiety does get,
And wanton boast respect,
That does himself forget.
S. Daniell. Like to the Dear that stricken with the dart
Withdrawes himself into some secret place,
And feeling grief the wound about his heart,
Startles with pangs till he fall on the grass,
And in great fear lies gasping there a space.
Forth braying sighs, as though each pang had brought
The present death which he does dread so often.
So we deep wounded with the bloody thought
And gnawing worm that grieved our conscience so,
Never took ease but as our heart out brought:
The strained sighs in witness of our woe.
Such restless cares our fault do well be know,
Wherewith with our deserved fall, the fears,
In every place rang death within our ears.
M. Sackuill. -- Loose Conscience is free
From all Conscience what else has liberty:
As't pleased the Thracian Boreas to blow,
So turns our weary Conscience too and fro.
I. Marston. Kings but the Conscience all things can defend.
M. Drayton. When as thou feel'st thy conscience touched with grief,
Thy self pursues thy self, both robbed, and thief.
Idem. -- Many with the Conscience of the crime
^n colder blood will curse what they designde:
And bad success vpbraiding their ill fact,
Draws them, that others draw from such an act.
S. Daniell. Craft. Deceit. Fraud.
What man so wise, what earthly wit so ware,
As to descry the crafty cunning train
By which Deceit does mask in vizard fair:
And cast her colors died deep in grain,
To seem like truth, whose shape she well can feign,
And fitting gestures to her purpose frame,
The guiltless mind with guile to entertain.
Ed. Spencer. Fraud showd in comely clothes a lovely look,
An humble cast of eye, a sober pace:
And so sweet speech, a man might her have took
For him that said hail Mary full of grace:
But all the rest deformedly did look,
As full of filthiness and foul disgrace:
Hid under long large garments that she ware,
Under the which, a poisoned knife she bare.
S. I. H. Often Craft can cause the man to make a seeming show
Of heart, with dolor all distaind, where grief does neue^ grow*
S. T. B. -- Craft wrapped still in many comberments,
With all her cunning thriues not though it speed.
S. Daniell. Craft finds a key to open every door.
M. Dr. Conquest.
Who hopes a conquest, leaves no conquest sought.
M. Drayton. It Is much to conquer, but to keep possession
Is full as much, and if it be not more.
I. Syluester. tran^ To win the field against our armed foes,
Is counted honorable any ways,
Whether it be with policy or blows:
Yet bloody conque^st stains the Captains praise.
But chiefest honor does belong to those
Whom fortune to such height of hap does raise,
To have their foes suppressed and overthrown,
With little loss and daring of their own.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Whereas proud conquest keeps all in awe,
Kings often are forced in servile yoakes to draw.
M. Drayton. Country, commonweal.
We must affect our Country as our parents,
And if at any time we alienate
Our love or industry from doing it honor,
It must respect effects and touch the soul,
Matter of conscience and religion,
And not desire of rule or benefit.
G. Peele. Necessity enforces every wight,
To love his native seat with all his might.
A happy quarrel is it and a good,
For countries cause to spend our dearest blood.
G. Gascoigne. That public weal must needs to ruin go,
Where private profit is preferred so.
G. Geffrayes. Home though it homely be, yet is sweet,
And native soil is best.
S. I. Harr. If so the temperature of Commonweal
Be guided by the course of heavenly powers,
Such as in deep affairs will justly deal,
Must have an eye to those eternal bowres,
And by their view direct this state of ours.
Then how can he a perfect states man prove,
That knows not how celestial bodies move?
Th. Stouer. -- The love
That men their country and their birthright bear,
Exceeds all love, and dearer is by far:
Our countries love, the^ friends or children are.
T. Kyd. Content.
All wealth and wisdom rests in true Content.
Contentment is our heaven, and all our deeds
Bound in that circle, seld or never closde.
G. Chapman. Who seeks to have the thing we call enough,
Acquaint himself with Contentation:
For plenteousnesse is but a naked name:
And what suffices use of mortal men,
Shall best apay the mean and modest hearts.
G. Gascoigne. The noblest mind the best contentment has.
Ed. Spencer. High climing wits do catch a sudden fall,
With none of these Content does dwell withal.
D. Lodge. Content feeds not on glory nor on pelf.
Content can be contented with her self.
Th. Bastard. Content is worth a monarchy, and mischief hits the hie.
W. Warner. Who so contented lives, is happy wise.
D. Lodge. Inconstant change such tickle turns has lent,
As who so fears to fall, must seek Content.
Deprive the world of perfect discontent.
All glories end, true honor strait is stained:
And life it self in errors course is spent.
All toil does sort but to a sorry end,
For through mislikes each learnes for to amend.
D. Lodge. He only lives most happily
That Is free and far from majesty:
Can live content, although unknown:
He fearing none, none fearing him:
Meddling with nothing but his own,
While gazing eyes at crowns grow dim.
Th. Kyd. Courage.
-- To Courage great
It is no less beseeming well to bear,
The storm of fortunes frown, or heavens threat,
Then in the sunshine of her countenance clear,
Timely to joy and carry comely cheer.
Ed. Spencer. High Courage with true wisdom ever backed,
Winnes perfect fame.
Th. Lodge. Nere was there ever noble courage seen,
That in advantage would his puissance boast,
Honor is least where ods appears most.
Ed. Spencer. Where is no courage, there is no ruth nor moan.
Idem. Good heart in ill, does the evil much amend.
Idem. Courage imboldneth wit, wit courage arms.
M. Drayton. They make their fortune who are stout and wise,
Wit rules the heavens, discretion guides the skies.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. Action is fiery valou^s souerainge good.
G. Chapman. No foot to foe Repining courage yields.
Ed. Spencer. Then are the valiant who more vain, then cowardes who more wise,
Not men that travel Pegasus, but fortunes fools do rise?
W Warner. Be valiant, not too ventrous, but fight to fight again,
Even Hercules did hold it ods, for one to strive with twain.
Idem. Might wanting measure, moves surquedrie.
Ed. Spencer. -- More is he that ventureth for more,
Then who fights but for what he had before.
S. Daniell. -- Valor mixed with fear, boldeneth dread,
May march more circumspect with better heed.
Idem. Valor in greatest dangers shows most bright.
As full-fac't Phoebe in the darkest night.
Chapter Fitz Geffrey. The Spartanes once exilde Archilochus,
The Author of Lycambes Tragedy,
Because he said it was commodious,
Rather to cast away his shield and fly,
Then boldly to resist, and bravely die.
Idem. Court.
The Princes Court is mansion of the wise.
Figure of heaven, fair fountain of delights,
Theater of honors, earthly paradise,
Sudden aduancer, Sphere of purest light,
The lively Vatican of bewties bright.
Thither let Phoebus progeny resort,
Where shines their father, but in Jove's great Court?
Th. Storer. -- This is ever proper unto Courts,
That nothing can be done but fame reports.
S. Daniell. To censure is the subject of the Court,
From thence fame carries, thither fame does bring,
There too each word, a thousand echoes ring,
A Lotterie, where most loose, but few do win.
M. Drayton. Nothing in Court is done without a fee,
The Courtier needs must recompensed be.
E. Sp. Most miserable man, whom wicked fate
Has brought to Court to sue for, had I wist,
That few has found, but many one has mist.
Idem. -- The Court is counted Venus net,
Where gifts and vows, forestalls are often set:
None be so chaste as Vesta, but shall mere,
A courteous tongue, to charm her eats with sweet.
R. Green. -- The Court has much of vanity and painful ease.
W. Warner. -- The Court is now become a skittish colte,
Of wise men hardlier man aged then of the glorious dolt,
Idem. These all deformities in form in some one man we see,
More guarded then regarded, frank not to continue free,
When as the mercha^ts book, the map of all his wealth shall be.
Idem. Sometimes the courts of kings were virtuous schools,
Now find we naught in Court, but curious fools.
O you whose noble hearts cannot accord,
To be the the slaves to an infamous Lord,
And knows not how to mix with perilous art,
The deadly poison with the amorous dart,
Whose natures being found, wills no constraint,
Nor will your face with flattering pensill paint.
For we will nor woe, for pity nor for hire,
Of good my Lords their favors to require,
Go not to Court, if ye will me believe,
For in that place where ye think to relieve:
The honor due fot virtue ye shall find,
Naught but contempt which leaves good men behind.
Th. Hudson. Transl. The wanton luxury of Court,
Does form the people of like sort.
S. Daniell. Ye worthy dames that in your breasts do bear,
Of your all-seeing god, no servile fear:
Ye that of honor have a greater care,
Then sights of Courts, I pray you come not there,
Let them that in their purse have not a mite,
Cloathe them like Kings, and play the Hypocrite,
And with a lying tale and fained cheer,
Court-coozen them whom they would see on bear,
Let there the Pandar sell his wife for gain,
With service vile, his noblesse to attain:
Let him that serves the time, change his intent,
With faith unconstant sail at every vent.
Th. Hudsrn. Transl. The Court was never barren yet of those
Which could with subtle train, and hard advise,
Work on the Princes weakness and dispose,
Of feeble frailty easiest to entice.
S. Daniell. Golden cups do harbor poison,
And the greatest pomp dissembling,
Court of seasoned words has foyson
Treason haunts in most dissembling.
D. Lodge. Ye fearful wits, ye impes of Achelous,
Which wracks the wisest youth with charming voice,
Ye Circes, who by your enchauntment strange,
In stones and swine, your Lovers true do change:
Ye Stymphalids, who with your youth vptakes,
Ye Ravens that from us our riches takes.
Ye who with riches, art, and painted face,
For Priams wife puts Castor's sister in place.
Ye Myrrhaes, Canaces, and Semyrames,
And if there were yet more defamed dames,
Come all to Court, and there ye shall receive
A thousand gains, unmeet for you to have,
There shall you see the gifts of great provinces,
There shall you see the grace of graceless Princes.
Th. Hudson. Transl. Courtiers as the tide do rise and fall.
Ed. Spencer. -- It does not sit
With Courtiers majesty to be reputed
Too learned, too grave, too fine, or too conceited.
Thomas Stouer. Who full of wealth and honors blandishment,
Among great Lords his yoonger years has spent,
And quaffing deeply of the Court delights,
Used naught but tilts, armours, and maskes, and sights,
If in his age his Princes angry doom,
With deep disgrace, daine him to live at home
In homely cottage, where continually
The bitter smoke exhales abundantly,
From his before vnsorrowe-drained brain,
The brackish vapors of a silver rain,
Where usher less both day and night the North,
South East, and West winds enter and go forth.
Where round about the lower roofte-broke walls,
In stead of Arras, hang with Spider calls:
Where all at once he reaches as he stands,
With brows the roof, both walls with both his hands.
He weeps and sighs, and shunning comforts aye,
Wishes pale death a thousand times a day,
And yet at length falling to work, is glad
To bite a brown crust that the mouse has had,
And in a dish, in stead of Plate or glass,
Sups oaten drink, in stead of Hypocrasse.
I. Syluister. Courtesy.
Of Court it seems, men Courtesy do call,
For that it there most uses to abound,
And well beseems that in Princes hall,
That virtue should be plentifully found.
Which of all goodly manners is the ground,
And root of civil conversation.
Ed. Spencer. Among virtues all grows not a fairer flower,
Then is the bloome of comely Courtesy,
Which though it on a lowely stalk do bower,
Yet brauncheth forth in brave nobility,
And spreads it self through all civility:
Of which though present age do plentious seem,
Yet being matched with plain antiquity,
Ye will them all but fained shows esteem,
Which carry colors fair, which feeble eyes misdeem.
Idem. -- In the trial of true Courtesy,
Its now so far from that which once it was,
That it indeed is naught but forgerie,
Fashioned to please the eyes of them that pass,
Which see not perfect things but in a glass,
Yet is that glass so gay, it cannot blind
The wisest sight, to think that gold is brass.
But virtues seat is deep within the mind,
And not in outward show, but inward thoughts defind.
Idem. -- This noble virtue and divine,
Does chiefly make a man so rare and odd,
As in that one, they most resemble God.
S. I. Harr. Transl. -- Courteous speech usage mild and kind,
Wipes malice out of every noble mind.
S. I. Harrington. -- Courtesy ofttimes in simple bowers,
Is found as great, as in the stately towers.
Idem. It Is meet a gentle heart should ever show
By Courtesy, the fruits of true gentilitie,
Which will by practice, to an habit grow,
And make men do the same with great facility.
Likewise, the dunghill-blood a man shall know
By churlish parts, and acts of inciuilitie,
Whose nature apt to take each lewd infection,
Custom confirms, and makes ill in perfection.
Idem. Cruelty.
All lay on hands to punish Cruelty.
M. Drayton. -- Cruel deeds can never escape the scourge
Of open shame, or else some bloody death,
Repentance self, that other sins may purge,
Does fly from this, so sore the soul it sleieth,
Despair dissolues the cruel caitiffes breath,
For vengeance due does suddenly alight
On cruel deeds, the mischief to requite.
I. H. Mir. of M. Custom.
Round headed Custom th'apoplexie is,
Of bedrid nature, and lives led amiss,
And takes away all feeling of offense.
G. Chapman. Custom abusd brings virtue in disdain.
Nature with Custom joined, never fails
But by her self, and her self preuailes.
D. Lodge. Whereas to nature, forward to retain,
Lewd objects are annexed, and Customs vain,
The wounds grow desperate, and death does and,
Before good counsel can the fault amend.
Idem. Custom the worlds judgment does blind so far,
That virtue is often arraigned at vices bar.
I. Syl. Transl. Danger.
-- Danger clothed in ragged weed,
Made of bears skin, that him more dreadful, made,
Yet his own face was dreadful, ne did need
Strange horror to deforme his grisly shade,
A net in the one hand, and a rustie blade
^n the other was, this mischief, that mishap
With the one, his foes he threatened to invade,
^or whom he could not kill, he practiced to entrap.
Ed. Spencer. Danger has honor, great designs their fame.
S. Dan. The greatest dangers promise greatest bliss.
M. Drayton. Danger deuiseth shifts, wit waits on fear.
W. Shakespeare. Daunger's the chiefest joy to happiness,
And resolution honors fairest aim,
Chapter Marlowe. The path is smooth that leads unto Danger.
VV. Sh. When as we think we most in safety stand,
The greatest danger then, is near at hand.
M. Drayton. The Danger hid, the place unknown and wild,
Breeds dreadful doubts: often fire is without smoke,
And peril without show.
Ed. Spencer. Ay-me, how many perils do enfolde
The righteous man, to make him daily fall:
Were not that heavenly grace did him behold,
And steadfast truth acquit him out of all.
Idem. A thousand perils lie in close awaite,
About us daily to work our decay,
That none except a god, or god his guide,
May them avoid, or remedy provide.
Idem. In peril, we do think our selves most sure,
And often in death some men are most secure.
No Danger but in hie estate, none enuies mean degre^
VV. Warner. -- Dangerous things dissembled sildome are,
Which many eyes attend with busy care.
M. Drayton. The absent danger greater still appears,
Less fears he, who is near the thing he fears.
Most strong is he when dangers are at hand,
That lives prepard' their furies to withstand.
Of common sense he is deprived clean,
That falls with closed eyes on danger seen:
And he that may both pain and hurt eschew,
Is vain, if he his proper death pursue.
S. Daniell. Dread.
Next saw we Dread, all trembling how he shook,
With foot uncertain proffered here and there:
Benumbd of speech, and with a ghastly look,
Searched every place, all pale and dead for fear:
His cap borne up with staring of his hair.
Stoynd and amazed at his own shade for dread,
And feeling greater dangers then was need.
M. Sackuill. -- Coward Dread lackes order, fear wants art,
Deaf to attend, commanded, or defirde.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. Death.
-- A dumb dead course we ^awe,
Heavy and cold the shape of death aright,
That daunts all earthly creatures to his laws
Against whose force in vain it i^ to fight,
Ne Peers, ne Princes, nor no mortal wight,
No Towns, ne Realms, Cities ne strongest Tower,
But all perforce must yield unto his power.
His dart anon out of his corpse he took,
And in his hand (a needful fight to see)
With great triumph eftsoons the same he shook:
That most of all my fears affraied me,
His body dight with naught but bones perdie.
The naked shape of man there saw I plain,
All save the flesh, the sinew, and the vain.
M. Sackuill. Death is a port, whereby we pass to joy,
Life is a lake, that drowneth all in pain:
Death is so near it cease all annoy.
Life is so leaud, that all it yields is vain.
And as by life to bondage man was brought,
Even so likewise by death was freedom wrought.
E. of Surrey. Naught is immortal underneath the Sun,
All things are subject to deaths tyranny:
Both clownes and kings, one selfsame course must run,
And whatsoever lives is sure to die.
Th. Kyd. Death's always ready, and our time is known
To be at heavens dispose, and not our own.
Idem. The brauest are as blossoms, and the longest liver dies:
And dead, the loueliest creature as the lothsoms carrion lies.
W. Warner. Our frailties done are written in the flowers,
Which flourish now, and fade away ere many hours.
S. Daniell. -- All earthly things be borne
To die the death, for naught long time may last:
The sun his beauty yields to winters blast.
I. H. M. of Magist. Is It not gods deed what ever thing is done,
In heaven and earth? Did not he all create
To die again? all ends that was begun:
Their times, in his eternal books of fate,
Are written sure, and have their certain date.
Who then can strive with strong necessity,
That holds the world in his still changing state?
Or shun the death ordaind by desteny,
When hour of death is come, let none ask whence or why.
Ed. Spencer. -- Death amongst all deals equally,
For he is impartial, and with one self hand
Cuts off both good and bad, none can withstand.
Chapter Middleton. Death certain is to all the proverb says:
Uncertain is to all the hour of death.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Pale fearful death with bloody dart does strike,
The wretched caitiffe and the king alike.
Untimely never comes the life's last mere,
In cradle death may rightly claim his debt,
Straight after birth, is due the fatal beer:
By deaths permission th'aged linger here.
Even in the swath-bands our commission goes,
To loose thy breath, that yet but yoongly bleweth.
I. H. Mir. of M. All music sleeps where death does lead the dance.
Ed. Spencer. Let nature for perfection mould a paragon each way,
Yet death at last on finest lumps of living flesh will pray
For nature never framed it, that never shall decay.
VV. Warner. -- Fatal death the emperor of graves.
I. Markham. Death is the key which vnlockes misery,
And lets them out to blessed liberty.
M. Drayton. All is but lost that living we bestowed,
If not well ended at our dying day.
O man have mind of that last bitter rage,
For as the tree does fall, so lies it ever low:
Ed. Spencer. No fear of death should force us to do ill.
Th. Kyd. -- When for fear of an ensuing ill
We seek to shorten our appointed race,
Then it is for fear that we our selves do kill:
So fond we are to fear the worlds disgrace.
Idem. Happy, thrice happy, who so lost his breath,
That life he gains, by his godly death.
Unwise and wretched men to weet what is good or ill,
We deem of death as doom of ill desert:
But know we fools what it us brings until:
Die would we daily once it too expert.
No danger there the shepherd can a start,
Fair fields and pleasant fields there been,
The fields aye fresh, the grass aye green.
Ed. Spencer. -- This same
Which we call death, the souls release from woe,
The work which bring our bliss to happy frame:
Sildome arrests the body, but we find
Some notice of it written in our mind.
I. Markham. The worth of all men by their end esteem,
And then due praise, or due reproach them yield.
S. Spencer. -- Death is an evil doom.
To good and bad, the common Inn of rest,
But after death the trial is to come
When best shall be to them that lived best,
But both alike when death has both suppressed.
Religious reverence does burial teene,
Which who so wants, wants so much of his rest.
For all so great shame after death I ween,
As self to dien bad, unburied, bad to been.
Ed. Spencer. -- Beasts with careless steps to laethe go,
Where men whose thoughts and honors clime on hie,
Living with fame, must learn with fame to die.
D. Lodge. Death but an acted passion does appear,
Where truth gives courage and the conscience clear.
M. Drayton. Who dies, the utmost dolor must abide:
But who that lives, is left to wail his loss,
So life is loss, and death felicity.
Sad life worse then glad death, and greater cross
To see friends grave, then dead, the grave self to engrosse.
Ed. Spencer. -- In wretches sudden death at once
There long-some ill is buried with their bones.
Th. Hudson. Transl. Death is to him that wretched life does lead
Both grace and gain; but he in hell does lie
That lives a loathed life, and wishing cannot die.
Ed. Spencer. Death is most lovely sweet and amiable:
But captived life for foulness admirable.
I. Marston. -- The toongs of dying men
Enforce attention like deep harmony,
Where words are scarce, they are sildom spent in vain:
For they breath truth, that breath their words in pain.
He that no more must say, is lissened more,
Then they whom youth and ease have taught to gloss:
More are men's ends marked, then their lives before.
The setting sun and music at the close,
As the last taste of sweet is sweetest taste,
Writ in remembrance more, then things long past.
W. Shakespeare. Delaie.
On the one side doubt, on the other sat Delaie,
Behind the gate, that none her might epsy;
Whose manner was, all passengers to stay,
And entertain with her occasions sly.
Through which, some lost great hope vnheedilie,
Which never they recover might again:
And others quite excluded forth did lie.
Long languishing there, in vnpittied pain,
And seeking often entrance afterward in vain.
Ed. Spencer. -- Danger grows by lingering till the last,
And physic has no help when life is past.
Th. Watson. -- Often things done, perhaps, do less annoy
Then may the doing, handeled with delay.
S. Daniell. Delaie in close awaite
Caught hold on me, and thought my steps to stay,
Faining still, many a fond excuse, to prate:
And time, to steal the treasure of man's day,
Whose smallest minute lost, no riches render may.
Ed. Spencer. -- Times delay new hope of help still breeds.
Idem. -- Fearful tormenting
Is leaden seruitor, to dull delay.
W. Shakespeare. He that will stop the brook must then begin
When summers heat has dried up the spring:
And when his pittering streams are low and thin*
For let the winter aid unto them bring,
He grows to be of watery floods the king:
And though you damme him up with lofty ranks,
Yet will he quickly ouerflow his banks.
R. Green. Ill news deferring, is a plague as great as an ill news.
Ab. France. Delay in love breeds doubts, but sharp denial death^
W. Shakespeare. -- Intermission suffers men dispute,
What dangers are, and cast with further care,
Cold doubt cauells with honor, scorneth fame,
And in the end fear waighes down faith with shame*
S. Daniel. Where hearts be knit, what helps if not in joy?
Delay breeds doubts, no cunning to be joy.
M. D. Delight.
In things without us, no Delight is sure^
G. Chapman. A sweet in shape is but a bad Delight.
D. Lodge. Prosperity a flatterer is found,
Delight is fearelesse till it feel the wound.
M. D. Vid. Pleasure.

Desire.
-- Desire, whom not the firmament,
Nor air, nor earth, nor Ocean can content,
Whose looks are hooks, whose bellies bottomless,
Whose hands are gripes to scrape with greedines,
Under whose command,
She brings to field a rough unruly band,
First, secret burning, mighty swollen ambition,
Whom Epicurus many worlds suffice not,
Whose furious thirst of proud aspiring dies not,
Whose hands transported with phantasticke passion,
Bear painted steeples in imaginaton.
I. Syluister. Transl. Amongst the most, the worst, we best can choose,
It Is easy to desire, but hard to use.
M. Drayton. Desire has philters, which desire procure.
Idem. If blind desire thy heart has once embraced,
Inthrall'd it is, and honor so defaced.
.. Desire with small encouraging grows bold.
M. Drayton. What can be said that Lovers cannot say?
Desire can make a Doctor in a day.
Idem. Things much retained, do make us much desire them,
And bewties seldom seen, makes us admire them.
Idem. Destiny.
Sad Clotho held the rock, the whiles the third
By grisly Lachesis, was spunne with pain,
That cruel Atropos eft-soones undid,
With cursed knife cutting the twist in twain,
Most wretched me^, whose days depe^donthrids so vain.
E. of S. The holy Prophet brought Astolpho, where
A Palace (seldom seen by mortal men)
Was placed, by which, a thick dark river ran,
Each room therein was full of diverse fleeces:
Of Wolle, of Lint of Woll, or else of Cotton,
An aged woman spunne the diverse pieces.
Whose look and hue did show her old and rotten,
Nor much unlike unto that labor this is.
By which in summer a new made silk is gotten,
Where from the silke-wormes his fine garment taking,
They reaue him of the clothes of his own making.
For first in one large room a woman span,
Infinite thrids of diverse stuff and hew,
An other does wi^h all the speed she can,
With other stuff the distaffe still renew:
The third in feature like, and pale and wan,
Seuers the fair from foul, the old from new.
Who be these here, the Duke demands his guide?
These be the fatal sisters he replide:
The Parcaes that the third of life do spin
To mortal men, hence death and nature, know
When life must end, and when it must begin.
Now she that does divide them, and bestow
The course from finer, and the thick from thin
Works to that kind, that those which finest grow,
For ornaments in Paradise must dwell.
The course are cursed, to be consumed in hell.
Further, the Duke did in the place behold,
That when the thrids were spent that had been spunne
Theit names in brass, in silver, and in gold
Were wrote, and so into great heaps were done.
From which, a man that seemed wondrous old
With whole loades of those names away did run,
And turned again as fast, the way he went,
Nor never weary was, nor never spent.
This aged man did hold his pace so swift,
As though to run, he had been only borne,
And in the lappet of his cloak were borne
The names, etc. This was time.
An heap of names within his cloak he bore,
And in the river did them all unlade:
Or to say truth, away he cast them all,
Into this stream, which Laethe we do call.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Vide. Fame.

-- You sad daughters of the quiet night,
Which in your private resolution wright,
What has, or shall upon our fortunes light,
Whose stories none may see, much less recite;
You rulers of the Gods.
I. Markham. Down in the bottom of the deep Abisse,
Where Demogorgon in dull darkness p^nt,
Far from the view of Gods, or heavens bliss,
The hidious Chaos, there dreadful dwelling is.
Ed. Spencer. What man can turn the stream of Destenie?
Or break the chain of strong necessity?
Which fast is tide to Jones eternal seat?
Idem. -- What shall be shall. There is no choice,
Things needs must drive as Destenie decrees:
For which we ought in all our haps rejoice,
Because the eye eternal, things foreseeth:
Which to no ill at any time agrees,
For ills, too ill to us, be good to it,
So far his skill exceeds, our reach of wit.
I. H. Mir. of M. Woe worth the wight that strives with Gods foresight
They are not wise, but wickedly do err,
Which think ill deeds due destenies may bar.
Idem. No humble speech nor moan, may move the fixed stint.
Of Destiny or death: such is the will that paints
The earth with colors fresh, ye darkish skies with store
Of Starry light.
Ed. Spencer. Walls may a while keep out an enemy,
But never castle kept out destiny.
M. Drayton. -- Who can deceive his destiny?
Or ween by warning to avoid his fate?
That when he sleeps in most security,
And safest seems, him soonest does amate,
And finds due effect, or soon, or late,
So feeble is the power of fleshly arm.
Ed. Spencer. -- That which Jove and Destiny have done,
Men may lament, but never disanull.
Chapter Fitz. vide fate.

Despair.
Ere long they came where that same wicked wight
His dwelling has, low in a hollow Cave,
Far underneath a craggy clift upright,
Dark, doleful, drery, like a drery grave,
That still for carrion carcasses does crave.
On top whereof, aye dwells the ghastly Owl,
Shriking his balefull note, which ever drove
Far from that haunt, all other cheerful foul.
And all about it wandering ghostes do wail and houle*
And all about old stocks and stubs of trees,
Whereas, nor fruit, nor leaf was ever seen,
Did hang upon the ragged rocky trees,
On which had many witches hanged been,
Whose carcasses were scattered on the green,
And thrown about the cliffes.
Ed. Spencer. That darkesome cave they enter, where they find
That cursed man, low sitting on the ground,
Musing full sadly in his sullen mind:
Hi^ grisly locks, long grown and unbound,
Disordered hung about his shoulders round
And hid his face; through which his hollow eyes
Looked deadly, dull, and stared as astound.
His rawebone cheeks through penury and pine,
Were shrunk into his jaws, as he did never dine,
His garment naught but many ragged clouts,
With thorns together pind and patched was,
The which his naked sides he wraps abouts.
And him beside, there lay upon the grass,
Adrery coarse, whose life away did pass,
All wallowed in his own, yet lukewarm blood,
That from his wound yet welled fresh a less.
In which a rustie knife fast fixed stood,
And made an open passage for the gushing flood.
Idem. Me thought by night, a grisly ghost in dark I saw,
Eke ever still to me with stealing steps she drew,
^he was of color pale, and deadly hew,
Her clothes resembled thousand kinds of thrall,
And pictures plain of hastened deaths withal.
I. H. Mir. of M. -- Despair
The factor for improuident restraint.
I. Markeham. -- Despair, that deep disdained elfe,
Delightlesse lives, still stabbing of her self.
D. Lodge. -- As it is not lawful for a man
At such a Kings departure or decease,
To leave the place, and falsify his faith,
So in this place we ought not to surrender
That deerer part, till heaven it self command it.
For as they lent us life to do us pleasure,
So look they for return of such a treasure.
Th. Kyd. Far greater folly is it for to kill
Themselves dispairing, then is any ill.
I. H. M. of M. Be resolute, not desperate, the Gods that made thee poor,
Can if they will (do wait their will) thy former state rest^^^
W. Warner. -- When last need to desperation drives
Who dares the most, wisest counsel gives.
S. I. Harrington. We may in war sometime take truce with foes,
But in Despair, we cannot with our woes.
M. Drayton. Despair has ever danger all contemned.
Idem Devil.
Hells prince, sly parent of reuolts, and lies.
I. Syluister. O ruthlesse murderer of immortal souls,
A less, to pull us from the happy poales,
And plunge us headlong in the yawning hell,
Thy ceaselesse frauds and fetches who can tell?
Thou play'st the Lion when thou do engage,
Blood-thirstie Neroes barbarous heart with rage,
While flesht in murders, butcherlike he paints
The Saint-poore world, with the dear blood of Saints*
Thou plaiest the dog, when by the mouth profane,
Of some false Prophets thou do belch thy bane.
Where from the Pulpet barkingly he rings,
Bold blasphemies against the King of Kings.
Thou plai'st the swine when plunged in pleasures vile,
Some Epicure does sober minds defile,
Transforming lewdly by his loose impiety,
Sweet Lacedemon to a soft society.
Thou plaiest the Nightingale, or else the swan,
When any famous Rhetorician
With captious wit, and curious language draws,
Seduced hearers, and subuerts the laws.
Thou play'st the fox when thou do feign aright.
The face and phrase of some deep Hypocrite.
True painted tomb, dead seeming cole, but quick,
A scorpion fell, whose hidden tail does prick:
Yet this were little, if thy spite audacious,
Spared (at the least) the face of angels gracious,
And if thou did not apely immitate
The Almighty's works, the wariest wits to mate.
I. Syl. Transl. The ghostly enemy does not stay,
Till tempted persons do obey.
Yield to him, he a Lion is,
Gain stood a fly, his pray does mis.
Ignoto. A subtle Pandar with more enticing rights,
Then sea has fish, or heaven has twinkling lights.
I. Syl. As a false Lover that thick snares has laid,
To entrap the honor of a fair young maid,
When she (though listening) little ear affords,
To his sweet courting deep affected words,
Fears some asswaging of his freezing flame,
And soothes himself with hope to gain his game,
And wrapped with joy upon this point persists,
That parlying city never long resists.
Even so the serpent that does counterfeit
A guilefull call to allure us to his net:
Perceiving Eve his flattering gloze digest,
He prosecutes, and iocund does not rest,
Till he have tried foot, hand, head and all,
Upon the breach of this new battered wall.
I. Syl. Transl. Discord.
Hard by the gates of hell her dwelling is,
There where as all the plagues and harms abound*
Which punish wicked men that walk amiss.
It is a darkesome delue, far under ground,
And thorns which barren brooks inuirond roun^
That none the same may easily out win,
Yet many ways to enter may be found,
But none to issue forth when one is in,
For Discord harder is to end then to begin.
Ed. Spencer. Ate, mother of debate
And all dissension which does daily grow
Amongst frail men, that many a public state
And many a private often it does ore^unne.
Idem. -- He knew her weed of sundry hew,
Patched with infinite unequal lists,
Her skin in sundry naked places view,
At diverse rents and cuts he may that lists:
Her hair was gray, and red, and black and blew,
And hard and soft, in laces some she twists:
Some hangs down, upright some stands staring,
As if each hair with other had been squaring.
Her lap was full of writs and of citations,
Of processes, of actions, and arrests,
Of bills, of answers, and of replications,
Greeuing the simple sort with great vexations.
She had resorting to her as her guests
Attending on her circuits and her iournies,
Suitors and Clerks, Lawiers, and Atturnies.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Her face most foul and filthy was to see,
With squinted eyes contrariwise intended:
And loathly mouthed, unmeet a mouth to be.
That naught but gall and venom comprehended,
and wicked words that God and man offended.
Her lying tongue was in two parts divided,
and both the parts did speak, and both contended:
and as her tongue so was her heart descided.
That never thought on them, but doubly still was guided
Ed. Spencer. All like as drops engender mighty floods,
And little seeds sprout forth great leaves and buds:
Even so small strifes if they be suffered run,
Breed wrath and war, and death ere they be done.
M. of Magist. Concord in kingdoms is great assurance,
And royal fame lies do never fall:
But where discord does lead the doubtful dance,
With busy brawles, and terms of variance,
Where malice minstrell is, the pipe ill report,
The mask mischief, and so does end the sport.,
Idem. Firebrand of hell first tinde in Phlegeton,
By thousand suries, and from thence outthrowne
Into this world, to work confusion,
And set it all on fire by force unknown,
Is wicked discord; whose small sparks once blown,
None but a God or godlike man can slake:
Such as was Orpheus, that when strife was grown
Amongst those famous Imps of Greece, did take
His silver harp in hand, and shortly friends them mak^
Ed. Spencer. O cruel discord, food of deadly hate,
O mortal corsiue to a commonweal:
Death-lingring consumption to a state,
A poisoned sore that never salve could heal.
O soul contagion, deadly killing fever,
Infecting often, but ^o be cured never.
M. Drayton. A state divided, cannot firmly stand:
Two Kings within one realm could never rest.
T. Kyd. Dissimulation.
-- Fierce lightening from her eyes
Did set on fire fair Heroes sacrifice:
Which was her torn robe and enforced hair,
And the bright flame became a maid most fair
For her aspect; her tresses were of wire,
Knit like a net, where hearts all set on fire,
Struggled in pants and could not get releast:
Her arms were all with golden pincers dressed,
And twenty fashioned knots, pullies and brakes,
And all her body girdled with printed snakes.
Her down parts in a scorpion tail combinde,
Freckled with twenty colors p^edwings shinde
Out of her shoulders; cloth did never die,
Nor sweeter colors ever viewed eye.
In scorching Turkey, Cares, Tartarie:
Then shinde about this spirit notorious,
Nor was Arachnes web so glorious.
Of lightning and of shreds she was begot,
More hold in base dissemblers is there not.
Her name was Eronusis.
G. Chapman. The colors of dissemblance and deceit,
Were died deep in grain, to seem like truth.
Ed. Spencer. Better a wretch then a dissembler.
E. Gilpin. -- Commonly in dissimulations
The Excess of glauering does guile ^^tect,
Reason refuses falsehood to direct.
The will therefore for fear of being spied,
Exceeds mean, because it wants guide.
M. of M. -- Commonly all that counterfeit
In any thing, exceed the natural mean,
And that for fear of fa^^ing in their feat.
Idem. The lovely looks, the sighs that storm so sore,
The due of deep dissembling doubleness:
These may attempt, but are of power no more,
Where beauty leanes to wit and soothfastnesse.
D. Lodge. -- Who has to do
With deep dissemblers, must dissemble too.
Chapter Middleton. Vid. Hypocrisy.

End.
-- The End does always prove the fact,
By End we judge the meaning of the act.
S. I. H. Transl. Begin where lightness will, in shame it ends.
G. Chapman. Earth.
Thus whilst he laid his head upon her lap,
She in a fiery mantle does him wrap:
And carries him up from his lumpish mould,
Into the skies whereas he might behold
The Earth in perfect roundnesse of a ball,
Exceeding globes most artificial.
Which in a fixed point nature disposed,
And with the sundry elements enclosed.
Which as the Center, permanent does stay,
When as the skies in their diurnall sway:
Strongly maintain the euerturning course,
Forced alone by their first mouers source.
Where he beholds the aerie regions,
Whereas the clouds and strange impressions
Maintaind by coldness often do appear:
And by the highest region of the air
Unto the clearest element of fire,
Which to her silver footstool does appear.
M. Drayton. The Moon is darkened to all creatures eyes,
Whilst in the shadow of the earth she lies:
For that the earth of nature cold and dry,
A very Chaos of obscurity:
Whose globe exceeds her compass by degrees,
Fixed upon her superficies.
When in his shadow she does hap to fall,
Does cause her darkness to be general.
Idem. -- Earth
Bears all her sons and daughters in one womb,
She Europes, Ameriques, Affriques, Asians toombe.
Idem. -- Earth cannot comprehend
The secret depths of judgments all divine,
Where is no ground beginning, midst nor fine.
I. Syluester. Transl. O trustlesse state of earthly things, and slipper hope
Of mortal men, that swinke and work for naught:
And shooting wide, does miss the marked scope.
Now have I turned (a lesson dearly bought)
That nis on earth assurance to be sought.
Ed. Spencer. A narrow room our glory vain unties,
A little circle does our pride contain:
Earth like an I Will amid the water lies,
Which sea sometime is called, sometime the maine.
Yet naught therein resounds a name so great,
It Is but a lake, a pond, a marish street.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. Our mother earth nere glories in her fruit,
Till by the sun clad in her tinsell suit:
Nor does she ever stare him in the face,
Till in her glorious arms she him embrace.
Which proves she has a soul, sense, and delight,
Of generation, feeling, appetite.
M. Drayton. To know our selves to come of humane birth,
These sad afflictions cross us here on earth.
A task imposde by heavens eternal law,
To keep our rude rebellions well in awe.
M. Drayton. Next unto him, malicious Envy rode,
Upon a ravenous Wolf, and still did chawe
Between his cankred teeth a venomous tode,
That all the poison ran about his iawe.
But inwardly he chawed his own mawe
At neighbors wealth, that made him ever sad,
For death it was when any good he saw,
And wept, that cause of weeping none he had,
But when he heard of harm, he waxed wondrous glad.
Ed. Spencer. The other held a snake with venom fraught,
On which she fed and gnawed hungerly:
As if that long she had not eaten ought,
That round about the jaws we might discry
The bloody gore, and poison dropping loathsomly.
Her name was Envy, known well thereby,
Whose nature is to grieve and grudge at all
That she sees done praise worthily:
Whose sight to her is greatest cross may fall,
And vexes so, that makes her eat her gall:
For when she wants other thing to eat,
She feeds on her own man unnatural.
And of her own foul entrails make her meat,
Meat fit for such a monsters monstrous diet.
Idem. I chanced on a monster of a man,
With health heart sick, sterued with store of food,
With riches poor, with beauty pale and wan,
Wretched with happiness, evil with good.
One eye did envy at the the other eye:
Because the other enuide more then he,
His hands did fight for the first injury,
So Envy enuide, enuide to be.
And as he went, his tender foot was sore,
And enuide at the foot that went before.
Th. Bastard. This monster honors hurt, is like the curre
That barks at strangers coming at the durre.
But sparing always those are to her known,
To them most gentle, to the others thrown.
This monster als is like a rauing cloud,
Which threatens always kindly Vulcan loud
To smore and drown him with her pouring rain,
Yet force of fire repels his force again.
K. of S. Often malice makes the mind to shed the boiled brine,
And enuies humor often vnlades, by conduits of the eine.
T. W. Envy lives with us whilst our selves survive,
But when we die, it is no more alive.
Chapter Fitz Ieffry. The knottie Oak and wainscot old,
Within does eat the silly worm,
Even so a mind in envy cold,
Always within it self does burn.
Idem. Each sense may common subjects comprehend,
Things excellent the sensitive confound:
The eye with light and colors may contend:
The care endure the note of common sound
Both fail, when glorious beams and strokes abound*
So Envy that at meanest things bears spite,
Stands mute at view of unexpected height.
Th. Storer. -- Envy harbors most in feeblest breast.
S. Phil. Sidney. Fell enuies cloud, still dimmeth virtues ray.
Ed. Spencer. Foul envy, thou the partial judge of right,
Son of deceit, borne of that harlot hate:
Nursed in hell, a vile and ugly sprite,
Feeding on slander, cherisht with debate,
Never contented with thine own estate:
Deeming alike, the wicked and the good,
Whose words be gall, whose actions end in blood.
M. Drayton. Envy does cease, wanting to feed upon.
Idem. Like as the poyze that would the palm repress
Does cause the bows spread larger round about:
So spite and envy causes glory sprout,
And aye the more the top is ouertroad,
The deeper does the same root spread abroad.
M. of M. Sicilian Tyrants yet did never find
Then Envy, greater torment of the mind.
Idem. Our days are stamped in Enuies mint,
And this our age cast in the Iron mold,
Our hearts are hewed out of Cancasean flint,
And two leau'd plates of brass our breast enfold,
Hate waxes young, the world thus waxing old,
And best we like them, that do us love the least,
And least we love them, whom we should like best.
Chapter Fitz Geffrey. Error.
-- His gliste^ing armor made
A little glooming light, much like a shade:
By which she saw the ugly monster plain,
Half like a serpent, horribly displaied,
But the other half did woman's shape retain,
Most loathsome, filthy, foul, and full of vile disdain.
And as she lay upon the dyrtie ground,
Her huge long tail, her den all ouerspred,
Yet was in knots, and many bouts vpwound:
Pointed with mortal sting: of her there bred
A thousand young ones, which she daily fed,
Sucking upon her poisoned dugges, each one
Of sundry shapes, yet all ill sauoured.
Soon as the uncouth light upon them shone,
Into her mouth they crept, and suddenly were gone.
Ed. Spencer. To err is proper unto men, and but brutish to persist*
W. Warner. -- Errors are no errors, but by fate,
For often the event makes foul faults fortunate.
S. Daniell. -- Errors left unpunished, are professed,
And being not defended, are oppressed.
Chapter Middleton. To hear good counsel, error never loves.
D. Lodge. -- Errors are hardly moved,
That love does breed in an unadvised breast.
S. I. H. Transl. A stony coldness has benumbde the sense,
And lively spirits of each living wight,
And dimmed with darkness their intelligence,
Darkness more then Cymerians day by night,
And monsters Error flying in the air,
Has marred the face of all that seems fair.
Ed. Spencer. Faith.
-- Fidelia
Like sunny beams threw forth her crystal face,
That could have mazde the r^r'st beholders sight,
And round about her head did shine like heavens light
She was araied all in Lilly white,
And in her right hand bare a Cup of Gold,
With wine and water filld up to the height.
In which a serpent did himself infold,
That horror made to all that did behold,
But she nowhit did change her constant mind.
And in her other hand, she full did hold,
A book that was both signd and sealed with blood.
Ed. Spencer. Faith sits triumphant on a coach of gold,
Of Tuballs work, where costly Saphires shine,
Rich Diamonds, and many Rubies fine,
And if ought else, the work more costly hold,
This glorious chariots rolling wheels are like
The holy wheels the great Ezechiel saw,
For own self spirit, self wind and will does draw,
Their restesse courses equal both alike,
The bird that led the Roman standerds out
The bird that fixed can oppose his eyes,
Against the greatest light in all the skies,
High through the air draws this rich Coach about.
Faith flaunts it not in silver nor in gold.
Nor precious scarlet of the Tyrian die:
Nor paints her face to hide deformity,
But as she is, she does her self unfold,
Her body that all bodies does disgrace,
Like Iunoes bird is full of watching eyes,
Whose holy glaunces pierce the lofty skies,
Pierce the hie heavens, and see God face to face.
She has great store of flowing tongues to praise
The Lord of hoastes: she has most mighty wings,
(Passing the swiftnes of all mortal things)
That in a moment up to heaven her raise,
Her glorious head is compast with a crown
Nor made of Olive, pine, or Laurel bow,
Nor Parsley wreath which Graecians did allow.
The olympian gaimes for signalls of renown,
But of fresh Roses plucked from honors tree,
That never shrink for winters chilling frost,
Nor wither not when Titan hotely tostes,
But by the Lord for ever watered be.
I. Syl. Transl. Faith friendly porter of heavens Crystal hold,
Conduct us straight before the throne of gold:
O^ Gods great grace, there prostrate on her knee,
Does prayer speak in name of all the three.
I. S. Transl. What was the world before the world? or God ere he was God
Why this he did, or does not that, this bidde^ or forbod:
I dare not think, or arrogate such mysteries divine,
Faith with her wits significant suffice these wits of mine:
To love God and our neighbors as our self is all in fine.
W. Warner. Draw thy forces all unto thy heart,
The strongest fortress of this earthly part:
And on these three, let thy assurance lie,
On faith, hope, and humility.
M. Drayton. Faith is thy Fort, thy shield, thy stronger aid,
Never controlled, nere yielded, ne dismaide:
Which does dilate, unfold, foretell, expresses,
Which gives rewards, inuesteth and possesses.
Idem. Faith has not only power on things terrene
Both hie, and low, but oftentimes does force
Gods justice too, and sometimes seems perforce,
Gods purposes to change and alter clean.
I. Syl. -- The hardest things faith makes most possible.
Idem. -- Even the faithful flocks are like the ground,
That for good fruit, with weeds will still abound:
If that the share and coulter idle lie,
That riues the share, and roots the brambles bie.
Th. Hudson. Transl. Add faith unto your force, and be not faint.
Ed. Spencer. Only faith does justify say we, of Gods free grace,
By Christ, nor faith is idle, but does charity embrace.
W. Warner. Fame.
A monster swifter none is under sun.
Increasing as in waters we discrie,
The circles small of nothing that begin,
Which at the length, unto such breadth do come,
That of a drop which from the skies do fall,
The circles spread, and hide the waters all.
So Fame in flight increasing more and more,
For at the first, she is not scarcely known,
But by and by she flits from shore to shore,
To clouds from the earth, her stature straight is grown
There whatsoever by her trumpe is blown,
The sound that both by sea and land out-flies,
Rebounds again, and verberates the skies:
They say, the earth that first the Giants bred,
For anger that the Gods did them dispatch,
Brought forth this sister of those monsters dead,
Full light of foot, swift wings, the winds to catch,
Such monster erst did nature never hatch.
As many plumes she has as top to toe,
So many eyes them underneath or more:
And tongues do speak: so many ears do hark,
By night tweene heaven she flies and earthly shade,
And shreaking takes no quiet sleep by dark,
On houses roofes, or towers as keeper made,
She fits by day, and cities threats to invade,
And as she tells what things she sees by view,
She rather shows that is fained false, then true,
I. H. Mir. of M. Fame in a stoale of purple set with eyes,
And ears, and tongues, carried a golden book,
Upon the cover, this I saw engrau'd.
Pauci quos aequus amauit
Jupiter, aut ardeus euerit ad aethera virtus
Dijs geniti.
G. Peele. Fame with golden wings aloft does fly,
Above the reach of ruinous decay,
And with brave plumes does beat the ayrie sky,
Admired of base borne men, from far away.
Ed. Spencer. The Brazen Trompe of Iron winged fame,
That mingleth truth with forged lies.
E. Fairfax. Transl. Then came they to the foul and loathsome lake,
Dark, deep, and mirie, of a dreadful hue,
Where was the aged man that never stinted
To carry bundles of the names imprinted.
This was the man, whom (as I told before)
Nature and custom so swift of foot had made,
He never rested, but ran evermore.
And with his coming he did use this trade:
A heap of names within his cloak he bare,
And in the River did them all unlade:
Or to (say truth) away he cast them all,
Into this stream which Laethe we do call.
This prodigal old wrerch no sooner came
Unto this cursed rivers barren bank,
But desperately without all fear of blame,
Or caring to deserve reward or thank,
He hurled therein full many a precious name,
Where millions soon into the bottom sanke:
Hardly in every thousand one was found,
That was not in the gulf quite lost and dround:
Yet all about great store of birds there flew,
As vultures, carren crows, and chattering pies,
And many more of sundry kinds and hew,
Making leaude harmony with their loud cries,
These when the careless wretch the treasure threw
Into the stream, did all they could devise,
What with their tallents some, and some with beak
To save these names, but find themselves too weak.
For ever as they thought themselves to raise,
To bear away those names of good renown,
The weight of them, so heavy downward ways,
They in the stream were driven to cast them down,
Only two swans sustained so great a paize
In spite of him that sought them all to drown,
These two did still take up whose names they list,
And bare them safe away, and never mist.
Sometime all under the foul lake they diued,
And took up some that were with water covered:
And those that seemed condemned, they repriued.
And often as about the bank they houered,
They caught them, ere they to the stream arrived,
Then went they with the names they had recovered,
Up to a hill that stood the water nie,
On which a stately Church was built on hie.
This place is sacred to immortal fame,
And evermore a Nymph stands at the gate,
And took the names wherewith the two swans came,
Whether they early come, or whether late.
Then all about the Church she hanged the same,
Before that sacred Image in such rate,
As they might then well be assured for ever,
Spite of that wretch, in safety to persevere.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Fame on his right hand in a roabe of gold,
Whose stately train, Time as her page did bear:
On which for rich imbroydery was enrold,
The deeds of all the Worthies ever were:
So strongly wrought as wrong could not impair,
Whose large memorialls she did still rehearse,
In Poets man immortallizing verse.
Two tablets on her goodly breast she bore,
The one of Crystal, the other Ebonie,
Engrau'd with names of all that lived before
That; the fair book of heavenly memory:
The Other, the base scrowle of Infamy.
One stuffed with Poets, Saints, and Conquerors,
The Other, with Atheists, Tyrants, Usurers,
And in her word appeared as a wonder,
Her daring force, and never failing might:
Which softly spoke far off, as't were a thunder,
And round about the world would take their flight,
And bring the most obscured things to light.
That still the farther off, the greater still,
Did ever sound our good, or make our ill.
M. Drayton. Her dwelling is betwixt the earth and skies,
Her Turret unto heaven her top vpreares:
The windows made of Lynceus piercing eyes,
And all the walls be made of daintiest ears,
Where every thing that is done in earth appears.
No word is whispered in this vaultie round,
But in her palace straitwaies it does sound:
The rafters, trumpets which do rend the air,
Sounding aloud each name that thither comes.
The chinkes like tongues of all things talking here,
And all things past, in memory do bear.
The doors unlock with every word man says,
And opens wide with every little breath.
It Is hung about with arms and conquering spoils,
The pillars which support the roof of this,
Are trophies graven with Herculean toiles.
The roof of garlands, crown, and ensigns is:
In midst of which a Crystal Pyramid,
All over carved with men of most renown,
Whose base is her fair chair, the spire her crown.
Idem. -- Fame
Refuge of hope, the harbinger of truth,
Hand-mayd of heaven virtues skillful guide,
The life of life, the ages springing youth:
Triumph of joy, eternities fair bride,
The virgins glory, and the martyrs pride.
The courages immortal raising fire,
The very height to which great thoughts aspire:
The staire by which men to the stars do clime:
The minds first mouer greatness to express,
Faiths armor, and the vanquisher of time.
A pleasant sweet against deaths bitterness,
The hie reward which does all labors bless:
The study which does heavenly things impart,
The joy amidst the tedious ways of art.
Learnings green laurel, Justice glorious throne,
The Muses chariot, memories true food:
The Poets life, the gods companion,
The fire-reuiuing Phaenix sun-nurst brood.
The spirits eternal image, honors good.
The Balsamum which cures the soldiers scarres,
The world, discovering seamens happy stars.
Idem. A lofty subject of it self does bring,
Grave words and weighty, of it self divine:
And makes the authors holy honor shine.
If ye would after ashes live, beware:
To do like Erostrate, who burnt the fair
Ephesian Temple, or to win a name
To make of brass a cruel calfe vntame.
K. of S. -- Incorporeall Fame
Whose weight consists in nothing but her name,
Is swifter then the wind, whose tardy plumes
Are reeking water, and dull earthly fumes.
Chapter Marlowe. Fame (whereof the world seems to make such choice)
Is but an Echo and an idle voice.
S. Daniell. Unto this Hydra are we subject still,
Who dares to speak, not caring good or ill.
Better it is without renown to be,
Then be renownd for vile iniquity.
K. of K. -- Fame the queen of immortality.
Chapter Fitz Ieffrey. Death has no dart to slay deserved Fame.
Chapter Fitz. This jealous monster has a thousand eyes,
Her aerie body has a thousand wings:
Now on the earth, now up to heaven she flies.
And here and there with every wind she flings:
Nothing so secret but to her appears,
And apt to credit every thing she hears.
Foul babbling, tell tale, secrets soon bewraier,
The air bred Echo, the speaker of lies:
Shrill-sounding trompet, truths unkind betraier.
False larum-bell, awaking dead men's eyes.
Fond prattling parrat telling all thou hear,
Often furthest off, when as thou should be nearest.
M. Drayton. The path is set with danger, leads to fame,
When Minos did the Grecians flight deny,
He made him wings and mounted through the sky.
Idem. Still fame will grow if once abroad it fly,
Whether it be a troth, or be a lie.
Idem. Fame does explore what lies most secret hidden,
Entering the closet of the palace dweller,
A broad revealing what i^ forbidden,
Of truth and falsehood both an equal teller,
It Is not a guard can serve for to expel her:
The sword of justice cannot cut her wings,
Nor stop her mouth from uttering secret things.
S. Daniell. Celestial goddess everliving fame,
Mineruaes daughter by fair Maias son,
Of all the inhabitants of heavens fair frame:
Most highly honored since the world begun,
And shall be till the fatal glass be run.
Souls sweet receipt, the healths restoratiue:
Hearts cordial, the minds preservative.
Goddess of thoughts, muse animating appetite,
Altar of honor, simple of renown,
Shrine of devotion, yielding art her merit:
Life's richest treasure, virtues gorgious gown,
Heavens best abilliment, Ariadnes crown.
The Cynosura of the purest thought,
Fair Helice, by whom the heart is taught.
Chapter Fitz Ieffrey. Famine.
A grisly shape of Famine might we see,
With greedy looks and gaping mouth that cride
And would torment as she should there have did:
Her body thin and bare as any bone,
Whereto was left naught but the case alone:
And that alas was gnawne on every where,
All full of holes, that I ne might refrain
From tears to see how she her arms could tear,
And with her teeth gnash on her bones in vain,
When all for naught she feign would so sustain
Her staruen corpse, that rather seemed a shade,
Then any substance of a creature made.
Great was her force, whom stone walls could not stay,
Her tearing nails snatching at all she saw:
With gaping jaws, that by no means y may
Be satisfied from hunger of her mawe,
But eats her self, as she that has no law:
Gnawing alas her carkas all in vain,
While you may count each sinew, bone and vain:
On her, while we thus firmly fixed our eye,
That bled for ^uth of such a drery sight,
Lo suddenly she shrikte in so huge wise,
As made hell gates to shiuer with the might:
Where with a dart we saw how it did light
Right on his breast, and therewithal pale death
Enthrilling it, to reaue her of her breath.
M. Sackuile. Mean cates are welcome still to hungry guests.
B. Ioh. Fancy.
Fancy we feel includes all passions might.
S. Phil. Sydney. Fancy by kind, with reason strives still.
Th. Watson. -- Vid. love

Fate.
What God has said, that cannot but ensue,
Though all the world would have it overthrown:
When men suppose by fetches of their own
To fly their Fate, they further on the same,
Like blasts of wind, which often revive the flame.
M. of M. The heavens do rule in their continual course,
That yields to Fate, that does not yield to force.
M. Drayton. Chance is uncertain, fortune double faced.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. -- Demogorgon ruler of the Fates.
R. Green. -- The Fates can make
Way for themselves, their purpose to partake.
Ed. Spencer. -- What the Fates do once decree,
Not all the gods can change, nor Jove himself can free.
Idem. -- The laws of Fate
Being grau'n in steel, must stand inuiolate.
Th. Dekkar. Who can escape what his own Fate has wrought,
The work of heavens will, surpass all humane thought.
Ed. Spencer. -- Who can deceive his destenie?
Or ween by warning to avoid his Fate?
That when he sleeps in more security
And safest seems, him soonest does amate,
And finds due effect, or soon or late
So feeble is the power of fleshly arm.
Idem. -- Indeed the Fates are firm,
And may not shrink though all the word do shake:
Yet ought men's good endeavors them confirm,
And guide the heavenly causes to their constant term.
Idem. Each man they say his Fate has in his hands,
And what he makes or marres to leese or save,
Of good or evil, is even self do, self have.
I. H. M. of M. The Fates far off, foreseen come gently near.
M. Drayton. Our Fate is not prevented though fore-knowne,
For that must hap decreed by heavenly powers,
Who work our fall, yet make the fault still ours.
S. Daniell. -- Fate
Keeps in eternal dark our fortunes hidden,
And ere they come to know them, it is forbidden.
Idem. All men are men in ignorance of Fate,
To alter chance, exceeds humane state.
I. Markham. The heavens do rule in their continual course,
That yields to Fate, that does not yield to force.
M. Drayton. Fear.
-- Fear all armed from top to toe,
Yet thought himself not safe enough thereby,
But feared each shadow moving too and fro,
And his own arms whom glistering he did spy,
Or clashing heard, he fast away did fly
As ashes pale of hew, and winghie heeld,
And evermore on danger fixed his eye,
Against whom he always bent a brazen sheeld,
Which his right hand unarmed faithfully did weeld.
Ed. Spencer. Who so for fickle fear from virtue shrinkes,
Shall in his life embrace no worthy thing,
No mortal man the cup of surety drinks.
S. Phil. Sid. Fear is more pain then is the pain it fears,
Disarming humane minds of native might:
Where each conceit an ugly figure bears,
Which were not evil, well viewd in reasons light.
Idem. The gift being great, the fear does still exceed,
And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
But cowardlike with trembling terror die.
W. Shakespeare. The fear of ill, exceeds the ill we fear.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. Fear lends wings to aged folk to fly,
And made them mount to places that were hie.
Fear made the woeful child to wail and weep,
For want of speed, on foot and hands to creep.
Th. Hudson. Transl. Fear in a fearful heart, frets more then plagues that
he fears.
A. France. Fear that is wiser then the truth does ill.
S. D. Fear casts too deep, and never is too wise.
Idem. In vain with terror is he fortified,
That is not guarded with firm love beside.
Idem. A fearful thing to tumble from a throne.
M. Drayton. Where crowned might, and crossed right so near together dwell
Behoues that forest flying fear whereof the Fox does tell,
Our factious Lancaster and York, thereof could witness well.
VV. Warner. Thunder affrights the Infants in the schools,
And threatenings are the conquerors of fools.
I. Markham. Whom fear constraines to praise their Princes deeds,
That fear eternal, hatted in them feeds.
R. Green. Fear misinterprets things, each angury
The worser way he fondly does imply.
Weakness is false, and faith in cowards rare,
Fear finds our shifts, timitidie is subtle.
S. Daniell. It Is incident to those whom many fear,
Many to them more grievous hate to bear.
M. Drayton. -- He whom all men fear,
Fears all men every where:
(Hate enforcing them thereto)
Makes many undertake
Many things they would not do.
Th. Kyd. The only good that grows of passed fear,
Is to be wise, and ware of like again.
Ed. Spencer. A man to fear a woman's moodie eire,
Makes reason lie a slave to servile fear.
S. Ph. Sydney. Nothing seen fearful, we the most should fear,
Great amistes rise before the greatest rain:
The water deep'st, where we least murmr hear,
In fairest Cups men temper deadliest baine.
The nearer night, the air more clear and still,
The nearer to one deaths, least fearing ill.
M. Drayton. -- Bloodlesse, trustlesse, witless fear,
That like an Aspen tree, trembles each where,
She leads black terror, and black clownish shame,
And drowsy sloth that counterfeiteth lame,
With snailelike motion measuring the ground.
Foul sluggish drone, barren (but sin to breed)
Diseased beggar, steru'd with wilful need.
I. S. Transl. The fear of evil does affright us more,
Then the evil it self, though it seem nere so sore.
Fortitude.
Rich buskind Seneca, that did declaime
And first in Rome our tragic pomp compile,
Says Fortitude is that, which in extreme,
And certain hazard all base fear exile.
It guides says he, the noble mind from far,
Through frost and fire, to conquer honors war.
I. Markham. Honey tong'd Tully Marmaid of our ears,
Affirms, no force can force true Fortitude:
It with out bodies no communion bears.
The soul and spirit, soly it does include.
It is that part of honesty, which reares
The heart to heaven, and ever does obtrude,
Faint fear and doubt, still taking his delight
In pe^ills, which exceed all perils might.
Patience, perseverance, greatness, and strong trust,
These Pages are to Fortitude their King:
Patience that suffers, and esteems just,
What ever we for virtue fortunes brine.
Perseverance holds constant what we must,
Greatness that effects the gilded thing,
And armed trust which never can despair,
And hopes good hap how ever fatal dear.
Idem. The man that has of Fortitude and might,
And thereto has a Kingdom void withal,
Except he also guide himself aright,
His power and strength prevails but a small,
He cannot escape at length, an hapless fall.
I. H. M. of M. The Roman Sergius having lost his hand,
Slew with one hand four in a single fight,
A thing all reason ever did withstand,
But that bright Fortitude spreads forth her light.
Pompey by shore held from The Italian Land,
And all his saylors quaking in his sight,
First hoysed sails, and cried amidst the strife,
There Is need I go, no need to save my life.
I. Markeham. Force without wisdom, is of little worth.
G. Gascoigne. Greater force there needs to maintain wrong the^ right.
Ed. Spencer. Agis that guilt the Lacedemon street,
Entending one day battle with his foes,
By counsel was repeld as thing unmeet,
The enemy being ten to one in shoes,
But he replied, it is needful that his feet
With many heads, should lead to many blows.
And one being good, an army is for ten:
Foes to Religion, and known naughty men,
To him that told Dineceus how his foes
Covered the sun with darts and armed spears.
He made reply, thy news is joy in woes,
We Will in the shadow fight, and conquer foes.
I. Markham. -- As to love, the life for virtues flame,
Is the just act of a true noble will:
So to contemn it, and her hopes exclude
Is baseness, rashness, and no Fortitude.
Idem. Rash Isadas the Lacedemon Lord,
That naked fought against the Theban power,
Although they chained his valor by a cord,
Yet was he find for rashness in that hour.
And those which most his careless praise afford,
Did most condemn what folly did devour:
For in attempting, prowess is not meant,
But wisely doing what we do attempt.
Idem. Felicity.
O had Felicity feeling of woe?
Or could on mean but moderately feed?
Or would look down the way that he must go?
Or could abstain from what diseases breed?
To stop the wound before to death it bleed?
War should not fill Kings palaces with moan,
Nor peril come, when it is least thought upon.
M. Drayton. Folly Fools.
Folly in youth is sin, in age is madness.
S. Daniel. A greater sign of Folly is not shown,
Then trusting others force, distrust our own:
S. I. Harr. Transl. -- Wicked men repine their sins to hear,
And Folly flings, if counsel touch him near.
D. Lodge. Fair fools delight to be accounted wise.
Chapter Marlowe. Fools will find fault without the cause discerning.
And argue most of that they have no learning.
S. I. Harr. Transl. -- There is a method, time, and place,
Which fools observing do co^mence, ere wise me^ have their grace.
W. Warner. It Is better be a fool then be a fox,
For Folly is rewarded and respected,
Where subtlety is hated and rejected.
D. Lodge* -- The foolish commmons use
Obey them most, who does them most abuse.
S. I. Harrington. P. A witless fool may every man him guess,
That leaves the more, and takes him to the less.
G. Gascoigne. Flatterer.
-- Foul leasings and vile flattery,
Two filthy blots in noble genterie.
Ed. Sp. When as we finely soothe our own desires,
Our best conceits do prove the greatest hers.
M. Drayton. Nere was pretense so foul, but some would flatter it*
Nor any thing so pestilent, as misapplied wit.
W. Warner. To be officious, gets friends, plain dealing hated is
Yet better plainly to reprove, then fainedly to kis:
We cannot also love our friends, and Flatter their amiss.
Idem. -- Flattery can never want rewards.
D. Lodge. He twice offends, who sin in flattery bears,
Yet every hour he dies, who ever fears.
D. Lodge. The Lords and Ladies over rent, and cunningly the fine,
The Parasite does ouerreach, and bears away the gain.
W. Warner. Ye sons of craft bearing as many faces,
As Proteus, takes among the marine places,
And force your natures all the best you can,
To counterfeit the grace of some great man
Chamelion like, who takes him in each hew,
Of black or white, or yellow, green, or blew,
That comes him next, so you that find the fashion
To hurt the poor, with many a great taxation,
You that do prease to have the princes ear,
To make your names in provinces appear,
Ye subtle Thurins sell your fumish wind
To wicked wights, whose senses ye do blind.
Th. Hudson. Transl. Time fawning spaniels, Mermaids on the earth.
Trencher fed flies.
Base Parasites, these elbowe-rubbing mates,
A plague to all lascivious wanton states:
O filthy monkies, vile and beastly kind,
Foul prating Parrats, birds of Harpy brood,
A corasiue to every noble mind.
Vipers that suck your mothers dearest blood:
Misshapen monster, worst of any creature,
A foe to all, an enemy to nature.
M. Drayton. Fortune.
Fortune as blind as he whom she does lead,
Her feature chaung'd each minute of the hour,
Her riggish feet fantastickly would tread:
Now would she smile, and suddenly would lowre,
And with one breath, her words are sweet and sour.
Upon her foes she amorously does glaunce,
And on her followers coyly look askaunce,
About her neck (it seemed as for a chain)
Some Princes crowns and broken scepters hung.
Upon her arm a lazy youth did lean,
Which scornfully unto the ground she flung,
And with a wanton grace passing alone,
Great bags of gold from out her bosom drew,
And to base Pesants and fond Idiots threw.
A duskie vale which hid her sightlesse-eies
Like clouds, which cover our uncertain lives,
Painted about with bloody Tragedies,
Fools wearing crowns and wise men clogged in given
Now how she gives again, how she depriues:
In this black map this she her might discouers,
In Camps and Courts, on soldiers, and on lovers.
M. Drayton. A hap, a chance, a casual event,
The vulgars Idol, and a childish terror:
A what man will, a silly accident
The mask of blindness, and disguise of error,
Natures vile nickname, follies foolish mirror:
A term, a byword, by tradition learned,
A hearsay, nothing not to be discernd,
A wanton fear, a silly Infants dream,
A vain illusion, a mere fantasy:
A seeming shade, a lunaticke man's dream.
A fond Aenigma, a flat heresy.
Imaginations doting emperie.
A folly in it self, it one self loathing,
A thing that would be, and yet can be nothing.
Disease of time, ambitions concubine:
A mind intrancing snare, a slippery ice,
The bait of death, destructions heady wine.
Vaine-glories patron, the fools paradise.
Fond hope wherewith confusion does entice.
A vile seducing f^end, which haunts men still,
To loose them in the errors of their will.
Idem. O fortune the great Amorite of kings,
Opinions breath, thou Epicurian air:
Invention of man's soul, falsest of things,
A step beyond our judgment, and a staire
Higher then men can reach with reasons wings.
Thou blindfold Archeresse, thou that wilt not hear:
Thou foe to persons, manners, times and all,
That raisest worthless, while the worthiest fall.
I. Markham. Ah fortune, nurse of fools, poison of hope,
Fuel of vain desires, deserts destruction*
Supposed sovereign, through our vain construction
Princes of Paganism, root of impie^ie,
Devil on earth, masked in piety.
Scorn of the learned, follies elder scholar,
Bastard of time, begot by vain opinion:
Against thy power, a peevish proud resister.
Mother of lies, and witness of illusion:
Lamp of vainglory, double faced shroe,
Who smiles at first, succesfull, ends in woe.
D. Lodge. Who wins her grace, must with atchiuements woe he^
As she is blind, so never had she ears,
Nor must with puling eloquence go to her:
She understands not sighs, she hears not prayers.
Flattered she flies; controld she ever fears.
And though a while she nicely do forsake it,
She i^ a woman, and at length will take it.
Nor ever let him dream once of a crown,
For one bad cast that will give up his game,
And though by ill hap he be overthrown,
Yet let him manage her till she be tame.
M. Drayton. Fortune the folly is, and plague of those
Which to the world their wretched will dispose.
M. of M. All flesh is frail and full of fickleness,
Subject to fortunes charm, still changing new,
What haps to day to me, to morrow may to you.
Ed. Spencer. Fortune the foe to famous chieuisance,
Sildome or never yields to virtue aid:
But in her way throws mischief and mischance,
Whereby her course is stopped, and passage laid.
Idem. Mock Gods they are, and many Gods induce,
Who fortune feign to father there abuse.
M. of M. -- In vain do men
The heavens of there fortunes fault accuse,
Sith they know best what is the best for them,
For they to each such fortune do diffuse,
As they do know each can most aptly use:
For not that which men covet most is best,
Nor that thing worst which men do most refuse.
But fittest is, that all contented rest
With that they hold: each has his fortune in his breast.
Ed. Spencer. No fortune is so bad, our selves ne frame
There is no chance at all has us preserved.
There is no fate whom we have need to blame:
There is no desteny but is deserved:
No luck that leaves us safe, or vnpreseru'd.
Let us not then complain of fortunes skill,
For all our good descends from Gods good will,
And of our lewdness, springs all our ill.
M. of M. -- They that do dwell on fortunes call,
No sooner rise, but ready are to fall.
D. Lodge. Look how much higher fortune does erect
The climing wight on her unstable wheel:
So much the nigher may a man exspect
To see his head where late he saw his heel.
Policrates has proved it in effect,
And Dyonisius that too true did feel
Who long were luld on hie in fortunes lap:
And fell down suddenly to great mishap.
On the other side, the more man is oppressed
And utterly overthrown by fortunes lowre,
The sooner comes his state to be redressed,
When wheel shall turn and bring the happy hour.
Some from the Block have grown to be so blessed.
Whole realms have been subverted to their power.
As Marius and Ventidius sample is,
In former age, and Jews of France in this.
S. I. Harr. Transl. -- As the boystrous wind
Does shake the tops of highest reared towers,
So does the force of froward fortune strike
The wight that highest sits in haughty state.
G. Gascoigne. -- So wills the wanton queen of chance,
That each man trace this Labyrinth of life:
With slippery steps now wronged by fortune strange,
Now drawn by counsel from the maze of strife.
D. Lodge. We all are proud when fortune favors us,
As if inconstant chance were always one:
Or standing now, she would continue thus,
O fools look back, and see the rolling stone
Whereon she blindly lighting sets her foot,
And slightly sowes, that sildome takes root.
Th. Kyd. Fortune the first and last that gouernes states.
I. Markham. The blindfold mistress of uncertain change.
D. Lodge. The wayward lady of this wicked world.
Idem. Blind fortune fails mighty ones, and meaner does advance.
W. Warner. Blind fortune finds none so fit to flout
As Sures by sotts, which cast no kind of doubt.
M. of M. -- Fortune cannot raise
Any one aloft without some others wrack,
Floods drown no fields unless they find a bracke.
Idem. Where power dwelles and riches rest,
False fortune is a comely guest.
E. of S. Think fortune newly hatched is fledge, and waggeth wing to fly
All suffer change, our selves new born, even then begin to die.
VV. Warner. The man that fortune at command will keep,
He must be sure he never let her sleep.
M. Drayton. There never yet was Emperor or King,
Could boast that he had fortune in a string.
S. I. Harr. Transl. -- All things to fortune are subjected,
Chiefly in wars, that are by chance directed.
Idem. Wheresoever fortune her bounty will bestow,
There heaven and earth must pay what she does owe.
M. of M. The man whose thoughts to fortunes height aspires,
Were better die then live in low desires.
Th. Achelly. Admit thou had Pactolian waves to land thee gold at will,
Know Craesus did to Cyrus kneel, and thou may speed as ill.
W. Warner. Attempt not things beyond thy reach, join fortune to thy will,
Least Phoebus chair do else surcharge rash Phaethon his skill
Idem. If fortune help who^ thou woldst hurt, fret not at it the more,
When Ajax stormed, then from him the prize Ulysses bore.
Idem. Good fortune draws from heaven her descent,
Making hie Jove the root of her large tree:
She shows from him how many Godheads went,
Archangels, Angels, heavens posterity,
From thence she shows the glorious third she lent,
To Monarkes, Emperors and Kings in fee.
Annexing as collateralls to her love,
Honor, virtue, valor and endless time.
N^thelesse ill fortune will be elder borne
She says she springs from Saturn, Jove's wronged sire,
And heaven and earth, and hell, her coat have borne
Fresh bleeding hearts within a field of fire:
All that the world admires she makes her scorn,
Who farthest seems, is to ill fortune near.
And that just proof may her great praise commend,
All that good chance begins, ill chance does end.
I. Markham. Ill fortune is attended by reproach,
Good fortune fame and virtue stellifies.
Idem. -- What man can shun the hap,
That hidden lies, unawares him to surprise:
Misfortune waits advantage to entrappe
The man most wary, in her whelming lap.
Ed. Spencer. The fortune that misfortune does afford,
Is for to live and die unfortunate.
Th. Achelly. Misfortune follows him that tempts fortune.
Chapter Fitz Ieffrey. Friendship. Friends.
The natural affection soon does cease,
And quenched is with Cupids greater flame:
But faithful friendship does them both suppress:
And them with maistring discipline does tame
Through thoughts aspiring, to eternal fame.
Ed. Spencer. In friendship, sovereign it is as Mithridate,
Thy friend to love, as one whom thou may hate.
M. of M. Ne certes can that friendship long endure,
How ever gay and goodly be the style,
That does ill cause or evil end endure,
For virtue is the band which binds hearts most sure.
Ed. Spencer. -- Enmity that of no ill proceeds,
But of occasion, with the occasion ends,
And friendship which a faint affection breeds,
Without regard of good, lies like ill grounded seed.
Ed. Spencer. With virtue choose thy friend, with virtue him retain,
Let virtue be the ground, so shall it not be vain.
S. Th. Wiat. Try friends by touch, a feeble fre^d may prove thy stro^gest foe*
Great Pompeys head to Caesar's hand, it was betrayed so,
VV. Warner. In perfect friendship no suspect, for two in one are all,
Community, or doubling joy, or making grief more small.
Idem. The truest friendship in misery is tried,
For then will none but faithful friends abide,
G. Turberuile. Right true it is, and said full yore ago,
Take heed of him that by the back thee claweth,
For none is worse, then is the friendly foe,
Though thee seem good, all things yt thee delights:
Yet know it well, that in thy bosom creeps,
For many a man such fires often times he kindles,
That with the blaze his beard himself he sings.
E. of Surrey. None can deem right who faithful friends do rest,
While they bear sway and rule in hie degree:
For then both fast and fained friends are pressed.
Whose faiths seem both of one effect to be.
But then reuolts the first and fained guest,
When wealth vnwindes and fortune seems to fly,
But he that loves indeed, remains fast,
And loves and serves when life and all is past.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Often times we see in house of mean estate,
In fortunes bad, and chances overthwart:
That men do sooner lay away debate,
And join in sound accord with hand and heart,
Then Princes courts, where riches genders hate:
And vile suspect that loving minds does part.
Where charity is clean consumde and vanished,
And friendship firm, is quite cast out and banished.
Idem. Who so wants friends to back what he begins,
In lands far off, gets not, although he wins.
S. Daniell. If fortune friendly fawn, and lend thee wealthy store,
Thy friends conioined joy, does make thy joy the more
If frowardly she frown, and drives to distress:
His aid releeues thy ruth, and makes thy solace less.
S. Th. Wiat. They are not always surest friends on who^ we most do spend.
W. Warner. True friends have feeling of each others woe,
And when ones heart is sad, all theirs is so.
Chapter Middleion. A golden treasure is the ^ried friend,
But who may gold from counterfeits defend?
Trust not to soon, nor yet to soon mistrust,
With the one thy self, with the other thy friend thou hurtst,
Who twines betwixt, and stears the golden mean,
Nor rashly loves, nor mistrusts in vain.
Mir. of M. -- Friends are geason now a days,
And grow to fume before they taste the fire:
Aquersitie bereauing man's auailes,
They fly like feathers dallying in the wind.
They rise like bubbles in a stormy rain,
Swelling in words, and flying faith and deeds.
D. Lodge. Faint friends when they fall out, most cruel foemen be.
Ed. Spencer. Better a new friend, then an old foe is said.
Idem. Frugalitie.
He that will thrive, must think no courses vile.
B. Johnson. No hurt but good (who means to multiply)
Bought wit is dear, and dressed with sower sauce,
Repentance comes too late, and then say I,
Who spares the first, and keeps the last unspent*
Shall find that sparing yields a goodly rent.
G. Gascoigne. Let first thine own hand hold fast all that comes,
But let the other learn his letting fly:
Idem. Fury.
-- Fury furiously man's life assailes
With thousand cannons, sooner felt then seen,
Where weakest, strongest, fraught with deadly teene,
Blind, crooked, blisterd, melancholy, sad,
Many-nam'd poison, minister of death,
Which from us creepes, but to us gallopeth.
Foul, trouble rest, phantasticke, greedy-gut,
Blood sweating, hearts-theefe, wretched, filthy-slut
The child of surfait and aires-temper vicious,
Perilous known, but unknown most pernicious.
I. Syluister. -- Fury cruel cursed wight,
That unto Knighthood works much shame and woe,
And that same hag, his aged mother hight,
Occasion, the root of all wrath and dispight.
With her, who so will raging Fury tame,
Must first begin, and welther amenage,
First her restrain from her reproachful blame
And evil means, with which she does enrage
Her frantic son, and kindles his courage,
Then when she is withdrawn, or strong withstood,
Is eath his Idle Fury to assuage,
And calm this tempest of his passion wood,
The banks are overflowed, when so sped is the flood.
Ed. Spencer. Fury was red with rage, his eyes did glowe,
While flakes of fire from forth his mouth did flow
His hands and arms y bathed in blood of those
Whom fortune, sin, or fate made countries foes.
T. Lodge. -- This fell fury, for forerunner sends
Many and phrenzie, to subborne her friends,
Whereof the one drying, the other ouerwarming.
The feeble brain (the edge of judgment harming)
Within the soul phantastickly they feign,
A confused host of strange Chimeraes vain.
I. Syluister. Gifts.
It Is wisdom to give much, a Gift preuailes,
When deep persuading Oratorie fails.
Chapter Marlowe. A giving hand though foul, shall have fair praise.
S. Daniell. -- The greatest Gifts whereof we boast,
Are those which do attempt and tire us most.
T. Lodge. -- Only wisdom grave, and judgments clear,
Gifts given from heaven, that are not common here.
S. I. H. Transl. Goods Gifts are often given to men past good.
G. Chapman. Good Gifts abused, to man's confusion turn.
Th. Dekkar. Testators and Executors so give and so receive,
As doubtful whethers joy or grief, is more to take or leave
For as do hogs their troghs to hou^ds, so these give and get place
Death not the Dier gives bequests, and therefore but grave grace.
W. Warner. To loiter well deserved Gifts, is not to give but sell,
When to requite ingratitude, were to do evil well.
Idem. Gentleness.
The gentle mind by gentle deeds is known,
For a man by nothing is so well bewraide,
As by his manners, in which plain is shown,
Of what degree, and what race he is grown.
Ed. Spencer. Sweet gentleness is Bewties waiting maid.
Th. Watson. -- In gentle thoughts,
Relenting thoughts, remorse, and pity rests.
Chapter Marlowe. All like as Phoebus, with his cheerful beams,
Does freshly force the fragrant flowers to flourish,
So gentle rulers subjects love do nourish.
I. H. Mir. of M. Like as the gentle heart it self bewraies,
In doing gentle deeds with francke delight:
Even so the baser mind it self displaies,
In canckered malice, and revenge for spite.
W. Shakespeare. O what an easy thing is it to discrie
The gentle blood, how ever it be wrapped,
In sad misfortunes foul deformity
And wretched sorrows which have often hapt.
For howsoever it may grow mishapt,
That to all virtue it may seem unapt,
Yet will it show some sparks of gentle mind,
And at the last, break forth in his own proper kind.
Ed. Spencer. Gentry.
-- True Gentry stands in the trade
Of virtuous life, not in the fleshly line,
For blood is knit, but Gentry is divine.
I. H. M. of M. Above cognizance or arms, or pedigree far,
An unspotted coat, is like a blazing star.
G. Gascoigne. Kind Amalthea was transformd by Jove,
Into his sparkling pauement, for his love,
Though but a goat, and giving him her milk,
Bazenes is flinty Gentry, soft as silk.
In heaven she lives, and rules a living sign
In humane bodies: yet not so divine,
That she can work her kindness in our hearts.
G. Chapman. The true Gentilitie by their own arms
Advance themselves, the falls by others harms.
Th. Bastard. Gluttony.
-- By his side rode loathsome Gluttony,
Deformed creature, on a filthy swine:
His belly was vpblowen with luxury,
And eke with fatnes, swollen were his eine.
And like a Crane, his neck was long and fine,
With which he swallowed up excessive feast,
For want of which, poor people often did pine,
And all the way most like a brutish swine,
He spued up his gorge, that all did him detest.
Ed. Spencer. Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bankrout quite the wits.
W. Shakespeare. Your appetites O gluttons to content,
The sacred breast of Thetis blew, is rent:
The air must be dispeopled for your mawes,
The Phoenix sole can scarce escape your claws.
Th. Hudson. Transl. Of little nature lives, superfluous meat
But dulls the spirit, and does the stomach freate.
Idem. Who fares finest, does but feed, and ouerfeedeth often,
Who sleeps softest does but sleep, and sometimes ouersoft.
VV. warner. -- Excess does work access to sin.
Idem. O plague, O poison to the warlike state,
Thou make the noble hearts effeminate,
While Rome was ruled by Curioes and Fabrices,
Who fed on roots, and sought not for delices.
And when the only Cressons was the food,
Most delicate to Persia then they stood
In happy state, renowned in peace and war,
And through the world their triumphs spread a far.
But when they after in th'Assirian hall,
Had heard the lessons of Sardanopall,
And when the other given to belly-cheare,
By Galbaes, Neroes, Vitels governed were,
Who gloried more to fill a costly plate,
Then kill a Pirrhus or a Mithridate.
Then both of them were seen for to be sacked
By nations poor, whom they before had wracked.
Th. Hudson. Transl. O glutton throats, O greedy guts profound,
The chosen meats which in the world his bound,
By the Abderois invented, may not stanch
Nor satisfy your foul devouring panch,
But must in Moluke seek the spices fine,
Canary sugar, and the Candy wine.
Idem. Fatness by nature (not immoderate)
Kills not the wit, quels not the minds estate.
But fatnes by intemperance increast,
When living man resembseth loathsome beast:
And belly cheer, with greedy gluttony
Is held the fullness of felicity.
This makes men addicted to the same,
Dull in conceit, gross minded, worthy blame.
Of such do Basis, Galen, Plato write:
That fattest belly has the weakest sprite.
D. Lodge. -- O short, o dangerous madness,
That in thy rage do trusty Clytus smother,
By his dear friend: Panthea by his mother.
Phrenzie, that makes the vaunter insolent,
The talkefull blab, cruel and violent,
The fornicator wax adulterous,
Th'adulterer to become incestuous,
With thy plagues leven, swelling all our crimes
Blind, shameless, senseless, quenching oftentimes
The soul within it self: and often defames
The holiest men, with execrable flames.
I. Siluester. Like as the must beginning to reboyle,
Makes his new vessel wood-bands to recoyle:
Lifts up his lees, and spues with fuming vent,
From this tubbes ground his scumming excrement.
So ruinist thou thy host, and foolishly
From his hearts bottom driu'st all secrecy.
Idem. Good name.
The voice that goes of your unspotted fame,
Is like a tender flower, that with the blast
Of every little wind does fade away.
G. Gascoigne. Transl. The purest treasure mortal times afford,
Is spotless reputation, that away,
Men are but gilded trunkes, or painted clay.
W. Shakespeare. You cannot be too curious of you name,
Fond show of ill (though still the mind be chaste)
Decaies the credit often that Ladies had,
Sometimes the place presumes a wanton mind,
Repair sometimes of some does hurt their honor.
Sometimes the light and garish proud attire,
Persuades a yielding bent of pleasing youths.
G. Gascoigne. Goodness.
-- Even with Goodness men grow discontent.
Where allare ripe to fall, and virtue spent.
S. Daniell. Good things may scarce appear,
But pass away with speedy wing.
M. Roydon. Of God.
I am that one, is, was, and aye shall be,
Who create all of naught, as pleases me:
I can destroy, I am the great and just,
The fair, the good, the holy one to trust:
Whose strong right hand this world has set in frame.
I plague my foe, and grant my servants grace,
All those that knowledge me, and all their race.
Th. Hudson. Transl. -- How soever things in likelihood descent
In birth, life, death, our God is first, the middle and event.
And not what he can do he will, but what he will he can,
And that he do or do it not, behoues us not to scan.
VV. Warner God first made Angels bodilesse pure minds,
Then other things, which mindlesse bodies be:
Last he made man the Horizon twixt both kinds,
In whom we do the worlds abtidgement see.
I. Dauies. How fond is that man in his fantasy
Who thinks that Jove the maker of us all,
The Sun, the Moon the Stars celestial,
So that no leaf without his leave can fall.
Has not in him omnipotence also,
To guide and govern all things here below.
G. Gascoigne. Transl. -- Heaven is his seat,
The Earth his footestoole, and the prison great.
Of Plutoes reign, where damned souls are shut,
Is of his anger evermore the but.
I. Syluester. Transl. -- Full hard it is to read aright
The secret meaning of the eternal might:
That rules man's ways, and rules the thoughts of living wight.
Ed. Spencer. The man of earth sounds not the seas profound
Of Gods deep judgments, where there is no ground
Let soberr^esse be still thy wisdoms end,
Admiring that thou can not comprehend.
I. Syluester. Tran. Under his feet (subjected to his grace,
Sit nature, fortune, motion, time, and place.
Ed. Fairfax. Tran. -- Is there care in heaven? is there love
In the heavenly spirits to these creatures base,
That may compassion of their evils move?
There is: else much more wretched were the case
Of men, then beasts; but o the exceeding grace
Of highest God, that loves his creature so:
And all his works with mercy does embrace.
That blessed Angels he sends too and fro,
To serve to wicked man, to serve his wicked foe.
Ed. Spencer. Our gracious God makes scant weight of displeasure,
And spreads his mercy without weight or measure,
I. Syluester. The eternal power that guides the earthly frame,
And serves him with the instrument of heaven:
To call the earth, and summon up our shame:
By an edict from everlasting given,
Forbids mortality to search the same.
Where sense is blind, and wit of wit bereauen:
Terror must be our knowledge, fear our skill,
To admire his work, and tremble at his will.
S. Daniell. -- Howsoever things in likely hood descent,
In birth life, death, our god is first, the middle and event
And not what he can do he will, but what he will he can,
And that he do or do it not, behoues us not to scan.
W. Warner. God may all that he wills, his will is just,
God wills all good to them that in him trust.
Th. Hudson. Transl. Where the Almighties lightening brand does light,
It dimmes the daz'led eyes, and daunts the senses quight
Ed. Spencer. -- The Gods are ever just,
Our faults excuse their rigor must.
S. Daniell. The Lord lawmakers just and righteous,
Does frame his laws not for himself but us:
He frees himself; and flies with his powers wing,
No where but where his holy will does bring.
All that he does is good, because it does proceed
From him: that is the root of good indeed
From him; that is the spring of righteousness:
From him, whose goodness nothing can express.
I. Syluester. -- Indeed the evil done
Dies not when breath the body first does leave,
But from the gransire to the nephews son,
And all his seed the curse does often cleave,
Till vengeance utterly the guilt bereave:
So straightly God does judge.
Ed. Spencer. There is no strength in armor, man or horse,
Can veil, If Jove on wronged take remorse:
For he on whom the deadly dart does light,
Can never escape by ransom, friend nor flight.
I. Harr. Mir. of Mag. Eternal providence exceeding thought,
Where none appears, can make her self away.
Ed. Spencer. If Gods can their own excellence excel,
It Is in pardoning mortals that rebel.
M. Drayton. God most does punish, whom he most regards.
S. I. Harr. Transl. -- Where Gods do vengeance crave,
It is not strong deensiue walls that any thing can save.
VV. Warner. -- God has made a salve for every sore,
If men would learn the same for to apply.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Man purposes, but all things are disposed
By that great God that sits and rules above.
Idem. What man is he that boasts of fleshly might,
And vain assurance of mortality?
Which all so soon as it does come to fight,
Against spiritual foes, yields by and by,
Or from the field most cowardly does fly?
Ne let the man ascribe it to his skill,
That though grace has gained victory.
If any slight we have it is to ill,
But all the good is Gods, both power and eke the will.
Ed. Spencer. God never seeks by trial of temptation,
To sound man's heart and secret cogitation.
For well he knows man, and his eye does see
All thoughts of men, ere they conceived be.
I. Syluester. Transl. -- God
Conioynes no less our wills then bolds our hearts,
A sure presage that he is on our parts.
Th. Hudson. Tran. Our God is just, whose stroke delaid long,
Does light at last with pain more sharp and strong.
I. H. M. of Magist. The mistie clouds that fall sometime
And ouercast the skies:
Are like to troubles of our time,
Which do but dim our eyes.
But as such deawes are dried up quite
When Phoebus shows his face:
So are sad fancies put to flight,
When God does guide by grace.
G. Gascoigne. Gods mercy gently waighes his justice down.
Th. A^helly. So blinds the sharpest counsel of the wise,
This ouershadowing providence on hie:
And dazeleth the clearest sighted eyes,
That they see not how nakedly they lie.
There where they little think the storm does rise,
And ouercast their clear security.
When man has stopped all ways save only that,
That (least suspected) ruin enters at.
S. Daniell. When Satan tempts he leads us unto hell,
But God does guide whereas no death does dwell.
When Satan tempts he seeks our faith to foil,
But God does seal it never to recoyle.
Satan suggesteth ill, good moves to grace,
The devil seeks our baptism to deface.
But God does make our burning zeal to shine,
Amongst the candels of his Church divine.
I. Syl. Transl. -- Gods word
(Which made the world, sustaines and guides it still)
To diverse ends conducts both good and ill.
He that preferres not God fore all his race,
Amongst the sons of God deserves no place.
And he that plowes the furrows of Gods feeld,
May not turn back his fainting face nor yield.
Idem. God with eternal bread in time of need,
His loved Jacob forty years did feed.
And gave them water from the solid stone,
Which of it self had never moisture none.
Their caps, their coats, and shoes that they did wear,
God kept all fresh and new full forty year.
Th. Hud. Tran. The most just God when once man's sins do grow
Beyond the bounds of pardon and of grace:
Because that men his judgments best may know:
Like to his love, to rule on earth does place
Monsters most vile to tyrannize us so,
With wrong the right, with lust laws to deface.
For this said cause were Scylla sent and Marius,
The Nerons both, and filthy minded Varius:
For this Domitian held in Rome the reign,
And Antoninus of that name the last:
And Messinine a base unworthy swain.
To place mankind in princely throne was plaste:
For this in Thebes did cruel Creon reign,
With other tyrants more in ages past.
For this of late has Italy been won,
By men of Lombardie, of Goth and Hunne.
S. Daniell. Good deeds.
Who would to God but works no good, who seeks fame by ease,
Comes short of both, no less then maps to very lands and seas.
VV. Warner. Good deeds in case that they be evil placed,
Ill deeds are reckoned and soon disgraced.
That is a good deed that preuents a bad.
G. Chapman. Well doing, far exceeds well to say.
G. Turberuile. Ill deeds may better the bad words be bore.
Ed. Spencer. Let every one do all the good they can,
or sildom comes harm of doing well.
Though just reward it wants now and than.
Yet shame and evil death it does expel:
But he that mischieueth an other man,
Seldom does carry it to heaven or hell.
Men say it, and we see it come to pass,
Good turns in dust, and bad turns writ in glass.
S. I. Harrington. Transl. Wretched is he that thinks by doing ill,
His evil deeds long to conceal and hide:
For though the voice and tongues of men be still,
By fowls and beasts his sin shall be discride,
And God often works by his secret will,
That sin it self, the sinner so does guide,
That of his own accord without request,
He makes his wicked doings manifest.
Idem. Our bodies buried, then our deeds ascend,
Those deeds in life to worth can not be rated,
In death with life, our fame even then is dated.
M. Drayton. Greatness.
Great things still orewhelme themselves by weight.
E. Guilpin. Greatness like to the suns reflecting powers,
The fire bred vapors naturally exhailes,
And is the cause that often the evening lowers,
When foggy mists enlarge their duskie sails.
That his own beams he in the clouds impailes,
And either must extinguish his own light,
Or by his virtue cause his proper right.
M. Drayton. To be huge is to be deadly sick.
I. Marston. O blinded Greatness, thou with thy turmoile,
Still selling happy life, make life a toil.
S. Daniel. -- He that strives to manage mighty things,
Amidst his triumphs, bears a troubled mind:
The greatest hope the greatest harvest brings,
And poor men in content there glory find.
D. L^dge. The man that furthereth other men to thrive,
Of private greatness does himself deprive.
Th. Storer. Grief.
Grief all in sables sorrowfully clad,
Down hanging his dull head with heavy cheer,
Yet inly beine more, then seeming sad,
A pair of pincers in his hand he had.
With which, he pinched people to the heart,
That from thenceforth, a wretched life they lad:
In wilful languor and consuming smart,
Dying each day with impaired wounds of dolors dart.
Ed. Spencer. Grief only makes his wretched state to see,
(Even like a top, which naught but whipping moves)
This man, this talking beast, this walking tree,
Grief is the stone, which finest judgments proves,
For who grieves not, has but a blockish brain,
Since cause of Grief we cause, from life remoues.
S. Ph. Sydney. -- Griefs deadly sore,
Unkindness breeds, unkindness fostereth hate.
Idem. Grief to it self most dreadful does appear,
And never yet was sorrow void of fear:
But yet in death, they both do hope the best.
M. Drayton. Griefs be long lived, and sorrows seldom die.
Idem. Grief has two tongues, and never woman yet
Could rule them both, without ten women's wit.
W. Shakespeare. He often finds medicine, who his griefs imparts,
But double Grief afflicts concealing hearts,
As raging flames, who strives to suppress.
Ed. Spencer. Found never help, who never could his grief impart.
Idem. No greater ease of heart the griefs to tell,
It daunteth all the dolours of the mind:
Our careful hearts thereby great comfort find.
I. H. Mir. of Mag. An Oven that is stopped, or River stayed,
Burns more hotely, swells with more rage:
So of concealed Grief it may be said.
Free vent of words, loves fire does assuage.
But when the hearts attorney once is mute,
The Client breaks, as desperate in his suit.
W. Shakespeare. No one thing does avail man more,
To cure a grief, and perfectly to heal it,
Then if he do unto some friends reveal it.
S. I. Harr. Transl. -- Grief it is enough to vexed wight,
To feel his fault and not be farther vexed.
Fd. Spencer. -- Some grief shows much of love,
But much to grief shows still some want of wit.
W. Shakespeare. -- Great grief can not be told,
And can more easily be thought then found.
Ed. Sp. Pain.
Thou Pain, the only ghuest of loathed constraint,
The child of curse, man's weakness foster child,
Brother to woe, and father of complaint,
Thou Pain, thou loathed pain from heaven exild.
H. C. The scourge of life, and deaths extreme disgrace,
The smoke of hell, that monster's called pain.
Idem. The thing that grievous were to do or bear
Them to renew, I wot breeds no delight.
Ed. Spencer. True grief is fond, and testy as a child,
Who wayward once, his mood with naught agrees,
Old woes not infant sorrows bear them mild,
Continuance tames the one, the other wild,
Like an vnpractiz'd swimmer plunging still
With too much labor drownes for want of skill.
W. Shakespeare. Pain paies the income of each precious thing.
W. Sh. Heaven.
From hence with grace and goodness compast round
God rules, blesses, keeps, all he wrought:
Above the air, the fire, the sea, and ground,
Our sense, our wit, our reason, and our thought:
Where persons three, with power and glory crowned,
Are all one God, who made all things of naught.
Under whose feet subjected to his grace,
Sit nature, fortune, motion, time, and place.
This is the place from whence like smoke and dust
Of this frail world, the wealth, the pomp, the power
He tosseth, humbles, turns as he lust,
And guides our life, our end, our death and hour:
No eye (how ever virtuous, pure and just)
Can view the brightness, of that glorious bower,
On every side the blessed spirirs be
Equal in joys, though differing in degree.
E. Fairfax. Transl. In this great temple, richly bewtified,
Pau'd all with stars, dispersed on Sapphire flower,
The Clarke is a pure Angel sanctified,
The Judge our hie Messiah full of power,
The Apostles, his assistance, every hour
The Jury Saints, the verdit Innocent,
The Sentence, Come ye blessed to my tent.
The spear that pierst his side, the writing Pen,
Christ's blood the Ink, red Ink for Princes name,
The vailes great breach, the miracles for men,
The sight is show of them that long dead came
From their old graves, restored to living fame.
And that last signet passing all the rest,
Our souls discharged by Consumatum est.
Here endless joy is, there perpetual cheer,
Their exercise, sweet songs of many parts,
Angels the quier, whose symphonie to hear,
Is able to provoke conceiving hearts,
To misconceiue of all enticing arts.
The dirty praise, the subject is the Lord,
That tunes their gladsome spirit to this accord.
Th. Storer. What so the Heavens in their secret doombe,
Ordained have, how can frail fleshly wight
Forecast, but it must needs to issue come.
Ed. Spencer. What in the heavenly parliament above,
Is written by the finger of the first,
Mortals may feel, but never can remove,
For they are subject to the heavens worst.
I. Markham. By mortal law the bond may be divorced,
The heavens decrees by no means can be forced.
M. Drarton. In vain does man contend against the Stars,
For what he seeks to make, his wisdom marres.
S. Daniell. -- Humane wishes never have the power
To hurt or have the course of heaven one hour.
Th. Hudson. Transl. Experience proves, and daily it is seen,
In vain (too vain) man strives against the heavens.
G. Gascoigne. It is most true, that eyes are bound to serve
The inward part, and that th'heauenly part
Ought to be King, from whose rules who does swerue,
Rebels to nature, strive for their own smart.
True that true beauty, virtue is indeed,
Whereof this beauty can be but a shade:
Which elements, with mortal mixture breed,
True that on earth we are but pilgrims made,
And should in soul up to our country move.
S. Ph. Sydney. Heaven is our home, we are but strangers here.
M. Drayton. The heavens, earth, and air, and seas and all,
Taught men to see, but not to shun their fall.
S. Daniell. Things which presage both good and ill there be,
Which heaven foreshewes, yet will not let us see.
M. Drayton. From them comes good, from them comes also ill,
That which they made, who can them warn to spill.
Ed. Spencer. In vain be arms, when heaven becomes thy foe.
Idem. Look when the heavens are to justice bent,
All things be turned to our just punishment.
Idem. All powers are subject to the power of heaven,
Nor wrongs pass unrevenged, although excused.
Idem. Would heaven her beauty should be hid from sight,
Nere would she thus adorn her self with light,
With sparkling Lamps; nor would she paint her throne
But she delighted to be gazed upon.
And when the glorious sun goes down,
Would she put on her stary bestudded crown,
And in her masking sure, the spangled sky
Come forth to bride it with her reuellry,
Heavens gave this gift to all things in creation,
That they in this should immitate their fashion.
Idem. M Drayton. Heavens influence was never constant yet,
In good or bad, as to continue it.
Th. Kyd. If thou be wise hold this as ominous,
The heavens not like disposed every hour,
The stars be still predominant in us:
Fortune not always forth her bag does power,
Nor every cloud does rain a golden shower.
M. Drayton. Heart.
Free is the Heart, the temple of the mind,
The sanctuary sacred from above,
Where nature keeps the keys that loose and bind,
No mortal hand force, open can that door,
So close shut up, and lock to all mankind.
S. Daniell. The bodies wound, by medicines may be eased,
But griefs of heart, by salues are not appeased.
R. Green. By thought of heart, the speech of tongue is carried.
S. I. Harr. Tran. -- Happiness, vid. Felicity.

Hate.
Hate is the elder, love the younger brother,
Yet is the younger stronger in his state
Then the elder, and him mastereth still in all debate.
Ed. Spencer. Nor Hate nor love, did ever judge aright,
Innated hate will hardly be displaste
Out of high hearts, and chiefly where debate
Happens amongst great persons of estate.
I. H. Mirr. of M. Hatred must be beguilde by some new course,
Where states are strong, and Princes doubt their force.
S. Daniell. Spite bites the dead, that living never darde.
Ed. Spencer. Sildome does malice want a mean to work.
M. Drayton. Hate hits the hie, and winds force tallest towers*
Hate is peculiar to a Princes state.
R. Green. Hatred accompanies prosperity,
For one man greeueth at an others good:
And so much more we think o^r misery,
The more that fortune has with others stood.
So that we seld are seen as wisdom would,
To bridle time with reason as we should.
Th. Kyd. Haste.
Often times the greatest haste the worser speeds.
S. I. Harr. Transl. As busy brains must beat on tickle toys,
As rash invention breeds a raw device:
So suddein falls do hinder hasty joys,
And as swift baits do fleetest fish entice,
So haste makes waste, and therefore now I say,
No haste but good, where wisdom bears the sway.
G. Gascoigne. The swiftest bitch brings forth the blindest whelps,
The hottest fevers coldest crampes ensue.
The nakedst need, has ouer-latest helps.
Idem. Hasty respect, repents when it is too late.
I. Markeham. Rashness sees all, but nothing can prevent.
M. Drayton. Fore-iudging, puts out one of wisdoms eyes.
-- If by rashness valor have got honor,
We blame the rashness, but reward the valor.
Chapter Fitz Ieffrey. O rash false heat wrapped in repentance cold,
Thy haste springs still blood, and nere grows old.
W. Sh. Hell.
An hidious hole all vast withouten shape,
Of endless depth, orewhelm'd with ragged stone:
With ougly mouth and grifly jaws does gape,
And to our sight confounds it self in one.
Here entered we, and yeeding forth anon
An horrible loathly lake we might discern
As black as pitch, that cleped is Auerne,
A deadly gulf, where naught but rubbish grows,
With foul black swelth in thickened lumps that lies:
Which up in the air such stinking vapor throws.
That over, there may fly no foul but dies,
Choakt with th'pestilent savors that arise.
M. Sackuile. Thence come we to the horror and the hell,
The large great kingdoms and the dreadful reign,
Of Pluto in his throne where he did dwell,
The wide waste places and the hugie plain:
The waylings, shrikes, and sundry sorts of pain.
The sighs, the sobbes, the deep and deadly groan,
Earth, air, and all resounding plain and moan.
Idem. Then turning back, in silence soft they stole,
And brought the heavy course with easy pace,
To yawning gulf of deep Auernus hole,
And by that same an entrance dark and base,
With smoke and Sulphur hiding all the place,
Descends to hell, their creature never past,
That back returned without heavenly grace.
But dreadful furies, which their chains have brast,
And damned sprights, sent forth to make ill men aghast.
Ed. Spencer. -- Darksome den of Auernus
Where Is no path to return, nor starting holes to be scaping,
Desteny, death, and hell, and howling hidious hell-hound,
Loathsome streams of Stix, that nine times compass Auernu^.
Ab. France. They pass the bitter waves of Acheron,
Where many souls sit wayling woefully:
And come to fiery flood of Phlegeton,
Whereas the damned ghoasts in torments fry,
And with sharp shrilling shrikes do bootlesse cry:
Cursing high Jove, the which them thither sent.
Ed. Spencer. About the desert parts of Greece there is a valley low,
To which the roaring waters fall, that from the mou^tains flow^
So rocks do ouershadow it, that scarce a man may view
The open air, no sun shines there; amidst this darkesom cre^
Does stand a city, to the same belongs one only gate,
But one at once may come thereto, the entrance is so strait.
Cut out the rough maine stony rock: this city did belong
To Pluto, and because that he was doing always wrong,
And kept a theeuish rabble that in mischief did excel,
His citizens were devils said, and city named hell.
W. Warner. Honor.
In woods, in waves, in wars does honor dwell,
And will be found with petill and with pain:
Ne can the man that moulds in idle cell
Unto her happy mansion attain,
Before her gate hie God did sweat ordain,
And wakefull watches ever to abide.
Ed. Spencer. Honor is purchas'de by the deeds we do.
Chapter Marlowe. -- Honor is not won
Until some honorable deed be done.
Idem. Danger bids seek the softest way one way.
But what says honor? honor says not so.
Never retire with shame; this honor says:
The worst that can befall one, is but death.
S. I. Harr. In brave pursuit of honorable deed,
There is I know not what great difference
Between the vulgar and the common seed,
Which unto things of valerous pretense
Seems to be borne by native influence:
As feats of arms, and love to entertain,
But chiefly skill to ride, does seem a science,
Proper to gentle blood; some others feign.
To manage steed. etc.
Ed. Spencer. -- Ever great employment for the great,
Quickens the blood, and honor does beget.
S. Daniell. -- Promotion is a puff,
These worldly honors are but shades of sweet:
Who seek too much before they get enough,
Before they meet the mean, with death they meet.
With death they meet the haven of all desire,
Where will must wa^ne, and pride cannot aspire.
D. Lodge. Honor a thing without us, not our own.
S. D. What does avail to have a princely place,
A name of honor, and an high degree:
To come by kindred of a noble race,
Except we princely worthy noble be,
The fruit declares the goodness of the tree.
Do brag no more of birth or lineage than,
Since virtue, grace, and manners make the man.
M. of M. Search all thy books, and thou shall find therein,
That honor is more hard to hold then win.
G. Gascoigne. Defeated honor never more is to be got again.
W. Warner. -- Vile is honor, and a little vain,
The which true worth and danger do not gain.
S. Daniell. Virtue can bear what can on virtue fall.
Who cheapneth honor must not stand on price.
M. Drayton. It most behoues the honorable race
Of mighty peers, true wisdom to sustain:
And with their noble countenance to grace
The learned forheads without gifts or gain.
Or rather learnd themselves behoues to be,
That is the garland of nobility.
Ed. Spencer. -- If that honor have one minutes stain,
An hundred years scant can it cleanse again.
S. I. H. Transl. A shame to fetch our long descent from kings,
And from great Jove derive our pedigree:
The brave atchiements of an hundred things,
Breathing vain boasts the world to terrify,
If we our selves do blot with infamy.
And stain the right and honor that is theirs,
Men cannot leave their virtues to their heirs.
M. Drayton. Honor is grounded on the tickle ice.
The purest lawne most apt for every spot.
Idem. Honors shade, thrusts honors substance from his place.
I. Marston. Honor by due right is virtues hire.
Th. Watson. Honors without employment of estate,
Are like to sunbeams without heat or light:
A noble man and not a magistrate
Shines half eclipsed in his clearest bright.
Join heavenly gifts to earthly, light to light.
Let these great excellencies make a truce,
Fortune shall need no wheele-wright for her use.
Th. Storer. Great is the choice that grows in youthful mind,
When honor falls at variance with affection:
Nor could it yet be known or well definde,
Which passion keeps the other in subjection.
Both do allure, both does the judgments blind,
Both do corrupt the heart with strong infection.
Yet lo sometimes these hurts procure our weal,
Even as one poison does another heal.
S. I. Harr. Transl. The fiery sparkling precious Chrysolite
Spangled with gold, does most transplendent shine:
The pearl graced by the ring, the ring by it,
The one, the others beauty does refine:
And both together beauties do combine.
The jewel decks the golden hair that wears it,
Honor decks learning, that with honor reares it.
Chapter Fitz. The inward touch that wounded honor bears,
Rests closely ranckling, and can find no ease,
Till death of one side cure this great disease.
S. Daniell. Hope.
Faiths younger sister that Speranza hight,
Was clad in blew, that her beseemed well:
Not all so cheerful seemed she of sight
As was her sister: whether dread did dwell
Or anguish in her heart, is hard to tell:
Upon her arm a silver anchor lay,
Whereon she leaned ever as befell.
And ever up to heaven as she did pray,
Her eyes were bent, ne swarued other way.
Ed. Spencer. -- Hope a handsome maid,
Of cheerful look and lovely to behold:
In silken Samite she was light araide,
And her fair locks were wouen up in gold:
She always smilde, and in her hand did hold
An holy water sprinkle, dipped in dew,
With which she sprinkled favors manifold.
On whom she list, and did great liking show,
Great liking unto many, but true love to few.
Idem. True hope is swift, and flies with swallows wings,
Kings it makes Gods, and meaner creatures Kings.
W. Shakespeare. Wan Hope poor soul, on broken anchor sits
Wringing his arms, as robbed of his bliss.
D. Lodge. What better emperor can the body hold,
Then sacred Hope? the element from whence,
Virtue is drawn fresh looking, never old:
Matter most worthy of a strong defense.
It animates young men, and makes them bold,
Arming their hearts with holy influence,
It like a seal in tender thoughts does press
The perfect Image of all happiness.
L. Markham. -- Hope is double, and has double power,
As being mortal, and immortal fram'de:
In the one she is mouelesse, certain every hour:
In the other doubtful, and incertaine nam'de.
The Immortal Hope raines in a holy bower,
In earthy closures is the mortal tam'de.
And these two contraries, where ere they meet,
Double delight, and make our thoughts more sweet.
Idem. He that hopes least, leaves not to hope at all,
But hopes the most, hoping so little hope,
Augmenting of our hope, makes hope grow small,
And taking from it, gives it greater scope.
The desperate man which in despair does fall,
Hopes by that end ill fortune to revoke,
And to this hope belongs a second part,
Which we call confidence, which rules the heart.
This second part of hope, this confidence,
Does Tully call a virtue that does guide
The Spirit to an honest residence,
Without whose aid, no pleasure will abide
In our world-wearied flesh.
I. Markeham. All men are guests where hope does hold the feast.
G. Gascoigne. Such is the weakness of all mortal hope,
So tickle is the state of earthly things,
And brings us bale and bitter sorrowings,
That ere they come unto their aimed scope,
They fall too short of our frail reckonings,
In stead of comfort which we should embrace.
This is the death of Keysars and of Kings,
Let none therefore that is in meaner place,
Too greatly grieve at any unlucky case.
Ed. Spencer. Unworthy they of grace, whom one denial
Excludes from fairest hope, without farther trial.
Idem. Hope like the Hyenna coming to be old,
Alters his shape, is turned to despair.
H. C. Sorrow does utter what us still does grieve,
But hope forbids us sorrow to believe.
Idem. -- Our hopes good deceiues us,
But that we would forgo that seldom leaves us.
Idem. None without great hopes will follow such,
Whose power and honor does not promise much.
S. Daniell. Who nothing hopes, let him despair in naught.
Th. Achelly. To live in hope of that they mean to give,
Is to deceive our selves, and not to live.
D. Lodge. Hope lost, breeds grief, grief pain, and pain disease.
Th. Watson. Our haps do turn as chances on the die.
Nor let him from his hope remove,
That under him, has moved the stars above.
M. Drayton. Hope and have, in time a man may gain any woman.
A. France. Hope well, fear not, mark this, be wise,
Droupe not, for to despair, is to die twice.
Ignoto. Bad haps are help with hap and good belief.
S. I. Harrington. Transl. O Hope, how cunning with our cares to gloze?
Griefs breathing point, the true man to desire,
The rest in sighs, the very thoughts repose,
As thou art mild, oh were thou not a lier?
Fair speaking flattery subtle soothing guile:
Ah Hope, in thee our sorrows sweetly smile.
M. Drayton. Humility.
He was an aged sire, hoary gray,
With looks full lowly cast, and gate full slow,
Wont on a staff his feeble steps to stay,
Hight Humilta: they pass in stouping low,
For straight and narrow was the way that he did show.
Ed. Spencer. Humility to heaven, the step, the staire
Is, for devotion, sacrifice, and prayer.
M. Drayton. The bending knee in safety still does go,
When others stumble, as too stiff to bow.
Idem. As on the unsavory stock, the Lilly is borne,
And as the Rose grows on the pricking thorn,
So modest life with sobs of grievous smart,
And cries devout, comes from an humble heart.
Th. Hudson. Transl, More honor in Humility, then safety in walls,
Proud livers prove not monuments, save only in their falls.
VV. Warner. Ah God shield man that I should clime,
and learn to look aloft:
This reed is ripe, that oftentime:
great climers fall vnsoft.
In humble dale is footing fast,
the trod is not so fickle:
And though one fall through heedlesse haste,
yet is his miss not mickle.
Ed. Spencer. The lowly heart does win the love of all,
But pride at last, is sure of shameful fall.
G. Tur. Hypocrisy.
-- Hypocrisy has bred of Godlike devils store,
That speak to serve, that serve to shift, that shift to spare by guile,
And smoothe and soothe, and yet deceive, with scriptum est mean while.
W. Warner. But let the^ heave their hands to heaven, they show they are here in
hell,
That seem devout to cloak deceit, and say, but do not well.
Idem. Who cloakes their minds in hoods of holiness
Are double villains, and the Hypocrite
Is most odious in Gods glorious sight,
That takes his name to cover wickedness.
I. Syl. Many use temples to set godly faces
On impious hearts; those sins use most excess,
That seek their shrowdes in fained holiness.
G. Chapman. Vide. Dissimulation.

Jealousy.
She seemed of woman's shape, but in her head
A thousand eyes she had that watch did keep:
As many ears with which she harkened,
Her eyes want lids, and therefore never sleep.
In stead of hair, her crown snakes ouerspred.
Thus marched she forth of the darkness deep,
Her tail one serpent bigger then the rest,
Which she with knots fastened about her breast.
S. I. Harrington. Transl. A monster, others harm, self misery
Bewties plague, virtues scourge, succor of lies.
Who since he has by natures special grace,
So piercing paws as spoil, when they embrace,
So nimble feet, as stir though still on thorns.
So many men seeking their own woe.
So ample ears that never good news kowes
Is it not ill that such a beast want hotnes?
S. Ph. Sydney. O hateful hellish snake what fury first
Broughr thee from balefull house of Proserpine?
Where in her bosom she the long had nursed,
And fostered up with bitter milk of time,
Foul jealousy that turnest love divine.
To day less dread, and make the living heart
With hateful thoughts to languish and to pine,
And feed it self with self consuming smart,
Of all the passions in the mind, thou viler art.
Ed. Spencer. O Jealousy, daughter of Envy and love,
Most wayward issue of a gentle sire
Fostred with fears thy fathers ioies to prove,
Mirth marring monster, borne in subtlety,
Hateful unto thy self, flying thy own desire,
Feeding upon suspect that does renew thee,
Happy were Lovers, if they never knew thee.
Thou have a thousand gates thou entrest by,
Condemning trembling passions to our heart.
Hundred eyed Argus, ever making spy,
Pale hagge, infernal fury, pleasures smart:
Envious obseruer, prying in every part,
Suspicions fearful, gazing still about the heart.
O would to God that love could be without thee.
S. Daniell. A new disease? I know not, new, or old;
But it may well be termed, poor mortal plain.
For like the pestilence, it does infect
The houses of the brain: first it begins
Solely to work upon the fantasy,
Filling her seat with such pestiferous air,
As soon corrupts the judgment, and from thence
Sends like contagion to the memory,
Still each of other taking like infection,
Which as a searching vapor spreads it self,
Confusedly through every sensiue part,
Till not a thought or motion in the mind,
Be far from the black poison of suspect.
B. Johnson. Where love does reign, disturbing jealousy,
Does call himself affections Centinell,
And in a peaceful hour, does cry kill, kill,
Distempering gentle love with his desire,
As air and water does abate the fire:
This sound informer, this bare-breeding spy,
This cancker that eats up this tender spring,
This carry-tale, discentio's jealousy.
W. Shakespeare. Foul weatherd jealousy to a forward spring,
Makes weeds grow rank, but spoils a better thing.
Sowes tares against harvest in the fields of love,
And dogged humor dogdayes like does prove,
Scorching loves glorious world with glowing tongue,
A serpent by which love to death is stonge
A foe to waste his pleasant summer bowers,
Ruin his mansions, and deface his bowers.
E. Guilpin. Pale Jealousy child of insatiat love,
Of heartsicke thoughts, which melancholy bred,
A hell tormenting fear, no faith can move:
By discontent with deadly poison fed,
With heedlesse youth and error vainly led.
A mortal plague, a virtue drowing flood,
A hellish fire, not quenched but with blood.
M. Drayton. What state of life more pleasant can we find,
Then these that true and hearty love do bear?
Whom that sweet yoke does fast together bind,
That man in Paradise first learnd to wear.
Were not some so tormented in their mind
With that same vile suspect that filthy fear,
That torture great, that foolish phrenezie,
That raging madness, called Jealousy,
For every other sower that gets a place
To seat it self amidst this pleasant sweet,
Helps in the end to give a greater grace,
And make loves ioies more gracious then they were,
He that abstaines from sustenance a space,
Shall find both bread and water relish sweet.
S. I. Harr. Transl. -- Jealousy is Cupids food,
For the swift steed runs not so fast alone,
As when some other strive him to out go.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. Love wakes the jealous eye, least then it moves
The jealous eye, the more it looks it loves.
S. Ph. Sydney. -- No jealousy can that prevent,
Whereas two parties once be full content.
Idem. Impatience changes smoke to flame, but jealousy to hell.
W. Warner. On love, says some, waits iealouzie, but jealousy wants love
When curiously the overplus does idle quarrels move.
Idem. -- Where jealousy is bred,
Horns in the mind, are worse then horns in the head.
B. Johnson. That canker-worme, that monster jealousy,
Which eats the heart, and feeds upon the gall,
Turning all loves delight to misery,
Through fear of loosing his felicity.
Ed. Spencer. Shun jealousy that hart-breake love, if cat will go to kind,
Be sure that Io has a means, that Argus shall be blind.
VV. Warner. True love does look with pale suspicious eye,
Take away love, if you take jealousy.
M. Drayton. No beast is fierer then a jealous woman.
S. Daniell. Idleness.
Prides coach was drawn of six unequal beasts,
On which her six sage counselors did ride:
Taught to obey her bestiall beheasts,
With like conditions to their kinds applide.
Of which the first that all the rest did guide,
Was sluggish Idleness, the nurse of sin,
Upon a slothful Ass he chose to ride,
Arraid in habit black and amiss thin,
Like to an holy Monk, the service to begin.
Ed. Spencer. -- Idleness pure innocence subuerts,
Defiles our body, and our soul peruerts:
Yea soberest men it makes delicious,
To virtue dull, to vice ingenious.
I. Syl. Transl. -- Ill humors by excessive ease are bred,
And sloth corrupts and choakes the vital sprights,
It kills the memory, and hurts the sights.
D. Lodge. -- Drowsy sloth that counterfeiteth lame
With Snaile like motion measu^ing the ground:
Having her arms in willing fetters bound.
Foul, sluggish drone, barren (but sin to breed)
Diseased, beggar, starved with sinful need.
I. Siluester. If thou fly Idleness, Cupid has no might,
His bow lies broken, his torch has no light.
Ignorance.
At last with creeping crooked pace forth came
An old old man, with beard as white as snow:
That on a staff his feeble limbs did frame,
And guide his weary gate both too and fro.
For his eye sight him failed long ago,
And on his arm a bunch of keys he bore,
The which unused, rust did ouergrow.
But very uncouth sight was to behold
How he did fashion his untoward pace:
For a^ he forward moved his footing old,
So backward still was turned his wrinckled face^
Unlike to men who ever as they trace
Both feet and face one way are wont to lead,
His name Ignaro, did his nature right aread.
Ed. Spencer. Image of hellish horror, Ignorance,
Borne in the bosom of the black abisse,
And fed with furies milk for sustenance,
Of his weak infancy begot amiss:
By gnawing sloth, upon his mother night,
So he his sons, both Sire and brother hight.
Idem. -- All is turned into wilderness,
Whilst Ignorance the Muses does oppress.
Idem. -- Hell and darkness and the grisly grave,
Is Ignorance, the enemy of grace:
That minds of men borne heavenly, does deface.
Idem. It Is naught but shows that Ignorance esteems
The thing possessed, is not the thing it seems.
S. Daniell. -- Great ill upon desert does chance,
When it does pass by beastly Ignorance.
M. Dray. Impatience.
Impatience ehangeth smoke to flame, but jealousy to hell.
W. Warner. Make not thy grief too great by thy suppose,
Let not Impatience aggrauate thy woes.
D. Lodge. Infamy.
-- To attempt hie dangers evident,
Without constraint or need is Infamy.
And honor turns to rashness in the event:
And who so dares, not caring how he dares,
Sells virtues name, to purchase foolish cares.
I. Markham. -- Reproach
A vile disease that never time can cure.
M. Drayton. Sin in a chain leads on her sister shame,
And both in gives fast fettered to defame.
Idem. Thy name once foild, incurable the blot,
Thy name defaste whch touched with any stain,
And once supplanted never grows again.
Against open shame no text can well be cited,
The blow once given cannot be euited.
M. Drayton. Ingratitude.
Unthankfulness is that great sin,
Which made the devil and his angels fall:
Lost him and them the joys that they were in,
And now in hell detaines them bound and thrall.
S. I. Harr. Transl. Thou hateful monster base Ingratitude,
Souls mortal poison, deadly killing wound:
Deceitful serpent seeking to delude,
Black loathsome ditch, where all desert is drowned:
Vile pestilence, which all things do confound.
At first created to no other end,
But to grieve those, whom nothing could offend.
M. Drayton. Ungrateful who is called, the worst of ill is spoken.
S. Phil. Sidney. It Is true that slave whom Pompey did promote,
Was he, that first assaid to cut his throat.
D. Lodge. Innocence.
A plaint of guiltless hurt does pierce the sky.
S. Phil. Sidney. Sildome untouched does Innocence escape,
When error comes in good counsels shape.
A lawful title, counterchecks proud might,
The weakest things, become strong props to right.
M. Drayton. Pure Innocence sildome suspecteth ought.
Idem. A guiltless mind does easily deem the best.
M. of M. The lion licks the sores of filly wounded sheep,
The dead ma^s course does cause the crocodile to weep:
The waves that wast the rocks refresh the rotten weeds,
Such ruth the wrack of innocence in cruel creatures breeds.
M. of M. Well gave that Judge his doom upon the death
Of Titus Laelius that in bed was slain:
When every wight the cruel murder laith
To his two sons that in his chamber lay,
That Judge that by the proof perceives plain
That they were found fast sleeping in their bed,
Has deemed them guiltless of this bloody shed.
He thought it could not be that they which brake
The laws of God and man in such outrage,
Could so forth with themselves to rest betake:
He rather thought the horror and the rage
Of such an heinous gilt, could never swage.
Nor never suffer them to sleep or rest,
Or dreadlesse breathe one breath out of their breast.
M. Sackuile. Inconstancy.
Unto the world such is Inconstancy,
As sap to tree, as apple to the eye.
D. Lodge. Joy.
All like as sicker as the end of woe is Joy,
And glorious light to obscure night does tend,
So extreme Joy in extreme woe does end.
M. of M. For why extremes are haps rackt out of course,
By violent might far swinged forth perforce:
Which as they are piercingst they violentest move:
For that they are nere to cause that does them shoue.
So soonest fall from that their highest extreme,
To the other contrary that does want of mean,
So laughed he erst that laughed out his breath.
Idem. The pleasing means bode not the luckiest ends,
Nor aye, found treasure to like pleasure tends.
Mirth means not mirth always thrice happy line
Of wit to shun the excess that all desire.
Idem. Joy lighteneth woe, woe Joy does moderate.
M. Drayton. Joy is forgetful, weal thinks not of woe.
Idem. -- Joy ascends, but sorrow sinks below.
Chapter Fitz. Fruits follow flowers, and sorrow greatest Joys.
As sudden grief, so sudden Joy does kill.
Th. Achelly. The Roman widow died when she beheld
Her son who erst she counted slain in field.
G. Gascoigne. -- Excessive Joy
Leapeth and likes finding the Appian way
Too strait for her: whose senses all possess
All wished pleasure, in all plenteousnesse.
I. Syluester. Injustice.
Injustice never yet took lasting root.
Nor held that long, Impiety did win.
S. Daniell. So foul a thing, o thou Injustice art,
That torment'st both the dooer and distressed:
For when a man has done a wicked part,
O how he strives to excuse, to make the best:
To shift the fault t'vnburden his chargde heart.
And glad to find the least surmise of rest.
And if he could make his, seem others sin,
O what repose, what ease he finds therein.
Idem. Injustice never scapes unpunished still,
Though men revenge not, yet the heavens will.
Idem. Justice.
Now when the world with sin began to abound,
Astraea loathing longer here to space
Among wicked men in whom no truth she found,
Returned to heaven whence she derived her race,
Where she has now an everlasting place.
Among those twelve signs which rightly we do see,
The heavens bright shining bawdrick to inchace:
And is the virgin sixth in her degree,
And next her self, her righteous balance hanging be.
Ed. Spencer. Then justice comes the last of all the gods,
That left her residence here on the earth:
For lack of whom the world grew all at ods,
And man to man curses each others birth.
For then usurping wrong succeeded straight,
That no man knew how long to hold his right:
Then calls the world for Justice back again,
Complaining how they now were ouerrunne,
And they would suffer any scourging pain,
In penance for those sins themselves had done.
For that their wickedness did force that power
To leave the seat whereas she sat before,
Whereas the Gods did in their courts decree,
Justice should be transformed to the stars:
There foolish men might every minute see
Her that should help these miseries of theirs,
But stand like Tantalus within those brinkes,
Where he sees water, but yet never drinks.
Chapter Middleton. -- Fair Astraea of the Titans line,
Whom equity and justice made divine.
M. Drayton. -- Well did the Anticke world invent,
That Justice was a God of sovereign grace,
And Altars unto him and temples lent,
And heavenly honors in the highest place.
Calling him, great Osyris of the race,
Of the old Egyptian Kings, that whilome were,
With fained colors shading a true case:
For that Osyris whilst he lived here,
The iustest man alive and truest did aspire.
His wife was Isis, whom they likewise made
A goddess of great power and sovereignty:
And in her person cunningly did shade,
That part of Justice which is equity.
Ed. Spencer. Until the world ftom his perfection fell,
Into all filth and foul iniquity:
Astraea here among earthly men did dwell,
And in the rules of justice then and stumbled well.
Idem. Where Justice grows, there grows eke quiet grace,
The which does quench the brand of hellish smart,
And that accursed handwriting does deface.
Idem. -- Sparing Justice, feeds iniquity.
W. Shakespeare. The first was Bacchus, that with furious might,
All the east before vntam'de did ouerrunne,
And wrong repressed and established right,
Which lawless men had formerly foredone,
Their justice forced her princely rule begun.
Next Hercules, his like ensample showed,
Who all the west with equal conquest won.
And monstrous Tirants with his club subdued,
The club of Justice dread, with kingly power endued.
Ed. Spencer. Who so upon himself will take the skill,
And Justice unto people to divide,
Had need of mighty hands for to fulfill
That which he does, with righteous doom decide,
And for to master wrong and puissant pride:
For vain it is to deem of things aright,
And make wrong doers Justice to deride
Unless it be performed with dreadlesse might,
For power is the right hand of justice truly hight.
Idem. Offenses urged in public, are made worse,
The show of Justice aggrauates despite:
The multitude that look not to the cause,
Rest satsfied, so it be done by laws.
S. Daniel. It often falls in course of common life,
That right long time is ouerborne of wrong,
Through avarice or power, or guile, or strife,
That weakens her, and makes her party strong,
But Justice though her doom she do prolong.
Yet at the last she will her own cause right.
Fd. Spencer. Good causes need not curious terms, and equal Judges hear
The equity, not eloquence.
W. Warner. Who passes judgment for his private gain,
He well may judge he is adiudg'd to pain.
R. Green. Kings.
Kings are the Gods vicegerents on the earth,
The Gods have power, Kings from that power have might:
Kings should excel in virtue and in birth:
Gods punish wrongs, and kings should maintain right,
They be the suns from which we borrow light,
And they as Kings, should still in justice strive
With Gods, from whom their beings they derive.
M. Drayton. The baser is he coming from a King,
To shame his hopes with deeds degenerate:
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing,
That makes him honored, or begets him hate:
For greater scandal waits on greater state.
The Moon being clouded, presently is mist,
But little stars may hide them where they list.
The Crow may bathe his cole-blacke wing in mire,
And vnperceiu'd, fly with the filth away,
But if she like the snow white swan desire,
The stain upon his silver down will stay,
Poor grooms are sightles nights, kings glorious day.
Gnats are unnoted wheresoever they fly,
But Eagles are gazed upon with every eye.
VV. Shakespeare. -- Since the heavens strong arms teach Kings, to stand,
Angels are placed about the glorious throne,
To guard it from the strokes of traitrous hand.
Th. Dekkar. When thou becom'st an earthly God, men's faults to ouersee,
Forget not that eternal God, that ouerlooketh thee.
W. Warner. The least part of a King is allowing him, and none
Less private then a Prince, the weal or woe of every one.
Idem. He and his people make but one, a body, weak or strong,
As does the head, the limbs, or limbs the head assist, or wrong.
Idem. Kings, Lords of times and of occasions,
May take the advantage when and how they list.
S. Daniell. Kings will be alone, Competitors must down,
Near death he stands, that stands to wear a crown.
Idem. -- It is a dangerous thing
In rule of love, but once to cross a King.
M. Drayton. Endless cares concur with crowns, a bitter sweeting is reign.
W. Warner. Not all the water in the rough rude sea
Can wash the balm from an anointed King:
The breath of worldly men cannot depose
The deputy elected by the Lord.
W. Shakespeare. He knows not what it is to be a King,
That thinks a Scepter is a pleasant thing.
R. Green. A glittering Crown does make the hair soon gray,
Within whose circle, a king is but arrested,
In all his feasts he is but with sorrow feasted,
And when his feet disdain to touch the mold,
His head's a prisoner in a Iaile of Gold.
M. Drayton. Unhappy Kings that never can be taught,
To know themselves, or to discern their fault.
S. Daniell. -- No outrageous thing
From vassal actors can be wipte away,
The Kings misdeeds can not be hid in clay.
W. Shakespeare. No Scepter serves dishonor to excuse,
Nor kingly veil can cover villainie.
Fame is not subject to authority.
M. Drayton. -- Think not but Kings are men, and as the rest miscarry,
Save that their fame and infamy continually does tarry.
VV. Warner. Kings want no means to accomplish what they will,
M. Drayton. Mislikes are silly lets where Kings resolve them,
Where counsel chasing will has emperie,
Deeds are too pressed for reason to dissolve them,
In mighty minds a grounded vanity.
Like springs that ceassesse never stops,
Until her neighbor Oak she ouertoppeth.
D. Lodge. -- Great men too well graced, much rigor use,
Presuming favorites mischief ever bring:
So that concluding, I may boldly speak,
Minions too great, argue a king too weak.
S. Daniell. New kings do fear when old kings farther strain,
Established state to all things will consent.
Idem. -- Good from kings must not be drawn by force.
Idem. A Scepter like a pillar of great height,
Whereon a mighty building does depend:
Which when the same is ouer-prest with weight,
And past his compass forced thereby to bend.
His massy roof down to the ground does send.
Crushing the lesser part, and murdering all
Which stand within the compass of his fall.
M. Drayton. Too true that tyrant Dyonisyus
Did picture out the image of a king:
When Damocles was placed in his throne,
And ore his head a threatening sword did hang,
Fastened up only by a horses hair.
R. Green. Kingdoms.
A rule there is, not failing but most sure,
Kingdom no kin does know, ^e can endure.
M. of M. Thebes, Babell, Rome, these proud heaven daring wonders
Lo under ground in dust and ashes lie,
For earthly kingdoms, even as men do die.
I. Syluester. Transl. If thou will mighty be, fly from the rage
Or cruel will, and see thou keep thee free
From the foul yoke of sensual bondage:
For though thy Empire stretches to Indian sea,
And for thy fear trembles the farthest Thisce,
If thy desire have over thee the power,
Subject then art thou, and no governor.
E. of Surrey. Knowledge.
Through knowledge we behold the worlds creation,
How in his cradle first he fostered was:
And judge of natures cunning operation,
How things she formed of a formelesse mass.
By knowledge we do learn our selves to know,
And what to man, and what to God we owe:
From hence we mount aloft unto the sky,
And look into the crystal firmament:
There we behold the heavens great Hierarchy.
The stars pure light, the spheres swift mouement,
The spirits and intelligences fair:
And Angels waiting on the almighty's chair.
And there with humble mind and hie in sight,
The Eternal makers majesty we view,
His love, his faith, his glory and his might,
And mercy more then mortal men can view.
Ed. Spencer. Soul of the world, knowledge withouten thee,
What has the earth that is truly glorious.
Why should our pride make such a stir to be,
To be forgot? What good is like to this?
To do worthy the writing, and to write,
Worthy the reading, and the worlds delight.
S. Daniell. What difference twixt man and beast is left,
When th'heauenly light of knowledge is put out,
And the ornaments of wisdom are bereft?
Then wandreth he in error and in doubt,
Vnweeting of the danger he is in,
Through fleshlesse frailty, and deceit of sin.
Ed. Spencer. -- Our new knowledge has for tedious train,
A drouping life, an ouerracked brain:
A face forlorn, a sad and sullen fashion,
A restless toil, and cares selfepining passion.
Knowledge was then even the souls soul for light,
The spirits calm port, and lantern shining bright.
To thait-stept feet clear knowledge: not confusde,
Not sower but sweet, not gotten, but infusde.
I. Syl. Transl. -- We see to know, men still are glad,
And yet we see knowledge often makes men mad.
S. I. H. Transl. Who so knows most, the more he knows to doubt,
The best discourse, is commonly most stout.
S. Daniell. -- Common is the proof
That envying is not cunning if it stands not aloof.
VV. Warner. By knowledge thine, thou have no name,
Least others know, thou know the same.
Skill comes too slow, and life so fast does fly.
We learn so little, and forget so much.
I. Dauies. Vid. Learning.

Labor.
Where ease abounds, it is death to do amiss,
But who his limbs with labors, and his mind
Behaues with cares, cannot so easy miss:
Abroad in arms, at home in studious kind,
Who seeks with painful toil, shall honor soonest find.
Ed. Spencer. Learn with the Ant in summer to provide,
Drive with the Be the drone from out the hiue,
Build like the Swallow in the summer tide.
D. Lodge. Much labor is too little, that should household charge defraye.
W. Warner. -- Industry well cherisht to his face,
In sunshine walks in spite of sower disgrace.
M. Roydon. The noblest borne dame should industrious be,
That which does good, disgraceth no degree.
G. Chapman. Let Mandeuile example be to men not to be idle
In amorous passions: labor is to love at least a bridle*
VV. Warner. Adams labor in Eden.
-- Edens earth was then so fertile and so fat,
That he made only sweet assaies in that.
Of skillful industry and naked wrought,
More for delight, then for the gain he sought.
In brief, it was a pleasant exercise,
A labor likte, a pain much like the guise
Of cunning dauncers, who although they skip
Run, caper, vault, trauerse and turn and trip,
From morn til even, at night again full merry
Renew their dance, of dancing never weary:
Or else of hunters, that with happy luck,
Rowsing betimes some often breathed bucke
Or goodly stagge, their yelping hounds uncouple,
Wind loud their horns, their hoopes and hallows double
Spur on and spare not, following their desire:
Themselves vnweary, though their hacknies tire.
But for in the end of all their iollitie
Their's found much stiffness, sweat and vanity;
I rather match it to the pleasing pain
Of Angels pure, who ever sloth disdain.
Or to the Suns calm course, who plainlesse aye
About the welkin poasteth night and day.
I. Syl. Transl. Learning.
O blessed letters that combine in one
All ages past, and make one live withal:
By you we do confer, with who are gone,
And the dead living unto counsel call.
By you the unborn shall have communion
Of what we fe^le, and what does best befall.
S. Daniell. By the clear beams of learnings light,
We tread the obscure paths of Sages right.
Idem. -- But that learning in despite of fate
Will mount aloft and enter heaven gate:
And to the seat of Jove it self advance,
Hermes had slept in hell with ignorance.
Yet as a punishment they added this,
That he and poverty should always kis.
And to this day is every scholar poor,
Gross gold from them runs headlong to the boore.
Chapter Marlowe. Of little worth is learnings worthy skill,
Where Pilots wisdom is not perfect still.
Corinnaes praise, and Sapphoes are discerned
Above the rest, because they both were learned.
S. I. Harr. Transl. K. Cecrops and his royal seed did honor Athence so,
As that from thence are said the springs of sciences to flow.
W. Warner. Lechery.
Next unto him rode lustful Lechery
Upon a bearded Goat, whose rugged hair
And whally eyes (the sign of jealousy)
Was like the persons self whom he did bear,
Who rough and black and filthy did appear:
Unseemly man to please fair Ladies eye,
Yet he of Ladies often was loved dear,
When fairer faces were bid standen by,
O who does know the bent of women's fantasy?
Ed. Spencer. Incontinence, dull sleep, and idle bed,
All virtue from the world have banished.
The tickling flames which our fond souls surprise,
(That dead a while in Epilepsie lies)
Does stark our sinews all by little and little,
Drawing our reason in foul pleasure brittle.
I. Syl. Transl. Love comfort like sunshine after rain,
But lusts effect, is tempest after sun:
Loves gentle spring does always fresh remain,
Lusts winter comes ere summer half be done.
Love surfets not, but like a glutton dies,
Love is all truth, lust full of forced lies.
W. Shakespeare. Where whoredom reigns, there murder follows fast,
As falling leaves before the winters blast.
R. Green. Lust is a fire, and for an hour or twain*
Gives a scorching blaze, and then he dies.
H. C. O deeper sin then bottomless conceit
Can comprehend in still imagination:
Drunken desire must vomit his receipt,
Ere he can see his own abomination:
While lust is in his pride, no exclamation
Can cure his heat, or reign his rash desire,
Till like a Jade, self-will himself do tire.
VV. Shakespeare. Lust never takes joy in what is due,
But leaves known delights to seek out new.
S. Daniell. In chastity is ever prostitute,
Whose trees we loath when we have plucked the fruit.
G. Chapman. Eschew vile Venus toys, she cuts off age,
And learn this lesson of (and teach thy friend)
By pocks, death sudden, begging, harlots end.
M. of M. The lechars tongue is never void of guile,
Nor Crocodile wants tears to win his pray:
The subtillest temptor has the sweetest style,
With rarest music, Sirens soon'st betraie.
M. Drayton. Lust puts the most unlawful things in ure,
Nor yet in limits ever could be bounded,
Till he himself himself has quite confounded.
Idem. Abandon lust, if not for sin, yet to avoid the shame,
So hogs of Ithacus his men the Latian witch did frame.
VV. Warner. That great Physician that had lived in health and age admirde,
Did answer asked the cause, not he had done, as flesh desirde.
Idem. The Spartans war for rapted queen to Ilions overthrow,
The Monarch of Assiria changed, and Latin kings also,
For Tarquins lust.
Idem. Each house for lust a harbor and an Inn,
Each city is a sanctuary for sin.
And all do pity beauty in distress,
If beauty chaste, then only pitiless.
M. Drayton. Laws.
Derive thy laws from wisest heads, to be vpholden still,
Not adding or abstracting, as conceited tire brains will.
Encourage good men by thy love, reform the bad by law,
Reserve an ear for either plea, and borrow leave of awe.
VV. Warner. In vain be counsels statutes, human laws,
When chief of Counsels pleades the iustest cause.
M. Drayton. So constantly the Judges conster laws,
That all agree still with the stronger cause.
M. of M. Pansamias and Lisander, by their swords
And warlike virtues made Lacaena rich,
Fame followed them where they the tents did pitch,
But grave Licurgus by his laws and words,
Did merit more then these renowned Lords.
D. Lodge. Licurgus for good laws, lost his own liberty,
And thought it better to prefer common commodity.
G. Gascoigne. That Lawyer though he more by art the^ right does overthrow
Consents to sin, deceiues the Judge, wrong right is justice foe.
VV. Warner. Liberty.
Sweet liberty to us gives leave to sing,
What world it was where love the rule did bear,
How foolish chance by lots ruled every thing,
How error was maine sail, each wave a tear.
The Mr. love himself; deep sighs wear wind,
Cares rowd with vows, the ship vnmerry mind.
False hope as firm often turned the boat about,
In constant faith stood up for middle mast,
Despair the cable, twisted all with doubt,
Held griping grief the piked Anchor fast,
Beauty was all the rocks.
VV. Watson. O liberty how much is that man blessed,
Whose happy fortunes do his fa^es areede,
That for deserts reioyces to be freede?
Th. Storer. Sweet liberty the life's best living flame.
I. Markham. Our lands may come again, but liberty once lost,
Can never find such recompense as counteruails the cost.
G. Gascoigne. Learn freedom and felicity, hawks flying where they list,
Be kindlier and more sound then hawks best tended to the ^ist.
vv. warner. He lives to die a noble death, that life forefreed once spends.
Idem. -- The name of Liberty,
The watchword of rebellion ever used,
The idle Echo of uncertainty
That evermore the simple has abusde.
S. Daniell. Life.
-- All man's life me seems a Tragedy,
Full of sad sighs and sore Catastrophes,
First coming to the world with weeping eye,
Where all his days like dolorous Trophies,
Are heapt with spoils of fortune and of fear.
And he at last laid forth on balefull bear.
Ed. Spencer. Our life is but a step in dustie way.
S. Phil. Sidney. This mortal life as death is tried,
And death gives life.
M. Roydon. What in this life we have or can desire,
Has time of grow'th and moment of retire.
D. Lodge. Our bodies, every foot-step that they make,
March toward death, until at last they die:
Whether we work or play, or sleep or wake,
Our life does pass, and with times wings does fly.
I. Dauies. The life of man a warfare right, in body and in soul,
Resignes his robbed carcass to be rolled in the mould.
W. Warner. -- The term of life is limited.
Ne may a man prolong or shorten it,
The soldier may not move from watchful stid,
Nor leave his stand until his captain bid.
Ed. Spencer. The longer life I wot the greater sin,
The greater sin, the greater punishment.
Idem. Thus passes with the overplus of life,
The pleasant spring and flower of mortal life:
The Aprils pomp once subject to decay,
Returns not in the bud that erst was rife.
Whilst mornings weep, the lively flower does bost,
Then pluck the stalk, and let not it be lost.
D. Lodge. The sun does set and brings again the day,
But when our life is gone, we sleep for aye.
Th. Ach. Sun sets and rises, goes down and quickly reuiueth,
But man's light once out, eternal darkness abides.
Ab. France. All mortal men must from this life be gone,
Of life and death, there are more souls then one.
The greatest and most glorious thing on ground,
May often need the help of weakest hand,
So feeble is man's state, and life unsound,
That in assurance it may never stand,
Till it disordered be from earthly band.
Ed. Spencer. -- The restless life which men here lead,
May be resembled to the tender plant:
It springs, it sprouts, as babes in cradle breed,
Flourish in May, like youths that wisdom want,
In Autumn ripe, and rots least store wax scant.
In winter shrinkes and shrowdes from every blast,
Like crooked age, when lusty youth is past.
G. Gascoigne. The wicked livers oftentimes have wicked ends.
S. I. H. Life is not lost said she, for which is bought
Endless renown, that more then death is to be sought.
Ed. Spencer. Better it is for one to live obscure,
Then in a public state to live unsure.
D. Lodge. No life is blessed that is not graced with love.
B. Ihonson. They double life that dead things grief sustain,
They kill, that feel not their friends living pain.
G Chapman. That life's ill spared that is spared to cast more blood.
S. Daniell. Love.
Of Love's perfection perfectly to speak,
Or of his nature rightly to define:
Indeed does far surpass our reasons reach,
And needs this priest to express his power divine:
For long before the world he was yborne,
And bred above in Venus bosom dear,
For by his power the world was made of yore,
And all that therein wondrous does appear.
Ed. Spencer. Love is the Lord of all the world by right,
And rules the creatures by his powerful saw:
All being made the vassalls of his might,
Through secret sense, which thereto does them draw.
Idem. Vapor eterne in man, in beast, in tree,
In plant and flower is love, (and so of might)
For in the world may not contained be,
Without accord and Loves imperial right.
Yet wends the fox in holy hood full often,
And craft in stead of truth, bears crest aloft.
D. Lodge. -- That true Love which dancing did invent,
Is he that tuned the worlds whole harmony,
And linked all men in sweet society,
He first exaulted from the earth mingled mind,
That heavenly fire or quintessence divine,
Which does such sympathy in beauty find.
As is betwixt the Elm and fruitful Vine,
And so to beauty ever does incline.
Life's life it is, and cordial to the heart,
And of our better part, the better part.
I. Dauies. Sweet love is a celestial harmony,
Of likely hearts composed of hearts consent,
Which joy together in sweet sympathy,
To work each others kind and true content,
Which they have harbored since their first descent,
Out of these heavenly bowers, where they do see
And know each other here beloved to be.
Ed. Spencer. Iron with wearing shines, rust wastes treasure
On earth, but Love there is no other pleasure.
H. Constable. Love a continual furnace does maintain.
Idem. Wealth master is, and porter of the gate,
That lets in love, when want shall come too late.
Th. Churchyard. -- Love to heaven is fled,
Since swearing lust on earth usurped his name,
Under whose simple semblance he has fled
Upon fresh beauty blotting it with blame,
Which the hot tyrant stains, and soon ber^aues,
As caterpillars, do the tender leaves.
W. Sh. Love is a spirit all compact of fire,
Not gross to sink, but light and will aspire.
Idem. Love is a golden bubble full of dreams,
That waking breaks, and fills us with extremes.
G. Chapman. Love is a discord and a strange divorce,
Betwixt our sense and rest, by whose power,
As mad with reason, we admit that force,
Which wit or labor never may divorce.
It is a will that brooketh no consent,
It would refuse, yet never may repent.
-- Love's a desire, which for to weight a time,
Does loose an age of years, and so does pass,
As does the shadow seuerd from his prime,
Seeming as though it were, yet never was.
Leaving behind, naught but repentant thoughts,
Of days ill spent, of that which profits noughts.
It Is now a peace, and then a sudden war,
A hope consumde before it is conceived,
At hand it fears, and menaceth a far,
And he that gains, is most of all deceived.
Love whets the dullest wits his plagues be such,
But makes the wise by pleasing, dote as much.
E. O. Love is a brain-sicke boy, and fierce by kind,
A wilful thought, which reason cannot move,
A flattering Sycophant, a murdering thief,
A poisoned choking bait, a ticing grief.
A Tyrant in his laws, in speech unknown,
A blindfold guide, a feather in the wind:
A right Chamelion for change of hew,
A lame-lime-lust, a tempest of the mind.
A breach of charity, all virtues foe,
A private war, a toilsome web of woe.
A fearful jealousy, a vain desire,
A labyrinth, a pleasing misery,
A shipwreck of man's life, a smoakelesse fire,
A ship of tears, a lasting lunacie.
A heavy servitude, a dropsy thirst,
A hellish Iaile, whose captives are accursed.
Th. Watson. A sugared harm, a poison full of pleasure,
A painted shrine, ful-fill'd with rotten treasure.
An heaven in show, a hell to them that prove,
A broken staff, which fully does uphold,
A flower, that fades with every frostie cold:
An Orient rose, sprung from a withered plant,
A game in seeming, shadowed still with want.
A minutes joy to gain a world of grief,
A subtle net, to snare the idle mind,
A seeing scorpion, yet in seeing blind,
A poor rejoice, a plague without teliefe,
D. Lodge. Love is a smoke made with fume of sighs,
Being purged, a fire sparkling in Lovers eyes,
Being vexed, a sea, nourisht with loving tears,
What is it else? a madness most distressed,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
W. Shakespeare. It is a doubled grief, a spark of pleasure,
Begot by vain desire, and this his love:
Whom in our youth, we count our chiefest treasure.
In age for want of power we do reprove,
Yea such a power is Love, whose loss is pain,
And having got him, we repent again.
D. Lodge. Love the Idle bodies work and surfeit of the eye.
W. Warner. Love is but a term, like as is Echo but a voice,
That this does babble, that does breed, or not, is ours the choice.
W. Warner. -- Love is a subtle influence,
Whose final force still hangs in suspense.
D. Lodge. Love is a wanton famine, rich in food,
But with a riper appetite controlled,
An argument in figure and in mood:
Yet hates all arguments; disputing still,
For sense against reason, with a senseless will.
G. Chapman. Of every ill the hateful father vile,
That does the world with sorceries beguile,
Cunningly mad, religiously profane,
Wits monster, reasons canker, senses bane,
Love taught the mother that unkind desire,
To wash her hands in her own Infants blood.
Love taught the daughter to betray her fire
Into most base and worthy servitude:
Love taught the brother to prepare such food;
To feast his brothers, that all seeing sun
Wrapped in a cloud that wicked sight did shun.
I. Dauies. Love is a sour delight, a sugared grief,
A living death, an ever dying life,
A breach of reasons law, a secret thief,
A sea of tears, an everlasting strife.
A bait for fools, a scourge of noble wits,
A deadly wound, a shot which ever hits,
Love is a blinded god, and angry boy,
A labyrinth of doubts, an idle lust,
A slave to bewties will, a witless toy.
A ravening bird, a tyrant most unjust,
A burning heat, a cold, a flattering joy,
A private hell, a very world of woe.
Th. Watson. -- Love bewitcher of the wit.
The scorn of virtue, vices parasite,
The slave to weakness, friendships false bewraier,
Reasons rebel, fortitudes betraier.
The churchme^s staff, court, camp, and countries guider,
Arts infection, chaste thoughts, and youths defiler.
I. VVeeuer. Controlling Love, proud fortunes busy factor,
The gall of wit, sad melancholies school,
Heart-killing corsiue, golden times detractor,
Life-fretting canker, mischiefs poisoned tool,
The Idiots idle brother, wise men's fool.
A foe to friendship enemy to truth,
The wrong misleader of our pleasing youth.
M. Drayton. -- Love is root and only crop of care,
The bodies foe, the hearts annoy, and cause of pleasures rare.
The sickness of the mind, the fountain of unrest,
The gulf of guile, the pit of pain, of grief the hollow chest:
A fiery frost, a flame that frozen is with Ice,
A heavy burden, light to bear, a virtue fraught with vice.
It is a worldlike peace, a safety seeing dread,
A deep despair, annexed to hope, a fancy that is fed,
Sweet poison for his taste, a port Charibdis like,
Ascylla for his safety, though a Lion that is meek.
Th. Turberuile. -- O brawling love, O loving hate,
O any thing of nothing first created:
O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
Misshapen Chaos of well seeing forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sickness, health,
Still waking sleep, that is not what it is.
W. Shakespeare. Sight is his root, in thought is his progression,
His childhood wonder, prentiship attention:
His youth delight, his age the souls opression,
Doubt is his sleep, he waketh in invention.
Fancy his food, his clothing carfulness,
Beauty his book, his play, Lovers discention.
His eyes are curious search, but vaild with warefulnesse,
His wings desire, often clipped with desperation:
Largess his hands, could never skill of sparefulnesse.
But how he does by might or by persuasion,
To conquer, and his conquest how to ratify,
Experience doubts, and schools had disputation.
S. Ph. Sidney. Love has two shafts, the one of beaten gold,
By stroke whereof, a sweet effect is wrought:
The other is of lumpish leaden mold,
And works no effect but what is naught.
Th. Watson. At Venus entreaty for Cupid her son,
These arrows by Vulcan were cunningly done:
The first is Love, as here you may behold,
His feathers head and body are of gold.
The second shaft is Hate, a foe to love,
And bitter are his torments for to prove.
The third is Hope, from whence our comfort springs,
His feathers are pulled from Fortunes wings.
Fourth, Jealousy in basest minds does dwell,
This metal Vulcans Cyclops sent from hell.
G. Peele. Hard is the doubt, and difficult to deem,
When all three kinds of love together meet:
And do dispart the heart with power extreme,
Whether shall weigh the balance down; to weet
The dear affection unto kindred sweet,
Or raging fire of love to woman kind,
Or zeal of friends combinde with virtues meet.
But of them all the band of virtues mind,
Me seems the gentle heart should most assured find.
Ed. Spencer. Of virtue only, perfect love does grow,
Whose first beginning though it be more slow
Then that of lust, and quickens not so fast:
Yet sure it is, and longer time does last.
The straw inkindles soon, and slakes again,
But iron is slow, and long will heat retain.
Th. Hudson. Most true it is that true love has no power
To looken back, his eyes be fixed before.
W. Sha. Love always does bring forth most bounteous deeds,
And in each gentle heart desire of honor breeds.
True love is free, and led with self delight,
Ne will enforced be with masterdome or might.
Idem. Love naked boy has nothing on his back,
And though he wants neither arm nor leg,
Yet maimed he is, since he his sight does lack:
And yet (though blind) he beauty can behold,
And yet though naked, he feels more heat then cold.
H. C. Love stays not long, it is but one years bird.
Th. Churchyard. Love must have change to season sweet delight.
Idem. Love, laws and Judges has in fee,
Nature and use his judges be:
To whom his whole course censures flee,
Since past, and things to come they see.
G. Chapman. Love is in power felt of all, in person found of none,
Or rather is not real but some fancy; If not, then
Fantastical in women, but essential in men.
W. Warner. Loves eyes in viewing never have their fill.
W. Marlowe. This is the least effect of Cupids dart,
To change the mind by wounding of the heart.
Th. Watson. Unto the woods runs love, as well as rides to the palace,
Neither he bears reverence to a prince, nor pity to beggere
But (like a point amidst of a circle) still of an evenness,
All to a lesson he draws, neither hills nor caves can avoid him.
S. Phil. Sidney. The throne of Cupid has an easy staire,
His bark is fit to sail with every wind:
The breach he makes, no wise man can repair.
Ed. Fairfax. -- Love will have his godhead seen
In famous queens, and highest princes hearts.
S. I. H. Love wants his eyes, yet shootes he passing right,
His shafts our thoughts, his bow he makes our sight,
His deadly pills are tempered with such art,
As still directs the arrow to the heart.
M. Drayton. -- Love does reign
In stoutest minds, and makes monstrous war,
He makes war, he makes peace again:
And yet his peace is but continual war,
O miserable men, that to him subject are.
Ed. Spencer. First love is firm and touches very near.
W. Warner. Love unto life this cognizance does give,
This badge, this mark, to every man that minds it:
Love lends life, which living cannot die,
Nor living, love.
G. Gascoigne. Love is too full of faith, too credulous,
With folly and false hope deluding us.
Chapter Marlowe. Love is not full of mercy as men say,
But deaf and cruel where he means to pray.
Idem. Love paints his longings in sweet virgins eyes.
G. Chapman. -- Love gainsaid: grows madder then before.
Th. Watson. Love finds mean, but hatred knows no measure.
Ed. Spencer. As Bacchus opes dissembled hearts,
So love sets out our better parts.
M. Roydon. As love has wreathes his pretty eyes to sear,
So lovers must keep secret what they fear.
D. Lodge. Love keeps his revels where there are but twain.
W. Shakespeare. As Iris coat in sundry taints does show,
So love is clad in weal, and strait in woe.
D. Lodge. Love can abide no law, love always loves to be lawless,
Love alters nature, rules reason, mastereth Olympus:
Laws, edicts, deerees, contemnes Jove mightily thundering.
Jove that rules and raigns, that with beck bends Olympus.
Love carried Hyppolitus with briars and thorns to be mangled
For that he had the fair foul lusting Phedra refused.
Love made Absyrtus with sisters hands to be murdered
And in pieces torn, and here and there to be scattered.
Love forced Pasiphae man's company long to be loathing,
And for a while bulls flesh, bulls company long to be taking.
Love and luring looks of lovely Polixena caused
Greekish Achilles death when he came to the church to be wedded.
Love made Alcides that most invincible Heroes,
Master of all monsters, at length to be whipped of a monster.
Love drowned Leander, swimming to the beautiful He^o,
Unto the town Cestos, from town of cursed Abydos.
Love made Jove that is ruler of earth, and ruler of heaven,
Like to a silly shepherd, and like to the fruitful Echidua.
Like to a fish, to a swan, a spawne, to a bull, to an eagle:
Sometimes Amphitrio, sometimes Dictinua resembling.
Ab. France. Trifling attempts no serious acts advance,
The fire of love is blown by dalliance.
G. Chapman. -- Where there grows a sympathy of hearts,
Each passion in the one, the other paineth:
And by even carryage of the outward parts,
(Wherein the actual work of love remains.)
The inward griefs, mislikes and joys are taught,
And every sign bewraies a secret thought.
D. Lodge. Love deeply grounded, hardly is dissembled.
Chapter Marlowe. O bold believing love, how hot it seems,
Not to believe, and yet too credulous:
Thy weal and woe are both of them extremes,
Despair and hope makes thee ridiculous.
The one does flatter the inthoughts unlikely,
The likely thoughts the other kills quickly.
W. Sha. Love goes toward love, as school boys from their books,
But love from love toward school with heavy looks.
Idem. -- Love can comment upon every woe.
Idem. Cupids deep rivers have their shallow fordes
His grief bring joys, his loss recompenses.
He breeds the sore, and cures us of the pain,
Achilles lance, that wounds and heales again.
Ed. Fairfax. Wonder it is to see in diverse minds,
How diversely love does his pageant play,
And shows his power in variable kinds:
The baser wit whose idle thoughts always
Are wont to cleave unto the lowly clay.
It stirs up to sensual desire,
And in leaud sloth to waste his careless day,
But in brave spirits it kindles goodly fire,
That to all hie desert and honor does aspire.
Ed. Spencer. Such ones, ill judge of love that cannot love,
Ne in their frozen hearts feel kindly flame:
For thy they ought nothing unknown reprove,
Ne natural affection faultlesse blame.
For it of honor and all virtue is
The root, and brings forth glorious fruits of fame.
That crown true lovers with immortal bliss,
The meed of them that love, and do not live amiss.
Idem. The persons must in passions iumpe else love is but a game,
Nor think I of a woman's grant, but as a wooers game.
VV. Warner. Pure love said she, the purest grace pursues,
And there is contract not by application:
Of lips or bodies, but of bodies virtues,
As in our elementall motion.
Stars by their powers, which are their heat and light,
Do heavenly works, and that which has probation
By virtue all contract has the noblest plight,
Both for the lasting and affinity
It has with natural divinity.
G. Chapman. Love is a lord of truth and loyalty,
Lifting himself out of the lowly dust:
On golden plumes up to the purest sky,
Above the reach of loathly sinful lust.
Whose base affect through cowardly distrust
Of his weak wings dare not to heavens fly,
But like a mold warpe in the earth does lie.
Ed. Spencer. -- One loving hour
For many years of sorrow can dispense,
A dram of sweet, is worth a pound of sour.
Idem. Love and majesty dwell ill together.
S. Daniell. The joys of love, if they should ever last
Without affliction or disquietnes:
That worldly chances do among them cast,
Would be on earth too great a blessedness.
Liker to heaven then mortal wretchedness:
Therefore the winged God to let men weet
That here on earth is no sure happiness,
A thousand sowres has tempered with one sweet,
To make it seem more dear and dainty as is meet.
Ed. Spencer. True it is said, what ever man it said,
That love with gall and honey does abound:
But if the one be with the other waid,
For every dram of honey therein found,
A pound of gall does over it abound.
Idem. Love has delight in sweet delicious fruit,
Love never takes good counsel for his friend.
Love author is, and cause of idle care.
Love is destraught of wit, he has no end.
Love shoots shafts of burning hot desire,
Love burns more then either flame or fire.
Love does much harm through Iealousies assault.
Love once embraced will hardly part again.
Love thinks in breach of faith there is no fault.
Love makes a sport of others deadly pain.
Love is a wanton child, and loves to brall,
Love with his war brings many souls to thrall.
Th. Watson. -- Gods themselves are chaung'd by Love,
Jove steals from skies to lie by Laedaes side:
Arcas descends for fair Aglauraes sake,
And Sol so soon as Daphne is espide,
To follow his chariot does forsake.
Idem. -- The sweetest honey,
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness,
And in the taste confounds the appetite,
Therefore Love moderately long love does so,
Too swift arriues as tardie as too slow.
W. Shakespeare. -- The rights
In which Loves beauteous empress most delights,
Are banquets, Doricke music, midnight reuelling,
Plays, maskes, and all that stern age counts evil.
Chapter Marlowe. Those easily men credit whom they love.
S. Daniell. Play with the fire, yet die not in the flame,
Show passion in thy words, but not in heart,
Least when thou think to bring thy thoughts in frame
Thou prove thy self a prisoner by thy art.
Play with these babes of love, as Apes with glasses,
And put no trust in feathers, wind or lasses.
D. Lodge. The greedy moon along her giddie sphere,
Boads not such change in her inconstant course,
No crinite comet in the waine of year,
No rising rage nor swelling of sourse.
As Love in shape, in substance and effect,
But Gods and men with fury does infect,
A morning star (that peereth from the pride
Of silver floate) bedewed and sparkling bright,
Borne from the second form of waters glide,
The queen of Love, the mistress of delight.
Aye such is love in semblance at the first,
But his effects are cruel and accursed.
D^ Lod, Albeit beauty moves to love, and love does make thee sue,
Better at first be nonsuite, then at length not to subdue.
W. Warner. It has been when as hearty love did treat and tie the knot,
Though now if gold but lacking be, the wedding fadgeth not.
Idem. Love learnes rural wits and base borne brats to be reading,
Heartburning secrets, and wonders daintily written,
In fair flaming eyes, by the hand of lovely Cupido.
A. France. Love nill consent that bewties fiel^ lie waste.
Ed. Fairfax. It Is often seen, Love works a man a weak dejected mind,
For ever seen, a woman's love does alter as the wind.
W^ Warner. No style is held for base, where love well named is,
Each ear suckes up the words a true love scatters.
S. Ph. Sydney. All loss is less, and less the infamy,
Then loss of love to him that loves but one,
Ne may love be compeld by maisterie,
For as soon as maisterie comes sweet love anon:
Takes his nimble wings, and soon is gone.
Ed. Spencer. For every pleasure that in love is found,
A thousand woes and more therein abound.
Th. Watson. Like as a nibling fish that half mistrusts
The golden show of an enticing bait,
Makes many offers for the thing she lusts,
Daring to deal with that she deemes deceit:
So plays the amorous God with his fair prize,
Whom love and lust bids board, but shame denies.
Chapter Middleton. From these hie hills as when a spring does fall,
It thrilleth down with still and subtle course,
Of this and that it gathers aid, and shall
Till wit have just done, flowed to stream and force,
Then at the foot, it rages over all:
So fares Love when he has taken a course.
Rage is vain resistance vaileth none,
The first issue is remedy alone.
E. of Surrey. Not all the writs Diana has, can Cupids plaint remove.
W. Warnaer. -- Lordly Love is such a Tyrant fell,
That where he rules, all power he does expel.
Ed. Sp. If Love compelled be and cannot choose,
How can it grateful or thank worthy prove?
Love must free hearted be and voluntary,
And not enchaunted or by fate constrained.
Nor like that love which did Ulysses carry,
To Circes I Will with mighty charms.
I. Dauies. Where heat of Love does once possess the heart,
There cares oppress the mind, with wondrous ill,
Wit runs awrie, not fearing subtle smart,
And fond desire does ever master will.
The belly neither cares for meat nor drink,
Nor ouerwatched eyes desite to wink.
Footesteps are false, and wavering too and fro,
The brightsome flower of beauty fades away,
Reason retires, and pleasure brings in woe,
And wisdom yields place to black decay.
Council and fame, and friendship are condemned,
And bashful shame, and Gods themselves conte^ned.
Watchful suspect is kindled with despair,
Inconstant hope is often drowned in fears:
What folly hurts not, fortune can repair,
And misery does swim in seas of tears.
Long use of life is but a living foe,
As gentle death is only end of woe.
Th. Watson. Unlawful means does make love lawful gain,
He speaks most true when he the most does feign.
M. Drayton. As many bees, as Hybla daily sheelds,
As many fry as fleet in Oceans face,
As many herds as on the earth do trace,
As many flowers as decked the fragrant fields,
As many stars as glorious heaven contains,
As many clouds as wayward winter weeps,
As many plagues as hell enclosed keeps.
So many griefs in Love, so many pains,
Suspicions, thoughts, desires, opinions, prayers,
Mislikes, misdeeds, fond joys, and fained peace,
Illusions, dreams, great pains, and small increase,
Vows, hope, acceptance scorns and deep dispaires.
D. Lodge. The gnawing envy, the heartfretting fear,
The vain surmises, the distinctfull shows,
The false reports that flying tales do bear,
The doubts, the dangers, the delays, the woes,
The fained friends, the unexpected foes,
With thousand more then any tongue can tell,
Do make a Lovers life a wretches hell.
Ed. Spencer. It Is folly by our wisest worldlings proved,
If not to gain by love) to be beloved,
B. Ihonson. Against Loves fire fears frost has dissolution.
W. Shakespeare. -- Greater conquest of hard Love he gains,
That works it to his will, then he that it constraines.
Ed. Spencer. unto a Knight there is no greater shame,
^hen lightness and inconstancy in love.
Idem. ^oues weeping flames, by reason do subdue
before their rage grow to so great unrest,
^s miserable lovers use to rue,
which still wax old in woes whilst woe still waxes new
Ed. Spencer. Old Love is little worth when new is more preferred.
Idem. Who can show all his love, can love but lightly.
S. Daniell. No man from the monarch love by wit or weapon flies.
W. Warner. -- Lofty Love does loathe a lowly eye.
Ed. Spencer. Love thriues not in the heart, that shadows dreadeth.
W. Shakespeare. Gather I say, the Rose while it is time,
For soon comes age that will her pride deflame:
Gather the Rose of Love while yet is time,
Whilst loving, thou mai'st loved be with equal aim.
Ed. Sp. O learn to love, the lesson is but plain,
And once made perfect, never lost again.
VV. Shakespeare. Lovers their loved Ladies loves to gain
Promise, protest and swear without regard,
That God does see and know their falsehood still,
And can and shall revenge it at his will.
Their oaths but words, their words are all but wind,
Uttered in heart, and with like heart forgotten,
As bundles are trust up coards all rotten.
Coinesse is naught, but worst to be too kind;
Men care not for the good that soon is gotten:
But women of their wits may chiefly boast,
That are made wiser by an others cost.
S. I. H. He that binds himself in worthy bands,
Although his show but grace him small:
Although he find no favor at her hands,
Sharp words, coy looks, small thanks, hope none at all,
Though more and more, aloof from him she stands:
Yet for his heart and thoughts be highly placed,
He must not mourn, although he die disgraced.
Idem. Dumb Swans, not chattering Pies do Lovers prove,
They love indeed, who dare not say they love.
S. Ph. Sydney. The Lover and beloved are not tied to one Love.
VV. Sh. He that on Loves blind snares once sets his foot,
Seems to draw it back, but finds it caught,
And madness mere in Love to ouershoote,
The fool has felt, the wise has ever taught.
And though in all alike it take not root,
Yet all shall find, Love is a thing of naught.
For sure it is, an open sign of madness,
To have an others pleasure breed thy sadness.
S. I. Harrington. The birds their beak, the lion has his tail,
And lovers naught but sighs and bitter moan,
The spotless force of fancy to assail.
D. Lodge. Sweet are the kisses, the embracements sweet,
When like desires, and affections meet:
For from the earth to heaven is Cupid raised,
Where fancy is in equal balance peized.
Chapter Marlowe. Foul words and frowns must not repel a Lover,
What though the Rose has prickles, yet it is plucked,
Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast,
Yet Love breaks through, and breaks them all at last,
W. Shakespeare. -- Lovers hours are long, though seeming short,
If pleased themselves, others they delight:
In such like circumstance, with such like sport,
Their copious stories oftentimes begun,
End without audience, and are never done.
Idem. A Lover may bestride the Gossamours,
That Idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not full so light is vanity.
Idem. The Dutch in love is proud, Italians envious,
The French man full of mirth, the Spanyard furious.
Magic.
Three kinds there are for natures skill:
The first they natural do name,
In which by herbs and stones they will
Work wondrous things, and worthy fame.
The next is Mathematical,
Where Magic works by nature so,
That brazen heads make speak it shall,
Of woods, birds, bodies, fly and go,
The third Veneficall, by right
Is named, for by it they make
The shape of bodies changed in sight
And their forms on them to take.
M. of M. -- Oh who can tell
The hidden power of herbs, and might of magic skill?
Ed. Spencer. Man.
In time convenient this world Almighty created,
And it a large theater to behold, his glory appointed:
Which when he had with store of treasures richly replenisht,
And with abundant grace causd every part to be furnished,
Man was made at length, Adam was quickly created
Most perfect creature, and like to the mighty Creator,
Good wit, immortal, of mankind only beginner.
But proud ambition the serpent craftily cloaking,
With cursed and bitter sweet, his cankred poison abounding.
Adam dispossessed of pleasant beautiful harbors.
Adams heart possessed with most unspeakable horrors.
Man was mard at length, Adam was foully defaced.
Last work and lost work, Adam was filthily fowled:
Most cursed creature, unlike to the mighty Creator,
Bad, foolish, mortal, of mankind only the murderer.
A. France. -- Vile man begot of clay, and borne of dust.
Ed. Fairfax. Man composed first of slime,
Does live to lead his days in strife:
And as the heavens do that dispose,
So shuts and spreads he with the rose.
D. Lodge. Time over old and young is still reuolued,
Within it self, and never tastes end:
But mankind is to naught for aye reserved,
The filthy snake her aged coat can mend.
And getting youth again, in youth does flourish:
But unto man age ever death does send.
The very trees with grafting we can cherish:
So that we can long time produce their time,
But man which helps them, helpless must perish.
S. Phil. Sidney. O trustlesse state of miserable men,
That build your bliss on hope of earthly thing:
And vainly think your selves half happy then,
When painted faces with smooth flattering
Do fawn on you, and your wide praises sing.
And when the courting masker louteth low,
Him free in heart, and trusty too you know.
Ed. Spencer. He that comparde man's body to a hoaste,
Said that the hands were scouts discovering harms:
The feet were horsemen thundering on the coaste.
The breast and stomach foe men, huge in swarms,
But for the head in sovereignty did boast,
It captain was, directer of alarmes.
Whose rashness if it hazarded any ill,
Not he alone, but all the host did spill.
I. Markeham. Each creature not grudging at man's glory,
Unto his life becomes contributorie.
Idem. Like floods in summer, or flowing springs in the winter,
So man consumes:
No trust or firmness in life, that flies like a shadow?
What then alas is man
That so presumes?
D. Lodge. The shadow of the clock by motion wends,
We see it pass, yet mark not when it parts:
So what is man's declines, and sudden ends,
Each thing begins, continues and conuerts.
Idem. -- Man to woman gives all perfection,
And as our chief Philosophers do say,
Woman by man is perfect made each way.
I. VVeeuer. -- Man is laden with ten thousand languors,
All other creatures only feel the angors
Of few diseases; as the gleaming quail,
Only the falling sickness does assail.
The turne-about and murraine trouble cattle,
Madness and quincie bid the mastife battle.
I. Siluester. ^t does exceed man's thought to think how hie
God has raisd man, since God a man became:
The Angels do admire this mystery,
And are astonished when they view the same.
I. Dauies. Men do not know what they themselves will be,
When as more then themselves, themselves they see.
S. Daniell. ^ike as the fatal raven that in his voice
^arries the dreadful summons of our deaths,
^ies by the fair Arabian spiceries,
^er pleasant gardens and delightful parts,
^eeming to curse them with his hoarse exclaimes:
and yet does stoop with hungry violence,
upon a piece of hateful carrion.
So wretched man displeased with those delights,
Would yield a quickening savor to his soul,
Pursues with eager and vnstanched thirst,
The greedy longings of his loathsome flesh.
G. Peele. Man is a little world, and bears the face
And picture of the university:
All but resembles God, all but is glass,
All but the picture of his majesty.
Man is the little world (so we him call)
The world the little God, God the great all.
Th. Bastard. The gallant courser in his full carrire
Is made by man to stop with slender rain:
But man himself his lust and fond desire
Is sildome drawn by reason to refrain.
It Is hard to stop, but harder to retire,
When youthful course ensues pleasure vain.
As bears do break the hiues and weak defenses,
When smell of honey comes to their senses.
S. I. H. Great Pompey in the midst of victory,
All unexpected happened to his end:
And Caesar in his greatest majesty
Untimely murdered by his dearest friend.
Such are men's best estates, more wretched they,
In greatest pomp most subject to decay.
Chapter Midleton. What does make men without the parts of men,
Or in their manhoods less then children
But manlesse natures? all this world was namd'd
A world of him for whom it first was framde
(Who like a tender cheuerell shrunk with fire
Of base ambition, and of self desire)
His arms into his shoulders crept, for fear
Bounty should use them, and fierce rape forbear,
His legs into his greedy belly run,
The charge of hospitality to shun)
In him the world is to a lump reuerst:
That shrunk from form that was by form dispersed.
And in naught more then thanklesse avarice,
Not rendering virtue her deserved price.
G. Chapman. Like as rude Painters that contend to show
Beasts, fowls, or fish, all artlesse to bestow
On every side his native counterfeit,
Above his head his name had need to set.
So men that will be men in more then fate
(As in their forheads) should in actions place
More perfect characters to prove they be
No mockers of their first nobility.
Else may they easily pass for beasts or fowls,
Souls praise our shapes, and not our shapes our souls.
Idem. When as men all do know, then nothing know.
S. Daniell. -- The milder passions does show man.
For as the leaf does bewtifie the tree,
The pleasant flowers bedeck the flourishing spring,
Even so in men of greatest reach and power,
A mild and piteous thought augments renown.
D. Lodge. No man before his end is truly blessed.
T. Dekkar. -- Man to man, as beast to beast, holds civil duties vain.
W. Warner. Man's inward parts are colder and the nummer,
When outwardly they feel a boiling summer.
Man's voice in every ones opinion, is but an airie repercussion*
D. Lodge. Marriage.
Hymen that now is god of nuptial rights,
And crowns with honor love and his delights.
G. Chapman. Before them on an altar he presented
Both fire and water, which was first invented:
Since to ingenerate every humane creature
And every other birth produc'st by nature,
Moisture and heat, must mix, so man and wife
For humane race, must join in nuptial life.
Idem. -- In Athence
The custom was, that every maid did wear
During her maydenhead, a silken sphere:
About her waste above her inmost weed
Knit with Mineruaes knot, and that was freed
By the fair bridegroom on the marriage night,
With many ceremonies of delight.
Idem. Should thou but dream what marriage is, thou would not live a maid,
One heart of two, two souls of one, by wedlock is conuaid.
VV. Warner. Believe me man, there is no greater bliss,
Then is the quiet joy of loving wife:
Which who so wants, half of himself does miss.
Friend without change, play-fellow without strife.
Food without fullness, counsel without pride,
Is this sweet doubling of our single life.
S. Phil. Sidney. In choice of wife, prefer the modest chaste,
Lillies are fair in show, but foul in smell:
The sweetest looks by age are soon defaste,
Then choose thy wife by wit and loving well.
Who brings thee wealth, and many faults withal,
Presents thee honey mixed with bitter gall.
D. Lodge. Wild savages that drinks of running springs,
Thinks water fair, exceeds all other things.
But they that daily taste meat, nere despi^e it,
Virginity, al be some highly prise it,
Compared with marriage, had you tried them both,
Differs as much, as wine and water does.
Chapter Marlow. All touch sweet, taste sweet, eye sweet, ear sweet, sweet sense,
sweet sou^e is,
A virtuous match, but vicious love in all contrary this.
W. Warner. One is no number, maids are nothing then
Without the sweet society of men.
Chapter Marlow. -- Marriage will soon destroy
Those passions which to youthful head do clime,
Mothers and nurses of all vain annoy.
Idem. -- Wretched wedlock breeds but hated heat,
Where no love seems so sweet, as stolen and secret.
D. Lodge. Offer no love rights, but let wives still seek them,
For when they come unsought, they sildom like them.
B. Johnson. -- Even as Adam wrote his overthrow
By tasting fruit that God did him forbid,
So he that curiously will search to know
All that his wife has said, or what she did,
May fortune at the last himself beshrow.
S. I. H. Let him that his wife to his bent will draw,
Match with a virgin and keep her in awe.
To love, and wed for love, is perfect bliss.
G. Turb. His be the hurt that looks not ere he wed.
The husband may the woman make or mar.
Idem. We are not male nor female borne, that we should fruitless die.
W. Warner. -- Experience bidding us, does bid us lay to thrive.
The first degree to which say some, is warily to wine:
But wife if shrow or saint become (as not unlike) a shrow,
Then is that first degree to thrift, the third degree in woe.
Idem. Let nothing severe those whom God does link.
S. I. H. -- The chance that once befell
To wandering Dina, may be witness well
That secret marriage that to few is kend,
Does never lead the lovers to good end.
For of our bodies we no power may claim,
Except our parents do confirm the same.
Th. Hud. We worldly folks account him very wise,
That has the wit most worthily to wed,
By all means therefore, always we devise
To see our issue rich in spousall fed,
We buy and sell rich Orphans; babes scant bred
Must match, ere they do know what marriage means:
Boys marry old trots, old fools wed young queanes.
We call this wedding, which in any wise
Can be no marriage, but pollution plain:
A new found trade of human merchandise,
The devils net, a filthy fleshly gain,
Of kind and nature, an unnatural stain:
A foul abuse of Gods most holy order,
And yet allowed almost in every border.
M. of M. A filthy trull, is irksome to the eye,
A gallant gyrle allures the lookers mind:
A wanton wench will have the head to die,
An aged trot to like, is hard to find.
A bearing wife with brats, will cloy the store,
A greater care then childrens care is none:
A barren beast will grieve thee ten times more,
No joy remains when sap of fruit is gone.
Wherefore let wiuing go live single aye,
A shrew we see is wedded on a day,
But ere a man can shift his hands it is long.
G. Turb. Malady.
Fast by old age pale Malady was placed,
Sore sick in bed her color all forgone,
Bereft of stomach, savor, and of taste,
Ne could she brook no meat but broaths alone.
Abhorring her, her sickness past recure,
Detesting physic, and all phisicks cure.
M. i Sackuill. Sickness the herald of arms, hearts, and all.
Th. Storer. Th'humorous sick, removing, find no ease,
When changed chambers help not the disease.
S. Dauiell. -- O sickness thou art often betide,
When death has many woes to come beside.
Idem. Might.
The meanest fault is hie offense, urged of a mighty foe.
W. Warner. To shadow sin Might can the more pretend.
M. Dr. -- Might is ever absolute alone,
When of two powers there is true coniunctione.
Idem. Power constrained is but a glorious slave.
Ed. Fairfax. -- Slight, force, are mighty things,
From which, much, if not most, earths glory springs:
If virtues self were clad in human shape,
Virtue without these, might go beg and scrape.
I. Marston. United powers, makes each the stronger prove.
S. Ph. Sydney. -- Honey words make foolishness,
And power the greatest wit with error blinds.
D. Lodge. All as the highest trees do sheeld the shrubs,
From posting Phlegons warmth, and warming fire,
So mighty men obscure each others fame,
And make the best deseruer fortunes game.
Idem. -- Excellency never bears this mind,
By no inferior skill to be definde.
Th. Storer. Where power decreed has to find the offense,
The cause is better still, then the defense.
S. Daniell. Misery.
His face was lean and some deal pinde away,
And eke his hands consumed to the bone:
But what his body was I cannot say,
For on his carcass, raiment had he none.
Save cloutes and patches peeced one by one,
With staff in hand, and scrippe on shoulder cast,
His chief defense against the winters blast.
His food for most, was wild fruits of the tree,
Unless sometimes, some crummes fell to his share,
Which in his wallet long, God-wot kept he,
As one the which full daintily would fare:
His drink the running stream his cup, the bare
Of his palm clozd, his bed the hard cold ground,
To this poor life, was Misery ybound.
M. Sackuill. -- This Iron world
Brings down the stoutest hearts to lowest state,
For Misery does brauest minds abate,
And makes them seek for that they wont to scorn,
Of fortune and of hope, at once forlorn.
Ed. Spencer. -- He has a foolish fantasy,
That thinks to find a friend in misery.
G. Gascoigne. O Misery, where once thou art possessed,
How soon thy faint infection alters kind,
And like a Circe, turnest man to beast,
And with the body do transform the mind,
That can in fetters our affection bind.
M. Drayton. -- Misery is trodden on by many,
But being low, never relieved by any.
W. Shakespeare. -- The mightiest that have lived,
Have fallen and headlong too, in Misery,
It is some comfort to have company.
G. Peele. Men fly from foes, but not from Misery.
M. Drayton. Let him that sees his private Misery
Avoid the prospect of prosperity:
It breeds pale envy, and sad discontent
Procures offense before a proffered wrong.
Torments it self till all conceits are spent,
And thoughts delivered by malicious tongue,
Then rapt with violent fury goes so strong,
That it enuenomes all our human parts,
Blind judging in eyes, and sense confounding hearts.
Th. Storer. Melancholy.
-- Melancholy from the spleen begun,
By passion moved, into the veins does run:
Which when this humor as a swelling flood,
By vigor is infused in the blood,
The vital spirits does mightily appall,
And weakeneth so the parts Organicall,
And when the senses are disturbed and tired,
With what the heart incessantly desir'd^
Like travelers with labor long oppressed,
Finding relief, eftsoons they fall to rest.
M. Drayton. Thou nursing mother of fair wisdoms lore,
Ingenious Melancholy.
I. Marston. Those men to Melancholy given, we Saturnists do call.
VV. Warner. Memory.
This Lidger book lies in the brain behind,
Like Ianus eye which in his poll was set:
The lay man's table, Storehouse of the mind,
Which does remember much, and much forget.
I. Dauies. Here senses apprehensions end does take,
As when a stone is into water cast:
One circle, does an other circle make,
Till the last circle touch the bank at last.
Idem. Remembrance is the life of grief, his grave forgetfulness.
Ed. Fairfax. Remembrance fresh, makes weakened sorrows strong.
Idem. Mischief.
The cause once gone, th'ffects thereof surcease,
And mischiefs being prevented whilst they are young
Cannot branch forth themselves to do that hurt,
That time, their natures, and bad men would work.
Chapter Middleton. A Mischife seen may easily be prevented,
But being hapt, not helped, yet still lamented.
M. Drayton. Fair goodness is foul ill, if mischiefs wit,
Be not represt from leaud corrupting it.
Idem. Mischief is often made good by speeding well.
S. Daniell. Mercy.
Some Clerks do doubt in their deuisefull art,
Whether this heavenly thing whereof I treat,
To weeten Mercy be of Justice part,
Or drawn forth from her by divine extreat.
This well I wot, that sure she as great,
And meriteth to have so hie a place:
She first was bred and borne of heavenly race,
From thence powered down of men by influence of grace.
Ed. Spencer. O who shall show the countenance and gestures
Of Mercy and justice; which fair sacred sisters,
With equal poize do ever balance even,
Th'vnchaunging proiects of the King of heaven.
The One stern of look, the other mild aspecting,
The'one pleased with tears, the other blood affecting:
The One bears the sword of vengeance unrelenting,
The Other brings pardon for the true repenting.
I. Syluicter. -- Still as rage kindles the fire of wrath,
Mercy to quench it, store of water has.
S. I. Harrington. -- This noble virtue and divine,
Does chiefly make a man so rare and od,
As in that one, he most resembles God.
Idem. Then come we nearest to the Gods on hie,
When we are farthest from extremity,
Giving forth sentence of our Laws with Mercy.
Tho. Achely. Mercy may mend whom malice made offend,
Death gives no thanks, but checks authority,
So Rulers mildness, subjects love do nourish.
S. Daniell. Soft pity enters at an Iron gate.
VV. Sh. Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Idem. Pity draws love bloodshed, as natures grief,
Compassion, follows the unfortunate.
S. D. When pity runs before, love always follows after,
A. France. As it is greater praise to save then spill,
So better to reform, then to cut off the ill.
Ed. Spencer. How dear is mercy having power and will,
When pity helps where equity does kill?
M. Drayton. Mind.
The Mind has in it self a deity,
And in the stretching circle of her eye,
All things are compast, all things present still
Will framed to power, does make us what we will.
G. Chapman. It is the mind that makes good or ill,
That makes a wretch, or happy, rich or poor,
For some that have a boundance at their will,
Have not enough, but want in greatest store.
An other that has little, asks no more,
But in that little is both rich and wise.
Ed. Spencer. The Mind is free what ere afflict the man,
A King's a King, do fortune what she can.
M. Drayton. -- The Mind times enemy, obliuions foe,
Disposer true of each note worthy thing.
Ed. Fairfax. Our minds discern where eyes could never see.
M. Draiton. -- That Mind most is bewtifull and hie,
And nearest comes to a divinity,
That farthest is from spots of earthes delight,
Pleasures that loose their substance with their sight,
Such one Saturnius rauisheth to love,
And fills the cup of all content to Jove.
G. Chapman. The settled mind is free from fortunes power,
They need not fear who look not up aloft:
But they that are too careful every hour,
For when they fall they light not very soft.
M. of M. What plague is greater then the grief of mind?
The grief of mind that eats in every vain:
In every vain that leaves such clods behind,
Such clods behind as breed such bitter pain.
So bitter pain that none shall ever find
What plague is greater then the grief of mind.
E. of Ox. Ill mind, to mind so much of others ill,
As to become unmindful of his own.
Ed. Spencer. Into our minds let us a little fall,
And we shall find more spots then leopards have.
S. Phil. Sidner. O vanity of man's unstable mind,
Puffed up with every blast of friendly wind.
Ed. Fairfax. In base minds no friendship dwells, nor emnitie.
Ed. Spencer. Often times we see that sorrows of the mind
Find remedy unsought, which seeking cannot find.
Ed. Spencer. Weak body well is changed, for minds redoubled force.
Idem. So move our minds, as motions move the air.
M. of M. Nor is it his our minds that make our native homes our grave,
As we to ours, others to theirs, like parciall fancy have.
Transmut we but our minds, and then all one an alien is,
As if a native once resolved, makes every country his.
VV. Warner. Monarchs.
Augustus quailing Anthony, was Emperor alone,
In whose vnfoed Monarchy our common health was known
W. Warner. A mighty monarch must whilst greening youth does flow,
Make one or two or three proofs of his peerles power:
For valor is the gate of honor beautified,
The first staire step it is, whereby good hap does guide,
Our feet to glories mount; and nothing hartens so
The men of arms to fight, as valiant prince (we know)
But afterward he must with wary wisdom war:
More often with his wit, then with his weapon far.
And feeding so his spirit with sweet sharp easy pain
Not keep a soldiers place, but captains room retain.
I. Syluester. Mildness fitteth majesty, hie minds are disalowed.
VV. Warner. No man from the Monarch love by wealth, or weapon flies.
Idem. Mildness would better suite with majesty
Then rash revenge and rough severity.
M. Dray. Murder.
Black hell-bred humor of fier-venging sin,
By whose inticements murders we commit:
The end unthought of, rashly we begin,
Letting our passion ouerwhelme our wit.
Who may and will not, murder in truth commits.
S. Phil. Sidney. Unpunished scapes, from heinous crime some one,
But unrevenged, in mind and body none.
Idem. The cruel man a cruel death shall taste,
And blood with blood be venged at the last.
I. Syl. Those that in blood such violent pleasure have,
Seldom descend but bleeding to their grave.
B. Johnson. Vengeance on mind the fretting furies take,
The sinful corpse like earthquake agues shake.
Their frowning looks, their troubled minds bewray,
In have they run, and midst their race they stay.
As gidded Do: amidst their speech they whist,
At meat they muse; no where they may persist.
But some fear netleth them, aye hang they so,
So never wants the wicked murderer woe.
M. of M. Muses.
Imps of K. Jove, and Queen remembrance lo,
The Sisters nine, the Poets pleasant pheers:
Calliope does stately style bestow,
And worthy praises paints of princely peers.
Clio in sullen songs renews all day,
With present years conioyning age by past,
Delightful talk, loves comicall Thalia.
In fresh green youth, who does laurel taste.
With voices tragical sounds Melpomen,
And as with chains the allured ears she binds,
Her strings when Terpsichore does touch, even then
She touches hearts, and reigns in men's minds,
Fond Erato, whose look a lovely cheer
Presents in dancing, bears a comely grace,
With seemly gesture does Polhymnie stir place.
Whose words whole routs of ranks do rule,
Vraine her globes to view are bent,
The nine-fold heaven observes with fixed face,
The blessed Eutrope tunes her instrument
With solace sweet, hence heavy dumps to chase,
Lord Phoebus in the midst whose heavenly spirit
These Ladies does inspire.
E. of Surrey. The golden brood of great Apolloes wit.
Ed. Spencer. Sweet Lady Muses, Ladies of delight,
Delights of life, and ornaments of light.
Idem. Then followed on the Muses sacred nine,
With the first number equally divine:
In virgins white, whose lively maiden brows
Were covered with tryumphant laurel brows:
And on their garments painted out in glory,
Their offices and functions in a story:
Imblazoning the fury and conceat
Which on their sacred company await.
M. Drayton. From these the Muses only are derived,
Which of the Angels were in nine contrived,
These heavenly inspired babes of memory,
Which by a like attracting sympathy
Apolloes prophets in their furies wrought,
And in their spirit inchaunting numbers taught,
To teach such as at poesy repine,
That it is only heavenly and divine.
And manifest her intellectual parts,
Sucking the purest of the purest arts.
And unto these as by a sweet consent,
The sphery circles are aequiualent:
From the first mouer and the starry heaven,
To glorious Phaebe, lowest of the seven.
Which Jove in tunefull Diapazons framde,
Of heavenly music of the Muses namde:
To which the soul in her divinity
By her Creator made of harmony,
Whilst she in frail and mortal flesh does live,
To her nine sundry offices do give:
Which offices united are in three,
Which like the orders of the Angels be,
Prefiguring thus by the number nine
The soul, like to the Angels is divine.
Idem. -- Provide ye Princes whilst ye live,
That of the Muses ye be friended be:
Which unto men eternity does give,
For they be daughters of dame memory,
And Jove, the father of Eternity.
And do those men in golden chrones repose,
Whose merits they to glorify do choose?
The seuenfold iron gates of grisly hell,
And horrid house of sad Proserpina,
They able are with power of mighty spell,
To break, and thence the souls to bring away
Out of dread darkness to eternal day.
And them immortal make which else would die
In foul forgetfulness, and namelesse lie.
Ed. Spencer. -- Wise words taught in numbers for to run
Recorded by the Muses live for aye,
Ne may with storming showers be washed away.
Ne bitter breathing winds with harmfull blast,
Nor age nor envy shall them ever last.
Idem. The Muses not long since intrapping love
In chains of Roses linked all array:
Gave beauty charge to watch in their behoue
With Graces three, least he should wend away.
Who fearing yet he would escape at last,
On hie Parnassus top they clapped him fast.
When Venus understood her soon was thrall,
She made post-haste to have god Vulcans aid:
Sold him her Iemmes and Ceston therewithal,
To ransom home her son that was betrayed.
But all in vain, the Muses made no store
Of gold, but bound him faster then before.
Th. Watson. The Muses basely beg or bibbe, or both, and must, for why
They find as bad Bestoe, as is their portly beggary.
vv' warner. Music.
-- Thou sweet Music, dauncings only life,
The ears sole happiness, the aires best speech:
Lodestone of fellowship, charming rod of strife,
The soft minds paradize, the sick man's leech.
With their own tongue that trees and stones can teach.
That when the air does dance her finest measure,
Then art thou borne, the gods and men's sweet pleasure.
I. Dauies. As without breath no pipe does move,
No Music kindly without love.
S. Phil. Sidney. Esclepiad did cure with Trompets sound,
Such men as first had lost their hearing quite:
And many such as in their drink lay drowned,
Damon revived with tunes of grave delight.
And Theophrast when ought his mind oppressed,
Used Music sound to bring himself to rest.
With sound of Harp Thales did make recure
Of such as lay with pestilence forlorn:
With Organ pipes Xenocrates made pure
Their wits, whose minds long lunacy had worn.
Th. Watson. Some that report great Alexanders life,
They say that harmony so moved his mind:
That often he rose from meat to warlike strife,
At sound of Trompe, or noise of battle kind.
And then that Musicks force of softer vain,
Caused him return from strokes to meat again.
Idem. Nature.
Nature in which divinity does shine,
Lively presenting unborn deity:
Is that same spirit of reason most divine,
Which causes every natural work to be.
All things she does preserve, and can refine
Muddy pollutions from impiety.
Philosophy can teach no art nor ground,
Which Nature (elder borne) had not first found.
I. Markham. -- Nature in man's heart her laws does pen,
Prescribing truth to wit, and good to will,
Which do accuse, or else excuse all men,
For every thought or practice good or ill.
I. Dauies. Nature above all things requires this,
That we our kind do labor to maintain.
S. Phil. Sidney. Nature which headlong into life does throng us
With our feet forward to our grave does bring us:
What is less ours, then this our borrowed breath*
We stumble into life, we go to death.
Th. Bastard. Inexplicable nature by the God of nature wroght,
Makes things seem miracles to some, to some not wonders thought.
And every climates people both as they are men and live,
Do differ: if observed, she not admired does give
The workman rather the^ the work extol we, though in her
Not curiously, and all things to his providence refer.
W. Warner. Nature has powered enough in each man's lap,
Could each man learn to use his private hap.
Th. Storer. -- Marks descried in men's nativity,
Are natures faults, not their own infamy.
VV. Shakespeare. Nature is Learnings eyes, she natures thought,
Use wanting either, is imperfect made,
They without use, no better then a shade.
I. Markham. -- Nature seems only fair in change.
D. Lodge. -- Where nature fails in strength she adds in wit.
W. W. Nature gives beauty, fortune wealth in vain.
Ed. Fairfax. -- The desire of nature is not vain,
She couets not impossibilities,
Fond thoughts may fall into some Idle brain,
But one assent of all is ever wise.
I. Dauies. Nature does hate and shun her contrary.
Idem. -- Nature teaches ever
Who loves preferment, needs must love the giver.
Th. Storer. Nobility.
If to be noble and hie thy mind be moved,
Consider well the ground and thy beginning,
For he that has each star in heaven fixed,
And gives the moon her horns and her eclipsing,
Alike has made the noble in his working:
So that wretched no way may thou be,
Except foul lust and vice do conquer thee.
E. of Surrey. Let each man crack of that which was his own,
Our present virtues are theirs, and no whit ours:
Who therefore will of noble birth be known,
Ought shine in virtue like his ancestors.
Gentry consists not in lands and towns,
He is a churl though all the world were his,
Yea Arthurs heir if that he lived amiss.
M. of M. Behold of nobles new the diverse sourse,
Some virtue raises, some climb by sluttish sorts:
The first though only of themselves begun,
Yet circle-wise into themselves do run,
Within themselves therefore united so,
Both endless is, and stronger against their foe:
For when ends it that never has begun?
Or how may that has not end, be undone?
The other as by wicked means they grew,
And raignd by flattery, or violence; so soon rue.
First stumbling step from honors old is vice,
Which once stepped down, some linger, none arise
To former Type: but they catch virtues spray,
Which raises them that climb by lawful way.
Beware to rise by serving princely lust,
Surely to stand on mean, is rising just.
M. of M. The Rose although in thornie shrubs she spread,
Is still the Rose, her bewties wax not dead.
And noble minds, although the court be bare,
Are by resemblance known how great they are.
R. Gree^e. A noble mind disdaineth servitude.
Th. Kyd. True nobleness never does the thing it should not.
Idem. The noble heart that harbors virtuous thought,
And is with child with glories great intent:
Can never rest until it forth have brought
The Eternal brood of glory excellent.
Ed. Spencer. Old Age.
-- Next in order, sad old Age we found,
His beard all hoare, his eyes hollow and blind,
With drouping cheer still poaring on the ground
As on the the place where valor him assigned
To rest, when as the sisters had vntwind
His vital thread, and ended with their knife,
The fleeting course of fast declining life.
M. Sackuill. Crookt backed he was, tooth-shaken and bleare eide,
Went on three feet, and sometime crept on four,
With old lame bones that ratled by his side,
His scalpe all pild, and he with eld forlore,
His withered fist still knocking at deaths door,
Fumbling and driueling as he draws his breath,
In brief, the shape and messenger of death.
G. Gascoigne. Transl. Old age and winter do accord full nie,
This chill, that cold, this crooked, that awrie.
Ed. Spencer. -- He that plies the laps and lips of Ladies all his time,
And falls to arms when age fails arms, then also loses time:
As if a bear in Moone-shine, should attempt the Moon to clime.
W^ Warner. Our infancy is feeble, and our lusty youth unstaid,
Our manhood carking, and our age more loathed then obaid.
Idem. Our heirs wax sickish of our health, too long our here abode
Mean while the nerer to our graves, the farther we from God
Gripple in works, testie in words, loathsome for most at length,
And such at four score, as at four, for manners wit and strength.
Idem. Eld is ordaind to counsel, youth to fight,
Age to foresee, young courage to inact.
D. Lodge. Skill and experience good companions been,
Age knows whatsoeuet youth has seen.
S. I. H. Decrepit age and hoary silver hairs,
Still craves help of lusty youthful years.
G. Gascoigne^ It is a common point whereon the aged grossly run,
Once to have dared said, and seen, more then was ever done.
W. Warner. -- The equal age does equal life desire.
S. Daniel. Small drops God knows do quench age heatlesse fire,
When all the strength is only in desire.
M. Drayton. Opinion.
O malcontent seducing ghuest,
Contriuer of our greatest woes:
Which borne of wind and fed with shows,
Do nurse thy self in thine unrest,
Judging vngotten things the best,
Or what thou in conceit designest.
S. Daniell. Thou all things in the world do deem,
Not as they are, but as they seem,
Idem. Thou soul of pleasure, hours only substance,
Great arbitrator, vmpire of the earth,
Whom fleshly Epicures call virtues essence
Thou moving Orator, whose powerful breath
Swaies all men's judgments, Great Opinion,
I. Marston. Opinion is as various as light change,
Now speaking courtlike friendly, straight as strange.
She Is any humors perfect parasite,
Displeasd with her, and pleased with her delight.
She is the Echo of inconstancy,
Soothing her no with nay, her I with yea.
E. Guilpin. This siren or Opinion, wind-borne lame,
Seeking to ease us, brings us to unrest:
For it adiudgeth nothing it does see,
By what it is, but what it seems be.
I. Markham. We must in matters moral, quite reject
Vulgar Opinion, ever led amiss:
And let autenticke reason be our guide,
The wife of truth, and wisdoms gouernesse.
G. Chapman. Opportunity.
Opportunity thy guilt is great,
It Is thou that execut'st the traitors treason,
Thou setst the wolf where he the lamb may get,
Who ever plots the sin, thou points the season.
It Is thou that spurn'st at right, at lawiers reason:
And in thy shady Cell where none may spy him,
Sits sin, to fear each soul that wanders by him.
W. Shakespeare. Fair Opportunity can win the coyest she that is,
Then he that rules her gamesome vain, and te^pers toies with art,
Brings love that swimmeth in her eyes, to diue into her heart.
W. Warner. When love has knit two parts in perfect unity,
They seldom fail to find th'opportunitie.
S. I. Harrington. Occasion.
Occasion's wingd, and ever flies fast,
Coming she smiles, and frowns once being past.
M. Drayton. Now by the forehead let us take Occasion,
Least after all our travel and expense,
He hide away his hair, and turn his balld,
And we improvident bethought and called.
S. I. H. If lust or age does mind assail,
Subdue Occasion, so thou shall prevail.
Idem. True judgment slight regards Opinion.
I. Marston. Opinion how do thou molest
Th'affected mind of restless man?
Who following thee never can,
Nor ever shall attain to rest,
Forgetting what thou say is best,
Yet lo, that best he finds far wide,
Of what thou promisest before,
For in the same he looked for more,
Which proves but small when once is tried.
S. Daniell. He only treads the sure and perfect path
To greatness, who love and opinion has.
Idem. Let us esteem Opinion as she is
Fools babble, Innouations mistress.
The Proteus Robin good fellow of change,
Smithfield of iaded fancies, and the exchange
Of fleeting censures, nurse of heresy,
Begot by nature on inconstancy,
Its but the kiss of grief, the peoples noise,
The tongue of humors and fantastic voice,
Of hair braind apprehension it respects
With all due titles, and that due neglects
Even in one instant.
Ed. Guilpin. Patience.
Patience does bear a never pierced sheeld,
Whose brightness has enforc'r more monsters yield,
Then that of ugly Gorgons head was made.
I. Syluister. Patience is angers subject, and controlled
With every fury, which men would redress,
But cannot do it, for she is gentle mild,
Overcome and kept down like a strengthlesse child.
Chapter Middleton. Patience a praise, forbearance is a treasure,
Sufferance an angel, a monster rage.
Ed. Fairfax. Let gentle Patience profit thee, for Patience is a thing,
Whereby a beggar gains of a discontented King.
VV. Warner. Man in himself a little world does bear,
His soul the Monarch ever ruling there,
Where ever then his body do remain,
He is a King that in himself does reign,
And never fears fortunes hot'st alarmes,
That bears against her Patience for her arms.
M. Drayton. The lesser pangs can bear, who has endured the chief.
Ed. Sp. What fortune hurts, let Patience only heal,
No wisdom with extremities to deal.
M. Dr. By patient sufferance could we mildly bear
With fortune, yet we equally might share,
And ouercomming that which all do fear.
By present cure, prevent ensuing care.
Idem. Who in distress from resolution flies,
Is rightly said to yield to miseries.
That life is only miserable and vile,
From which fair Patience does it self exile.
Idem. Though eyes want sight of that they would see feign,
The thought yet sees, and heart with patience likes it:
Long absence greeues thee when they meet again,
Absence delights, and does more pleasant make it
To serve and sue long time for little gain.
(So that all hope do not quite forsake it)
One may endure, for when the pain is past
Reward though long it stay, yet comes at last.
S. I. H. Let Brontes and black Steropes
Sweat at the Forge their hammers beating:
An hour will come, they must affect their ease,
Though but while mettall's heating.
And after all their Aetnean ire,
"Gold that is perfect will out-liue the fire.
"For Fury wastes,
"As Patiend lasts.
"No armor to the Mind: "He is shoot-fire
From Injury,
That is not hurt; not he, that is not hit:
So Fools we see,
Often escape their Imputation, more through luck, then wit.
B. Johnson. Passion.
Passion deuours, but time digests our woe.
Passion bears hie, when puffing wits do blow:
But is indeed a to^, if not a toy,
True cause of evils, and cause of caused th show.
S. Phil. Sid They only aptest are for to reveal
Their private passions who the same do feel.
D. Lodge. None does live not passionate of love, ire, mirth or grief.
W. Warner. A man may not of passions judge aright,
Except his mind be from all passions free:
Nor can a Judge his office well acquit,
If he possessed of either party be.
I. Dauies. Parents.
It is as common as unkind a fault
In youth (too subject to this worlds assault)
To imitate, admit, and daily choose
Those errors which their lawless parents use.
D. Lodge. If damned dice the father does affect,
The selfe-like folly does his heir infect.
If lust, to lust the son is to procliue,
If fraud, by fraud his wanton race will thrive.
If surfit, surfit is esteemed no sin,
For youth perseuers as he does begin.
Idem. -- From damned deeds abstain,
From lawless riots and from pleasures vain.
If not regarding of thy own degree,
Yet in behalf of thy posterity,
For we are docible to imitate
Depraved pleasures, though degenerate.
Be careful therefore least thy son admit
By ear or eye things filthy or unfit.
Idem. The Babe is blessed that godly parent^ bred,
And sharpe-sweet tutors train in loving dred:
But chiefly that (in tender cradle bed)
With sincere milk of piety is fed.
I. Syl. -- Charitable, godly, wise and continent were fit
Should parents be; so prosper they, theirs, and whom they beget.
W. Warner. -- Often we see men so fond and blind
To carry to their sons too much affection:
That when they seem to love they are unkind,
For they do hate a child that spare correction.
S. I. H. -- Parents thoughts in love, often step awry.
G. Peele. Our parents age worse then our graund-syres be,
We worse, beget our children worse then we.
Th. Storer. Peace.
-- Mother of the living, second nature
Of the elements, fire, water, earth and air:
The grace whereby men clime the heavenly chair,
Whence void, this world harbors no happy creature.
Pillar of laws, religions pedestall,
Hope of the glory, glory of the immortal.
Honor of cities, pearl of kingdoms all,
The nurse of virtues, Muses chief supportall.
Patron of arts, of good the special spring.
I. Syluester. Heavens sacred nymph, fair goddess that renuest
The golden age, and brightly now revewest,
Our cloudy sky, making our fields to smile,
Hope of the virtuous, horror of the vile.
Virgin unseen, in France this many a year,
O blessed peace, we bid thee welcome here.
Idem. O holy peace by thee are only found,
The passing joys that every where abound.
G. Gascoigne. Transl. -- Most sacred peace
Does nourish virtue, and fast friendship breeds,
Weak she makes strong, and strong things does increase:
Till it the pitch of highest praise exceeds.
Brave be her wars, and honorable deeds,
By which she tryumphs over ire and pride,
And wins an Olive garland for their meeds.
Ed. Spencer. Peace does depend on reason, war on force,
The one is humane, honest and upright:
The other brutish, fostered by despite.
The one extreme, concluded with remorse,
The other all injustice does divorce.
D. Lodge. Peace brings in pleasure, pleasure breeds excess,
Excess procures want, want worse distress.
Distress contempt, contempt is not repaired,
Till liuelesse death determine hope dispaired.
Idem. Wars greaest woes, and miseries increase,
Flows from the surfets which we take in peace.
B. John. Pleasure.
Physche in steadfast love and happy state
With Cupid lives, and has him borne a child,
Pleasure that does both Gods and men aggrate.
Ed. Spencer. Most easy is the way and passage plain,
To Pleasures palace; it may soon be spide,
And day and night her doors to all stand open wide.
Idem. Her face was wan, a lean and withered skin,
Her stature scant three horsloaues did exceed:
Her hair was gray of hue, and very thin,
Her teeth were gone, her gummes served in their steed.
No space there was between her nose and chin.
Her noisome breath contagion would breed.
In fine, of her it might have well been said,
In Nestors youth she was a pretty maid.
S. I. Harr. O poisoned hook that lurkes in sugared bait
O Pleasures vain, that in this world are found:
Which like a subtle thief do lie in wait
To swallow man in sink of sin profound.
Idem. -- Revels, daunces, maskes and merry hours,
Forerun fair love, strowing her way with flowers.
W. Sha. O Pleasure thou the very lure of sin,
The root of woe, our youths deceitful guide:
A shop where all infected persons bin,
The bait of lust, the instrument of pride.
Inchaunting Circes smoothing covert guile,
Alluring Siren, flattering Crocodile.
M. Drayton. Pleasures be poor, and our delights be dead,
When as a man does not enjoy the head.
Idem. Never have unjust pleasures been complete
In joys entire; but still fear kept the door:
And held back something from that hell of sweet,
To inter sour unsure delights the more.
For never did all circumstances meet
With those desires which were conceived before.
Something must still be left to cheer our sin,
And give a touch of what should not have bin.
S. Daniell. Pleasure is felt, opinion but conceived.
Idem. In fear her arts are learned now a days,
To counterfeit their hair and paint their skin:
But reasons ring their craft and guile bewraies,
No wise men of their paintings pass a pin.
S. I. H. Too much desire to please, pleasure divorces,
Attempts, and not entreat, get Ladies larges.
G. Chapman. Our fond preferments are but childrens toys,
And as a shadow all our pleasures pass:
As years increase, so waining are our joys,
And beauty crazed like a broken glass,
A pretty tale of that which never was.
M. Drayton. -- Pleasures never dine but on excess,
Whose diet made to draw on all delight:
And overcome in that sweet drunkenness,
His appetite maintained by his sight,
Strengthens desire, but ever weakeneth might.
Until this ulcer ripening to an head,
Vomits the poison which it nourished.
Idem. Short hours work long effects minutes have change,
While pleasure ioyeth, pain more ripe does grow.
Idem. The secret sweet is sweetest, sweet to fall.
Th. Achilley. -- To them that know not pleasures price,
Alls one, a prison, or a paradise.
M. Drayton. Poesy.
All art is learnd by art, this art alone
It is a heavenly gift: no flesh nor bone
Can preise the honey we from Pind distill,
Except with holy fire his breast we fill.
From that spring flows, that men of special choose
Consumed in learning and perfect in prose:
For to make verse in vain do is travel take,
When as a prentise fairer words will make.
K. of S. Whilome in ages past none might profess
But princes and hie priests that sacred skill:
The sacred laws wherein they wont express,
And with deep oracles their verses fill,
Then was he held in sovereign dignity,
And made the noursling of nobility.
But now nor Prince nor Priest does her maintain,
But suffer her profaned for to be,
Of the base vulgar that with hands unclean
Dares to pollute her hidden mystery.
And treads underfoot her holy things,
Which was the care of Keysars and of Kings.
Ed. Spencer. Those numbers wherewith heaven and earth are moved,
Show, weakness speaks in prose, but power in verse.
S. Daniell. -- Man from man must holy parted be,
If with his age his verse do well agree.
Amongst our hands, he must his wits resing,
A holy trance to highest heaven him bring.
For even as humane fury makes the man
Less then the man: so heavenly fury can
Make man pass man, and wander in holy mist
Upon the fiery heaven to walk at list.
Within that place the heavenly Poets sought
Their learning, sin to us here down it brought.
With verse that ought to Atropos no due,
Dame Natures trunchmen, heavens interpret true,
K. of Scots. The vaunted verse a vacant head demands,
Ne wont with crabbed care the Muses dwell,
Unwisely weaues that takes two webbes in hand.
Ed. Spencer. O peerlesse Poesy, where is then thy place?
If not in princes palace thou do sit,
And yet is princes palace the most fit.
Or breach of baser birth does thee embrace,
Then make thee wings of thy aspiring wit,
And whence thou came fly back to heaven apace.
Idem. All art is learned by art, but poesy
It is a gift divine, and cannot die.
Idem. Like as into the wax the seals imprent,
Is like a seal: right so the Poet gent,
Does grave so viue in us his passions strange,
As makes the reader half in author change,
For Verses force is like that softly slides,
Through secret poris, and in our senses bides,
As make them have both good and ill imprented,
Which by the learned work is represented.
K. of Scots. -- Only he of Laurel is condign,
Who wisely can with profit pleasure minge,
The fairest walking on the sea coast been,
And surest swimming where the braes are green,
So wise is he who in his verse can have
Skill mixed with pleasure sports, with doctrine grave.
Idem. Who ever casts to compass weighty prise,
And thinks to throw out thundering words of threat:
Let power in lavish cups and thriftie bits of meat,
For Bacchus fruit is friend to Phoebus wise,
And when with wine the brain begins to sweat,
The numbers flow, as freely spring does rise.
Ed. Spencer. Ridled poesies and those significantly flow,
Differ in ears, as do in mouths the apricocke and sloe.
W. Warner. What reason moved the golden Augustine
To name our Poetry vain errors wine?
Or Hierome deeply sighted in their evils,
To term it nothing but the food of devils.
Naught but the misimployment of our gifts,
Ordaind for Art, but spent in shamlesse slufts.
D. Lodge. Look as the sun-beame in a burning glass,
Does kindle fire where ever it does pass,
But freely spread upon th'engendring earth,
Eggs on the spring, and bills the cause of dearth,
So Poesy restraind in errors bounds,
With poisoned words and sinful sweetness wounds,
But clothing virtue and adorning it,
Wit shines in virtue, virtue shines in it.
Idem. Poets.
The Greeks do paint the Poets office whole,
In Pegasus their fained horse, with wings,
Whom shaped so, Medusaes blood did foil,
Who with his feet struck out the Muses springs
Fro flintie rocks to Helicon that clings,
And then flew up into the starry sky,
And thete abides among the Gods on hie:
For who that will a perfect Poet be,
He must be bred out of Medusaes blood,
He must be chaste and virtuous as was she,
Who to her power, the Ocean God withstood.
To the end also his doombe be just and good,
He must as she, look rightly with one eye,
Truth to regard, ne write one thing awrie.
In courage eke, he must be like a horse,
He may not fear to register the right.
What though some frown? thereof he may not force
No bit, ne rain his tender jaws may twight,
He must be armed with strength of wit and sprite,
To dash the rocks, dark causes and obscure,
Till he attain the springs of truth most pure.
His houes also must pliant be and strong,
To riue the rocks of lust and errors blind.
In brainelesse heads that always wander wrong,
These must be bruised with reasons plain and kind,
Till springs of grace do gush out of thy mind:
For till affections fond be from thee driven,
In vain is truth told, or good counsel given.
Like Pegasus, a Poet must have wings,
To fly to heaven, or where him likes best,
He must have knowledge of eternal things,
Almighty Jove must harbor in his breast,
With worldly cares he may not be oppressed.
The wings of wit and skill must heave him hier,
With great delight to ratify desire.
He must also be lusty, free, and swift,
To travel far to view the trades of men.
Great knowledge often is gotten by the shift,
Things that import he must be quick to pen,
Reproving vices sharply now and then.
He must be swift when touched tyrants chafe,
To gallope thence, to keep his carkas safe.
M. of M. A Poet must be pleasant, not too plain,
Faults to control, ne yet to flatter vice,
But sound and sweet, in all things ware and wise.
Idem. -- Poets only pride,
Is virtue to advance, and vice deride.
Ed. Spencer. -- Poets right are like the pipe always,
Who full does sound, and empty, stays to play:
Even so their fury lasting, lasts their tone,
Their fury ceast, their muse does stay anon.
K. of Scots. When heaven would strive to do the best she can,
And put an Angels spirit into a man,
Then all her powers she in that work does spend,
When she a Poet to the world does send.
The difference only twixt the Gods and us,
Allowd by them, is but distinguished thus.
They give men breath, men by their powers are born,
That life they give, the Poet does adorn:
And from the world when they dissolve man's breath,
They in the world do give man life in death.
M. Drayton. -- Who so will with virtues deeds assay
To mount to heaven on Pegasus must ride,
And with sweet Poets verse be glorifide,
For not to have been dipped in Laethe Lake,
Could save the son of Thetis for to die,
But that blind bard did him immortal make,
With Verses dipped, in deaw of Castelie,
Which made the Eastern Emperor to cry.
O fortunate young man whose virtue found
So brave a trumpe thy virtues to resound.
Ed. Spencer. Physicians bills not patients but Apothecaries knows,
Some modern Poets be hardly inward so,
Not intellectually to write, is learnedly they trow,
Whereby they hit capacities, as blind men hit the crow.
W. Warner. As now by melancholy walks, and thredbare coats we guess,
At clients and at Poets none work more, and profit less.
None make to more unmade of more, the good of other men
For those enrich the gownists, these eternize with their pen.
Yet soothly nods to Poets now, are largess and but lost,
For Pallas hermits live secure, obscure in roofes embost.
Idem. The world and they so ill according be,
That wealth and Poets hardly can agree:
Few live in court, that of their good do care,
The muses friends are every where so rare.
M. Draiton. He gives a Poet that his verses hears.
Idem. But oh Mecenas is yclad in clay,
And great Augustus long ago is dead,
And all the worthies liggen wrapped in lead,
That matter made for Poets on to play
^or ever, who in dorring do, were dead,
The lofty verse of them was loved aye:
But after virtue, began for age to stoop,
And mighty manhood brought to bed of ease,
^he vaunting Poets found naught worth a pease,
^o put in preaze among the learned troop,
^ho began the streams of flowing wits to cease,
And sun-bright honor pend in shameful coope.
Ed. Spencer. -- These frugall patrons who begin
To scantle learning with a servile pay,
Make Poets think their negligence no sin,
The cold conceit of recompense does flay,
Their fiery fury when they should begin,
The Priest unpaid, can neither sing nor say,
Nor Poets sweetly write, except they meet
With some rewards for sermoning so sweet.
D. Lodge. -- Platoes Commonweal did pack
None of those Poets, who by Verse did make
The good men evil, and the wicked worse,
Whose pleasant words betrayed the public corse,
Nor those who in their songs good terms, always
Joined with fair theames: whilst thundering on the praise
Of God, just thunderer; whiles this holy speech,
Like Hermes did the way to strayers teach.
K. of Scots. Plenty.
-- Such is th'ffect of two much store,
It makes them loathe that which they loved before.
Chapter Middleton. The stately Eagle on his pitch does stand
And from the maine the fearful foul does suit,
Yet scorns to touch them lying on the land,
When he has felt the sweet of his delight,
But leaves the same a pray to every Kite,
With much we surfeit, Plenty makes us poor,
The wretched Indian scorns the golden Oar.
M. Drayton. Policy.
O policy scarce known in times that is past,
Or being known, yet least of most esteemd,
Thy providence most worthily shall last,
And in these latter days be better deemd.
L. Markham. -- War, honor does deserve,
Yet counsel in all Kingdoms pollicied,
Is far more worthy and more dignified:
For arms but in extremes do never serve,
To reconcile and punish such as swerue.
D. Lodge. He that will gain what policy does heed,
By Mercury must deal, or never speed.
M. Drayton. Grounded advice in danger seldom trips
The deadliest poison still can safely drink:
Foresight, stands fast where giddie rashness slides,
Wisdom seems blind, when eyed as a Lin^
Prevention speaks ill, but what he thinks,
The deadliest hate which smiles securely stands.
Idem. -- Policy religious habit wears.
Idem. No Policy to silence now adays.
Th. Storer. Our troubles kept abroad, although to cost,
A^e well bought out, for least by them is lost.
D. Lodge. It Is better far thy enemy to aband
Quite from thy bowers to a stranger soil,
Then he at home thee and thy country foil.
M. of M. The head that deemes to ouertop the sky,
Shall perish in his humane policy.
R. Green. How often have watching policy deuizde
A cunning clause which has himself surprizde?
How often has leaud fraud been set a flore
Of purpose that his goods might cut his throat?
Who builds on strength by policy is stripped,
Who hurts his wit by wit, is soonest tript.
D. Lodge. Endeavors polliticke take small effect,
That wants assistance from the heavenly word:
Beside foam help must wealth and state afford.
For judgment uttered by the mouth of want,
Is either partial or admired scant.
Th. Storer. A Clergy man his calling much impaires,
To meddle with the polliticke affairs.
Idem. Though Marius could begin and make the fray,
Yet Scaurus policy deserves the baye.
D. Lodge. Let Catulus with Pompey be comparde,
Or witty Cicero with Cateline:
And to prevent with policy divine,
That which the other ouer-rashly darde,
Deserves such fame as may not be imparde.
Idem. Say military virtues do require
A valiant heart, great strength and constancy:
The self like gifts in civil policy,
Are requisite for such as do aspire
To gain renown by counsel for their hire.
Idem. A little harm done to a great good end,
For lawful policy remains inacted,
The poisonous simple sometime is compacted
In a pure compound; being so applied
His venom in effect is purified.
W. Sha. Poverty.
O poverty, chief of the heavenly brood.
Ed. Fairfax. -- Such is the world, this cros-blis world of ours,
That virtue hardly hides her self in poor and desert bowers,
And such be best as seem not best, content exceeds a crown
VV. Warner. -- Powerful need (arts ancient dame, and keeper)
The early watch clock of the slothful sleeper.
I. Syluester. -- Lack is thrall and slave to every thing.
Th. Churchyard. Need is mistress of all exercise.
Th. Bastard. A scholars want exceeds a clownes content.
Idem. No danger but in hie estate, none err in mean degree.
W. Warner. -- Where imperious need does tyrannize,
The holy heat through worldly cares does pawse
Its soild with earthly thoughts and downward draws.
Hence come those dull conceits among the wise,
Which coy eard readers censure to proceed
From ignorance, whereas they grow by need.
D. Lodge. The citizens like ponned pikes, the lesser feeds the great,
The rich for meat seek stomachs, and the pore for stomach meat.
VV. Warner. Be as thou art, not as thou would, it will be as it is,
Learn then to lack, and learn to live, for crosses never miss.
Idem. Prayer.
Prayers heart and sides, and feet, are full of wings
(Like to The Arcadian which Jove's arrand brings)
Her body burning, from her lips does come
The smoke of Incense, and of sweet Amome.
I. Syluester. Heavens are propitious unto fearful prayers.
R. Green. Fasting (though faint) her face with joy she cheares,
In weakness strong, and young in aged years.
Quick health preserver, curbing Cupids fits,
Watchful, purge humors, and refining wits.
I. Syl. Praise.
This false painted deity called Laud,
Which makes us thirst for vain eternity:
Twixt our desires and hope, a cunning baud
Vshers the soul unto extremity:
And helped by slye insinuating fraud,
Couers her deeds in scrowles of piety.
I. Markham. The hope of praise makes men no travel shun,
To say an other day this have we done.
S. I. H. Who rightly climes the top of endless praise,
Regards not what the wise discourser says.
Th. Storer. -- From praise takes envy cause.
W. W. The chiefest praise is to embrace the man
In wealth and woe, with whom our love began.
G. Turb. The greatest praise, in greatest perils won.
Ed. Fairfax. The looser wantons sild are praisde of many,
Vice often finds friends but virtue sildome any.
M. Dray. In Athence where Themistocles remaind,
Though much he conquered by his regiments,
Yet Solon was more praised for his intents.
D. Lodge. Praise not the bewty of thy wife, though she of fame be spread,
For Gyges moved so, did graft on Caudales his head.
VV. Warner. Providence.
O Providence the conduct to our life,
The ground of virtue, hostile foe to sin:
That re^^est Towers, and appeasest strife:
Thou gatherest all dispearsed exiles in.
Thou that inuentest laws against man and wife.
Thou mistress unto ancient discipline.
Thou that bear heaven and nature round about thee:
That make all things, nothing being without thee.
I. Markham. Pride.
Of grisly Pluto she the daughter was,
And sad Proserpina the queen of hell:
Yet does she think her peerlesse worth to pass,
That parentage with pride so does she swell,
And thundering Jove that high in heaven does dwell:
And weeld the world, she claimed for her sire.
Or if that any else does Jove excel,
For to the highest she does still aspire,
Or if ought higher were, then that does it desire.
-- And proud Lucifera men did her call.
Ed. Spencer. O pride, the shelfe close shrouded in the port
Of this life's Ocean, drowning all resort.
D. Lodge. Pride makes her rownds, for she has never end,
And sonnets, for she never leaves her noise:
She makes her dumps if any thing offend,
And to her Idoll-selfe with warbling voice
Sings Hymns and Anthems of especial choice.
And yet prides quiuer's put to silence clean,
Wanting a base, a tenor, and a mean.
Th. Storer. The winged giant lofty staring pride,
That in the clouds her brauing breast does hide.
I. Syl. Pride is the root of ill in every state,
The sourse of sin, the very fiend his fee:
The head of hell, the bough, the branch, the tree.
From which do spring and sprout such fleshly seeds,
As nothing else but moan and mischief breeds.
G. Gascoigne. Pride draws on vengeance, vengeance has no mean.
-- Nemesis has every hour reserved
A plague for pride that has from justice sweru'd.
D. Lodge. -- Such is the nature still of hautie pride,
Can nothing less then others praise abide.
M. of M. -- When once pride but points toward his fall.
He bears a sword to wound himself withal.
M. Drayton. -- Lofty pride that dwells
In towred courts, is often in shepherds cells.
Chapter Marlowe. A proud man may his own musition be,
His heads devise makes pauins to his heart:
This heart with lips and pleasures daunceth free,
All but the measures framing every part
Like organis worthy of so sweet an art.
His thoughts plays marches to his vaulting mind,
And memory his Recorder stands behind.
Th. Storer. Gay without good, is good hearts greatest loathing.
Ed. Spencer. Princes.
The very place wherein a Prince appears
Discernes his presence, makes his chamber blessed:
Like Planets are they known within their spheres,
Or as Halcion with her luring breast:
Demonstrates wind from wind, and East from West.
This is a certain nature of estate,
It cannot masked be, nor change his gate.
Th. Storer. A Princes safety lies in loving people,
His fort is Justice (free from stratageme)
Without the which strong citadels are feeble,
The subjects love is won by loving them.
Of loving them no oppression is the trial,
And no oppression makes them ever loyal.
I. Syl. To be a Prince, is more then be a man.
S. Daniell. -- Princes are the glass, the school, the book
where subjects eyes do live, do read, do look.
vv. warner. Howbeit subjects falsely judge their Princes blessed are,
when both of peace and perils they contain the common care.
And yet for this they grudgingly from pounds a penny spare.
Idem. Princes in subjects wro^gs must deem themselves abusd
S. Phil. Sidney. Private men sound not the hearts of Princes,
Whose actions often bear contrary pretenses.
S. Daniell. Princes like Lions never will be tamde,
A private man may yield and care not how,
But greater hearts will break before they bow.
Idem. The Princes arms are stretched from shore to shore.
M. Drayton. -- As the pawnce does circle with the Sun,
So to the vice, or virtue of the Prince, are people won.
W. Warner. Good Princes sorrow more in punishing,
Then evil subjects in committing sin.
Chapter Mid. Even as defaults will more conspicuous be
How much the offender greater is esteemd:
So virtue in a princely body seen,
Lamp-like and far more excellently deemd,
That in such vinitie its seldom seen.
In mutual approach of highest bliss,
Whether more graced each by other is.
Th. Storer. O happy Princes whose foresight and care
Can win the love of writers in such sort
As Caesar's did, so as you need not dread
The lake of Laethe after ye be dead.
S. I.H. -- Princes never do themselves more wrong
Then when they hinder justice or prolong.
Idem. In whose high breast may Justice build her bower
When Princes hearts wide open lie to wrong?
G. Gascoigne. We imitate the greater powers,
The princes manners, fashion ours:
The example of their light regarding,
Vulgar loosenes much incenses,
Vice vncontroll'd, grows wide enlarging,
Kings small faults be great offenses.
S. Daniell. Often for the pleasure of a prince go many things awry.
VV. Warner. Princes like sins be evermore in sight,
Ill see the clouds which do eclips their light.
Yet they which light all down from their skies,
See not the clouds offending others eyes.
And deem their noonetide is desirde of all,
When all exspect clear changes by their fall.
M. Dray. Princes have but their titles for their glories,
An outward honor for an inward toil:
And for unfelt imagination
They often feel a world of restless cares.
So that betwixt their titles and low names
Their's nothing differs but the outward fame.
W. Sha. Seld shall you see the ruin of a prince,
But that the people eke like brunt do bear:
And old records of ancient times long since
From age to age, yea almost every where,
With proof has glutted every year.
Thus by the follies of the princes heart,
The bounden subject still receives smart.
G. Gascoigne. Quietness.
The wind is great upon the highest hills,
The quiet life is in the dale below:
Who tread on y^e shall slide against their wills,
They want not cares that curious arts would know.
Who lives at ease and can content him so
Is perfect wise, and sets us all to school:
Who hates this lore, may well be called a fool.
M. of M. -- Quietness the only nurse or ease.
M. Dray. Wellwot I sooth they say that say, more quiet nights and days.
The shepherd sleeps and wakes, then he whose cattle he does graze*
VV. Warner. Reason.
-- Logic, reason in a dance
(Reason the Cynosure and bright load-starre
In this worlds sea) t'auoyd the rock of chance,
For vith close following and continuance,
O^e reason does another so ensue,
A in conclusion still the dance i^ true.
I. Dauies. -- Reason should have ability
To h^ld these worldly things in such proportion,
As lethem come or go with even facility.
S. Phil. Sidney. -- ^uery thing that is begun with reason
Will c^^e by ready means unto his end,
But things miscounselled, must needs miswend.
Ed. Spencer. Reason by prudence in her function,
Had wont to tutor all out action,
Ayding with precepts of Philosophy
Our feebled natures imbecillitie,
But now affection with concupiscence,
Have got ore reason chief pre-eminence.
I. Marston. What war so cruel, or what siege so sore
As that which strong affections do apply
Against the fort of reason evermore,
To bring the soul into captivity?
Their force is fairer through infirmity
Of the frail flesh, relenting to their rage,
And exercise most bitter tirannie,
Upon the parts brought into their bondage;
No wretchedness is like to sinful villainy.
Ed. Spencer. But in a body which does freely yield
His parts to reasons rule obedient,
And lets not that ought the scepter weeld,
All happy peace and goodly government.
Is settled there in sure establishment.
Idem. He that is of reasons skill bereft,
And wants the stuff of wisdom him to stay,
Is like a subject midst of tempest left,
Withouten helm or pilot her to sway,
Full sad and dreadful is that ships event:
So is the man that want intendment,
Idem. Reason does teach us that the care is vain,
For ill once past which cannot turn again.
Th. watson. If reason bandie with opinion,
Opinion winnes in the conclusion:
For if a man be once opinionate,
Millions of reasons will extenuate
His forced malice: conference
Cannot assuage opinions insolence.
But let opinion once lay battery
To reasons fort, she will turn heresy
Or superstition, wily politist,
But she will win those rampi^es which resist.
Ed. Gilpin. -- Naught can reason avail in heavenly matters.
S. Phil* Sid. She whom sauns reason men have reason hight,
Since first in ^ire the Lord the air inclosde:
In air the sea, in sea the earth disposde
Has with mild faith maintaind continual fight.
I. Syluester. -- The eye of reason is with raging ybent.
Ed. Sp. Religion.
Sacred Religion, mother of form and fear.
S. Daniell. O that this power from everlasting given,
The great alliance made twixt God and us,
The intelligence that earth does hold with heaven.
Sacred Religion, O that thou must thus
Be made to smooth our unjust vneuin,
Brought from above earths quarrel to discuss.
Must men beguile our souls to win our wills,
And make our zeal the furtherer of ills?
Idem. No one quails religion more then foundring presbitie,
Each s^t impugning order, says and does his infancy.
W. Warner. What may not mischief of mad man abuse?
Religions cloak some one to vice does choose.
And makes God protector of his crime,
O monstrous world, well ought we wish thy fine.
M. of M. -- English men, nay Christian men, not only seem profane,
But man to man, as beast to beast hold civil duties vain.
Yea pulpits some like pedlers packs yield forth as men affect:
And what a Synod should conclude, a souter does correct.
The rude thus bos^ing literature, one sin begets another
And grossly though a schism, yet has each Schismatic his brother
Mean while the learned want their meed, and none with profit hears,
The tedious dolt whose artlesse tongue does preach to very ears.
VV. Warner. -- Since pure religion does install
Learned professors, Prelates of deserts,
Let them aspire and reac instructed hearts
Against the base bestowers of church livings,
That use their graunts in tellings, not in giuings.
Th. Storer. Repentance.
Repentance makes two rivers of her eyes,
Her humble face dares scant behold the skies:
Her broken breast is beaten blew and black,
Her tender fleshis rent wih rugged sack,
With sorrows snowes her hoary waxen head,
With ashes pale, and dust is ouerspread.
I. Syluister. Repentance, hope, and soft humility,
Do flank the wings of faiths triumphant carre,
Idem. Repentance,
A salve, a comfort, and a cordial,
He that has her, the keys of heaven has,
This is the guide, this is the port, the path.
M. Drayton. O happy they that keep within their measure,
To turn their course in time, and sound retreit,
Before that wit which late Repentance tought,
Were better never had then so dear bought.
S. I. H. Sins have their salues, repentance can do much.
R. Green. -- To be penitent for faults, with it a paron bears.
W. W. Then hope we health when sin is left repentantly in heart,
Add then new life, and we to God, God does to us conuart.
Idem. Yet stay thy feet in murders ugly gate,
Ill comes to soon, repentance often too late.
M. Dr, Their lives no man so settled in content,
That has not daily whereof to repent.
D. Lodge. We see what is good, and thereto we consent,
But yet we choose the worse and soon repent.
S. Daniell. Rest.
-- What so strong,
But wanting rest, will also want of might?
The sun that measures heaven all day long,
At night does bath his steeds, The Ocean waves among.
Ed. Spencer. Untroubled night they say, gives counsel best.
Idem. Who long has rested cannot run apace,
The fettered horse is hindmost in the chase.
Revenge.
-- Next within the entry of the gate,
Sat fell revenge, gnashing her teeth with ire,
Devising means how she may vengeance take,
Never in rest till she have her desire.
But frets within so far forth with the fire
Of wreaking flames, that now determines she,
To die by death, or vengd by death to be.
M. Sackuill. O fearful frowning Nemesis,
Daughter of justice most severe,
That art the worlds great arbitresse,
And Queen of causes reigning here.
S. Daniell. Fierce Nemesis mother of fate and change,
Sword bearer of the eternal providence.
Idem. -- Nemesis whose hasty revenging
Hands are ever at hand: whose mind is mutable always,
At miseries laughing, at men's felicity grudging.
A. France. -- Nemesis hie mistress of revenge,
That with the scourge keeps all the world in awe.
Th. Dekkar. The mind by wrong is made a malcontent,
And clouds her shine in pleaslesse melancholy,
Her holy humors are in passion spent,
Till by revenge she is set at liberty.
For it is revenge that satisfaction brings
To injured minds, and to oppressed things.
I. Markham. The soul is like a boystrous working sea,
Swelling in billows for disdain of wrongs,
And tumbling up and down from bay to bay,
Proves great with child of indignations.
Yet with revenge is brought to calm allay,
Disburdend of the pain thereto belongs.
Her bowers are turned to bright-fac't sunshine braues,
And fair content plays gently on her waves.
Idem. Revenge dies not, rigor begets new wrath,
And blood has never glory, mercy has.
S. D. Revenge is mine, says he that sits on hie.
Th. Achelly. O dire revenge when thou in time art rakte,
From out the ashes that preserve thee long,
And lightly from thy cinders art awakte,
Fuel to freedom, and revived with wrong:
How soon from sparks the greatest flames art sprung?
Which does by nature to his top aspire,
Whose massy greatness once kept down his fire.
M. Drayton. Revenge in tears does ever wash his hands,
Idem. Who so does threat means of revenge does loose.
S. D. Had I revenged been of every harm,
My coat had never kept me half so warm.
G. Gascoigne. Though vengeance come behind, and her foot sore,
She ouertakes the offender going before.
Riches. Description of Mammon.
At last he came unto a gloomy glade,
Covered with boughs and shades from heaven light:
Whereas he sitting found in secret shade,
An uncouth, saluage, and uncivil wight,
Of grisly hue, and foul ill-favored sight:
His face with smoke was tand, and eyes were bleard,
His head and beard with sowte were all bedight,
His coal black hands did seem to have been seard,
In smith-fiers spitting forge, and nails like claws appeard.
His Iron coat all ouergrowne with rust,
Was underneath enueloped with gold,
Whose glittering gloss darkened with filthy dust
Well it appeared to have been of old,
A work of rich entraile and curious molde,
Wouen with Anticks and wild Imagerie,
And in his lap a mass of coin he told
And turned vpside down to feed his eye,
A covetous desire with his huge treasury:
And round about him lay on every side,
Great heaps of gold that never could be spent,
Of Mulcibers devouring element:
Some others were nere driven and distent
Into great Ingoes and to wedges square,
Some in round plates without monument:
But some were stamped, and in their end all bare,
The Anticke shapes of Kings and Keysars, strange and rare.
Ed. Spencer. Mammon. -- I riches read
And deem them root of all disquietnes:
First got with guile, and then preserved with dread,
And after spent with pride and lauishnes:
Leaving behind them grief and heaviness.
Infinite mischiefs of them do arise,
Strife and debate, blood-shead and bitterness,
Outrageous wrong, and hellish couetize,
That noble heart as great dishonor does despise.
Idem. -- It Is but a little slide
That does the house of riches from her mouth divide.
Before the door sat selfe-consuming care,
Day and night keeping wary watch and ward:
For fear least fotce or fraud should unaware
Break in and spoil the treasure there ingard.
Ne would he suffer sleep once thitherward
Approach, albe his drowsy den were next,
For next to death is sleep to be compared,
Therefore his house is unto his annexed,
Here sleep, there riches, and hell gate them both betwixt.
Ed. Spencer. Well may a rich man's hearse want tears, but heirs he shall not
miss,
To whom that he is dead at length no little joy it is.
vv. warner. Good is no good, but if it be spend,
God gives good for no other end.
Ed. Spencer. Vessels of brass, often handled brightly shine,
What difference between the richest mine
And basest earth, but use? for both not used
Are of little worth: then treasure is abusde
When misers keep it, being put to lone,
In time it will return us two for one.
Chapter Marlowe. Gold is a suitor, never took repulse,
It carries Palm with it, (where e're it goes)
Respect, and observation; it vncouers
The knottie heads of the most surly Grooms,
Enforcing iron doors to yield it way,
Were they as strong ram'd up as Aetna gates.
It bends the hams of Gossip Vigilance,
And makes her supple feet, as swift as wind.
It thawes the frostiest, and most stiff disdain:
Muffles the clearness of Election,
Strains fancy unto foul Apostacy.
And strikes the quickest-sighted Judgment blind.
Then why should we despair? despair? Away:
Where Gold's the Motive, women have no Nay.
B. Johnson. Wealth in this age will scarcely look on merit.
Idem. -- Gentry does small avail,
And virtue less, if lands and riches fail.
S. I. H. Sacrilege.
The common text shall have a common gloss,
Receipts in parcels, shall be paid in gross.
This doctrine preached who from the church does take
At last shall trebble restitution make.
M. Dray. Secrecy.
-- Secrecy the crown of a true Lover.
M. Drayton. -- Hard it is to prove
By sight or speech, what bides in secret breast.
S. I. H. -- What can so secret be,
But out of it will when we do least suspect?
For posts have ears, and walls have eyes to see,
Dumb beasts and birds have toongs ill to detect.
Idem. Silence.
Dumb Silence, sworn attendant on black night,
Thou that have power to close up murmures iawe:
To stop the barking of the watchful hound,
And charm the gagling of those waking foul,
That saved Jove's Capitol, mild Queen of rest.
Th. Dekkar. Soft Silence, and submisse obedience,
Both linkt together never do depart:
Both gifts of God, nor gotten but from thence,
Both girlonds of his saints, against their foes offense.
Ed. Spencer. -- Silence wisdoms mother.
S. Phil. Sidney. Silence does seem the mask of base oppression.
Idem. Senses.
Although things sensible be numberless,
But only five the Senses organs be:
And in those five all things their forms express,
Which we can touch, taste, feel, or hear or see.
I. Dauies. Man's eye makes what is seen to seem so fair,
Man's ear makes what is heard to sound so sweet:
His touch by softness every sense is meet
For his own object.
Idem. Sight.
-- The two eyes which have the seeing power,
Stand as one watchman, spy, or Sentinel:
Being placed aloft within the heads hie tower,
And though both seeing, yet both but one thing tell.
Idem. -- Nine things to sight required are,
The power to see, the light, the visible thing:
Being not too small, too thin, too nigh, too far,
Clear space; and time the form distinct to bring.
Idem. Like as a glass is an inanimate eye,
And outward forms imbraceth outwardly,
So is the eye an amimate glass that shows
In forms without us.
G. Chapman. What we behold is censured by the eyes,
Where both deliberate the love is slight:
Who ever loved, that loved not at first sight?
Chapter Marlowe. I trow that countenance cannot lie,
Whose thoughts are legible in the eye.
M. Roydon. Often the eye mistakes, the brain being troubled.
W. Sha. All amorous eyes observing form, thinks parts obscured best.
vv. warner. A greedy eye will have a greedy hand.
D. Lodge. -- A monstrous rabblement
Of foul misshapen wights, of which some were
Headed like Owls, with beakes uncomely bent:
Others like dogs, others like gryphons dreare,
And some had wings, and some had claws to tear.
And every one of them had Linceus eyes,
And every one did bows and arrows bear.
All those were lawless lusts, corrupt envy,
And covetous aspects, all cruel enemies.
Those same against the bulwark of the sight
Did lay strange siege and battailous assault,
Ne once did yield it respit day or night,
But soon as Titan began his head exault,
And soon again as he his light withhault
Their wicked engines they against it bent:
That is each thing by which the eyes may fault.
But to them all more huge and violent,
Beauty and money, they that bulwark shroudly rent.
Ed. Spencer. Hearing.
Ears office is the troubled air to take,
Which in their mazes forms a sound or noise,
Whereof her self does true distinction make.
The wickets of the soul are placed on hie,
Because all sounds do lightly mount aloft:
And that they may not pierce too violently,
They are delaid with turns and windings often.
I. Dauies. As streams which with their winding banks do play,
Stopped by their creekes run softly through the plain:
So in the ears labyrinth the voice does stay,
And does with easy notice touch the brain.
Idem. It is the slow'st yet the daintiest sense,
For even the ears of such as have no skill,
Perceive a discord and conceive offense,
And knowing not what is good, yet find the ill.
Idem. These conduit pipes of knowledge the mind,
But the other three attend the body still:
For by their services the soul does find
What things are to the body good or ill.
I. Dauies. The second bulwark was the hearing sense,
Against which the second troop designment makes
Deformed creatures, in strange difference,
Some having heads like hearts, some like to snakes,
Some wild like boares, late rowz'd out of the brakes.
Slanderous reproaches and foul infamies,
Leasings, backbitings, and vainglorious crake.
Bad counsels, praises and false flatteries,
All those against that first did send their batteries.
Ed. Spencer. Smelling.
Next, in the nosthrils she does use the Smell,
As God the breath of life in them did give:
So makes he now his power in them to dwell,
To judge all aires whereby we breathe and hue.
This sense is also mistress of an art,
Which to soft people sweet petfumes does sell:
Through this dear art does little good impart,
Since they smell best that does of nothing smell.
And ye good sents do purify the brain,
Awake the fancy, and the wits refine:
Hence old devotion in advise did ordain,
To make men's spirits more apt to thoughts divine.
I. Dauies. Likewise that same third fort that is the smell,
Of that third troop was cruelly assaide:
Whose hideous shapes were like to fiends of hell.
Some like to hounds, some like to apes dismaide.
Some like to puttocks all in plumes arraide,
All shapte according their conditions,
For by those ougly forms werren portraide
Foolish delights and fond abusions,
Which do that sense besiege with light illusio^s.
Ed. Sp. Tasting
The bodies life with meats and air is fed,
Therefore the soul does use the tasting power,
In veins which through the tongue and pallat spread.
Distinguish every relish sweet and sower.
This is the bodies nurse: but since man's wit
Found the Art of cookery to delight his sense,
More bodies are consumde and killed with it,
Then with the sword, famine, or pestilence.
I. Dauies. -- That fourth band which cruel battery bent
Against the fourth bulwark, that is the taste:
Was as the rest, a grisly rabblement,
Some mouth like greedy Estriges, some fac'st
Like loathly Toades, some fashioned in the waste
Like swine, for so deserved his luxury,
Surfeit, misdiet, and unthrifty warke,
Vain feasts, and idle superfluity,
All those this senses fort assail incessantly.
Ed. Sp. Feeling.
Lastly, the feeling power which is life's root,
Through every living part it self does shed,
By sinews which extend from head to foot,
And like a net all over the body spread.
Much like a subtle spider which does sit
In middle of her web which spreddeth wide:
If ought do touth the outmost thread of it,
She feels it instantly on every side.
I. Dauies. By touch the first pure qualities we learn,
Which quicken all things, hot, cold, moist, and dry:
By touch, hard, soft, rough, swoot, we do discern,
By touch, sweet pleasure and sharp pain we try.
These are the outward instruments of sense.
These are the guardes which every one must pass,
Ere it approach the minds intelligence,
Or touch the fantasy, wits looking glass.
Idem. But the fifth troop most horrible of hue,
And fierce of force was dreadful to report:
For some like snailes, some did like spiders show,
And some like ougly vrchins thick and short,
Cruelly they assailed that fifth fort*
Armed with darts of sensual delight,
With strings of carnal lust and strong effect.
Of feeling pleasures, with which day and night
Against the same fifth bulwark they continued fight.
Ed. Spencer. Sin.
First we do taste the fruit, then see our sin.
S. Daniell. Shame follows sin, disgrace is daily given,
Impiety will out, never so closely done,
No walls can hide us from the eye of heaven,
For shame must end what wickedness begun,
Forth breaks reproach when we least think thereon.
Idem. Like as diseases common cause of death,
Bring danger most when least they prick and smart:
Which is a sign they have expulst the breath
Of lively heat which does defend the heart,
Even so such sins as felt are on no part,
Have conquered grace, and by their wicked ure,
So killed the soul that it can have no cure.
I. Hig. M. of M. Sins harvest never fails, but grace has death.
D. Lodge. Cover thou fire never so close within,
Yet out it will, and so will secret sin.
M. of M. It doubles sin if finely sin we practice to prevent.
W.W. Man may securely sin, but safely never.
B. Ihonson. What wight on earth can void of fault be found?
What Saint is that who does not sin sometime?
Tweene good and bad this difference sole is found,
That good men sin but seld, and mend betime.
The bad man (making scruple none nor question)
Yields willingly to every leaud suggestion.
S. I. H. Sins often assaid, ere thought to be no sin,
So soileth sin, the soul it sinketh in.
M. of M. Shame leaves us by degrees, not at first coming,
For nature checks a new offense with loathing.
But use of sin does make it seem as nothing.
S. Daniell. What though our sins go brave and better clad?
They are as those in rags, as base, as bad.
Idem. The spot is foul, though by a Monarch made,
Kings cannot privilege a sin forbade.
Idem. -- Sin ever must
Be torturde with the rack of his own frame,
For he that holds no faith, shall find no trust,
But sowing wrong, is sure to reap the same.
Idem. -- Cunning sin being clad in virtues shape,
Flies much reproof, and many storms does escape.
D. Lodge. -- Place for people, people place, and all for sin decay.
vv. warner. To punish sin is good, it is no nay,
They wrecke not sin, but merit wrecke for sin
The fathers fault that wreake upon the kin.
M. of M. The sin to which a man by love is driven,
So much the rather ought to be forgiven.
S. I. H. Slander.
Her face was ugly, and her mouth distort,
Foming with poison round about her gils,
In which her cursed tongue full sharp and short,
Appeard like Aspes sting, that closely kills,
Or cruelly does wound, whom so she wills,
A distaffe in her other hand she had,
Upon the which she little spins but spils,
And feign to weaue false tales and leasings bad
To throw amongst the gods which others had dispred.
Ed. Sp. Her nature is, all goodness to abuse,
And causeless crimes continually to frame:
With which she guiltless persons may abuse,
And stole away the crown of her good name,
Ne ever knight so bold, ne ever dame
So chaste and loyal lived, but she would strive
With forged cause, them falsely to defame.
Ne ever thing was done so well alive,
But she with blame would blot, and of due praise deprive.
Idem. All like the stings of Asps, that kill with smart,
Her spightfull words do pierce and wound the inner part.
Idem. Foul canker of fair virtuous action,
Vile blaster of the fresh bloomes here on earth,
Enuies abhorred child detraction.
I. Marston. Happy is he that lives in such a sort,
That need not fear the tongues of false report.
E. of S. The vulgar tongues are armed evermore
With slanderous brute, to blemish the renown
Of virtuous dames; which though at first it spring,
Of slender cause, yet does it swell so fast,
As in short space it fills every ear
With swift report of undeserved blame.
G. Gascoigne. -- It ever has been known,
They other virtues scorn that doubt their own.
S. Daniell. No plaster heales a deadly poisoned sore,
No secret hid where slander keeps the door.
M. Drayton. Against bad tongues goodness cannot defend her,
Those be most free from faults, they least will spare,
But prate of them whom they have scantly known,
Judging their humors to be like their own.
S. I. H. Slander once set on foot though false, is talked in every street.
VV. Warner. No wound with warlike hand of enemy
Inflict with dint of sword so sore does light,
As does the poisonous sting which infamy
Infuseth in the name of noble wight.
It never can recured be again,
Ne all the skill which that immortal spright
Of Podalyrius did in it retain,
Can remedy such hurts: such hurts are hellish pain.
Ed. Sp. A sprightly wit disdaines detraction.
I. Marston. Backbiting pens, and pens that sooth up sin,
^nuious the one, the other clawbacks binne.
I. Syl. Sleep.
Amidst a dark thick wood there is a cave,
Whose entrance is with Iuie ouerspread,
They have no light within, nor none they crave,
^ere Sleep does couch her ouerdrowsie head,
and sloth lies by that seems the gout to have.
and Idleness not so well taught as fed,
^hey point forgetfulness the gate to keep,
that none come out or in to hinder Sleep.
^he knows no means of men, ne none will learn,
their messages she list not understand:
She knows no business does her concern,
Silence is Sentinel of all this band,
And unto those he coming does discern
To come too near, he beckens with his hand,
He treads soft, his shoes are made of felt,
His garment short, and girded with a belt.
S. I. H. By care lay heavy sleep, the cousen of death,
Flat on the ground, and still as any stone:
A very corpse, save yielding forth a breath,
Small keep took he whom fortune frownd on,
Or whom she lifted up into the throne
Of high renown: but as a living death,
So dead alive, of life he drew the breath.
M. Sack. A drowsy head to earth by dull desire
Draws down the soul that should to heaven aspire.
Writing these later lines, weary well-nie
Of sacred Pallas, pleasing labor dear,
Mine humble chin saluteth often my breast,
With an Ambrosian deawe mine eyes possessed
By peece-meale close; all moving powers die still,
From my dull fingers drops my fainting quill.
Down in my sloath-bound bed again I shrink,
And in dark Laethe all deep cares I sink.
I. Syl. Solitariness.
Sweet solitary life thou true repose,
Wherein the wise contemplate heaven aright,
In thee no dread of war or worldly foes,
In thee no pomp seduceth mortal sight.
In thee no wanton ears to win with words,
Nor lurking toies which silly life affords.
D.L. Soldiers.
-- O Soldiers envy near ally to Kings
Maiesticke humor, careful jealous thought:
Thou, which awak'st us from ignoble things,
A passion nearest to a godhead brought.
Only indefinite: to whom none brings
Limit or bound, thou greater then our thought,
Who holds thee, holds a power to make him able,
Who looses then, becomes most miserable.
I. Mark, None is so poor of sense and eine,
To whom a soldier does not shine.
G. Chap. No elegancie can bewtifie
A shameless lump of gluttony:
His heart sweet Cupids tents reiects,
That only meat and drink affects.
O Flora all men's intellects,
Know soldiers power such respects,
Mere helps for need his mind suffices,
Dull sleep and surfets he despises:
Loves trumpe his temples exercises,
Courage and love his life compriseth.
Idem. Soul.
-- He that spread the skies
And fixed the earth, first formed the soul in man,
This true Prometheus first made men of earth,
And shead in him a beam of heavenly fire,
Now in their mothers wombes before their birth,
Does in all sons of men their souls inspire.
And as Minerua is in fables fainde
From Jove, without an other to proceed,
So our true Jove without an others aid,
Does daily millions of Mineruaes breed.
I Dauies. Like as the sun above the light does bring,
Though we behold it in the air below,
So from the eternal light the soul does spring,
Though in the body she her powers do show.
Idem. The soul a substance and a body is,
Which God himself does in the body make,
Which makes the man; or every man from this
The nature of a man and name does take.
And though the spirit be to the body knit,
As an apt mean her power to exercise:
Which are, life, motion, sense, and will and wit,
Yet she suruiues, although the body dies.
She is a substance and a real thing,
Which has it self an actual working might,
Which neither from the senses power does spring,
Nor from the bodies humors tempered right.
She is a vine which does no propping need,
To make her spread her self, or spring upright,
She is a star whose beams do not proceed
From any sin, but from a native light.
Idem. She is a spirit and an heavenly influence,
Which from the fountain of Gods spirit does flow,
She Is a spirit, yet not like air nor wind,
Nor like the spirits about the heart or brain,
Nor like the spirits which Alchimists definde,
When they in every thing seek gold in vain.
Idem. -- To show her powerful deity,
Her sweet Endimion more to beautify,
Into his soul the goddess does infuse,
The fiery Nature of an heavenly Muse:
Which the spirit laboring by the mind,
Partaketh of celestial things by kind:
For why the soul being divine alone,
Exempt from gross and vild corruption,
Of heavenly secrets incomprehensible,
Of which the dull flesh is not sensible*
And by one only powerful faculty,
Yet governs a multiplicitie,
Being essential, uniform in all,
Not to be severed or diuiduall:
But in her function holds her estate,
By powers divine in her ingenerate:
And so by inspiration conceiueth,
What heaven to her by divination breaths.
M. Drayton. Like as the soul does rule the earthly mass,
And all the service of the body frame,
So love of soul does love of body pass,
No less then perfect gold surmounts the meanest brass,
Ed. Spencer. Every good motion that the soul awakes,
A heavenly figure sees from whence it takes,
That sweetelesse bloome which by power of kind,
Forms like it self an image of the mind,
And in our faith the operations be,
Of that diuinesse which by faith we see,
Which never erres but accidentally,
By our frail fleshes in becilitie,
By each temptation ouer-apt to slide,
Except our spirit becomes our bodies guide.
For as our bodies prisons be the towers,
So to our souls these bodies be of ours,
Whose fleshly walls hinder that heavenly light,
As these stone walls deprive our wished sight.
Idem. -- As Phoebus throws
His beams abroad, though he in clouds be closed
Still glauncing by them till she find opposed
A loose and rorid vapor, that is fit
T'euent his searching beams, and uses it
To form a twenty colored eye,
Cast in a circle round about the sky.
So when our fiery soul, our bodies star,
(That ever is in motion circular)
Conceiues a form in seeking to display it,
Through all our cloudy parts it does convey it:
Forth at the eye, as the most pregnant place,
And that reflects it round about the face.
Idem. Like as the moisture which the thirsty earth
Sucks from the Sea to fill her empty veins,
From out her womb at last does take a birth,
And runs a nymph along the grassie plains:
Long does she stay, as loath to leave the land,
From whose soft side she first did issue make,
She tastes all places, turns to every hand,
Her flowing banks unwilling to forsake,
Yet nature so her streams does lead and carry,
As that her course does make no final stay,
Till she her self unto the Ocean marry,
Within whose watrie bosom first she lay.
Even so our soul within this earthly mould,
The spirit does secretly infuse,
Because at first she does the earth behold,
And only this material world she viewes.
At first our mother earth she holds dear,
And does embrace the world and worldly things,
She flies close to the ground and houers here,
And mounts not up with her celestial wings.
Yet under heaven she cannot light on ought,
That with her heavenly nature does agree,
She cannot rest, she cannot fix her thought,
She cannot in this world contented be.
I. Dauies. When the soul finds here no true content,
And like Noah's Dove, can no sure footing take,
She does return from whence she first was sent,
And flies to him that first her wings did make.
Idem. Heaven waxes old, and all the spheres above
Shall one day faint, and their swift motion stay,
And time it self shall cease in time to move,
Only the soul suruiues and lives for aye.
Idem. When as the soul is drowned once in vice,
The sweet of sin makes hell a Paradise*
M, Drayton, ^s is the fable of the Lady fair,
Which for her lust was turnde into a cow,
When thirsty to a stream she did repair,
And saw her self transformde she knew not how,
At first she startles, and she stands amazd,
And loathes the watery glass wherein she gazd:
At last for terror she from thence does fly,
And shunnes it still, though she for thirst do die.
Even so man's soul, which did Gods image bear,
And was at first fair, good, and spotless pure,
Since with her sins her beauties blotted were,
Does of all sights her own sight least endure:
For even at first reflecting she espies
Such strange Chimeraes and such monsters there,
Such toys, such antickes, and such vanities,
As she retyres, and shrinks for shame and fear.
I. Dauis. Even as the man loves least at home to be,
That has a sluttish house haunted with spirits,
So she impatient her own faults to see,
Turns from her self, and in strange things delights*
Idem. -- It Is a sacred cure
To salve the souls dread wounds, omnipotent
That nature is, that cures the impotent
Even in a moment, sure grace is infusde
By divine favor, nor by actions used:
Which is as permanent as heavens bliss,
To them that have it, then no habit is.
I. Marston. That learned Father which so firmly proves
The soul of man immortal and divine,
And does the several offices define.
Anima. Gives her that name as she the body moves.
Amor. Then is she love embracing charity.
Animus. Moving a will in us, it is the mind.
Men's. Retaining knowledge still the same in kind.
Memoria. As intellectual it is the memory.
Ratio. In judging, Reason only is her name.
Sensus. In speedy apprehension it is Sense.
Conscientia. In right or wrong men call her Conscience.
Spiritus. The Spirit, when to Godward it does inflame.
These of the soul the several functions be.
M. Drayton. Like as two bellows blown turn by turn,
By little and little make cold coals to burn,
And then their fire inflamde with glowing heat,
An iron bar which on the Anuile beat,
Seems no more iron, but flies almost all,
In hissing sparkles and quicke-bright cinders small.
So the worlds soul should in our soul inspire,
The Eternal force of an eternal fire,
And then our soul (as form) breathe in our corse,
Her countlesse numbers, and heavens turned force,
Wherewith our bodies beauty beautified,
Should like our (deathlesse soul) have never died.
I. Syluester. Of Sorrow.
In black all clad there fell before my face,
A ptiteous wight whom woe had all forewast,
Forth on her eyes the cristall tears out brast,
And sighing fore her hands she wrung and fold,
Tare all her hair, that ruth was to behold;
Her body small, sore withered and fore spent,
As is the stalk that summers drought oppressed,
Her welked face with woeful tears besprent:
Her color pale (as it seemed) her best,
In woe and plaint reposed was her rest:
And as the stone that drops of water wears,
So dented were her cheeks with fall of tears:
Her eyes swollen with flowing streams afloate,
Wherewith her looks thrown up full pitiously,
Her forcelesse hands together often she smote,
With doleful shrikes that ecchoed in the sky,
Whose plaints such sighs did strait accompany,
That in my doom was never man did see
A wight but half so woe-begone as she.
Sorrow I am, in endless sorrows pained,
Among the furies in the infernal lake,
Where Pluto God of hell so grisly black,
Does hold his throne and Laethes deadly taste,
Does riue remembrance of each thing fore-past.
M. Sackuile. Sorrows first leader of this furious crowde,
Muffled all over in a sable cloud,
Old before age, afflicted night and day,
Her face with wrinkles warped every way,
Creeping in corners, where she sits and vies;
Sighs from her heart, tears for her blubbered eyes,
Accompanied with selfe-consuming care,
With weeping pity, thought, and mad despair,
That bears about her burning coals and cords,
Aspes, poisons, pistols, haulters, knives, and swords,
Foul squinting envy, that selfe-eating elfe,
Through others leanness fatting up her self,
Joining in mischief, feeding but with langour,
And bitter tears, her toad-like swelling anger,
And jealousy that never sleeps for fear,
(Suspicious flea still nibling in her ear)
That leaves repast and rest, near pinde and blind,
With seeking what she would be loath to find.
I. Siluester. Two inward vulturs, sorrow and disdain.
Sorrow misfortunes son, dispayres foul fire.
Ed. Fairfax. Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
Makes the night morning, and the noone tide night,
W. Shakespeare. Sorrow is still unwilling to give over.
S. Daniell. Sorrow grows senseless when too much she bears.
M. Dr. Sad sorrow like a heavy ringing bell,
Once set in ringing, with his own weight goes,
Then little strength rings out the doleful knel.
W. Sh. It is some ease our sorrows to reveal,
If they to whom we shall impart our woes,
Seem but to feel a part of what we feel.
And meet us with a sigh but at a close.
S. Daniell. Sighs are the ease calamity affoords,
Which serve for speech when sorrow wants words.
Idem. Fell sorrows tooth never ranckles more,
Then when it bites, but launcheth not the sore.
Idem. -- Sorrow close shrouded in the heart.
I know to keep, it is a wondrous smart,
Each thing imparted, is more ease to bear,
When the rain is fallen, the clouds wax clear.
Ed. Spencer. -- Sorrow ne need be hastened on,
For he will come without calling anon.
Idem. -- Snarling sorrow has less powrc to bite
The man that mocks at it, and sets it light.
Ed. Spencer. He that his sorrow sought through wilfulness,
And his foe fettered would release again,
Deserves to taste his follies fruit, repented pain.
Ed. Spencer. -- Mirth does search the bottom of annoy,
Sad souls are slain in mirthie company,
Grief best is pleased with griefs society:
True sorrow then is feelingly suffizde,
When with like sorrow it is sympathizde.
True sorrow has not ever a wet eye.
Th. Dekker. Sad sorrow ever joys to hear her worst.
S. D. Suspicion.
-- False suspicion of another is
A sure condemning of our own amiss.
Edw. Gilpin. Mistrust does treason in the truest raise,
Suspicious Romulus stained his walls first reared
With brothers blood, whom for light leap he feared,
The jealous cuckold wears th'infamous horn,
So not in brotherhood, jealousy may be borne.
M. of M. Riualles in love will be suspicious quickly.
I. Weeuer. The Merchant traffiking abroad, suspects his wife at home
A youth will play the wanton, and a wanton prove a mome.
W. Warner. Tears.
-- These two parts belong
Unto true knowledge, words and tears have force,
To move compassion in the savage minds
Of brutish people reason wanting kinds.
Tho. Middleton. Tears, vows, and prayers gain the hardest hearts.
S. Daniell. Tears work no truce, but where the heart is tender.
D. Lodge. Tears harden lust, though marble wear with rain.
W. Sh. Seld speaks love, but sighs his secret pains,
Tears are his truch-men, words do make him tremble.
R. Green. Tears cannot soften flint, nor vows convert.
S. D. A doleful case desires a doleful song,
Without vain art, or curious complement,
And squallid fortune into baseness flung,
Does scorn the pride of wonted ornament.
Ed. Spencer. Temperance.
-- Temperance which golden squire,
Betwixt these two can measure out a mean,
Neither to melt in pleasures hot desire,
Nor fry in heartlesse grief and doleful teene,
Thrice happy man who faires them both a tweene.
Ed. Spencer. Who ever does to Temperance apply
His steadfast life, and all his actions frame,
Trust me shall find no greater enemy,
Then stubburne perturbation to the same:
To which right well the wise do give that name:
For it the goodly peace of stayed minds
Does overthrew, and troublous war proclaim,
His own woes author, who so bound it finds,
As did Pyrrhocles, and it wilfully unbind.
Idem. A harder lesson to learn continence,
In joyous pleasure then in grievous pain,
For sweetness does allure the weakest sense.
So strongly that uneath it can refrain,
From that which feeble nature couers feign,
But grief and wrath that be her enemies
And foes of life she better can restrain,
Yet virtue vaunts in both their victories.
Idem. O in what safety Temperance does rest,
When it finds harbor in a kingly breast.
M. Drayton. Of all Gods works which do this world adorn,
There is none more fair and excellent
Then is man's body, both for power and form,
Whilst it is kept in sober government:
But none then it more foul and indecent,
Distempered through misrules, and passions base,
It grows a monster, and incontinent,
Does loose his dignity and native grace.
Ed. Spencer. Thoughts.
Thoughts are the slaves of life, and life times fool,
And time that takes survey of all the world
Must have a stop.
W. Shakespeare. Thoughts are but dreams, till their effects be tried.
Idem. Who so thinks many things, brings few to a fortunate ending.
A. France. The feeble eyes of our aspring thoughts,
Behold things present, and record things past,
But things to come exceed our humane reach.
G. Peele. Unfeigned thoughts do seldom dream on evil.
Birds never limde no secret bushes fear.
W. Sh. If all men's thoughts were written in their face,
Some one that now the rest does ouercrow,
Some others ebb that wants his sovereigns grace,
When as the Prince their inward thoughts should know
The meaner then should take the better place,
The greatest man might stoop and sit below.
S. I. Harrington. Time.
Beauties great enemy, and to all the rest
That in the garden of Adonis springs,
Is wicked Time, who with his sith addressed,
Does mow the flowing herbs and goodly things,
And all their glory to the earth down flings,
Where they do wither, and are foully marde,
He flies about, and with his flaggie wings,
Beats down both leaves and buds without regard.
Ne ever pity may relent his malice hard.
E. Spencer. Misshapen Time, coapsmate of ugly might,
Swift subtle poast, carrier of grisly care,
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
Base watch of woes, sins packhorse, virtues snare,
Thou nursest all, and murtherest all that are.
W. Shakespeare. Stealing Time the subject to delay.
S. Ph. Sydney. -- Times golden thigh
Vpholdes the flowrie body of the earth,
In sacred harmony and every birth
Of men, audacious makes legitimate,
Being used aright, the use of times is fate.
G. Chapman. No mortal form that under moon remains,
Exempt from traitorous Time, continues one.
Now mountes the flood, and straight his waves restrains
Now flows the tide, and strait the sourse is gone,
Who toils by Sea, must choose the fairest gale,
For time abodes our good or badde avail*
D. Lodge. Al those that live and think themselves but slime,
Must choose and thrive by favor of the time.
Idem. Swift speedy Time, feathered with flying hours,
Dissolues the beauty of the fairest browe.
S. Daniell. Time does consume fame, honor, wit, and strength,
Time roots out youth and beauties look at length.
Tho. Watson. Time wanting bonds, still wants certainty.
M. Dr. To Fames rich treasure Time unlocks the door,
Which angry sorrow had shut up before.
Idem. Time is a bondslaue to eternity.
Tho. Kyd. All that does live is subject to his law,
All things decay in time, and to their end do draw.
Ed. Spencer. What wrong has not continuance out-worne,
Years makes that right that never was so borne.
S. Daniell. Good time is blessed, badde time we hold accursed,
Time hurts them often that he did help at first.
T. Churchyard. Times glory is to calm contending kings,
To unmask falsehood, and bring truth to light,
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
To wake the morn, and sentinel the night,
To wrong the wronger till he render right:
To ruinate proud buildings with his hours,
And smeare with dust their glittering golden towers,
To fill with worm holes stately monuments,
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
To blot old Books, and alter their contents,
To pull the quilles from ancient Ravens wings,
To dry the old oaks sap, and cherish springs
To spoil antiquities of hammered steel,
And turn the giddie round of fortunes wheel,
To show the Beldame daughters of her daughters,
To make the child a man, the man a child,
To slay the tiger that does lively slaughter,
To tame the unicorn and the lion wild,
To make the subtle in themselves be guild,
To cheer the plowman with increasefull crops,
And waste huge stones with little water-drops.
W. Shakespeare. Truth.
The Truth does does dwell within the holy tables,
Of Gods live word, not in our wanton brain,
Which daily coining some strange error vain,
For gold takes lead, for truth electeth Fables.
I. Siluester. Truth is no harauld, nor no so sophist sure,
She notes not men's names, their sheelds or crests,
Though she compare them unto birds and beasts,
But whom she does fore-shew shall reign by force,
She terms a woolfe, a dragon, or a bear,
A wilful Prince, a raignelesse raging horse,
A boar, a lion, a coward much in fear,
A hare or heart, a crafty pricked ear,
A lecherous, a bull, a goat, a foale,
An underminer, a mould-warpe, or a moale.
M. of M. -- Tried truth
Does best be seem a simple naked tale,
Ne needs to be with painted process pricked,
That in her self has no diversity,
But always shows one vndisguised face,
Where deep deceit and lies must seek her shade,
And wrappe their words in guilefull eloquence,
As ever fraught with contrariety.
G. Gascoigne. The truth has certain bounds, but falsehood none.
S. Daniell. -- The naked truth is a well-clothed lie,
A nimble quick pale meunts to dignity
By force or fraud, that matters not a jot,
So massy wealth may fall unto thy lot.
Io. Marston. Treason.
Conspiracy against the person of a Prince,
Is treason against the deity of heaven.
Th. Achellye. -- Treason is but trusted like the Fox,
Who nere so tamde, so cherisht, and locked up,
Will have a wild trick of his auncetors.
W. Sh. No virtue merits praise once touched with blot of treason.
S. Ph. Sydney. Who fails one is false, though trusty to another*
Idem. There is no treason wounds half so deep,
As that which does in Princes bosom sleep.
M. Drayton. Who that resists his dread sovereign Lord,
Does damn his soul by Gods own very word,
A Christian subject should with honor due,
Obey his sovereign though he were a Jew,
Whereby assured when subjects do rebel,
Gods wrath is kindled, threatening fire and hell.
M. of M. Was never rebel before the world and since,
That could or should prevail against his Prince.
Idem. Revolted subjects of themselves will quail.
I. Syluester. Tyranny.
-- Next to Tyranny
Comes wars, discention, civil mutiny.
Chapter Middl. In greatest wants t'inflict the greatest woe,
This is the worst that tyranny can show.
Idem. Hell haleth tyrants down to death amain,
Was never yet, nor shall be cruel deed
Vnquited left, but had as cruel meed.
M. of M. -- No tyrant commonly
Living ill can kindly die,
But either traitorously surprizde
Does coward poison quayle their breath,
Or their people have deuizde,
Or their Guard to seek their death.
Tho. Kyd. It is an hell in hateful vassallage,
Under a tyrant to consume ones age,
A selfe-shauen Dennis, or an Nero fell,
Whose cursed Courts with blood and incest swell:
An Owl that flies the light of Parliaments
And state assemblies, jealous of th'intents
Of Private tongues, who for a pastime sets
His Peers at odds, and on their fury whets,
Who neither faith, honor, nor right respects.
Idem. Virtue.
What one art thou thus in torn weed yclad?
Virtue, in price, whom ancient sages had:
Why poorly clad? for fading goods past care:
Why double faced? I mark each fortunes rare:
This bridle what? minds rages to restrain:
Why bear you tools? I love to take great pain:
Why wings? I teach above the stars to fly:
Why tread you death? I only cannot die.
S. Th. Wiat. The path that leads to Virtues Court is narrow,
Thornie, and up a hill, a bitter journey:
But being gone through, you find al heavenly sweets,
Th'entrance is all flintie, but at the end
Two Towers of pearls and cristall you ascend.
Th. Dekkar. Virtue is fairest in a poor art aye.
Idem. Virtue abhorres too wear a borrowed face.
Idem. The wisest scholar of the wight most wise,
By Phoebus doom, with sugared sentence says,
That virtue If it once meet with our eyes,
Strange flames of love it in our souls would raise.
S. Ph. Sydney. That grows apace, that virtue helps t'aspire.
M. R^^don. When virtue rises, base affections fall.
Ed. Fairfax. Like as the horse well mand abides the bit,
And learnes his stop by rain in riders hand,
Where mountain colt that is not sadled yet,
Runs headlong on amidst the fallowed land,
Whose fierce resist scarce bendes with any band.
So men reclaimed by virtue tread aright,
Where led by follies, mischiefs on them light.
D. Lodge. Virtue does ^urb affection, and for conscience flies sin,
To leave for imperfection fear or shame no praise does win.
W. Warner. Virtue it self turns vice, being misapplyed,
And vice sometime by action dignified.
W. Shakespeare. Virtue in greatest danger is most shown,
And though oppressed, yet nere is overthrown.
S. Daniell. In virtue it is said, that men themselves suruie.
W. W. Honor indeed, and all things yield to death,
(Virtue excepted) which alone suruiues,
And living toyleth in an earthly gaile,
At last to be extolled in heavens high joys.
T. Kyd. All things decay, yet virtue shall not die,
This only gives us immortallitie.
M. Drayton. Whence is it that the flower of the field does fade,
And lies buried long in winters bale,
Yet soon as spring his mantle does display,
It flowreth fresh, as it should never fail,
But thing on earth that is of most avail.
As virtues and beauties bud,
Releeuen not for any good,
The branch once dead, the bud needs eke must quail*
Ed. Spencer. All that we had, or mortal men can have,
Seems only hut a shadow from the grave,
Virtue alone lives still.
Th. Dekkar. Virtue is more amiable and more sweet,
When virtue and true majesty do meet.
E. Spencer. -- All the sorrow in the world is less
Then virtues might and valures confidence,
For who will bide the burden of distress,
Must not here think to live, for life is wretchedness.
Idem. Virtue makes honor, as the soul does sense,
And merit, far exceedes inheritance.
G. Chapman. -- Virtue of the ^uncient blood and kin,
Does only please the parties she is in.
M. of M. -- Only virtue nobleness does dignifie,
And vicious life a lineage base does signify.
S. I. Harrington. The simple virtue may consist alone,
But better are two virtues joined in one.
D. Lodge. What virtue gets, once got does never waste,
And having this, this thou for ever haste.
M. Dryaton. Joy graven in sense, like snow in water wastes,
Without preserve of virtue nothings lasts.
G. Chapman. Virtue obscurde yeeldes small and happy gains,
But actiuely employed, she worth retains.
D. Lodge. What virtue breeds, iniquity deuours,
We have no good at all that we can say is ours*
But ill annexed opportunity,
Or killes his life or else his quality.
W. Sh. Virtue dies not, her tomb we need not raise,
Let them trust tombs which have out-liu'd their praise.
Th. Bastard. Vice.
Vice rides a horseback, Virtue does from out the saddl^ boult.
W. Warner. What licour first the earthen pot does take,
It keeps still the savor of the same,
Full hard it is a camocke straight to make,
Or crooked logges with wainscot fine to frame,
It Is hard to make the cruel Tiger tame:
And so it fares with those have vices caught,
Naught (once they say) and ever after naught.
M. of M. Although that virtue often wants due reward,
Yet seldom vice wants due deserved blame,
S. I. H. Where vice is countenanced with Nobility,
Art clean excluded, ignorance held in,
Blinding the world with mere hypocrisy,
Yet must be soothed in all their slavish sin,
Great malcontents to grow they then begin,
Nursing vild wits to make their factious tools,
Thus mighty men often prove the mightiest fools.
M. Drayton. Victory.
With victory revenge does ever cease,
S. I. H. He lives long that lives victorious.
Th. Kyd. The victor can no honor justly claim,
To loose the men who should advance the same.
-- That fisher is not fine,
Who for a frogge will loose a golden line:
The holy head-band seems not to attire
The head of him, who in his furious ire,
Preferres the pain of those that have him teend,
Before the health and safety of one friend.
Tho. Hudson. Vain is the vaunt and victory unjust,
That more to mighty hands then rightful cause does trust.
Edw. Spencer. Loss is no shame, nor to be less then foe,
But to be lesser then himself, does mar
Both loosers lotte, and victors praise also,
Vain others overthrows, who self does overthrow.
Idem. Understanding.
Most miserable creature under sky
Man, without understanding does appear,
For all this worlds affliction he thereby,
And fortvnes freates is wisely taught to bear:
Of wretched life the only joy she is,
And the only comfort in calamity,
She arms the breast with constant patience,
Against the bitter throws of dolours darts,
She solaceth with rules of sapience,
The gentle minds in midst of worldly smarts,
When he is sad, she seeks to make him merry,
And does refresh his spirits when they be weary,
Ed. Spencer. Vows.
Good vows are never broken with good deeds,
For then good deeds were bad: vows are but seeds,
And good deeds fruits.
G. Chapman. We know not how to vow, till love vnblind us,
And vows made ignorantly never bind us.
Idem. Our vows must be performed to God and King.
M. Drayton. -- A promise made for fear is void.
S. I. H. -- A man such promise must forsake,
As at the first unlawful was to make.
Idem. Virginity.
Like to the Rose I count the virgin pure,
That grows on native stem in garden fair,
Which whiles it stands with walls enuiron'd sure,
Where herd-men with their herds cannot repair
To savor it, it seems to allure
The morning dew, the heat, the earthly air,
Gallant young men and lovely dames delight
By their sweet sent, and in their pleasing sight:
But when that once it is gathered and gone
From proper stalk, where late before it grew,
The love the liking little is or none,
Favor, and grace, beauty and all adue:
So when a virgin graunts to one alone,
The precious flower for which so many sue:
Well he that gets it may love her best,
But she forgoes the love of all the rest.
S. I. H. Jewels being lost, are found again, this never,
It Is lost but once, and once lost, lost for ever.
Chapter Marlow. Virginity though praised is like a bird, for why,
As much the flesh is frail therein, as in the fear to die,
What was it said to all but us increase and multiply?
W. Warner. -- Virginity
Is neither essence subject to the eye,
No nor to any one exterior sense,
Nor has it any place of residence,
Nor is it of earth or mould celestial,
Or capable of any form at all.
Chapter Marlow. I know not her that willingly with maidenhead would die.
W. W. Use.
Use make things nothing huge, and huge things nothing.
G. Chapman. Foul cankering rust the hidden treasure frets.
But gold that's put to use, more gold begets.
W. Sh. War.
Lastly stood war in glistering arms yclad,
With visage grimme, stern looks and ghastly hood,
In his right hand a naked sword he had,
That to the hilts was all with blood imbrude,
And in his left that kings and kingdoms rued,
Famine and fire he had, and there withal
He rased towns, and threw down towers and all,
Cities he sacked, and realms that whilome flowred
In honor, glory, and rule above the best,
He ouerwhhlm'd, and all their fame devoured,
Consumde, destroyde, wasted, and never ceast,
Till he therewith their name and all oppressed:
His face forhued with wounds, and by his side,
There hung his targe with gashes deep and wide,
In midst of which depainted there we find
Deadly debate, all full of snakie hair,
That with a bloody fillet was ybound,
Out-breathing noght, but discord every where.
M. Sackuille. The Poets old in their fond fables faind,
That mighty Mars is God of war and strife:
The Astronomers think that whereas Mars does reign
That all debate and discord must be rife:
Some think Bellona, Goddess of that life.
Among the rest that Painter had some skill,
Which thus in arms did once set out the same,
A field of gules, and on a golden hill.
A stately town consumed all with flame,
On chief of sable taken from the dame,
A sucking babe ( O) borne to bide mischance,
Begoard with blood, and pierced with a lance.
On high the Helm, I bear it well in mind,
The wreath was silver powdered all with shot,
About the which (goutte du sang) did twind.
A roll of sable black, and foul beblot,
The crest two hands, which may not be forgot,
For in the right a trenchand blade did stand,
And in the left a fiery burning brand.
G. Gascoigne. -- War the mistress of enormitie,
Mother of mischief, monster of deformity,
Laws, manners, arts, she breaks, she marres, she chaces,
Blood, tears, bowres, towers, she spils, smites, burns, and races,
Her brazen teeth shake all the earth asunder:
Her mouth a firebrand, and her voice a thunder,
Her looks are lightning, every glaunce a flash,
Her fingers guns, that all to powder pash,
Fear and despair, flight and disorder, coast
With hasty march before her murderous host,
As burning, waste, rape, wrong, impiety,
Rage, ruins, discord, horror, cruelty,
Sack, sacrilege, impunitie pride,
Are still stern consorts by her barbarous side.
And poverty, sorrow, and desolation,
Follow her armies bloody transmigration.
I^ Siluester. O war begot in pride and luxury,
The child of wrath and of dissension*
Horrible good, mischief necessary,
The foul reformer of confusion:
Unjust just, scourge for our iniquity.
Cruel recurer of corruption.
S. Daniell. O goodly usage of those anticke times,
In which the sword was servant unto right,
When not for malice and contentious crimes,
But all for praise, and proof of manly might,
The martial brood accustomed to fight:
Then honor was the meede of victory,
And yet the vanquished had no dispight,
Let later age, that now the use envy,
Vild rancour so avoid and cruel furquedry.
Ed. Spencer. War rightly handled is most excellent,
And easy makes impossibility:
It mounts the Alps, and through the seas does rent*
By it in blood a way to heaven we see.
I. Markham. Under wars brazen feet stoopes all the earth,
His mouth a flaming brand, his voice a thunder,
Idem. No war is right, but that which needful is,
S. Daniell. The God of war has many men in store,
Which wait always to keep his kingdom up,
Of whom no one does show his service more,
Then lingering hope, which still does be^re the cup,
And flatteringly lendes every man a sup,
Which haunts his course, or in his progesse pass,
Hope brings the bowl wherein they all must quaffe,
G. Gascoigne. War seems sweet to such as raunge it not.
Idem. Men know not War, nor rightly how to deem it,
That first by War have not been taught t'esteeme it.
S. I. H. -- Wise men ever have preferred far,
Th'vniustest peace, before the iustest War.
S. Daniell. -- Time observing providence and War,
Still makes their foes far stronger then they are.
Idem. Sad be the sights and bitter fruits of War,
And thousand furies wait on wrathful sword,
Ne ought the praise of prowess more does mar,
Then foul revenging rage and proud contentious jar.
Ed. Spencer. -- Great reuenew
The chiefest sinew unto War affoords.
D. Lodge. -- Wars that public good pretend,
Work most in justice being done for spite,
For th'agreeued evermore do bend,
Against those whom they see of greatest might,
Who though themselves are wronged and often forced,
Yet though they can do most are thought the worst.
S. Daniell. -- Mars is Cupidoes friend
And is for Venus love renouned more,
Then all the wars and spoils the which he did before.
Ed. Spencer. Will.
From idle wit, there springs a braine-sicke will,
With wise men lust, which foolish make a God,
This in the shape of virtue reigns still.
D. Lodge. Will puts in practice what the wit deuiseth.
Will ever acts, and wit contemplates still,
And as from wit the power of wisdom rises,
All other virtues daughters are of will.
Idem. Will is the Prince, and wit the counselor,
Which does for common good in council sit,
And when wit is resolved, will lends her power,
To execute what is devised by wit.
I. Dauies. Will is as free as any Emperor,
Naught can restrain her gentle liberty,
No tyrant nor no torrent has the power
To make us will when we unwilling be.
Idem. Even as the will should goodness truly know,
We have a will which that true good should choose
Although will often, when wit false forms does show,
Take ill for good, and good for ill refuse.
Idem. It lives not in our power to love or hate,
For will in us is ouer-rul'd by fate.
Chapter Marlow. A stronger hand restraines our wilful powers,
A will must rule above this will of ours,
Not following what our vain desires do woe,
For virtues sake, but what we only do.
M. Dr. -- Headless will true judgment does ensnare.
Idem. Self-will does frown, when honest zeal reproues,
Idem. Whereas our actions measure no regard,
Our lawless will is made his own reward.
M. Dra. -- With a world of mischiefs and offense,
Unbridled will rebels against the sense.
D. Lodge. He least should list that may do what he will.
S. Dan. Wisdom.
Our God himself for wisdom most is praised,
And men to God thereby are nighest raised.
Ed. Spencer. Wisdom does warn, whilst foe is in the gate.
To stay the step, ere forced to retreat.
Idem. Wisdom must judge twixt men apt to amend,
And minds incurable borne to offend.
S. D. -- In danger wisdom does advise,
In humble terms to reconcile our foes.
D. Lodge. -- Wisdom and the sight of heavenly things,
Shines not so clear as earthly vanities.
G. Chapman. It Is said a wise man all mishaps withstands,
For though by stars we borne to mischiefs are,
Yet prudence bailes us quite from careful bands.
M. of M. Foresight does still on all advantage lie.
Wise men must give place to necessity.
M. Dr. -- A wiseman poor
Is like a sacred Book that is never read,
T'himselfe he lives, and to all else seems dead:
This age thinks better of a gilded fool,
Then of thread bare saint in wisdoms school.
Th. Dekkar. Wise men let faults ore-passe, they cannot mend.
Chapter Middle. Who can themselves beware by others costs,
May be accounted well among the wise.
S. I. H. -- Whatsoever Stars seem to importune,
Wisdom predominates both fate and fortune.
Chapter Fitz Griffon. Wit.
The wit the pupil of the souls clear eye,
And in man's world the only shining star,
Looks in the mirror of the fantasy,
Where all the gathering of the senses ate,
From thence this power the shape of things abstract^
And them within her passive part receives,
Which are enlightened by that part which acts,
And so the form of single things receives:
But after by discoursing to and fro,
Anticipating and comparing things
She does all universal natures know,
And all effects into their causes bring.
Our wit is given Almighty God to know,
Our will is given to love him being known,
But God could not be known to us below,
But by his works, which through the sense are known.
I. Dauis. Wit is the minds chief judge, which does control,
Of fancies Court the judgments false and vain,
Will, holds the royal scepter in the soul,
And on the passions of the heart does reign.
Idem. Emulation the proud nurse of wit.
S. D. -- Wit and learning are two Angels wings,
By which mean men soar up to mighty things.
Chapter Middl. Wit is with boldness prompt, with terror daunted,
And grace is sooner got of dames then granted.
Ed. Spencer. Some loose their wit with love, some with ambition
Some running to the sea great wealth to get,
Some following Lords and men of high condition,
Some in fair iewelles, rich and costly set.
One has desire to prove a rare magician,
Others with Poetry their wit forget:
Another thinks to be an Alchimist,
Till all he spent, and he his number mist.
S. I. H. Man's wit is monstrous, when the same from virtue does decline.
W. Warner. Man's wit does build for time but to devour,
But Virtue's free from time and fortunes power.
M. Dr. The wit not hurt, because not used more,
Grows dull and far less toward then before.
-- Wits ambition longs to the best,
For it desires in endless bliss to dwell.
I. Dauis. Best loves are lost for wit, when men blame fortune.
G. Chapman. -- Careless wit is wanton bewties page.
D. Lodge. The finest wits are soonest snarde with love.
Th. Achellye. A settled brain is worth a world of wit.
Th. Storer. Wits want makes men desirous to seem wise.
Woe.
Woe all in black within her hands did bear,
The fatal torches of a funeral,
Her cheeks were wet, dispersed was her hair,
Her voice was shrill (yet loathsome therewithal)
D. Lodge. Short time seems long in sorrows sharp sustaining,
Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps,
And they that watch see time how slow it creepes.
W. Shakespeare. -- Fellowship in woe, does woe assuage,
As palmers that make short their pilgrimage.
Idem. It Is double death to drown in ken of shore,
He ten times pines, that pines behoulding food:
To see the salve does make the wound ache more,
Great griefs grieve most at that would do it good,
Dear woes roll forward like a gentle flood:
Who being stopped, the bounden banks ore flows,
Grief dallied with, nor law nor limmit knows.
Idem. Distress likes dumps, when time is kept with tears.
Idem. For stronger woe we hardly long may wrest,
The depth of grief with words is sounded least.
M. Dra. -- The Painter
Who thought his colors pale could not declare
The special woe King Agamemnon bare,
When sacrificed was his only rage,
With bend of black he bound the fathers face.
Th. Hudson. Words.
-- Words
Windy atturnies of our clyent woes,
Ayery succeeders of intestate joys,
Poor breathing Orators of miseries,
Let them have scope, though what it does impart
Help not at all, yet does it ease the heart.
VV. Sh. Words are the tennants of an itching toy.
D. Lodge. Allusion of words is no sure ground,
For one thereon a steddie work to found.
One word of woe another after traineth.
S Ph. Sydney. -- Few words shall fit the trespass best,
Where no excuse can give the fault amending.
W. Sh. Deep sounds make better noise then shallow fords,
And sorrow ebbes being blown with wind of words.
W. Sh. Words are but wind, why cost they then so much,
The guilty kick when they too smartly to^ch.
Idem. Forth irreturnable flies the spoken word,
Be it in scoff, in earnest, or in bourd,
Without return and vnreceiu'd it hangs,
And at the takers mercy or rigor stands:
Which if he sowrely wrest, with wrathful cheer,
The shiuering word turns to the hearers fear:
If friendly courtesy do the word expound,
To th'speakers comfort quickly it does redound.
Idem. Smoothe words dissolve hard stones, fair words enforce
Pity in flintie hearts.
Chapter Middl. Through the world if it were sought,
Fair words enough a man should find,
They be good cheap, they cost right naught,
Their substance is but only wind:
But well to say, and so to mean,
That sweet accord is seldom seen.
S. Th. W. -- Words well placed move things were never thought.
G. Chapman. Even as the vapor which the fire repelles,
Turns not to earth, but in mid-ayre dwelles,
Where while it hangs, if Boreas frostie flawes,
With rigor rattle it: not to rain it thawes,
But thunder, lightning, rattling, hayle, or snow,
Sends down to earth, whence first it rose below.
But if fair Phoebus with his countenance sweet
Resolve it, down the dew or Manna sleete:
The Manna dew that in the Esterne lands,
Excelles the labor of the Bees small hands,
Else for her Memnon, gray Auroraes tears,
On the earth it stilleth the partner of her fears,
Or sends sweet showers to glad their mother earth
Whence first they took their first in constant birth.
To those great greefes ill taken words do grow,
Of words well taken such delights do flow.
M. of M. -- Men do foulest when they finest speak.
S. Daniell. They wash a Moore, they strive to dry the seas,
And plain proud Atlas, that intend to please
By filthy words, by railing, and detraction,
Proper to Momus, and his hateful faction:
For when they think they have deserved most,
Alas says wisdom, all the toil is lost.
D. Lodge. Few words well coucht, do most content the wise.
R. Green. Rash words flow from an unadvised mind.
Who once has past the bounds of honesty
In earnest deeds, may pass it well in words.
G. G. Have care to whom, of whom, and what to speak, though speech be true
That miss made Phoebus contrary his raue^s swan-like hue.
W. W. If so the crow would feast him without prate,
More meat he should receive, less brawle and hate
A fool he is that comes to preach and prate,
When men with swords their right and wrong debate.
-- Words well disposed,
Have secret power to appease inflamed rage.
Ed. Sp. Women.
-- Women be
Framde with the same parts of the mind as we,
Nay nature triumphed in their beauties birth,
And women made the glory of the earth:
The life of beauty, in whose supple breasts,
And in her fairest lodging virtue rests,
Whose towering thoughts attended with remorse,
Do make their fairness be of greater force.
I. Weeuer. What art so deep, what science is so hie,
Unto the which women have not attained,
Who list in stories old to look, may try
And find my speech herein nor false nor feigned,
And though of late they seem not to come nie
The praise their sex in former times have gained.
Doubtless the fault is either in back-biters,
Or want of skill or judgment in their writers.
Idem. Among the many rare and special gifts,
That in the female sex are found to sit,
This one is chief, that they at meerest shifts,
Give best advise, and show most ready wit,
But man except he chewes and thinks, and fifts,,
How every part may answer to their fit,
By rash advise does often ouer-shoote him,
And does accept the things that do no^boote him.
Idem. Those virtues that in women merit praise,
Are sober shows without, chaste thoughts within,
Truth says, and due obedience to their make,
And of their children honest care to take.
S. I. H. Let woolues and beasts be cruel in their kind,
But women meek, and have relenting minds.
M. Drayton. Not women, but our wilfulness does work our woe unrest
Though beauty, love, and they bear fault, we may abuse the best.
W. W. -- Men have Marble, women waxen minds
And therefore are they formed as Marble will,
The weak oppressed, the impression of strange kinds,
Is formed in them by force, by fraud, or skill,
Then call not them the Authors of their ill,
No more then wax shall be accounted evil,
Wherein is stamped the semblance of the devil.
Their smoothenesse like a goodly champaine plain,
Lays open all the little worms that creep,
In men as in a rough grown grove remain,
Caue-keeping euilles, that obscurely sleep,
Through cristall walls each little moule will peep,
Though men can cover minds with bold stern looks
Pale women's faces are their own faults Books.
No man inueyes against the withered flower,
But chides rough winter that the flower has killed,
Not that deuourd, but that which does devour,
Is worthy blame, O let it not be hild,
Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfilled,
With men's abuses those proud lores to blame,
Make weake-made women tenants to their shame.
W. Shakespeare. Be not therefore too proud and full of scorn,
O women-kind, that men come of your seed,
The fragrant Rose grows on the pricking thorn,
The Lilly sayre comes of a filthy weed,
In loathsome soil men sow the wholesome corn,
The basest mould the fairest flower does breed,
Ungrateful, false, crafty you are, and cruel,
Borne of our burning hell to be the fuel.
S. I. H. Base bullion for the stamp sake we allow,
Even so for men's impression do we you,
By which alone our reverend fathers say,
Women receive perfection every way.
Chapter Marlow. Their Virtues mount like billows to the skies,
And vanish straight out of the gazers eyes,
Hate and disdain is painted in their eyes,
Deceit and treason in their bosom lies.
G. Chapman. Women were made for this intent, to put us unto pain,
Yet sure I think they are a pleasure to the mind,
A joy which man can never want, as nature has assigned.
Idem, Extremely mad the man I surely deem,
That weenes with watch and hard restraint to stay
A woman's will, which is disposed to go astray.
Ed. Spencer. In vain he fears that which he cannot shun,
For who wots not that women's subtilties
Can gnilen Argus, when she list misdoone,
It is not iron bands nor hundred eyes,
Nor brazen walls, nor many wakefull spies,
That can withold her wilful wandering feet,
But fast good will with gentle courtesies,
And timely service to her pleasures meek,
May her perhaps contain that else would algates fleet.
Idem. Such is the cruelty of women-kind,
When they have shaken off the shame-fac't band,
With which wise nature did them strongly bind,
To Obey the hests of man's wel-ruling hand,
That then all rule and reason they withstand,
To purchase a licencious liberty.
But virtuous women wisely understand,
That they were borne to base humility,
Unless the heavens them lift to lawful soueraintie.
S. Ph. Sydney. Why? what be women? women, geld the latter syllable,
Then are they nothing more then woe, their names remain does tell,
W. W. Take away weakness, and take women too.
S. D. Women may fall, when there is no strength in men.
W. Sh. They melt with words, as wax against the sun,
So weak is many women's modesty,
For what sometimes they most would seem to sheeld
Another time vnaskte poor souls they yield.
Chapter Middleton. -- A woman
Loves to be woed of a man, thou know well Thirsis, a woman
Runs, and yet so runs, as though she desired to be outrun
Says no, no, yet so as no no, seems to be no, no,
Strives, and yet so strives, as though she desird to be vanquished,
Woman's like to a shade, that flies, yet lies by the subject,
Like to a Be, that never strives if sting be removed.
A. France. In women's mouths no is no negative.
I. W. Their yea, or no, when as they swear they love or love us most,
Believe who list, soon be they got, as suddenly are lost.
W. W. A woman's love is riuer-like, which stopped will ouerflow,
And when the current finds no let, it often falls too low.
Idem. Variety of men to court a woman is her pride,
Then which the vanity of men is nothing less espide
What are to us but common hurts,
Those common hopes they give,
If then their love does die to us,
When ours to them does live.
Idem. -- Women never
Love beauty in their sex, but envy ever.
G. Chapman. There cannot be a greater clogge to man,
Then to be weary of a wanton woman.
S. I. H. -- What more spite can be a woman told,
Then one should say she looks foul and old.
Idem. -- Be she base or hie,
A woman's eye does guide her wit, and not her wit her eye.
W. W. Women are most won, as when men merit least,
If merit look not well, love bids stand by,
Loves proper lesson is to please the eye.
G. Ch* He water plowes, and sows in the sand
And hopes the flickering wind with net to hold,
Who has his hopes laid on a woman's hand.
S. P. S -- Women by kind are mutable ever,
Soon hot, and soon cold, like, and mislike in a moment,
Change as a weather-cocke, and all as light as a fether.
A. Fr. Women have tongues of craft, and hearts of guile,
They will, they will not, fools that on them lust,
For in their speech is death, hell in their smile.
Ed. Fairfax. One woman with another may do much.
Th. Ach. Like vntund golden strings all women are,
Which long time lie untouched, will harshly jar.
Chapter Marlow. Discurteous women natures fairest ill,
The woe of man, that first createst curse,
Base female sex, sprung from black Ates loins,
Proud, disdainefull, cruel, and unjust,
Whose words are shaded with inchaunting wiles,
Worse then Med^s^, mateth all our minds,
And in their hearts sits shameless treachery,
Turning a truthlesse vile circumference,
O could my fury paint their furies forth,
For hell, no hell compared to their hearts*
Too simple diuelles, to conceive their arts:
Borne to be plagues unto the thoughts of men,
Brought for eternal pestilence to the world.
R Green. with women is too usual now theirs and themselves to sell,
For iointures by inde^ture with imperious me^ to dwell
And he does her, and she does him with his and her vpbraid,
W. VV. Women are kind by kind, and coy for fashion.
H. C. Of Wrath,
-- Fierce revenging wrath
Rides on a Lion, loath for to be led,
And in his stand a burning brand he had,
The which he brandished about his head,
His eyes did hurl forth sparkles fiery red,
And stared stern on all that him beheld,
As ashes pale of hew, and seeming dead,
And on his dagger still his hand he held,
Trembling through hasty rage when choler in him sweld.
Ed. Spencer. -- Boiling wrath, stern, cruel, swift, and rash,
That like a boar her teeth does grind and gnash,
Whose hair does stare like bristled po^cupine,
Who sometimes rowles her ghastly glowing eyene,
And sometimes fixly on the ground does glaunce,
Now bleake, then bloody in her countenance,
Rauing and railing with a hideous sound,
Clapping her hands, stamping against the ground,
Bearing Bocconi, fire, and sword, to slay
And murder all that for her pity pray,
Banning her self to bane her enemy,
Disdaining death, provided others die,
Like falling towers o're-turned by the wind,
That break themselves on that they vndergrinde.
I. Syluester. Full many mischiefs follow cruel wrath,
As horrid bloodshed, and tumultuous strife,
Unmanly murder, and unthrifty scath,
Bitter despite, and rancors rustie knife,
And fretting grief, the enemy of life,
All these and many euilles more haunt ire,
The swelling spleen, and frenzy raging rife,
The shaking palsy, and Saint Fraunces fire.
Ed. Spencer. When men with wrath and sudden pains of ire,
Suffer themselves to be o're-whelm'd and drowned,
And hot revenge that burns l^ke flaming fire,
Moo^es hearts to hurt, or tongs or hands to wound,
Though after to a mend, if they desire,
Yet place of pardon seldom can be found.
S. I. H. What iron band, or what sharp hard-mouthed bitte,
What chain of Diamond (if such might be)
Can bridle wrathfulnesse, and conquer it,
And keep him in his bounds and due degree.
Idem. -- Hasty wrath and heedlesse hazardie,
Do breed repentance and lasting infamy.
Ed. Spencer. Poor silly lambs the Lion never tears,
The feeble Mouse may lie among great Bears,
But wrath of man his rancour to requite,
Forgets all reason, ruth, and mercy quite.
M. of M. -- He is a mad man that does seek
Occasion to wrath and cause of strife,
She comes unsought, and shunned follows eke:
Happy, who can abstain when rancor rife
Kindles revenge and threats his cruel knife:
Woe never wants when every cause is caught,
And rash occa^ion makes unquiet life.
Ed. Spencer. Be not moody in thy wrath, but pawze ere fist be bent,
Often Phillips son did rashly strike and suddenly repent.
W. Warner. Achilles when with counterfaited crest,
He saw Patroclus bleeding all the way,
To kill his killer was not satisfied,
Except he hald and tare him all beside.
S. I. H. If fortune help whom thou would hurt,
Fret not at it the more,
When Ajax stormed them from him,
The prize Ulysses bore.
W. Warner. Rage, wanne and pale upon a Tygre sat
Gnawing upon the bones of mangled men,
Naught can he view but he repines thereat*
His locks were snakes bred forth in Stigian den*
T. Lodge. World,
The antique world in his first flowring youth,
Found no defect in his creators grace,
But with glad thanks and unreproved truth,
The gifts of sovereign bounty did embrace,
Like angels life was then man's happy case:
But later ages pride like corne-fed steed,
Abvsde her plenty and fatswoln increase,
To all licencious lust, and began exceed,
The measure of her mean and natural first seed.
Ed. Spencer. When arked Noah, and seven with him the empty worlds remain,
Had left the instrume^tall means of landing the^ again
And that both man beast and all did multiply with store
To Asia Sem, to Afric Cha^, to Europe Iapheth bore
Their families, thus triple wise the world divided was
VV. VV. I take this world to be but as a stage,
Where net-maskt men do play their personages,
It Is but a murmur and a pleasant show,
Sith over all strange vanities do flow.
I. Syluester. The world to the circumference of heaven,
Is as a small point in Geometry,
Whose greatness is so little that a less
Cannot be made.
Th. Dekkar The first world blessed was with heavenly favors,
And the last cursed with painful hellish labors.
Chapter Middl. O vain worlds glory, and uncertain state,
Of all that lives on face of sinful earth,
Which from their first until their utmost date,
Taste no one hour of happiness or mirth,
But like as is the ingate of their birth.
They crying creep out of their mothers womb,
So wayling back, go to their careful tomb.
Ed. Spencer. Ah wretched world, the den of wretchedness,
Deformd with filth and foul iniquity,
Ah wretched world, the house of heaviness,
Filled with the wreakes of mortal misery,
Oh wretched world and all that is therein,
The vassals of Gods wrath, and slaves to sin.
Idem. -- O worlds inconstancy,
That which is firm does flit and fall away,
And that is flitting does abide and stay.
Idem. Must not the world wend in his common course,
From good and bad, and then from bad to wourse,
From worst unto that which is worst of all,
And then return unto his former fall*
Who will not suffer the stormy time,
Where will he live until the lusty prime?
Idem. This golden age to iron does decline,
As summer unto winter must resign.
D. Lodge. The first and riper world of men and skill,
Yields to our latter time for three inventions,
Myraculously we write, we sail, we kill,
As neither ancient scrowle nor story mentions.
Print. The first has opened learnings old concealed
And obscurde arts restored to the light:
Loadst. The second hidden countries has reueald,
And sent Christ's Gospel to each living wight.
These we commend, but oh what needs more,
Guns. To teach death more skill then he had before.
Th. Bastard. Take moisture from the sea, take color from his kind,
Before the world deuoyd of change thou find.
-- All that in this world is great or gay,
Does as a vapor vanish and decay.
Ed. Spencer. This is the rest the vain world lendes,
To end in death, that all things ends.
S. Daniell. All men are willing with the world to hault,
But no man takes delight to know his fault.
D. Lodge. A die, a drab, and filthy broking Knaves,
Are the worlds wide mouths, al-deuouring graves*
I. Marston. Nothing does the world so full of mischief fill.
But want of feeling one-anothers will.
G. Chapman. -- Not by that which is the world now deemeth,
(As it was wont) but by that same that seems.
Ed. Spencer. There never shall be any age so clear,
But in her smoothe face shall some faults appear.
Th. Middl. The world must end, for men are so accursed,
Unless God end it sooner, men will first.
Th. Bastard. Youth.
Youth is a bubble blown up with a breath,
Whose wit is weakness, and whose wage is death,
Whose way is wildnes, and whose Inn penance,
And stoop gallant age, the host of greeuance.
Ed. Spencer. If crooked age accounts youth his spring,
The spring the fairest season of the year,
Enricht with flowers, and sweetes, and many a thing
That fair and glorious to the eye appears:
It fits that youth the spring of man should be,
Richt with such flowers as virtue gets thee.
R. Green. For noble youth there is no thing so meet
As learning is, to know the good from ill,
To know the tongues, and perfectly endite,
And of the laws to have the perfect skill
Things to reform as right and justice will:
For honor is ordained for no cause,
But to see right maintained by the laws.
M. of M. The youth of Princes have no bounds for sin,
Unless themselves do make the bounds within.
S. Daniell. Most true it is, as vessels of first licours ever taste,
Love seasoned so with sweetness of youth, the same does ever last.
W. Warner. Like as the vessel ever bears a taste
Of the same juice wherewith it first was filled,
And as in fruitful ground the seed grows fast,
That first is sown after the ground is tilled:
So look what lore in youthful years is plast,
By that they grow the worse or better willed,
When as they came to manly age and stature,
Since education is another nature.
S. I. H. The tun retains long the taste and sent,
Of that pure licour which at first it hent,
And what impression one in youth retain,
In age our reason hardly will restrain,
D. Lodge. -- What by vain example youth conceiues,
The same for lawful daily he receives.
Idem. Age is deformed, youth unkind,
We scorn their bodies, they our minds.
Th. Bastard. The youth are foolish hardy, or less hardy the^ they ought
Effeminate, fantastic, in few not few, are naught.
W. Warner. -- Forward sin in raines of foolish rage,
Leaves heedlesse youth inchaind his captive page.
D. Lodge. -- Youth does deserve by might,
But old age by good counsel and foresight.
Idem. -- Youth may love, and yongmen may admire,
If old age cannot, yet it will desire,
I. Weeuer. In grained habits died with often dips
Are not so soon discolored, young slippes
New set, are easily moved and plucked away,
But elder roots clippe faster in the clay.
I. Murston. The plowman first his land does dress and turn,
And makes it apt or ere the seed he sow,
Whereby he is full like to reap the corn,
Where otherwise no seed but weed should grow:
By which example men may easily know,
When youth have wealth before they can well use it,
It is no wonder though they do abuse it.
M. of M. Reform the eue^ to day, unapt to day, least apt to morrow
Youth aptly offers virtues, such as years unaptly borrow
VV. VV. Look what we have when youth is most in prime,
That shall we want in age by course of time.
Th. Churchyard. The division of the day natural. Mediae noctis inclinatio.
Night was far spent, and now in Ocean deep,
Orion flying fast from hissing snake,
His flaming head did hasten for to steep.
Ed. Sp. By this the eternal lamps wherewith high Jove,
Does light the lower world, were half yspent,
And the moist daughters of huge Atlas strove
Into the ocean deep to drive their weary drove.
Ide^. -- The gentle humorous night,
Implies her middle course, and the sharp east,
Breathes on my spirit with his fiery steedes.
G. Chapman. The silent night that long had soiourned,
Now began to cast her sable mantle off,
And now the sleepie waine-man softly drove
His slow-pac't teeme that long had travailed.
Th. Kyd. Gallicinium.
By this the Northern Wagoner had set
His seuen-fold teeme behind the steadfast star,
That was in Ocean waves, yet never wet,
But firm is fixed, and sends light from far,
To all that in the wide deep wandering are,
And cheereful chauntte clear with his notes shrill,
Had warned once that Phoebus fiery carre,
(...) haste was climing up to Esterne hill,
Full envious that the night so long his room did f^ill
Ed. Spencer. What time the native Bel-man of the night,
The bird that warned Peter of his fall,
First rings his silver bell to each sleeping wight,
That should their minds up to devotion call.
Idem. The cheerful cock, the sad nights trumpeter,
Waiting upon the rising of the sun,
Does sing to see how Cynthia shrinks her horn,
Where Clitia takes her progress to the East,
Where wringing west with drops of silver dew,
Her wonted tears of love she does renew,
The wandering swallow with her broken song,
The country wench unto her work awakes,
Whilst Cytherea sighing, walks to seek,
Her murdered love transformed to a rose,
Whom though she see, to croppe she kindly fears
But kissing sighs, and dewes him with her tears.
Th. Kyd. Now ere the purple dawning yet did spring,
The joyful Lark began to stretch her wing,
And now the cock the mornings trumpeter,
Played hunts up, for the day star to appear,
Down slideth Phebe from her cristall chair,
S'daigning to lend her light unto the air.
M. Drayton. Diliculum.
At last fair Hesperus in highest sky,
Had spent his lamp, and brought forth dawning light.
Ed. Spencer. The night grown old, her black head waxen gray,
Sure shepherds sign that morn will soon fetch day.
S. Ph. Sydney. It was the time when against the breaking day,
Rebellious night yet strove and still repined,
For in the east appears the morning gray,
And yet some lamps in Jove's high palace shined.
Ed. Fairfax. By this Apolloes golden harp began
To send forth music to the Ocean,
Which watchful Hesperos no sooner heard,
But he the day bright bearing carre prepared,
And ran before, as harkenger of light,
And with his flaming beams ^ockt ugly night.
Chapter Marlow. -- Lycaons son,
The hardy plough-swaine unto mighty Jove,
Has traced his silver furrows in the heaven,
And turning home his ouer-watched teeme,
Gives leave unto Apolloes chariot.
R. Green. Nights candles are burnt out, and iocond day,
Stands tiptoe on the mistie mountains top.
VV. Sh. Lo now the gentle Lark weary of rest,
From his moist cabynet mounts up on hie,
And wakes the morning from whose silver breast,
The sun arises in his majesty:
Who does the world so gloriously behold,
That Cedar tops and hills seemed burnisht gold.
Idem. Mane*
The joyous day began early to appear,
And fair Aurora fro her dewy bed
Of aged Tithon began her self to rear
With rosy cheeks, for shame as blushing red.
Ed. Spencer. Now when the rosie-fingred morning fair,
Weary of aged Tithons saffron bed,
Had spread her purple robe through dewie air,
And the high hills Titan discovered,
The royal Virgin shook off drowsy bed.
Idem. Now sullen night with slow sad pace descended
To ugly hell, when lo the blushing morrow
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow.
W. Sh. Soon as the morrow saire with purple beams,
Dispersed the shadows of the mistie night,
And Titan playing on the eastern streams,
Began clear the dewie air with springing light.
Ed. Spencer. The dewie Rose at morn had with her hayres,
In sundry sorts the Indian clime adornde,
And now her eyes apparelled in tears,
The loss of lovely Memnon long had mornde.
D. Lodge. The gaudie morn out of her golden sleep
Awakte, and little birds vncagde began sing,
To welcome home the bridegroom of the sea.
G. Peele. The gray-eyde morn smiles on the frowning night,
Cheering the eastern clouds with streams of light,
And darkness flected like a drunkard reeles,
From forth days pathway made by Titans wheels.
W. Sh. Now had the morn espide her lovers steedes,
VVhereat she starts, puts on her purple weed,
And red for anger that he stayed so long,
All headlong throws her self the clouds among.
Chapter Marlow. As soon as morning her shining hairs fro the mountains
Had shown forth and driven all starlight quite fro the heavens.
A. France. Fair Aurora betimes by the days break rose from her husband
Husband, old and cold, and drove back clouds from Olympas
Making way to the sun, taking her way to the younker,
Brave yonker Cephalus whom fair Aurora desired.
Idem. Now was the time when as Aurora fair,
Began to show the world her golden head,
And look abroad to take the cool fresh air,
Jealous Tithono lying still in bed.
S. I. H. The sable night dislodgd and now began,
Auroraes usher with a windy fan,
Sweetly to shake the woods on every side,
The whilst his mistress like a stately bride,
With flowers, with gemmes, and Indian gold does spangle
Her lovely locks her lovers looks to tangle,
When passing through the air in mantle blue,
With silver fringe she drops the pearlie dew,
With her goes Abram out.
I. Syluester. The rosy fringed morn with gladsome ray,
Rose to her task from old Tithonas lap.
Ed. Fairfax. The night begins be angry when she sees
She can distill no sleep in lovers eyes,
Tossing her self among the clouds now has
Sent the red morn as harauld of her wrath,
Whose lover Phoebus rising from his bed,
With dewie mantle has the world or'e-spread,
Shaking his tresses our Neptunes ebb:
And giving tincture to the spiders web,
These fair nimphs rose, seeing the light did call.
I. Weeuer. Aurora bright her cristall gates vnbatr'd,
And bridegroom like stepped forth the glorious sun
Ed. Fairfax. The dewie tressie morning newly wake,
With golden tinsell scarce had crowned her brow,
Riding in triumph on the Ocean lake,
Embellishing the hony-fringed bows.
M. Drayton. The purple morning left her crimsin bed,
And dond her robes of pure vermillion hue,
Her amber locks she crowned with roses red,
In Edens flowery gardens gathered new.
Ed. Fairfax. Soles Ortus.
At last the golden Oriental gate
Of greatest heaven began to open fair,
And Phoebus fresh as bridegroom to her mate,
Came dancing forth, shaking his dewie hair,
And hurles his glistering beams through gloomie air.
Ed. Spencer. The fiery sun was mounted up on hight,
Up to the heavenly towers, and shot each where
Out of his golden chariot glistering light:
And fair Aurora with her rosy hair,
The hateful darkness now had put to flight.
Idem. The golden sun rose from the silver wave,
And with his beams enameld every grene.
Ed. Fairfax. The snoring snout of restless Phlegon blew,
Hot on the Indes, which did the day renew
With scarlet sky.
Th. Hadson. Meridies.
Hyperion throwing forth his beams full often,
Into the highest top of heaven began clime,
And the world parting by an equal lot,
Did shed his whirling flames on either side,
As the great Ocean does himself divide.
Ed. Spencer. When as the sun towred in heavens head,
Down from the silver mountains of the sky,
Bent his bright chariot on the glassie bed,
Fair Cristall gilded with his glorious eye,
Fearing some usurpation in his sted,
Or least his love should too long dalliance spy,
Tweene him and Virgo, whose attractiue face,
Had newly made him leave the Lions chase,
In that same middayes hour etc.
I^ Markham. -- Golden Phoebus now that mounted hie
From fiery wheels of his fair chariot,
Hurled his beams so scorching cruel hot,
That living creature mote it not abide.
Ed. Spencer. In highest way of heaven the sun did ride,
Progressing from fair twins in golden place,
Having no mask of clouds before his face,
But streaming forth his heat in cheifest pride.
S. Ph. Sydney. Solis Occasus.
Now began the golden Phoebus for to steep,
His fiery face in billows of the west,
And his faint Steedes watered in Ocean deep,
Whilst from their iournall labors they do rest.
Ed. Spencer. -- Lo the great Automedon of day,
In Isis stream his golden locks does steep,
Sad even her dusky mantle does display,
Light flying fouls the posts of night do sport them,
And cheerful looking Phoebe does comfort them.
D. Lodge. By this the welked Phoebus began avail,
His weary waine and now the frostie night,
Her mantle black through heaven began ouerhaile,
Ed. Spencer. Such love as Phoebus from the colored sky,
Did headlong drive his horses toward the west,
To suffer horned Luna for to prye,
Amidst the dusky dark.
D. Lodge. When as the Sun hales towa^ds the western slade,
And the tree shadows three times greater made.
M. Dr. And now the Sun was past his middleway,
Leaning more lovely to his lemmons bed,
And the Moons third hour had attacht the day.
I. Markham. By this the sun had spread his golden locks
Upon the pale green carpet of the sea,
And opened wide the scarlet door which locks,
The easefull evening from the laboring day,
Now night began to leap from iron rocks.
And whippes her rustie wagon through the way.
Idem. The blushing sun plucks in his smiling beams,
^aking his steedes to mend their woonted pace,
Till plunging down into the ocean streams,
There in the froathie waves he hides his face,
Then raines them in more then his usual space,
And leaves foul darkness to possess the sky,
A time most fit for foulest tragedy.
M.D. Now the sun is mounted up on hie,
And pawseth in the midst of all the sky,
His fiery face upon the earth does beat,
And bakes it with intolerable heat.
I. Authoris. Vesper.
-- Now the golden Hesperus
Was mounted bie in top of heavens sheene,
And warned had his brethren joyous,
To light their blessed lamps in Jove's eternal house,
Ed. Spencer. (...) ^his the night from forth the darksome bower
(...) ^^bus, her teemed steedes began call,
(...) V^sper in his timely hour,
From golden Oeta began proceed withal.
R. Green. About the time when Vesper in the West,
(...) ^ing watch, and silent night,
(...) ^is twinkling train,
(...) to possess the world,
And fantasy to hauzen idle heads,
Under the stately Canopie of heaven,
I laid me down laden with many cares.
G. Peele. Now the worlds comforter with weary gate,
His days hot task has ended in the West*
The owl (nights harauld) shreekes, it is very late,
The sheep are gone to fold, the birds to nest,
The cole-blacke clouds that shadow heavens light
Do summon us to part and bid good night.
W. Sh. Noctis initium.
Now began the hunni'd vapor shed the ground
With pearlie dew, and the earths gloomie shade
Did dim the brightness of the welkin round,
That every beast and bird awarned made,
To shrowde themselves, while sleep their senses did invade,
Ed. Spencer. The silent shadows with their mother veil,
The bright lamp of heaven from Thetis hid,
Apolloes sister in her starry rail,
Along her lower Sphere in triumpeled.
D. Lodge. -- Cynthia companion of the night,
With shining brand lighting his eben carre,
Whose axeltree was iet auchact with stars,
And roof with shining ravens feathers cealed,
Piercing my eye lids as I lie along,
Awaked me through.
G. Peele. Thus whiles dumb sights their yielding hearts enta^gled
The air with sparks of living fire was spa^gled,
And night deep drencht in mistie Acheron,
Heaued up her head half the world upon,
Breathed darkness forth, dark night is Cupids day.
Chapter Marlow. -- From deep of regions underneath
Nights veil arose and suns bright luster chacde.
Ed. Fairfax. Invested in her stately vale the night
In her kind arms embraced all the round,
The silver moon from Sea vprising bright,
Spread frostie pearl upon the canded ground.
Idem. Now blacke-browde night plast in her chair of iet,
Sat wrapped in clouds within her cabinet,
And with her duskie mantle ouer-spread
The path the sunnie Palfraies used to tread,
And Cynthia sitting in her Cristall chair,
In all her pomp did ride along her Sphere,
The honyed dew descended in soft showers,
Drizled in pearl upon the tender flowers.
And Zephire hushed, who with a whispering gale,
Seemed to harken to the nightingale,
Which in the thornie brakes with her sweet song,
Unto the silent night bewrayde her wrong.
M. Dra. Noctis concubium.
Now was the heavenly vault depriude of light
With suns depart, and now the darkness of the night,
Did light those beamy stars which greater lite did dark
Now each thing that inioyd that fiery quickening spark
(Which life is called) were moud their spirits to repose,
And wanting use of eyes, their eyes began to close:
A silence sweet, each where with one consent imbrast,
A music sweet, to one in careful musing plast:
And mother earth now clad in morning weed, did breathe
A dull desire to kiss the image of our death.
S. Ph. Sydney. It was the time, when rest soft sliding down
From heavens height, into man's heavy eyes,
In the forgetfulness of sleep does drown
The careful thoughts of mortal miseries.
Ed. Spencer. -- The sun already sanke
Beyond our world, and ere I got my boothe,
Each wight with ma^tle black the night does scooth,
Saving the glowworm, which would courteous be,
Of that small light often watching sleepers see.
The welkin had full niggardly inclosde
In coffer of dim clouds his silver groates,
I cleped stars, each thing to rest disposde,
The caves were full, the mountains void of goats
The birds eyes closde, closed their chirping notes:
As for the nightingale, woods music King,
It August was, he daind not then to sing.
S. Ph. Sydney. -- Now the sable shade
I cleped night had thick enueloped
The sun, in veil of double darkness made
Sleep eased care, rest brought complaint to bed.
Ed. Fairfax. Now from the fresh, the soft, and tender bed,
Of her still mother gentle night out-flew
The fleeting balm on hills and dales she shed,
With honey drops of pure and precious dew,
And on the verdure of green forests spread,
The virgin prime rose, and the violet blew,
And sweete-breath Zephire on his spreading wings
Sleep, ease, repose, rest, peace, and quiet brings,
The thoughts and troubles of broad waking day,
They softly dip in mild obliuions lake.
Idem. Intempesta nox.
Now when Aldeboran was mounted hie,
Above the shinie Cassiopeias chair,
And all in deadly sleep did drowned lie.
Ed. Spencer. Midnight was come, when every vital thing,
With sweet sound sleep their weary limbs did rest,
The beasts were still, the little birds that sing,
Now sweetly slept besides their mothers breast,
The old and all were snrowded in their rest,
The waters calm, the cruel seas did cease,
The woods, the fields, and all things held their peace
The golden stars were whi^ld amidst their race,
And on the earth did laugh with twinkling light,
When each thing nestled in his resting place,
Forgot days pain with pleasure of the night,
The hare had no the greedy hounds in sight,
The fearful Dear of death stood not in doubt,
The Partrich dreamd not of the falchens foot,
The ugly bear now minded not the stake,
Nor how the cruel mastiffes do her tear,
The stagge lay still vnroused from the brake,
The foamie bore feared not the hunters spear,
All things were still in desert, bush and breere:
The quiet heart now from their travails rest,
Soundly they slept in most of all their rest.
M. Sackuile. -- The midnights waking star,
Sad Cassiopeia with a heavy cheer
Pusht forth her forehead to make known from far,
What time the deadly dole of earth drew near.
I. Markham. With falling mists the darkesome night extended
Her sable wings, and gently ouer-spread
Heavens gloomie veil, whence Phoebus lamp was fled,
Dead time of rest to every mortal wight,
To cheerful minds that brings wanton sleep,
With many a fantasy and deluding toy,
And pensive heart it does delaie and keep
From tedious company, that would annoy,
Dull Saturnists that have abiurdall joy.
Th. Storer. Now spread the night her spangled canopie,
And summond every restless soul to sleep,
On beds of tender grass the beasts do lie,
The fishes slumbred in the silent deep,
Unheard was Serpents hiss and Dragons cry,
Birds left to sing and Philomele to weep:
Only that noise heavens rolling circle kest,
Sung lullaby to bring the world to rest.
Ed. Fairfax. Noctis initium.
When low the night with mistie mantle spread,
Began dark the day, and dim the azure skies,
And Venus in her message Hermes sped
To bloody Mars, to will him not to rise,
While she her self approacht in speedy wise,
And Virgo hiding her disdainful breast,
With Thetis now had laid her down to rest,
While Scorpio dreading Sagitarius dart,
Whose bow pressed bent, in fight the string had slipped*
Down slid into the Ocean flood a part,
The bear that in the irish seas had dipped
Hs grisly feet, with speed from thence he whipped,
For Thetis hasting from the virgins bed,
Pursude the bear that ere she came was fled,
And Phaethon now near reaching to his race,
With glistering beams gold streaming where they bent*
Was pressed to enter in his resting place,
Enryhius that in the carte first went,
Had even now attained his iourneyes stent,
And fast declining hid away his head,
Where Titan coucht him in his purple bed,
And now pale Cynthia with her borrowed light,
Beginning to supply her brothers place,
Was past the noone-sted six degrees in sight,
When sparkling stars amidst the heavens face,
With twinkling light shone on the earth apace,
That while they brought about the nights chair,
The dark had dimd the day ere I was ware.
M. Sac. Such time as from her mothers tender lap
The night arose, guarded with gentle winds,
And with her precious dew refresht the sap,
Of bloome and dark, (whilst that her mantle blinds
The veil of heaven) and every bird was still,
Save Philomele that did bemone her ill:
When in the West Orion lift aloft
His stately crest, and smilde upon the twins,
And Cynthia seemly bright (whose eye full often
Had watched her love) with radiant light begins,
To pierce the veil of silence with her beams,
Sporting with wanton clear in Ocean streams.
When little winds in beating of their wings,
Did woe the eyes to leave their constant walk,
And all was hushed save Zephirus that sings,
With lovely breathings for the sea nymphs sake,
My wrathful greefes perplexe my mind so sore,
That forth I walked, my sorrows to deplore.
D. Lodge. Poetical Descriptions.
Of Theology.
In chariot framed of celestial mould,
And simple pureness of the purest sky,
A more then heavenly nymph I did behold,
Who glauncing on me with her gracious eye,
So gave me leave her beauty to epsy,
For sure no sense such sight can comprehend,
Except her beams their fair reflection lend
Her beauty with eternity began,
And only unto God was ever seen,
When Eden was possessed with sinful man,
She came to him, and gladly would have been,
The long succeedings worlds eternal Queen,
But they refused her (O heinous deed)
And from that garden banished was that seed,
Since when at sundry times and sundry ways,
Atheism, and blinded ignorance conspire,
How to obscure those holy burning rays,
And quench that zeal of heart-inflaming fire,
As makes our souls to heavenly things aspire:
But all in vain, for maugre all their might,
She never lost one sparkle of her light.
Pearls may be foyld, and gold be turned to dross,
The sun obscured, the moon be turned to blood,
The world may sorrow for Astreas loss,
The heavens darkened like a duskie wood,
Wast deserts lie where watrie fountains stood;
But fair Theology (for so she hight)
Shall never loose one sparkle of her light.
Such one she was, as in his Hebrew song,
The wisest king for fairest creature proves,
Embracing her the Cedar trees among,
Comparing her to roses and to Doves,
Preferring her before all other loves,
Such one she was, and every whit as fair,
Besides these two was never such a pair.
T. Storer. Astrology.
Her hand-maides in Amazon-like attire,
Went chaste and modest like Dianaes train,
One by her gazing looks seems to aspire
Beyond the Moon, and in a high disdain,
To deem the world and worldly treasures vain.
She hight Astrology, on whose bright lawne,
Spheres Astrolabes and skillful globes are drawn.
Retoricke.
The next, fair smiling with a pleasing cheek,
Had power to ravish and inchaunt men's ears,
Hight Rhetoric, whose shadowed veil showen clear
With silver tongues, and over it she wears,
A wimpled scarf, bedewd with hearers tears,
Whose captive hearts she should detain long while,
With pleasance of her unaffected style.
Of Logic.
The third a quicke-eyde dame of piercing sight,
That reasons worth in equal balance wayed,
The truth she loved above all earthly wight,
Yet could not tell her love, but what she said
Was certain true, and she a perfect maid,
Her garments short, tuckt up to earth preparde,
And she called Logic without welt or guard.
Th. Storer. Arith. Music. Geometry.
Next these, whose outward looks I knew aright,
And had some portion of their endless treasure,
Fair Algebra with fingers richly dight,
Sweet Music founder of delightsome pleasure,
Earth-scanning nymph, directresse of all measure.
These humbly did her sovereign highness greet,
And meekely laid their garlands at her feet.
From every one she plucked a special flower,
And laid each flower upon a several part,
Then from her one a stem of wondrous power,
Whose leaves were beams, whose stalk a fiery dart.
And that she laid upon my trembling heart,
These were the buds of art, this plant of bliss,
This gave them life, they yielded grace to this.
Th. Storer. Of Battle.
Two greater kings were never seen before.
Then camped was in Ragan field at morn,
With haughty hearts enarmed all on ire,
Each soldier set another so on fire,
Thar scarcely they could keep them in their bound
Till pipe or Cymball, or the Trumpet sound,
Denounce the chocke, but with their furious faces,
They threate their foes with fell menaces,
And stroks at hand, two thousand lads forlorn
(To blunt the sword) were down in battle borne,
Upon their flames flew fervently their stones,
That bet their bucklers to their bruised bones,
The Squadron then steps sternely to the stroke,
With hearts inhumane all the battle yoakes,
And are supplyde with many mighty bands,
Some counters them, and sternely them withstands,
With foot to foot each other ouerpries,
Both Medes and Caldes claspe with ghastly cries,
Like Nylus streams that from the rock do rumble,
(...) Encelade when he in tomb does tumble.
Tho. Huds^^. Of a kiss.
Best charge, and brauest retrait in Cupids fight,
A double key which opens to the heart,
Most rich, when most his riches it impart,
Neast of young joys, schoolmasters of de^ight,
Teaching the mean at once to take and give,
The friendly stay, where blows both wound and heal
The petty death where each in other live,
Poor hopes first wealth, hostage of promise weak.
Breakefast of love.
S. Ph. Sydney. Of People.
People, less settled then the sl^ding sand,
^ore mutable then Proteus or the Moon,
T^^nd and ^e^urnd in turning of a hand,
^^^e Eu^^pus^b^e flowing every noone:
Thou thousand headed headless monster most,
Of sl^ine like Antheus, and as often new rising,
Who hard as steel, as light as wingd art tossed,
Camelion like, each ob^ects color prising.
I. Syluester. Disdain.
A sturdie villain stirring strife and bold,
As though the highest God defy he would:
In his right hand an iron clubbe he held,
But he himself was all of golden mould,
Yet had both life and sense, and well could weilde
That cursed weapon, when his cruel foes he queld,
D^sdaine he called was, and did disdain
So to be calde, and who so him did call.
Ed. Spencer. Of the same.
-- Lo a knight unto his socour went
All armed in shining steel, and on his shield,
He bare a yoke in sundry pieces rent.
And flames of fire all in a yellow field:
So weaponed he was, as if he meant
To make all that incountred him to yield:
A sword and spear he had, and to the same
A mace, from whence he threw continual flame,
His mace was storde with everlasting fire,
That ever burned and did never waste,
No other wagon needed one desire
To make good way which way soere he past,
And sure Rinaldoes danger did require,
Quick remedy, wherefore the knight did haste,
And when he saw this monster and did view her,
With his stiff spear forth with he overthrew her:
But this same fall did her no whit annoy,
Wherefore to use his spear he now misliketh,
Only he will his fiery face employ,
And with thar same the monster foul he strikes,
Then she no longer could her force enjoy.
S. I. H. Of Dearth.
-- Dearth the lively form of death,
Still yawning wide with loathsome stinking breath,
With hollow eyes, with meger cheeks and chinne,
With sharp lean bones, piercing her sable skin,
Her empty bowels may be plainly spide,
Clean through the wrinckles of her withered hide,
She has no belly, but the bellies seat,
Her knees and knuckles swelling very great,
Insatiate Orque, that even at one repaste,
Almost all creatures in the world with waste,
Whose greedy gorge dish after dish does draw,
Seeks meat in meat, for still her monstrous maw
Voydes in devouring, and sometimes she eats
Her own dear babes, for lack of other meats,
Nay more sometimes (O strangest gluttony,)
She eats her self, her self to satisfy,
Lessning her self, her self so to enlarge,
And cruel thus, she does our grandfire charge,
And brings beside from Limbo to assist her,
Rage, feebleness, and thirst her ruthlesse sister.
I. Siluester. Of Thirst.
-- Cruel thirst came out of Cyren land,
Where she was fostered on the burning sand,
With hot intracted tongue, and sunken eine,
With stomach worn, and wrinckled visage keen
With light and meagre, corse, and pailed veins,
In steed of blood, that brimstone hot retains,
Her poisoned mouth blew through that holy town,
Such hellish air, that stiffeled up and down.
Th. Had. Old Woman.
Her eyes were sunk into her head,
Her cheeks were lean and lanke,
Out stood her chin,
Into her mouth her bloudlesse lips they sanke,
Her toothlesse chappes
Disgraste her tongue in telling of a tale,
And suck she might
A teat for teeth and spoonage too did fail,
Her hair since sixty years
Not black, was now, nor white, or none,
The substance of her wrinckled face
Were only skin and bone,
Dim were her eyes,
Deaf were her ears, rank smelt, if she could sent,
A palsy made her feeling cease,
Down tastlesse food it went.
W. Warner. Of a Combat.
Sometime they proffer, then they pause a while,
Sometime strike out, like masters of the play,
Now stand upright, now stoop, another while,
Now open lie, now cover all they may.
Now ward then with a slip the blow beguilde,
Now forward step, now back a little way,
Now round about, and where the tone gives place,
There still the other presses in his place.
S. I. H. Of Albion.
-- Fair Albion glory of the North,
Neptunes best darling held between his arms,
Divided from the world, as better worth,
Kept from himself, defended from all harms.
S. Daniell. This royal throne of Kings, this sceptred isle.
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, this demi-paradise,
This fortress built by nature for her self,
Against intestion and the hand of war,
This happy breed of man, this little world,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a Moate defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier lands,
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal Kings,
Fearde by their breed, and famous by their birth,
Renowned in their deeds as far from home,
For charity, service, and true chivalry,
As is the Sepulcher in stubburne Iewrie.
M. Dr. Of Aegipt.
The fairest flower that glories Africa,
Whose beauty Phoebus dare not dash with showers,
Over whose climate never hung a cloud,
But smiling Titan lights the Horizon.
R. Green. Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is feared on two hills,
Of height unlike, and turned side to side,
The space between a gentle vallie filles,
From mount to mount exspansed fair and wide,
Three sides are sure imbarde with crags and hills,
The rest is easy ^cant to rise espide,
But mighty bulwarks fence that plainer part,
So art helps nature, nature strengthens art.
The town is storde of troughs and cestornes made,
To keep fresh water, but the country seems
Deuoyde of grass, unfit for plowmens trade,
Not fertile, moist, with rivers, wells, and streams,
There grow few trees, to make the summers shade,
To shield the parched land from scorehing beams,
Save that a wood stands six miles from the town,
With aged Cedars, dark and shadows brown:
By east among the duskie valleys glide,
The silver streams of Iordanes siler flood,
By west the mid-land sea with bounders tide,
O^ sandy showers, where loppa whilom stood,
By North Samaria stands, and on that side,
The golden Calfe was reard in Bethell wood,
Bethlem by South, where Christ incarnate was,
A pearl in steel, a diamond set in brass.
Ed. Fairfax. Of Deluge.
Heavens Cristall windows with one hand God opes
Where on the world a thousand seas he drops,
With the other hand he gripes and wringeth forth,
The spungie globe of the execrable earth,
So straightly pressed that it does strait restore,
All liquid floods that it had drunk before,
In every rock new rivers do begin,
And to his aid the snowes came tumbling in.
The Pines and Cedars have but bows to show,
The shoares do shrink, the swelling waters grow.
I. Syluester. Of a Courtier effeminate.
About his neck a carknet rich he ware
Of precious stones all set in gold well tried,
His arms that carst all warlike weapons bare,
In golden bracelets wantonly were tied,
Into his ears two rings conuayed are,
Of golden wire, at which on eirher side,
Two Indian pearls, in making, like two pears
Of passing price, were pendant at his ears,
His locks bedewd with waters of sweet savor,
Stood curled round in order on his head,
He had such wanton womanish behavior,
As though in Valence he had long been bred,
So changd in speech, in manners, and in favor,
So from himself beyond all reason led,
By these inchauntments of this amorous dame,
He was himself in nothing but in name.
S. I. H. Of Eden.
For Adam God chose out an happy seat,
A climate temperate both for cold and heat,
Which dainty Flora paueth sumptuously,
With flowrie Verse inameld tapistrie,
Pomona prancks with fruits, whose taste excelles,
And Zephir filles with musk and amber smelles,
Where God himself (as gardener) treades the allies,
With trees and corn couers the hills and valleys,
Summons sweet sleep with noise of hundred brooks,
And sunne-proofe arbors makes in sundry nookes,
He plants, he proines, he pares, he trimmeth round,
The euer-greene bewties of a fruitful ground:
Here, there, the course of the holy lakes he leads,
With thousand dies he motleth all the meade.
I. Syluester. Of Winds.
-- O heavens fresh flames quoth he,
Earths sweeping broomes, O forests enmity,
O you my haraulds, and my harbengers,
My nimble posts, and speedy messengers,
My arms, my sinews, and my Eagles swift,
That through the air my rolling chariot lift.
I. Syluester. Of a drunken man.
His head grows giddie, and his foot indents,
A mighty fume his troub^ed brain torments,
His idle prattle from their purpose quite,
Is abrupt, fluttering, all confusde, and light,
His wine stuffed stomach wrung with wind he feels,
His trembling tent all topsi-turuie wheels,
At last not able on his legs to stand,
More like a foul swine then a sober man,
Oppressed with sleep he wallowes on the ground,
His shameless snorting trounke so deeply drowned,
In selfe-obliuion, that he did not hide,
Those parts that Caesar covered when he died.
Idem. A Palmer.
A silly man in simple weed forworne,
And soyld with dust of the long dried way,
His sandales were with toylsome travel torn,
And face all tand with scorching sunnie ray,
As he had trauaild many a summers day,
Through boiling sands of Africa and Inde,
And in his hand a Jacobs staff to stay
His weary limbs upon, and eke behind,
His scrip did hang, in which his needmets he did bind
Ed. Spencer. Of Harpies.
Seven of them came together in a knot,
With women's faces, wanne, with deadly cold,
So hunger-staru'd, as death it self might not
Be at first sight more hidious to behold:
Their wings were great, but foul black wings god wot,
Their tallents sharp to gripe, and strong to hold,
A large foul panch, a filthy tail and long,
From whence there came a mighty odor strong.
S. I. Harr. Of Cyprus.
-- With filled sails, in little while,
They came as far as Cyprus, Venus I Will:
Here every place was full of odours sweet,
Of gardens fair, of spyce of pleasant taste,
The people lustful, (for dame Venus meet)
From tender years to doting age do last,
With wanton damsels walking in each street,
Inuiting men to pleasure and repast.
S. I. Harr. Of the Rainebow.
Noah looks up, and in the air he viewes
A semicircle of an hundred hewes;
which bright ascending toward th'aetheriall thrones,
Has a line drawn between two Horizons
For just Diameter: an even bent bow
Contrived of three: whereof the one does show
To be all painted of a golden hew;
The second green, the third an orient blew:
Yet so, that in this pure blew-golden green,
Still (o pall-like) some changeable is seen;
A bow bright shining in th'archers hand,
Whose subtle string seems level with the land,
Half parting heaven, and over us it bends,
within two seas wetting his horned ends;
A temporal beauty of the lampfull skies,
where powerful Nature shows her fresh-red dies.
And if you only blew and red perceive,
The same as signs of sea and fire conceive,
Of both the flowing and the flaming doom,
The judgment past, and judgment yet to come.
I. Siluester. Of Paradise,
Soon after he a crystal stream espying,
From foot to head he washed himself therein,
Then up he gets him on his courser flying,
And of the air he more and more does win:
Ascending heaven, all earthly thoughts defying.
As fishes cut the liquid stream with fin,
So cutteth he the air and does not stop
Till he was come unto the mountain top.
This hill nie touched the circle of the Moon,
The top was all a fruitful pleasant field,
And light at night, as ours is here at noone,
The sweetest place that ever man beheld,
(There would I dwell if God gave me my boon)
The soil thereof most fragrant flowers does yield,
Like Rubies, gold, Sapphire, pearls, Topaze stones,
Chrisolites, Diamonds, Iacinths for the nonce.
The trees that there did grow, were ever green,
The fruit that thereon grew were never fading,
The sundry colored birds did sit between
(Singing most sweet) the fruitful boughs the^ shading,
Rivers more clear then Crystal to be seen,
The fragrant smell, the sense and soul inuading;
With air so temperate and so delightsome,
As all the place beside was clear and lightsome.
Of Diana,
The first with cloths tuckt up as Nimphs in woods do range,
Tuckt up eue^ to the knees, with bows and arrows pressed
Her right arm naked was, discovered was her breast:
But heavy was her pace, and such a megre cheer,
As little hunting mind (God knows) did there appear.
S. Phil. Sidney. -- Now great Phoebe in her triumph came,
With all the titles of her glorious name,
Diana, Delia, Luna, Cynthia,
Virago, Hecate, and Elythia,
Prothyria, Dictinna, Proserpine,
Latona, and Lucina most divine.
M. Drayton. Cynthia.
The silver Moon, dread sovereign of the deep
That with the floods fills up her horned head,
And by her waine, the waining ebs does keep.
Iar. Markham. -- With a brase of silver hindes,
(...) Iuorie Chariot swifter then the winds,
(...) great Hyperions horned daughter drawn,
^nchauntresse like, decked in disparent Lawne.
Circled with charms and incantations,
That ride huge spirits and ouragious passions;
Music and mood she loves, but love she hates,
As curious Ladies do their public cates.
G. Chapman. Natures bright eyesight, and the nights fair soul,
That with thy triple forhead do control
Earth, seas, and hell, and art in dignity
The great'st and swiftest Planet in the sky.
Idem. Venus.
-- Mounting in the East
Fair Venus in her Iuorie coach did have,
And toward those pensive Dames her course addressed
Her Doves so plied their wauing wings with flight,
That straight the sacred Goddess came in sight.
Upon her head she bare that gorgious crown
wherein the poor Amyntas is a star,
Her lovely locks her bosom hanging down,
Those nets that first insnard the God of war:
Delicious-louely shine her lovely eyes,
And on her cheeks Carnation clouds arise.
D. Lodge. Of Venus,
This goddess had with art (more the^ our women kno^
As stuff meant for the sale, set out to glaring show)
A wanton woman's face, and with curld knots had twin^
Her hair, which by the help of painters cunning shin'^
S. Phil. Sidney. Of Cupid.
Amongst this gamesome crew is seen,
The issue of the Cyprian Queen,
Whose head and shoulders fethered been;
And as the stars his countenance sheene.
In his left hand his bow he bare,
And by his side his quiver ware,
In power he sits past all compare,
And with his flames the world does dare;
A scepter in his hand he held,
With Chloris native flowers untilled,
And Nectars deathlesse odours stild
From his bright locks the Sun digild.
The triple Graces there assist,
Sustaining with their breasts commist
And knees that Thetis bosom kissed
The challice of this Amorist.
G. Chapman transl. -- Him the greatest of the Gods we deem,
Borne without sin or couples of one kind,
For V^nus self does solie couples seem,
Both male and female through commixture joined,
So pure and spotless Cupid forth she brought,
And in the gardens of Adonis nursed:
Where growing, he his own perfection wrought,
And shortly was of all the Gods the first.
Then got he bow and shafts of gold and lead,
In which so fell and puissant he grew,
That Jove himself his power began to dread,
And taking up to heaven, him godded new.
From thence he shoots his arrows every where
Into the world at random as he will,
On us frail men.
S. Daniell. Venus.
-- Now in ire,
She mounts her chariot swifter then the wind
Or subtle comprehension of the mind,
which by two nimble Cock-sparrowes was drawn
Caparisond but lightly with the lawne
Took from the Flowre-deluces inner skin,
Trapt and imbost with Marigolds: within
Sits Venus naked, holding in her hand
A tumbling shelfish with a Myrtle wand;
Wearing a garland on her wimpled head,
Compacted of the white Rose, and the red.
None but the blind boy Cupid durst approach
For to be whurried with her in her Coach,
The snow-white Graces running by their sides,
Were through the heavens their wagoners and guides,
Lashing the Sparrowes under quiuering wings,
With whyps of twisted gold, and silver strings,
A beauie of white Doves still fluttring over,
From the suns sight such beauty seemed to cover;
And thus she rode in triumph in her throne,
Whose radiant luster like the sunne-beames shone.
I. Weeuer. Calm weather.
As then no wind at all there blew,
No swelling cloud accloyd the air,
The sky like grass of watched hue
Reflected Phoebus golden hair:
The garnisht trees no pendant stird,
Nor voice was heard of any bird.
Mat. Roydon. The King of winds calls home his posts again,
And Amphitrite smooth's her watery plain,
The air his clouds has changed to crystal clear,
And now the lamps of light from heaven appear.
J. Syluester. Of Tempests.
On Neptune war was made by Aeolus and his train,
who letting loose the winds, tossed and tormented the air,
So that on every coast, men shipwreck did abide,
Or else were swallowed up in open sea with waves,
And such as came to shore, were beaten with despair.
Edm. Spen. -- Within a little season,
The vvinde discovered his deceit and treason,
First from the poope, it changed to the side,
Then to the prore, at last it whirled round,
Long in a place it never would abide,
which does the Pilots wit and skill confound;
The surging waves swell still in higher pride,
Proteus white flock, did more and more abound,
And seemed to them as many deaths to threaten,
As the shyps sides with diverse waves are beaten,
Now in their face the wind, straight on their back,
And forward this, and backward that it blows,
Then on the side it makes the ship to crack,
Among the Mariners confusion grows,
The Master doubts ruin and present wrack,
For none his will, nor none his meaning knows.
To whistle, becken, cry, it naught auailes,
Sometime to strike, sometime to turn their sails,
But none there was could hear, nor see, nor mark:
Their ears so stopped, so dazeled were their eyes,
with vveather so tempestuous, and so dark,
And black thick clouds, that with the storm did rise,
From whence sometimes great ghastly flames did spark^
And thunder claps that seemed to rent the skies;
Which made them in a manner deaf and blind,
That no man understood the Masters mind:
Nor less, nor much less fearful is the sound
The cruel tempest in the tackle makes,
Yet each one for himself some business found,
And so some special office him betakes:
One this untied, another this fast bound,
He the maine bowling now restraines, now slakes,
Some take an oar, some at the pumpe take pain,
And power the sea, into the Sea again.
Behold a horrible and hideous blast,
That Boreas from his frozen lips does send,
Does backward force the sail against the mast,
And makes the waves unto the skies ascend,
Then brake their oars and rudder eke at last,
Nothing was left from tempest to defend.
So that the ship as swai'd now quite a-side,
Unto the waves laid open her naked side,
Then all a-side the staggering ship did reele,
For one side quite beneath the water lay,
And on the the other side the very keele,
Above the water plain discern you may;
Then thought they all hope past, and down they kneel,
And unto God to take their souls they pray;
Worse danger grew then this, when this was past,
By means the ship began after leake so fast,
The wind, the waves to them no respite gave,
But ready every hour to ouer-throw them;
Often they were hoist so high upon the wave,
They thought the middle region was below them:
Oft-times so low the sand their vessel drove,
As though that Charon there his boat would show them.
Scant had they time, or power to fetch their breath,
All things did threaten them so present death.
S. I. Harr. -- An host of black and sable clouds
Began to eclipse Lucinaes silver face,
And with a hurling noise from forth the South,
A gust of wind did raise the billows up,
Then scantled we our sails with speedy hands,
And took our drablers from our bonners strain,
And severed our bonnets from our courses:
Our top sails up we trusse, our sprite sails in,
But vainly strive they that resist the heavens,
For lo the waves incense then more and more,
Mounting with hideous rorings from the depth;
Our Bark is battered by encountering storms,
And welnie steemd by breaking of the clouds:
The steeres-man pale, and careful holds the helm,
Wherein the trust of life and safety lay,
Till all at once, a mortal tale to tell,
Our sails were split by Bisas bitter blast;
Our middle broke, and we bereft of hope;
There might you see with pale and ghastly looks,
The dead in thought, and doleful Merchant lifts
Their eyes and hands unto their Country Gods,
The goods we cast in bowels of the Sea,
A sacrifice to swage proud Neptunes ire.
D. Lodge. Now Nerrus foames, and now the wrathful wave,
Tossed and turmoild by angry Neptunes slaves,
Do mount and roll, against Thetis heaven does fight,
And she (enraged) usurped on Rheas right,
An air, black, sable, sad, ore-spread the skies,
And reaues all light from woeful Sailors eyes:
Or if some beams break through their pitchy night,
This naught, but lighning flashes full of fright.
I. Syluester. The Eastern winds drives on the roaring train
Of white blew billows, and the clouds again
With fresh seas cross the seas, and she does send
In counter-change a rain with salty blend
The heavens, do seem in Thetis lap to fall,
The Sea-starre, skies, and God to arm this all:
Against one ship that skips from stars to ground,
From wave to wave (like windy balances bound)
The whilst the Pylot on a foamy mount,
Thinks from the pole to see hells pit profound;
And then cast down unto the sandy shore,
Seems from low hell to see the lofty pole,
And feeling foes within and eke without,
As many waves so many deaths does doubt:
The Sea sharp-surging round about the ship,
Vncaulks their keele, and does her seames vmip,
Whereby the waters entering uncontrolled,
Ebbing abroad, yet flow a-pace in hold,
For every ^un the plied pump does free,
A flood breaks in, the amazed master he,
His cunning conquered by the perils plains,
Doubts what to say, or where to turn his raines,
Which wave to meet, or which salt surge to fly,
So yields his charge in sea to live or die.
Strike sail the Master cries, strike sail amain,
Veil misme, and sprite sail, but the winds constrain
With boistrous blasts that beat upon his face,
His sea-shapt speech to fly before their chase:
Of men dismayed, the sad confused cries,
Wroath Neptunes noise, and bellowing winds likewise;
Heavens thunderclaps, the tacklings whistling,
(Strange Minstrells) do dire dreadful descant sing.
Iosuah Syluester. The day with cloud was sudden ouer-cast,
And angry Joue an hideous storm of rain,
Did pour into his Lemmons lap so fast,
That every wight to shroud it did constrain.
Ed. Spencer. The air does on the sudden grow obscure,
Lightened sometimes with lightnings dreadful light,
And save their houre-glasse, kept the reckning sure,
It Was hard for to discern the day from night;
The desperate Mariners do all endure
As men inured to the waters spite;
The heavens above, the waves beneath us roar,
Yet are they not dismayed one whit therefore;
One with a whistle, hanged about his neck,
Shows by the sound which cord must be undone,
And strait the ship-boy ready at a beck,
Unto the tops with nimble slight does run:
The other Mariners upon the deck;
Or at the steer the coming waves do shun,
And then by turns they pump the water out,
By pain and care preventing every doubt.
S. I. Harrington, The heavens on every side enclosed be,
Black storms and foggs are blown up from far,
That now the Pilot can no Load-starre see,
But skies and Seas do make most dreadful war:
The billows striving to the heavens to reach,
And th'heauens striving them for to impeach.
R. Green. Of the Spring
The soote seasons that blood, and bloome forth brings,
With green has clad the hill and eke the vale;
The Nightingale with feathers new she sings,
The Turtle to her mate has told her tale:
Summer is come, for every spray now springs;
The Heart has hung his old head on the pale:
The Bucke in brake his Winter-coate he flings:
The Fishes fleet with new-repared scale:
The Adder all her sloth away she flings:
The swift Swallow pursues the flies small:
The busy Be her honey now she mings:
Winter is worn that was the flowers bale.
E. of Surrey. The Winters wrath begins to quell,
And pleasant Spring appears;
The grass now gins to be refresht,
The Swallow peepes out of her nest,
And cloudy welkin clears.
E. Spenser. Flora now calls for each flower,
And bid's make ready Maias bower,
That new is up rise from bed.
Idem. The earth late choakt with showers,
Is now arai'd in green,
Her bosom springs with flowers,
The air dissolues her teene;
The vvoods are decked with leaves,
And trees are clothed gay,
And Flora crowned with sheaues,
With oaken boughs does play,
The birds upon the trees
Do sing with pleasant voices,
And chaunt in their degrees,
Their loves and luckie choyces.
D. Lodge. The tenth of March when Aries received,
Dan-Phoebus rays into his horned head.
In flowery season of the year,
And when the firmament was clear,
When Tellus her balls painted were,
With issue of disparent cheer;
When the Usher to the morn did rise,
Sleep gave their vituall liberties
To Phillis and to Floraes eyes.
G. Chapman. The air was calm, the day was clear,
Loves wanton winds with wooing breathe,
Began greet the sweetest of the year,
The flower forgot his Winters death;
The earth revived by the sun,
To let in gay attire begun.
The leaf allied unto the tree,
By help of spring in coat of green,
Stole forth my wandering eye to see,
The beauties of the Summers Queen.
D. Lodge. The Winter with his grisly storms no longer dare abide,
The pleasant grass with lusty green the earth has newly died,
The trees has leaves, the boughs do spread, new changed is the year
The water brooks are clean sunk down, the pleasant boughs appear,
The Spring is come, the goodly Nimphs now dance in every place:
Thus has the year most pleasantly of lately changed her face.
E. of Surrey. Now each creature joys the other,
Passing happy days and hours,
One bird reports unto an other,
In the fall of silver showers:
whilst the earth our common mother,
Has her bosom decked with flowers.
Whilst the nearest torch of heaven,
with bright rays warmes Eloraes lap,
Making nights and days both even.
Chearing plants with freshnes sap.
S. Daniell. Of VVinter.
The wrathful Winter proching on a pace,
with blustering blasts had all ybard the treene,
And old Saturnus with his frosty face,
with chilling cold had pearst the tender green;
The mantles rent wherein inwrapped been;
The gladsome Groves that now lay ouer-throwne,
The Tapers torn, and every tree down blown;
The soil that erst so seemly was to seem,
was all dispoiled of her beauties hew,
And stole fresh flowers (wher-with the summers Queen
Had clad the earth) now Boreas blast down blew,
And small fowls flocking in their songs did rue
The vvinters wrath, wherewith each thing defast,
In woeful wise bewayl'd the Summer past:
Hawthorne had lost his motly liuerie:
The naked twigs were shiuering all for cold,
And dropping down the tears abundantly;
Each thing (me thought) with weeping eye me told,
The cruel season, bidding me withold
My self within, for I was gotten out
Into the fields, whereas I walked about.
M. Sackuille. -- When ye count ye free from fear,
Comes the breame Winter with chamfered brows,
Full of wrinkles and frosty furrows,
Shooting his grisly dart,
Which cruddles the blood and pricks the heart.
Ed. Spenser. January.
-- Now sad Winter welked has the day,
And Phoebus weary of his yearly task,
Yshackled has his steeds in lowly lay,
And taken up his Inn in fishes haske.
Idem. Autumnus.
The wearied nights approached on a pace,
With darksome shades which somewhat breeds care,
The sun has take more near the earth his race.
In Libra then his greatest sway he bare,
For pardy then the days more colder are,
Then fades the green fruit, lively herbs are done,
And Winter gins to wast that Summer wone.
I. H. Mir. of Mag. Summer. Iulie.
Now the sun has reared up
his silver footed teame,
Making his wait between the cup
and golden Diadem.
The rampant Lion hunts he fast,
with dogs of noisome breath,
Whose balefull barking brings in have,
pine, plague, and drery death.
Edm. Spencer. August.
That time of year when the inamoured sun,
Clad in the richest roabes of living fires,
Courted the Virgin sign, great Natures Nun,
^vhich barraines earth, of all that earth desires:
^uen in the month that from Augustus wone
His sacred name, which unto heaven aspi^es,
And on the last of his tentrebled days
W. Shakespeare. ^t was the month in which the righteous maid,
That for disdain of sinful worlds vpbraid,
^ed back to heaven where she was first conceived
unto her silver bower the sun received,
And the hot Syrian dog on him awayting
After the chafed Lions cruel bayting,
^orrupted had the air with noisome breath,
And powrd on earth, plague, pestilence and dearth.
Rob. Green. ^ow was the month that old Sextilis name
^hangd by the Roman Senates sage degree,
And glorying so to innouate the same,
^o have himself new christened did agree,
^oude that Augustus Godfather should be,
(...) whilst Ceres clad him in a mantle fair
Of bearded Corn, still quauering with the air.
Char. Fitz Ieffrey. Iulie.
What time sleeps Nurse the silent night begun
To steal by minutes on the long-liu'd days,
The furious dog-starre chasing of the sun,
Whose scorching breath adds flames unto his rays,
At whose approach the angry Lion braies,
The earth now warmed in her celestial fire,
To cool her heat, puts off her rich attire.
M. Drayton. Of Morpheus.
Morpheus the lively son of deadly sleep,
Witness of life to them that living die,
A prophet often, and often an history;
A Poet eke, as humors fly or creep.
S. Phil. Sid. He making speedy way through persed air,
And through the world of waters wide and deep,
To Morpheus house does hastily repair,
Amid the bowels of the earth full steep,
And low where dawning day does never peep
His dwelling is; there Thetis her wet bed
Does ever wash, and Cynthia still does steep
In silver dew her euer-dropping head,
while sad night over him her mantle black does spread
Edm. Spencer. Whose double gates he finds locked fast,
The one fair framed of burnished Iuorie,
The other, all with silver ouer-cast,
And wakefull dogs before them fa^re do lie.
Watching to banish Care, their enemy,
who often is wont to trouble gentle Sleep.
Idem. Of Neptune.
First came great Neptune with his three-forkt mace,
That rules the seas, and makes them rise or fall;
His dewey locks did drop with brine a pace
Under his diadem imperial,
And by his side his Queen with Coronall,
Fair Amphitrite, most divinely fair,
whose Iuory shoulders were covered all
As with a robe, with her own silver hair,
And decked with pearls, which the Indian seas for her prepare.
Edm. Spencer. Of Proteus.
Proteus is shepherd of the Seas of yore,
And has the charge of Neptunes mighty heard
An aged Sire, with head all frothy hoare,
And sprinkled frost upon his dewie beard.
Idem. Of Thetis.
Thetis the Mother of the pleasant springs,
Grandome of all the Rivers in the world,
To whom earths veins a moystning tribute brings,
Now with a mad disturbed passion hurled
About her Cave (the worlds great treasure) flings,
And with wreathed arms, and long wet hair vncu^l'd,
Within herself laments a loss vnlost,
And mones her wrongs, before her joys be crossed.
I. Markham. Of Phoebus.
The golden offspring of Latona pure,
And ornament of great Jove's progeny,
Phoebus.
Edm. Spencer. -- Days King, God of undaunted verse.
G. Chapman. Of Neptune.
O Neptune, never like thy self in show,
Inconstant, variable, mutable,
How do thou Proteus like thy form renew,
O whereto is thy change impurable?
Or whereunto art thou bent suitable?
Rightly the Moon predominateth thee,
For thou art all as changeable as she.
Chapter Fitz Ieffray. Of Apollo.
Sacred Apollo, God of Archerie,
Of Arts, of pleasure, and of Poetry,
Jove's fair haird son, whose yellow tresses shine,
Like curled flames; hurling a most divine
And dazeling splendor, in those lesser fires
Which from thy guilt beams (when thy Car retires,)
Kindle those Tapers that lend eyes to night,
O thou that art the Landlord of all light,
Birdegroome of morning, days eternal King,
To whom nine Muses (in a sacred ring)
In daunces sphericall trip hand in hand,
Whilst thy seauen-stringed Lute their feet command,
whose motion such proportioned measure bears,
That to the music dance nine heavenly spheres.
Great Delian Priest, we to adore thy name,
Have burnt fat thighs of Bulls in hallowed flame,
whose savor wrapped in smoke and clouds of fire
To thy starre-spangled Palace did aspire.
Tho. Dekkar. Of Rome.
O thou worlds Queen, o town that did extend
Thy conquering arms beyond the Ocean,
And througdst thy conquests from the Libian shore,
Down to the Scythian swift-foote fearelesse porters,
Thou art debasd, and at this instant yields
Thy proud neck to a miserable yoke.
Tho. Kyd. Of Heat.
When Phoebus rose he left his golden weed,
And dond attire in deepest pulple dyed,
His sanguine beams about his forhead spread,
A sad presage of ill that should betide,
^ith vermile drops at even his tresses bleed
^or shows of future heat from The Ocean wide.
^hilst thus he bent against earth his scorching rays,
He burnt the flowers, and burnt his Clitia dear,
The leaves grew wan upon the withered spraies,
The grass and growing herbs all parched were.
Earth cleft in rifts, in floods their streams decaies,
The barren clouds with lightning bright appear,
And mankind feared least Clymens child again
Had driven away his Syers ill-guided vvaine.
As from a furnace flew the smoke to skies,
Such smoke as that when damned Sodom brent:
Within his Cave sweet Zephyre silent lies,
Still was the air, the rack nor came nor went,
But ore the lands with lukewarm breathing flies
The Southern wind, from sun-bright Affrique sent,
with thick and warm, his interrupted blasts,
Upon their bosoms, throats, and faces casts.
Nor yet more comfort brought the gloomy night,
In her thick shade was burning heat vprold,
Her sable mantle was imbrodered bright
with blazing stars and gliding fires of gold.
Nor to refresh sad earth thy thirsty spirit,
The niggard Moon let fall her May-dewes cold,
And dried up the vital moisture was
In trees, in plants, in herbs, in flowers, in grass.
Ed. Fairefax. Of Thirst.
When wells grew dry, the Commons ran in rage
And sought out every sincke, their thirst t'asswage:
And drank with loathsome draught the pooles in has^
To quench their thirst with ill-contented taste,
which poisoned air infect their purest breath,
whereby the drinker drank his present death:
O wretched folk, who felt so hard a strife,
Drink or not drink, both ways must lose their life,
For he that drank, and he that did refrain,
Had of their enemies both an equal pain:
For why? the water vile slew them throughout
No less, then did their enemies them about.
That wretched town had never a street nor view
But Parcaes there had framed some fashions new
To murder men, or martyr them with fears,
As moved the most indurate heart to tears,
If so much water in their brains had been
As might forbear a drop to wet their eyne.
One while he spoke his heart (for thirst) did faint:
And life him left, which frustrate his complaint.
The soldier brave, (oh hart-breake for to tell)
His proper urine drank, thirst to expel:
The woeful mother with her spettle fed
Her little child half dead in cradle-bed:
The Lady with her Lord at point of death,
Embracing falls, and yields their latest breath.
Thom. Hudson. Of an Assault.
-- They no less provided are within
With rampires, bulwarks, and with doubled dikes:
And where their foes to clime do once begin,
They push the^ down with bills, with staves, with pikes.
If one be killed, another steppeth in,
No man his place for fear of hurt mislikes,
Some throw down blocks, some stones, some scalding water,
Greeuing them much with all, most with the latter,
Some throw among them newly slaked Lime,
That burns most, when most it seems to quench,
with pots of Brimstone, Pitch and Turpentime,
Annoying them with heat, with smoke, and stench.
The rest are still imployd, and loose no time
with wreathed stakes to fortify the Trench:
Thus all within are busy, all without,
Fortune on both sides standing still in doubt.
S. I. Harr. Of an Host.
Their host with arrows, pykes, and standards stood
As bristle-poynted as a thornie wood,
Their multitude of men the rivers died,
which through the wealthy Judah swift did slide,
So that flood Jordan finding dry his bank,
For shame he blushed, and down his head he shrank,
For woe that he his credit could not keep,
To pay one wave for tribute to the deep.
Tho. Hudson. Of a Skirmish,
Then grew the fight on both sides firm and stable,
Both sides defend, both sides alike invade;
They cast on both sides darts innumerable
Making therewith a dark unpleasing shade,
An endless work it were to write the rabble
The Christians killed with bow, with bill, with blade.
Sometime the sway goes hither, sometime thither,
Like waters driven with doubtful tides and wether:
When one is slain, his room another fills,
When one is hurt, another takes his place,
And he that now an other smites and kills,
Falls dead him self within a little space,
Great heaps of bodies dead make little hills:
The earth it self looks with a bloody face;
The green wherewith it erst was stored,
Turns to sanguine and vermillion red.
S. I. Harrington. Of Discontent.
Disquiet thoughts the minutes of her watch,
Forth from her Cave the fiend full often does fly,
To Kings she goes, and troubles them with wars,
Setting those high aspiring bonds on fire;
That flame from earth unto the seat of Jove:
To such as Midas, men that dote on wealth,
And rent the bowels of the middle earth
For coin; who gape as did fair Danae
For showers of gold: there discontent in black,
Throws forth the violls of her restless cares,
To such as sit at Paphos for relief:
And offer Venus many solemn vows,
To such as Hymen in his saffron robe,
Has knit a gordian knot of passions,
To these, to all, parting the gloomy air,
Black discontent does make her bad repair.
R. Green. Obscure and dark is all the gloomy air,
The curtain of the night is ouer-spread;
The silent mistress of the lowry sphere,
Put on her sable colored vale and lower,
Nor star, nor milk-white circle of the sky,
Appears where Discontent does hold her lodge,
She sits shrin'd in a canapy of clouds,
whose massy darkness mazeth every sense,
won is her looks, her cheeks of azure hue,
Her hair as Gorgons foul retorting snakes;
Envy the glass, wherein the hag does gaze,
Restless the clock that chimes her fast a sleep.
Of Adams fear after his Transgression.
At this sad summons, woeful man resembles,
A bearded rush that in a river trembles,
His rosy cheeks are changed to earthen hue,
His dying body drops an icie dew;
His teare-drown'd-eyes a night of clouds bedims,
About his ears a burning horror swims,
His fainting knees with feeblenes are humble,
His faultring feet do slide away and stumble;
He has not now his free, bold, stately port,
But downward looks in fearful slavish sort;
Now naught of Adam does in Adam rest,
He feels his senses pained, his soul oppressed,
A confused host of violent passions jar,
His flesh and spirit are in continual war.
And now no more through conscience of his error:
He hears or sees, the almighty but with terror,
And loath he aunsweres (as with tongue distraught)
Confessing (thus) his fear, but not his fault.
I Syluester. Of the Vacation.
-- At such times when Lawyers walk the streets
Without long rowles of papers in their hands,
When friendly neighbor with his neighbor meets,
Without false challenge to each others lands,
The Counselor without his Clyent stands:
When that large Capital lies void and wast
Where Senators and Judges late were plast.
Th. Storer. Ceremony.
All suddenly a light of twenty hewes
Brake through the roof, and like rainebow viewes
Amazed Leander; in whose beams came down
The Goddess Ceremony, with a crown
Of all the stars, and heaven with her descended
Her flaming hair to her bright feet extended,
By which, hung all the bench of deities;
And in a chain compact of ears and eyes,
She led Religion; all her body was
Clear and transparent as the purest glass,
For she was all presented to the sense,
Devotion, order, state, and reverence
Her shadows were, society, memory;
All which her sight made live, her absence die,
A rich disparent pinnacle she wears,
Drawn full of circles and strange characters:
Her face was changeable to every eye,
One way looked ill, an other graciously,
Which while men viewed they cheerful were and holy,
But looking of, vicious and melancholy;
The snakie paths to each observed law,
Did policy in her broad bosom draw,
One hand a mathematique crystal swayes,
Which gathering in one line a thousand rays;
From her bright eyes confusion burns to death,
And all estates of men distinguishes,
By it mortality and comeliness,
Them selves in all their sightly figures dress.
Her other hand a Laurel rod applies,
To beat back barbarism and Avarice:
That followed eating earth and excrement,
And human limbs, and would make proud ascent,
To seats of Gods were Ceremony slain,
The hours and graces bore her glorious train,
And all the sweets of our society,
Were spheard and treasured in her bounteous eyes.
G. Chapman. Of Lovers.
Who with a maiden voice, and mincing pace,
Quaint looks, curled locks, perfumes, and painted face,
Base coward heart, and wanton soft array,
Their manhood only by their beard bewray,
Are cleanly called, who likeliest greedy Goats
Brothell from bed to bed; whose Siren notes
Inchaunt chaste Susans, and like hungry Kite
Fly at all game, they Lovers are behight.
I. Syluester. Who bear upon their French-sick-backs about,
Farms, Castles, fees in golden shields cut out,
Whose hand had at one Primerorest:
One pompous Turney, or on pampering feast.
Spends themselves, scrapt by the usury and care
Of miser parents, liberal counted are.
Idem. Who by false bargains and unlawful measures,
Robbing the world, have heaped kingly treasures:
Who cheat the simple, lend for fifty, fifty
Hundred, for hundred are esteemed thrifty.
Idem. Renown.
A trump more shrill then Tritons on the Sea,
The said Renown precursour of the train,
Did sound (for who rings louder then Renown:)
He mounted was upon a flying horse,
And clothed in Faulcons feathers to the ground,
By his Escochion justly might you guess,
He was the Herald of Eternity,
And Purseuant at Arms to might Jove.
G. Peele. Of Doubt.
-- Doubt had a double face,
The One forward looking, the other backward bent,
Therein resembling Ianus ancient,
Which has in charge the in-gate of the year,
And evermore his eyes about him went,
As if some proved peril he did fear,
Or did misdoubt some ill whose cause did not appear.
Ed. Spenser. Of a Gunne.
Vulcan begot me, Minerua me taught,
Nature my mother, Craft nourisht me year by year,
Three bodies are my food, my strength is naught,
Anger, Wrath, Wast, and Noise my children dear,
Guess friend what I am, and how I am wrought:
Monster of sea, or land, or of elsewhere
Know and use me, and I may thee defend,
And I be thy enemy I may thy life end.
S. Th. W. Of an Hargabush,
He has his other weapons strange among
A trunk of iron hollow made within,
And there he puts powder and pellets in,
All closed save a little hole behind,
Whereat no sooner taken is the flame,
The bullet flies with such a furious wind,
As though from clouds a bolt of thunder came:
And what-so-euer in the way it find,
It burns it, breaks it, tears it, spoils the same;
No doubt some fiend of hell or deuillish wight
Devised it, to do mankind a spite.
S. I. Harrington, Of an Horse.
Round hoof'd, short ioynted, fetlocks shag and long,
Broad breast, full eye, small head, and nosthrils wide,
High crest, short ears, strait legs, and passing strong*
Thin maine, thick tail, broad buttock, tender hide;
Look what an horse should have he did not lack
Save a proud rider on so proud a back.
W. Shakespeare. Among a hundred brave, light, lusty horses,
(With curious eye marking their comely forces)
He chooses one for his industrious proof,
With round, high, hollow, smooth, brown, ielly hoof,
with pasternes short, upright, but yet in mean,
Dry sinewie shanks, strong fleshlesse knees and lean,
with hart-like legs, broad breast, and large behind,
with body large, smooth flanks, and double chinde:
A crested neck bowed like a half bent bow,
vvhereon a long thin curled maine does flow;
A firm full tail touching the lowly ground,
with dock between two fair fat buttocks drowned;
A pricked ear, that rests as little space
As his light foot; a lean bare bony face,
Thin iowle, and head but of a middling size
Full lively flaming, quickly rolling eyes,
Great foaming mouth, hot fuming nosthrill wide,
Of chest-nut hair, his forehead starrified;
Three milky feet, a feather on his breast,
whom seven years old at the next grass he gest.
I. Syluester. Of a starued man.
His sad dull eyes deep sunk in hollow pits,
Could not endure the unwonted sun to view,
His bare thin cheeks for want of belly-bits,
And empty sides deceived of their due,
Could make a stony heart his hap to rue;
His raw bone arms whose mighty brawnie bowres,
Were wont to riue steel plates and helmets hew,
Were clean consumed, and all his vital parts
Decai'd, and all his flesh shrunk up like withered flowers.
Ed. Spenser. Of the confusion of languages.
This said, as soon confusedly did bound,
Through all the work, I wot not what strange sound,
A iangling noise, not much unlike the rumors
Of Bacchus Swains, amid their drunken humors:
Some speak between the teeth, some in the nose:
Some in the throat their words do ill dispose:
Some howl and cry, and some stut and strain,
Each has his gibberish, and all strive in vain.
To find again their known beloved tongue,
That with their milk they sucked in cradle young:
Arise betimes while th'opal-coloured morn,
In golden pomp does May days door adorn;
And patient, hear the all differing voices sweet
Of painted fingers, that in Groves do greet:
There love Bon-iours each in his phrase and fashion,
From trembling perch, uttering his earnest passion,
And so thou may conceit what mingle mangle
Among this people every where did iangle.
Bring me (quoth one) a trowell, quickly, quick,
One brings him up a hammer; hew this brick
Another bids, and then they cleave a tree:
Make fast this rope, and then they let it flee,
One calls for planks, another mortar lacks:
They bear the first a stone, the last an axe,
One would have spikes, and him a spade they gave,
Another asks a saw, and gets a sieve;
Thus crosly crossed, they prate and point in vain,
what one has made, another marrs again,
Nigh breathless all, with their confused yawling
In bootelesse labor, now begins appawling.
I. Syluester. Of Posterity.
Daughter of Time, sincere Posterity,
Always newborn, yet no man knows thy birth,
The arbitresse of pure Sincerity,
Yet, changeable, (like Proteus) on the earth,
Sometime in plenty, sometime joined with dearth.
Always to come, yet always present here,
Whom all run after, none come after near.
Impartial Judge of all save present state,
Truth's Idioma of the things are past,
But still pursuing present things with hate,
And more injurious at the first then last,
Preserving others, while thine own do wast:
True treasurer of all antiquity,
Whom all desire, yet never o^^ could see.
Char. Fitz Ieffrey. Discriptions of Beauty and personage.
What tongue can her perfections tell
^n whose each part all pens may dwell?
Her hair fine threads of finest gold
^n curled knots, men's thoughts to hold,
^ut that her forehead says, in me,
A whiter beauty you may see.
vvhiter indeed: more white then snow
which on cold winters face does grow:
That does present those even brows,
whose equal line their angles bows
Like to the Moon, when after change
Her horned head abroad does range;
And arches be to heavenly lids,
whose wincke each bold attempt forbids.
For the black stars those spheres contain
The matchless pair even praise does stain.
No lamp whose light by art is got,
No sun which shines and sets not,
Can liken them without all peer
Save one as much as other clear,
which only thus unhappy be,
Because themselves they cannot see.
Her cheeks which kindly claret spread,
Aurora like new out of bed,
Or like the fresh Queen apples side,
Blushing at sight of Phoebus pride.
Her nose her chin, pure Iuory wears
No purer then the pretty ears:
So that therein appears some blood
Like wine and milk that mingled stood:
In whose incircles if ye gaze
Your eyes may tread a Lovers maze:
But with such turns the voice to stray,
No talk untaught can find the way,
The lip no jewel needs to wear,
The lip is jewel of the ear.
But who those ruddy lips can miss?
which blessed still themselves do kiss,
Rubies, cherries, and roses new,
^n worth, in taste, in perfect hew:
which never part but that they show
Of precious pearls the double row:
The second sweetly fenced ward,
Her heavenly dewed tongue to guard,
whence never word in vain did flow:
^aire under these does stately grow
The handle of this precious work,
The neck in which strange graces lurk.
^uch be I think the sumptuous Towers
which skill does make in Princes bowres:
^o good a say inuites the eye
^ little downward to epsy
The lively clusters of her breasts,
^f Venus babe the wanton nests.
^ike pommels round of marble clear,
^here azurde veins well mixed appear,
^ith dearest tops of Porphirie
^etwixt these two away do lie:
^way more worthy beauties fame,
^hen that which bears the milkie name,
^his leads unto the joyous field
which only still does Lillies yield,
^t Lillies such whose native smell
^he Indian odours does excel:
^ast it is called, for it does wast
^ens lives until it be imbrast.
^here may one see, and yet not see
Her ribs in white all armed be,
More white then Neptunes foamy face
when struggling, rocks he would embrace.
In those delights the wandering thought
Might of each side astray be brought,
But that her navel does unite
In curious circle, busy sight:
A dainty seal of Virgin wax,
where nothing but impression lacks.
Her belly there glad sight does fill,
Justly entitled Cupids hill:
A hill most fit for such a master,
A spotless Mine of Alablaster.
Like Alablaster fair and sleeke,
But soft and subtle, Satin like:
In that sweet sea the boy does sport,
Loath I must leave his chief resort,
For such a use the world has gotten,
The best things still must be forgotten.
Yet never shall my song omit
Her thighs, for Ouids song more fit,
Which flanked with two sugared flancks
Lift up their stately swelling banks,
That Albion cliffes in whitenes pass,
with hanches smooth as looking-glass.
But bow all knees, now of her knees
My tongue does tell what fancy sees,
The knots of joy, the iems of love,
Whose motion makes all graces move:
whose bought incau'd does yield such sight,
Like cunning painter shadowing white.
The gartring place with child-like sign
Shows easy print in metal fine:
But then again the flesh does rise
In her brave calves, like crystal skies,
whose Atlas is a smallest small,
More white then whitest bone of all.
Thereout steals out that round clean foot,
This noble Cedars precious root,
In show and sent, pale Violets,
Whose step on earth all beauty sets.
But back unto her back my Muse,
where Ledas swan his feathers mewes,
Along whose ridge such bones are met
Like Comfets round in Marchpane set.
Her shoulders be like two white Doves
Pearching in square royal rooues,
Which leaded are with silver skin
Passing the hate-spot Ermelin.
And thence those arms derived are,
The Phenixe wings are not so rare
For faultlesse length and stainelesse hue;
Ah woe is me, my woes renew.
Now course does lead me to her hand,
Of my first love the fatal band,
where whitenes does for ever sit,
Nature her self inameld it:
For there, with strange compact does lie
Warm snow, moist pearl, soft Iuorie.
There fall those Sapphire colored brooks,
Which conduit like with curious crookes
Sweet Islands make in that sweet land.
As for he fingers of the hand,
The bloody shafts of Cupids war,
with Amathists they headed are.
Thus has each part his beauties part.
But now the Graces do impart
To all her limms a special grace,
Becoming every time and place.
which does even beauty beautify,
And most bewitch the wretched eye.
Now all this is but a fair Inn,
Of fairest guests which dwell therein:
Of whose high praise, and praisefull bliss,
Goodness the pen, heaven paper is,
The Incke immortal fame does lend.
As I began, so must I end:
No tongue can her perfections tell,
In whose each part all pens may dwell.
S. Phil. Sidney. Her face so fair, as flesh it seemed not,
But heavenly pourtrait of bright Angels hue,
Clear as the sky, withouten blame or blot,
Through goodly mixture of complexions due,
And in her cheeks the vermell red did show,
Like roses in a bed of Lillies shed,
The which Ambrosiall odours from her threw,
And gazers sense with double pleasure fed,
Able to heal the sick, and to revive the dead.
In her fair eyes two living lamps did flame,
Kindled above, at th'heauenly Makers light,
And darted fiery beams about the same
So passing persant, and so wondrous bright,
That quite bereaved the rash beholders sight.
In them the blinded God his lustful fire
To kindle often assaide but had no might,
For with dread majesty and awful ire
She broke his wanton shafts and quenched his base desire.
Her Iuory forhead, full of bounty brave
Like a broad table did it self dispread,
For love his lofty tryumphs to ingraue,
And write the battles of his great godhead,
All good and honor might therein be read,
For there their dwelling was. And when she spoke,
Sweet words like dropping honney she did shed,
And twixt the pearls and Rubies softly broke
A silver sound that heavenly music seemd to make.
Upon her eyelids many graces sat
Under the shadow of her even brows,
Working belgards and amorous retrate,
And every one her with a grace endowes,
And every one with meekenes to her bows:
So glorious mirror of celestial grace,
And sovereign monument of mortal vows,
How shall frail pen describe her heavenly face,
For fear through want of skill her beauty to disgrace?
So fair, and thousand thousand times more fair
She seemed, when she presented was to sight,
And was yclad for heat of scorching air
All in a silken Camous, lilly white,
Purfled upon with many a folded plight:
Which al above besprinckled was throughout
with golden aygulets that glistered bright
Like twinkling stars: and all the skyrt about
was hemd about with golden frindge.
Below her hamme her weed did somewhat train,
And her strait legs most bravely were embaild
In gilden Buskins of costly Cordwaine,
All bard with golden bends which were entaild
with curious antiques, and full fair aumaild.
Before they fastened were under her knee
In a rich Jewel, and therein intrailde
The ends of all their knots, that none might see
How they within their foldings close enwrapped be:
Like two fair Marble pillars they were seen,
which do the temple of the Gods support,
whom all the people deck with garlands green:
Those same with stately grace and princely port
She taught to tread when she herself would grace.
But with the woody Nimphs when she did play,
Or when the flying Libbard she did chase,
She could then nimbly move, and after fly a pace.
Within her hand a sharp Bore-speare she held,
And at her back a bow and quiver gay,
Shaft with steele-headed darts, wherewith she queld
The savage beasts in her victorious play:
Knit with a golden bauldrick, which forlay
Athwart the snowy breast, and did divide
Her dainty paps, which like young fruit in May
Now little began to swell; and being tide,
Through her thin weed their places signified.
Her yellow locks crisped, like golden wyre,
About her shoulders weren loosely shed,
And when the wind amongst them did inspyre,
They waued like a Penon wide despred,
And low behind her back were scattered:
And whether art it were, or heedelesse hap,
As through the flowring forest rash she fled,
In her rude hairs sweet flowers did wrap
Such as Diana by the sandy shore
Of swift Eurotas, or on Cynthus green;
where all the Nimphs have her unawares forlore,
Wandreth alone, with bows and arrows keen
To seek her game: or as that famous Queen
Of Amazons, whom Pyrhus did destroy
The day that first of Priam she was seen,
Did show herself in great tryumphant joy,
To succor the weak state of sad-afflicted Troy.
Edm. Spencer. Her yellow locks exceed the beaten gold,
Her sparkling eyes in heaven a place deserve,
Her forhead high and fair, of comely mold:
her words are musical, of silver sound,
her wit so sharp, as like can scarce be found.
Each eye-brow hangs like Iris in the skies,
Her Eagles nose is strait, of stately frame,
On either cheek a Rose and Lilly lies,
Her breath is sweet perfume, or holy flame:
her lips more red then any Corrall stone,
her neck more white then aged Swans that moan.
Her breast transparent is, like crystal rock,
Her fingers long, fit for Apollos Lute,
Her slipper such as Momus dare not mock,
Her virtues are so great, as make me mute.
what other parts she has, I need not say,
whose fairest face alone is my decay.
Tho. Watson. Like to the clear in highest sphere
where al imperious glory shines,
Of self same color is her hair
whether unfolded or in twines:
Her eyes are Sapphires set in snow,
Refyning heaven by every wink,
The Gods do fear when as they glow,
And I do tremble when I think.
Her cheeks are like the blushing cloud
That beautifies Auroras face,
Or like the silver crimson shrowde
That Phoebus smiling locks do grace:
Her lips are like two budded Roses
Whom ranks of Lillies neighbor nie,
which with bounds she still incloses,
Apt to entice a deity.
Her neck is like a stately tower,
where Love himself in pleasure lies,
To watch for glaunces every hour
From her divine and sacred eyes.
Her paps are centers of delight,
Her paps are rocks of heavenly flame,
where Nature moulds the dew of light
To feed perfection with the same:
With orient pearl, with Rubie red,
with Marble white, with azure blew,
Her body every way is fed,
Yet soft in touch, and sweet in view:
Nature herself her shape admires,
The Gods are wounded in her sight,
And Love forsakes his heavenly fires,
And at her eyes his brands does light.
D. Lodge. She lay and seemd a flood of Diamant
Bounded in flesh: as still as Vespers hair
When not an Aspen leaf is stird with air:
She lay at length, like an immortal soul
At endless rest in blessed Elysium,
And then did true felicity inroule
So fair a Lady, figure of her kingdom.
Now as she lay attirde in nakedness
His eye did carue him on that feast of feasts,
Sweet fields of life which deaths foot dare not press,
Flowrd with th'vnbroken waves of my loves breasts,
See wherewith bent of gold curld into knots.
In her heads grove the spring-bird Lameat nests,
Her body does present those fields of peace
where souls are feasted with the soul of ease.
To prove which Paradise that nurseth these,
See see the golden rivers that renown it,
Rich Gyhon, Tigris, Phison, Euphrates,
Two from her bright Pelopian shoulders crown it,
And two out of her snowy hills do glide,
That with a deluge of delight do drown it:
These highest two their precious streams divide
To ten pure floods that do the body duty,
Bounding themselves in length, but not in beauty.
These wind their courses through the painted bowers,
And raise such sounds in their inflection
As ceaselesse start from earth fresh sorts of flowers,
And bound that book of life with every section.
In these the Muses dare not swim for drowning,
Their sweetness poisons with such sweet infection,
And leaves the only lookers on them swouning,
These forms and color makes them so to shine,
That Gods for them, would cease to be divine.
G. Chapman. Her Lilly hand her rosy cheeks lie under,
Coosning the pillow of a lawful kiss,
Who therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Swelling on either side to want his bliss,
Between whose hills her head entombed is;
Where, like a virtuous monument she lies,
To be admirde of lewd unhallowed eyes.
Without the bed her other fair hand was
On the green Couerlet, whose perfect white
Showed like an April daisie on the grass,
with pearlie sweat, resembling dew of night;
Her eyes like Marigolds had sheathed their light:
And canopied in darkness, sweetly lay,
Till they might open to adorn the day.
Her hair like golden threads, played with her breath,
(O modest wantons, wanton modesty)
Showing life's triumph in the Map of death,
And deaths dim looks in life's mortality:
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify
As if between them twain there were no strife,
But that life lived in death, and death in life.
Her breasts like Iuory globes circled with blew,
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
Save of their Lord, no bearing yoke they knew,
And him by oath they truly honored:
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred:
who like a foul usurper went about
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.
W. Shakespeare. Stars fall to fetch fresh light from her rich eyes,
Her bright brow drives the sun to clouds beneath,
Her hairs reflexe, with red strakes paint the skies,
Sweet morn and evening dew falls from her breath.
T. Nash. Fayrer then Isaacks lover at the well,
Brighter then inside bark of new hewn Cedar,
Sweeter then flames of fire-perfumed Mirrhe,
And comlier then the silver clouds that dance
On Zephyrus wings before the King of heaven.
G. Peele. Her looks were like beams of the morning sun
Forth-looking through the windows of the East,
When first the fleecie cattle have begun
Upon the pearled grass to make their feast:
Her thoughts are like the fume of Francensence,
Which from a golden Censor forth did rise:
And throwing forth sweet odours, mounts from thence
In rolling globes up to the vaulted skies:
There she beholds with hie aspyring thought,
The cradle of her own creation:
Among the seats of Angels, heavenly wrought,
Much like an Angel in all form and fashion.
S. Daniell. Her locks are pleighted like the fleece of wool
That Jason with his Grecian mates atchiu'd,
As pure as gold, yet not from gold derived,
As full of sweets, as sweet of sweetes is full:
Her brows are pretty tables of conceate,
Where Love his records of delight does quote,
On them her dallying locks do daily floate,
As love full often does feed upon the bait*
Her eyes, fair eyes, like to the purest lights
That animate the sun, or cheer the day,
In whom the shining sunbeams brightly play
whilst fancy does on them divine delights.
Her cheeks like ripened Lillies steept in wine,
Or fair Pomegranate kirnels washed in milk,
Or snow-white threads in nets of Crimson silk,
Or gorgeous clouds upon the suns decline.
Her lips like Roses ouer-washt with dew,
Or like the Purple of Narcissus flower,
No frost their fair, no wind does wrest their power,
But by her breath their beauties do renew.
Her crystal chin like to the purest mould
Enchast with dainties, Daisies soft and white,
Where Fairies fair pauilion once is pight,
Whereas embrasd his beauties he does hold.
Her neck like to an Iuory shining tower,
Where through with azure veins sweet Nectar runs,
Or like the down of swanns,
Or like delight that does it self devour.
Her paps are like fair apples in the prime,
As round as orient pearls, as soft as down,
They never veil their fair through winters frown,
But from these sweets Love sucked his summer time:
Her bodies beauties best esteemed bower,
Delicious, comely, dainty, without stain,
The thought whereof (not touched) has wrought my pain.
Whose face so fair all beauties does distaine,
Her maiden womb the dwelling house of pleasure,
Not like, for why no like surpasses wonder:
O blessed is he may bring such beauties under,
Or search by suite the secrets of that treasure.
R. Green. Like to Diana in her summer weed
Girt with a Crimson robe of brightest die
goes fair Samela,
As fair Aurora in her morning gray,
Decked with the ruddy luster of her love
is fair Samela,
Like lovely Thetis on a calmed day,
When as her brightness Neptunes fancy moves,
Shines fair Samela.
Her tresses gold, her eyes like glassie streams,
Her teeth are pearl, the breasts are Iuory
of fair Samela.
Her cheeks like rosie-lillies yield forth gleames,
Her brows bright arches, framde of Ebonie,
thus fair Samela.
Passes fair Venus in her brauest hue,
And Juno in the show of majesty,
for she is Samela.
Pallas in wit, all three if you will view,
For beauty wit, and matchless dignity,
yeeldes fair Samela.
D. Lodge. Their soft young cheeke-balls to the eye,
Are of the fresh vermilion die,
So Lillies out of Scarlet peer,
So Roses bloomd in Lady Vere:
So shot two wanton stars yfere,
In the eternal burning Sphere.
G. Chapman. Her eyes like Gemini attend on Jove,
Her stately front was figured from above:
Her dainty nose of Iuory fair and sheene,
Bepurfurate with ruddy Roses been.
Her cherry lips does daunt the morning dew,
From whence a breath so pleasant does ensue
As that which laid fair Psyches in the vale,
Whom Cupid woed, and woed to his avail:
Within the compass of which hollow sweet,
Those orient rancks of silver perles do meet,
Prefixing like prefixion to the eye,
As silver clowd amidst the summers sky,
From whence such words in wisdom couched be,
As Gods from thence fetch their Phylosophie.
Her dimpled chin of Alablaster white,
Her stately neck, where nature did acquit
Her self so well, as that at sudden sight
She wished the work were spent upon herself,
Her cunning thus was showed upon the shelfe;
For in this hand was fancy painted fair*
In either hand an azure hand she bare.
By one, repeating many a sweet consent,
By the other, comfort to the heart she sent:
From which a seemly passage there does flow
To strangers pleasures that are placst below;
Like to the furrow Phaeton did leave
Amidst the Welkin, when he did receive
His Fathers charge, and set the world on fire.
In this fair path often paced sweet desire,
At every turn beholding with delight
That marble mount that did affect the sight.
Of Virgin wax the sweet impression was,
The cunning compass thereof did surpass,
For art concluding all perfections there,
Writ this report, all graces dwells here.
Which Cupid spying, built his mansion so,
As scorning those sweet graces to bestow
On mortal man, with bow ybent does wait
Least Jove should steal impressions by deceit,
And wondering at the crisped Comet fair,
In thought concludes it meeter for the air
Then mortal mould: next with the stately thighs,
Like two fair compast marble pillars rise,
Whose white does stain the dainty driven snow;
Next which the knees with lusty bent below
Conioynd with nerves and cords of Amber sweet,
These stately piles with gladsome honor greet:
Such stately knees as when they bend alite,
All knees do bend and bow with strange delight.
Her calves with stranger compass do succeed,
In which the azure streams a wonder breed,
Both art and nature therein labored have
To paint perfection in her colors brave.
Next which, the pretty groundwork of the pyle
Does show it self, and wonder does beguile;
The joints whereof combinde of Amber sweet,
With Corrall cords yield bent to seemly feet,
From which who list to lift his gazing eye,
Shall greater cause of wonder soon espy:
When on the back he bends his wavering look
In which the work and task Diana took
when with Arachne for the prize she straue,
Both art and nature there excellence have;
Where from Pigmalions image seemly white,
whose close conueyance passing Gordians plight,
where lovely Nectar, drink for all the Gods,
where every Grace is stained there by ods,
will not content which gazing look for more,
And spy those arms that stand his sight before
which for their mould The Egyptian wonders pass,
Which for their beauty stain the crystal glass,
which in their bosom cover natures sweet,
where blushing streams present a secret meet,
will now amazde, conclude at last of this,
That in the hands all grace concluded is:
where nature limits ever fatal time,
where fortune figures pleasure in her prime,
whence spread those fingers typt with Iuory,
whose touch Medusas turn may well supply:
where to conclude, now all the shepherds deem
All grace, all beauty, all perfections seem.
D. Lodge. Yet never eye to Cupids service vowde
Beheld a face of such a lovely pride:
A Tynsill vale her golden locks did shrowde,
That strove to cover what it could not hide:
The golden sun behind a silver cloud,
So streameth out his beams on every side,
The marble goddess set at Cnidos naked
She seemd; were she vncloth'd, or that awaked.
The gamesome wind among her tresses plays,
And curleth up those growing riches short,
Her sparefull eye to spread his beams denaies,
But keeps his shot where Cupid keeps his fort.
F. G. She was a woman in her freshest age
Of wondrous beauty, and of bounty rare,
with goodly grace and comely personage
That was on earth not easy to compare,
Full of great love, but Cupids wanton snare
As hell she hated: chaste in word and will,
Her neck and breasts were ever open bare,
That aye thereof her babes might suck their fill,
The rest was all in yellow robes araied still.
Edm. Spencer. A shape whose like in wax was hard to frame,
Or to express by skill of Painters rare;
Her hair was long and yellow to the same,
As might with wire of beaten gold compare:
Her lovely cheeks with show of modest shame,
with Roses and with Lillyes painted are.
Her forhead fair, and full of seemly cheer,
As smooth as pollisht Iuory does appear:
Under two arches of most curious fashion
Stand two black eyes, that like two clear suns shind.
Steady in look, but apt to take compassion,
Amid which lights the naked boy and blind
Casts his darts that cause so many a passion,
Leaving a sweet and curelesse wound behind,
From whence the nose in such good sort descended*
As envy knows not how it may be mended.
Under the which, in due and comely space
Stands the mouth, stainde with vermilion hew,
Two rows of pearls serve in their place,
Hence come the courteous words and full of grace
That mollify hard hearts and make them new:
From hence proceed those smilings sweet and nice,
That seem to make an earthly Paradise.
Her breasts as milk, her neck as white as snow,
Round was her neck, most plum and large her breast,
Two Iuory apples seemed there to grow,
Tender and smooth, and fittest to be pressed,
Wauing like seas when wind most calm does blow.
Argos himself might not discern the rest,
Yet by presumption well it might be gest
That that which was concealed was the best.
Her arms due measure of proportion bare,
Her fair white hand was to be viewed plain,
The fingers long, the joints so curious are
As neither knot appeard nor swelling vain,
And full to perfect all those features rare,
The foot that to be seen does sole remain,
Slender and short, little it was and round,
A finer foot might no where well be found.
S. I. Harr. Apollo when my mistress first was borne
Cut off his locks, and left them on her head,
And said, I plant these wyres in natures scorn,
Whose luster shall appear when time is dead:
From forth the crystal heaven when she was made,
The purity thereof did taint her brow,
On which the glistering that sought the shade
Began set, and there his glories does avow.
Those eyes, fair eyes, too fair to be described,
Were those that erst the Chaos did reform,
To whom the heavens their beauties have ascribd,
That fashion life in man, in beast, in worm,
When first her fair delicious cheeks were wrought,
Aurora brought her blush, the Moon her white,
Both so combinde as passed natures thought,
Compild those pretty orbs of sweet delight:
When love and nature once were proud with play,
From forth their lips, her lips their color drew,
On them does fancy sleep, and every day
Does swallow joy such sweet delights to view.
While one while Venus son did seek a bower
To sport with Psyches his desired dear,
He chose her chin, and from that happy stowre
He never stints in glory to appear.
Desires and joys that long had served love,
Besought a hold where pretty eyes might woo them,
Love made her neck, and for her best behoue
Has shut them there where no man can undo them.
Once Venus dreamd upon two pretty things,
Her thoughts, they were affections cheifest nests,
She sucked and sighed, and bathed her in the springs,
And when she wakt, they were my mistres breasts.
Once Cupid sought a hold to couch his kisses,
And found the body of my best beloved,
Wherein he cloyd the beauty of his blisses,
And from that bower can never be removed.
The Graces erst when Acidalian springs
were wexen dry, perhaps did find her fountain
Within the bale of bliss, where Cupids wings
Do shield the Nectar fleeting from the fountain.
R. Green. Her curious locks of gold like Tagus sands,
Her forhead smooth and white as Iuory,
where glory, state, and bashfulnes held hands:
Her eyes, one making peace, the other wars,
By Venus one, the other ruld by Mars.
Her Eagles nose, her scarlet cheek half white,
Her teeth of orient pearl, her gracious smile,
Her dimpled chin, her breast as clear as light,
Her hand like hers whom Titan did beguile.
Tho. Watson. Queen Virtues cave which some call Stellas face
Repaird by natures cheifest furniture,
Has his forfront of Alablaster pure,
Gold is the covering of that stately place:
The door by which sometimes runs forth her grace,
Red Porphirie which lock of pearl makes sure,
Whose porches rich which name of cheeks endure,
Marble-mixt red and white do interlace.
The windows now through which this heavenly gues^
Looks on the world, and can find nothing such
which dare claim from those sights the name of best,
Of touch they are that without touch do touch,
which Cupids self from beauties mine did draw,
Of touch they are, and poor I, am their straw.
S. Phil. Sidney. Two suns at once from one fair heaven there shind,
Ten branches from two boughs tipped all with roses,
Pure locks, more golden then is gold refinde,
Two pearled rows that natures pride incloses;
Two mounts fair marble, white down, soft and dainty,
Full woeful makes my heart, and body fainty.
D. Lodge. O she does teach the torches to burn bright,
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich Jewel in an Ethiops ear,
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear:
So shows a snowy Dove trooping with crows,
As yonder Lady ore her fellows shows.
W. Shakespeare. To make the wondrous power of heaven appear
In nothing more then her perfections found,
Close to her nauill she her mantle wrests,
Slacking it upwards, and the folds vnwound,
Showing Latonas twins, her plenteous breasts:
The Sun and Cynthia in their triumph robes
Of Lady skin more rich then both their globes.
G. Chapman. Upon a bed of Roses she was laid,
As faint through heat, or dight to pleasant sin,
And was araide, or rather disaraid
All in a veil of silk and silver thin,
That hid no whit her Alablaster skin,
But rather showd more white, if more might be;
More subtle web Arachne cannot spin,
Nor the fine nets which often we wouen see
Of scorched dew, do not in the air more lightly fly.
Her snowy breast was bare to ready spoil
Of hungry eyes, which not therewith be filled,
And yet through languor of her late sweet toil,
Few drops more clear then Nectar forth distild,
That like pure orient pearls adowne it thrild,
Frail hearts yet quenched not, like starry light,
which sparkling on the silent waves, do seem more bright.
Edm. Spen. Her Iuory neck, her Alablaster breast,
Her paps, which like white silken pillowes were,
For love in soft delight thereon to rest:
Her tender sides, her belly white and clear,
Which like an Altar did it self vpreare,
To offer sacrifice divine thereon:
Her goodly thighs, whose glory did appear
Like a triumphall arch, and thereupon
The spoils of Princes hanged, which were in battle wone.
Idem. -- Her sparkling eyes
Do lighten forth sweet loves alluring fire,
And in her tresses she does fold the looks
Of such as gaze upon her golden hair.
Her bashful white, mixed with the mornings red,
Luna does boast upon her lovely cheeks:
Her front is Beauties table, where she paints
The glories of her gorgeous excellence:
Her teeth are shelues of precious Margarite,
Richly inclosd with ruddy Currall cleeues.
R. Green. My mistres is a paragon, the fairest fair alive,
Alcides and Aeacides for fairelesse fair did strive,
Her color fresh as damask rose, her breath as violet,
Her body white as Iuory, as smooth as pollisht Iet,
As soft as down, and were she down, Jove might com down and kiss
A love so fresh, so sweet, so white, so smooth, so soft as this.
W. Warner. Then cast she off her roabe and stood upright,
As lightning breaks out of the laboring cloud,
Or as the morning heaven casts off her night,
Or as that heaven cast off it self, and showde
Heavens upper light, to which the brightest day
Is but a black and melancholy shrowde:
Or as when Venus strived for sovereign sway
Of choisefull beauty in young Troyes desire,
So stood Corinna varnishing her tire.
G. Chapman. Herewith she rose, like the Autumnall star
Fresh burnisht in the lofty Ocean flood,
That darts his glorious influence more far
Then any lamp of bright Olympus brood:
She lifts her lightning arms above her head
And stretches a Meridian, from her blood
That slept awakt in her Elizian bed:
Then knit she up, least loosd, her glowing hair
Should scorch the center, and incense the air.
Idem. Sweet mouth that sendst a muskie-rosied breath
Fountain of Nectar and delightful balm,
Eyes clowdy-cleere, smile-frowning, stormie-calme,
Whose every glaunce darts me a living death:
Brows, bending quaintly, your round Eben arkes,
Smile, that then Venus sooner Mars besets,
Locks more then golden, curld in curious knots,
where in close ambush wanton Cupid lurkes,
Grace Angel-like, fair forhead, smooth and hie,
Pure white that dimst the Lillies of the vale,
Vermilion rose that make Aurora pale.
I. Siluester. Such color had her face as when the sun
Shines in a watery cloud in pleasant spring;
And even as when the Summer is begun
The Nightingales in boughs do sit and sing,
So the blind God, whose force can no man shun
Sits in her eyes, and thence his darts does fling:
Bathing his wings in her bright crystal streams,
And sunning them in her rare beauties beams.
In these he heads his golden-headed dart,
In those he cools it, and tempereth so,
He leuels thence at good Obertos heart,
And to the head he draws it in his bow.
S. I. Harr. -- Olympias beauty was so rare
As well might move a man the same to note:
Her hair, her cheeks, her eyes, most amorous are,
Her nose, her mouth, her shoulders, and her throat,
As for her other parts that then were bare,
Which she was wont to cover with her coat,
Were made in such a mould as might have moved
The chaste Hippolitus her to have loved:
A man would think them framd by Phidias arts,
Their color and proportion good was such:
And unto them her shamefastnes imparts
A greater grace to that before was much.
I cease to praise those other secret parts,
Nothing so fit to talk of as to touch:
In general, all was as white as milk,
As smooth as Iuory, and as soft as silk.
Had she in valley of Idea been
when Pastor Paris hap did so befall
To be a Judge three goddesses between,
She should have got, and they forgone the ball:
Had she but once of him been naked seen,
For Helena he had not card at all,
Nor broke the bonds of sacred hospitality,
That bred his country wars and great mortality.
Had she but then been in Crotona town,
When Zeuxis for the Goddess Iunos sake
To paint a picture of most rare renown
Did many of the fairest damsels make
To stand before him bare from foot to crown,
A pattern of their perfect parts to take,
No doubt he would have all the rest refused,
And her alone in sted of all have chused.
S. I. Harr. Fair is my love for April in her face,
Her lovely breasts September claims his part,
And lordly July in her eyes has place,
But cold December dwells in her heart,
Blessed be the months that sets my heart on fire,
Accursed that month that hinders my desire.
Like Phoebus fire, so sparkles both her eyes,
As air perfumed with Amber is her breath,
Like swelling waves her lovely teates do rise,
As earth her heart cold, dateth me to death.
In pomp sits mercy seated in her face,
Love twixt her breasts his trophies does imprint,
Her eyes shines favor, courtesy, and grace,
But touch her heart, oh that is made of flint.
R. Green. Her hair not trust, but scattered on her brow,
Surpassing Hyblaes honney for the view,
Or softened golden wyers.
Within these snares first was my heart intrapped,
Till through those golden shrouds mine eye did see
An Iuory shadowed front, wherein was wrapped
Those pretty bowers where graces couched be:
Next which, her cheeks appeard like Crimson silk,
Or ruddy rose bespred in whitest milk.
Twixt which, the nose in lovely tenor bends
Two traces pretty for a lovers view:
Next which her lips like violets commends
By true proportion that which does ensue;
Which when they smile, present unto the eyes
The Oceans pride, and Iuory paradize.
Her pollisht neck of milk, where snows do shine
As when the Moon in winter night beholds them,
Her breast of Alablaster clear and fine,
vvhereon two rising apples fair unfold them,
Like Cynthias face when in her full she shines,
And blushing, to her loue-mates bower declineth.
From whence in length her arms do sweetly spread,
Like two rare branchie Saples in the spring,
Yielding five lovely sprigs from every head,
Proportioned alike in every thing;
which featly sprout in length like spring borne friends
whose pretty tops, with five sweet roses ends.
But why alas should I that marble hide
That does adorn that one and other flanck,
From whence a mount of quickened snow does glide,
Or else the veil that bounds this milk-white bank,
where Venus and her sisters hide the fount,
whose lovely Nectar does all sweetes surmount.
D. Lodge. Whilst thus she meant unseen away to slide,
Her pearls and jewels causde her to be spide,
The musk and ciuet amber as she past,
Long after her a sweet perfume did cast:
A Carbuncle on her crystal brow she pight,
whose fiery gleames expeld the shady night:
Upon her head a silver crispe she pind,
Loose wauing on her shoulders with the wind.
Gold band her golden hair, her Iuory neck,
The Rubies rich, and Saphires blew did deck,
And at her ear, a pearl of greater value
There hung, then that the Egyptian Queen did swallow
And through her collar showd her snowy breast,
Her utmost robe was color blew celest,
Benetted all with twist of perfect gold,
Beseeming well her comely corpse t'enfold.
What else she ware, might well be seen upon
That Queen who built the towers of Babylon.
Her wavering hair disparpling flew apart,
In seemly shed, the rest with recklesse art,
with many a curling ring decord her face,
And gave her ghastly brows a greater grace.
Two bending bows of Eben coupled right,
Two lucent stars that were of heavenly light,
Two ietty sparks where Cupid chastely hides
His subtle shafts that from his quiver glides:
Tweene those two suns and front of equal size,
A comely figure formally did rise,
which draught vnleuell to her lip descend,
where Momus self could nothing discommend.
Her pittid cheeks appeard to be depaint
with mixed rose and lillies, sweet and saint:
Her dulcet mouth with precious breath repleat,
Excelled the Saben Queen in savor sweet:
Her corrall lips discovered as it were
Two ranks of orient pearls with smyling cheer:
Her Iuory neck, and breast of Alablaster,
Made heathen men of her more Idolastre.
Upon her hand no wrinckled knot was seen,
But as each nail of Mother of pearl had been:
In short, this Judith was so passing fair,
As if the learned Zeuxis had been there
And seen this dame when he with pensill drew
The Croton dames, to form the picture true
Of her for whom both Greece and Asia fought,
This only pattern chief he would have sought.
Tho. Hudson. Her words were like a stream of honny fleeting,
The which does softly trickle from the hiue,
Able to melt the hearers heart vnweeting,
And eke to make the dead again to live:
Her deeds were like great clusters of ripe grapes
Which load the bunches of the fruitful Vine,
Offering to fall into each mouth that gapes,
And fill the same with store of timely wine.
Her breast two hills ore-spread with purest snow,
Sweet, smooth, and supple, soft and gently swelling
Between them lies a milkie dale below,
where love, youth, gladness, whitenes make their dwelling,
Her envious vesture greedy sight expelling:
So was the wanton clad, as if thus much
Should please the eye, the rest unseen they touch:
As when the sunne-beames diue through Tagus wave
To spy the storehouse of his springing gold,
Love persing thought so through her mantle drove,
And in their gentle bosom wandered bold:
It viewd the wondrous beauty Virgins have,
And all to find desire (with vantage) bold.
Alas what hope is left to quench this fire,
That kindled is by sight, blown by desire.
D. Lodge. Fayrer then was the Nymph of Mercury,
Who when bright Phoebus mounteth up his coach,
And tracks Aurora in her silver steps,
And sprinckling from the folding of her lap,
White Lillies, Roses, and sweet Violets.
R. Green. -- Her Angels face
As the great eye of heaven shined bright,
And made a sunshine in the shady place,
Did never mortal eye behold such heavenly grace.
Edm. Spencer. Not that night-wandring pale and watery star,
(when yawning dragons draw her thirsting carre
From Latmus mount up to the gloomie sky,
where crowned with blazing light and majesty
She proudly sits) more ouer-rules the flood,
Then she the hearts of those that near her stood.
Chapter Marlow. -- O Daphne is more fair
Then Angels swimming in the fluxiuyce air.
Could Loves rich bedchamber her two bright eyes,
Lodge but two guests at once, Beauty and Mercy*
Beauty lies always there, did Mercy too
Phoebus were then Daphne should be
Transformd into a stately dignity.
Th. Dekkar. Her stature comely tall, her gate well graced, and her wit,
To marvel at, not meddle with, as matchless I omit:
A globe-like head, a gold-like hair, a forhead smooth and hie^
An even nose, on either side stood out a grayish eye,
Two rosy cheeks, round ruddy lips, white just set teeth within
A mouth in mean, and vnderdeath, a round and dimpled chin:
Her snowish neck with bluish veins stood bolt upright upon
Her portly shoulders, beating balls her vained breasts anon
Ad more to beauty: wand-like was her middle, falling still,
And rising whereas women rise, imagine nothing ill,
And more, her long and limber arms had white and azurd wrist*
And slender fingers answer to her smooth and lilly fists,
A leg in print, a pretty foot, conjecture of the rest,
For amorous eyes observing form, think parts obscured best
W. Warner. See where she issues in her beauties pomp,
As Flora to salute the morning sun:
who when she shakes her tresses in the air,
Raines on the earth dissolved pearl in showers,
which with his beams the sun exhales to heaven:
She holds the spring and summer in her arms,
And every plant puts on his freshest robes
To dannce attendance on her princely steps,
Springing and fading as she comes and goes.
G. Chapman. Her hair was loose, and bout her shoulders hung,
Upon her brows did Venus naked lie,
And in her eyes did all the Graces swim.
Her cheeks that showd the temper of the mind,
Were beauties mornings where she ever rose,
Her lyps were loves rich altars where she makes
Her heart a neuer-ceasing sacrifice:
Her teeth stood like a rank of Dians maids
when naked in a secret bower they bathe;
Her long round neck was Cupids quiver called,
And her sweet words that flew from her, his shafts,
Her soft round breasts were his sole trauaild Alps,
where snow that thawed with sun did ever lie,
Her fingers bounds to her rich deity.
Idem. ^n Paradise of late a Dame begun
To peep out of her bed with such a grace,
As matched the rising of the morning sun,
^vith drops of honney falling from her face,
Brighter then Phoebus fierie-pointed beams,
Or ycie crust of crystal frozen streams.
Her hair like Amber twisted up in gold,
Passing the pride or riches of the East,
With curious knots were into trammels rould,
As snary nettings for a wandering guest;
The feathers decked her with a quaint disdain
Like Iunos byrd in pomp of spotted train.
Her shining forhead does suppress the stars,
New lightning sparkles from her lovely cheeks,
Her percing sight the stroke of beauties wars,
Wherewith the conquest of the world she seeks:
Brave be the darts that from her eyes she throws,
When Cupid lurkes between her lovely brows,
Arabian odours breathe out of her talk,
Which she between the pearl and Ruby breaks,
So smooth a compass has her tongue to walk,
As makes both heaven and earth blush when she speaks
No singing bird in all the air but doates,
And lay their ears attentive to her notes.
Her neck, her shoulders, and her breasts were bare,
Diana-like above the water smiling:
No snow, Iuory, or Alablaster there,
No statue of white Marble, me beguiling,
But the sweet season of the year I found
When Lillies peep out of the grassie ground.
Her other parts unto my view denide,
Much like the lamp that burnt at Psyches bed,
Made such a fire into my heart to glide
That love awaked, and my body bled:
O had she not so great a force to please,
Desire had slept, and I had lived at ease.
S. G. Astronomers the heavens do divide
Into eight houses, where the Gods remain,
All which in thy perfections do abide,
For in thy feet the Queen of silence reigns,
About thy wast Jove's messenger does dwell,
Inchaunting me, as I thereat admire,
And on thy duggs the Queen of love does tell
Her godheads power in scroules of my desire:
Thy beauty is the worlds eternal sun,
Thy favors force a cowards heart to darres,
And in thy hayres, Jove and his riches won,
Thy frowns hold Saturn, thine eyes the fixed stars.
H. C. What length of verse brave Mopsus good to show?
those virtues strange, and beauties such, as no man may them know.
Thus shrewdly burdned the^, how can my Muse escape?
The gods must help, and precious things must serve to show her shape
Like great god Saturn fair, and like fair Venus chaste,
As smooth as Pan as Juno mild, like goddess Iris gracst,
With Cupid she foresees, and goes Gods Vulcans pace,
And for a taste of all these gifts, she steals god Momus grace
Her forhead Iacinth like, her cheeks of opall hue,
Her twinkling eyes bedeckt with pearl, her lyps as Saphires blew,
Her hair like crapal stone, her mouth o heavenly wide,
Her skin like burnisht gold, her hands like siluer-ore untried:
As for her parts unknown, which hidden sure are best,
Happy be they which will believe, and never seek the rest.
S. Phil. Sidney. O words which fall like Summer dew on me,
O breath more sweet then is the growing bean,
O tongue in which all honnied licours be,
O voice that does the Thrush in shrilnes stain,
Gay hair, more gay then straw when harvest lies,
Lips red and plum, as cherries ruddy side,
Eyes fair and great, like fair great Oxes eyes,
O breasts in which two white sheep swell in pride.
But thou white skin, as white as curds well pressed,
So smooth as Sleeke-stone like, it smooths each part,
And thou dear flesh, as soft as wool new dressed,
And yet as hard as Brawne made hard by art.
S. Phil. Sidney. Poetical comparisons. Beauty.
As that fair star the messenger of morn
His dewy face out of the sea does rear,
Or as the Ciprian Goddess newly borne
Of the Oceans fruitful froth did first appear,
Such seemed they, and so their yellow hair,
Christalline humor dropped down apace.
Edm. Spencer. As when fair Cinthia in a darksome night
Is in a noyous cloud enuoloped,
where she may find the substance thin and light,
Breaks forth her silver beams, and her bright head
Discouers to the world discomfited:
Of the poor trauailer that went astray,
with thousand blessings she is hurried,
Such was the beauty and the shining ray
With which fair Britomart gave light unto the day.
Idem. Look how the crown which Ariadne wore
Upon her Iuory forhead that same day
That Theseus her unto his bridal bore,
when the bold Centaures made that bloody fray
with the fierce Lapiths that did them dismay,
Being now placed in the firmament,
Through the bright heaven does her beams display,
And is unto the stars an ornament
which round about her move in order excellent,
Such was the beauty of this goodly band.
Idem. Even as a stage set forth with pomp and pride,
Where men do cunning and their art bestow,
When curtains be remoou'd that all did hide,
Makes by light of torch a glistering show:
Or as the sun that in a cloud did bide,
when that is gone, does cleerer seem to grow:
So Bradamant when as her head was barest,
Her color and her bea^^^e seemed rarest.
S. I. Harr. transl. As when fair Ver dight in her flowrie rail,
In her new colored liuerie decks the earth,
And glorious Titan spreds his sunshine veil
To bring to pass her tender infants birth:
Such was her beauty which I then possessed,
With whose imbracings all my youth was blessed.
M. Drayton. Look how a Comet at the first appearing
Draws all men's eyes with wonder to behold it,
Or as the saddest tale at sudden hearing,
^lakes silent listening unto him that told it,
So did the blazing of my blush appear,
To maze the world, that holds such sights so dear.
S. Daniell. Even as when gaudie Nimphs pursue the chase,
vvretched Ixions shaggy-footed race
Incenst with savage heat gallop a maine
From steeppine-bearing mountains to the plain,
So ran the people forth to gaze upon her,
And all that viewd her, were inamourd on her.
C. Marlow. Like as an horse when he is barded hail,
And feathered pannache set upon his head,
Will make him seem more brave for to assail
The enemy, he that the troop dois lead,
And pannach on his helm will set indeid:
Even so had nature to decore her face,
Given her one top for to augment her grace.
Rex. Sco. Like as a Taper burning in the dark,
(As if it threatened every watchful eye
That burning viewes it) makes that eye his mark,
And hurles guild darts at it continually:
Or as it enuyed any eye but it
Should see in darkness: so my mistres beauty,
From forth her secret stand my heart does hit,
And like the dart of Cephalus does kill
Her perfect lover, though she mean no ill.
G. Chapman. Now as when heaven is mufled with the vapors,
His long since just divorced wife the earth
In envy breaths, to mask his spurry tapers
From the vnrich abundance of her birth,
When straight the Western issue of the air
Beats with his floury wings those brats of dearth,
And gives Olympus leave to show his fair,
So fled the offended shadows of her cheer,
And showed her pleasant countenance full as clear.
Idem. Dalliance.
Even as an empty Eagle sharp by fast,
Tires with her beak on feather, flesh and bone,
Shaking her wings, devouring all in have,
Till either gorge be stuffed, or pray be gone,
Even so she kissed his brow, his cheek, his chin,
And where she ends, she does anew begin.
W. Shakespeare. -- Look how close the Iuy does embrace
The tree or branch about the which it grows,
So close the lovers couched in that place,
Each drawing in the breath the other blows:
But how great joys they found that little space,
Well we may guess, but none for certain knows,
Such was their sport, so well their leere they couth,
That often they had two tongues within one mouth.
S. I. Harr. Like as the wanton Iuie with his twine,
When as the Oak his rootlesse body warmes,
The straightest saplings strictly do combine,
Clipping the wood with his lascivious arms:
Such our embraces when our sport begins,
Lapt in our arms like Ledaes lovely twins.
M. Drayton. Even as fair Castor when a calm begins,
Beholding then his starry-tressed brother,
With mirth and glee these swan-begotten twins,
Presaging joy the one embrace the other:
Thus one the other in our arms we fold,
Our breasts for joy our hearts could scarcely hold.
Idem. -- As when Jove at once from East to West
Cast off two Eagles to discern the fight
Of this worlds center, both his birds joined breast
In Cynthian Delphos, since Earths nauill height:
So casting off my ceaselesse thoughts to see
My hearts true center, all do meet in thee.
G. Chapman. Like as a well-tunde Lute that is tucht with skill
In musicks language sweetly speaking plain,
When every string it self with sound does fill,
Taking their times, and giving them again,
A diapazon heard in every strain;
So their affections set in keys so like,
Still fall in consort as their humors strike.
M. Drayton. Sorrow.
A down his cheeks the tears so flows
As does the stream of many springs:
So thunder rends the clouds in twain,
And makes a passage for the rain.
M. Roydon. As through an arch the violent roaring tide
Out-runnes the eye that does behold his have,
Yet in the Edie boundeth in his pride
Back to the strait that forced him so fast,
In rage sent out, recald in rage being past:
Even so his sighs, his sorrows make a saw,
To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.
W. Shakespeare. -- The storm so rumbled in her breast
As Eolus could never roar the like,
And showers down rained from her eyes so fast
That all bedrent the place, till at the last
Well eased they the dolor of the mind,
As rage of rain does swage the stormy wind.
M. Sackuile. As in September when our year resignes
The glorious sun unto the watery signs,
which through the clouds looks on the earth in scorn,
The little bird yet to salute the morn
Upon the naked branches sets her foot,
The leaves now lying on the mossie root:
And there a silly chiriping does keep,
As though she feign would sing, yet feign would weep,
Praising fair Summer that too soon is gone,
Or mourning winter, too fast coming on,
In this sad plight I mourn for thy return.
M. Drayton. As when the fatal bird of augurie
Seeing a stormy dismal cloud arise
within the South, foretells with pittious cry
The weeping tempest that on sudden hies,
So the poor soul, in view of his disdain,
Began to descant on her future pain.
D. Lodge. All like as Hecuba fell raging mad,
with grief of mind and sorrow sore oppressed,
To see her Polydorus little lad
By fraud of his kinsman unkind distressed,
So rau'd Olympia fair.
J. Harrington. The raging pang remained still within,
That would have burst out all at once so fast,
Even so we see the water tarry in
A bottle little mouthed and big in wast,
That though you topsie-turnie turn the brim,
The licour bides behind with too much have,
And with the striving often is in such taking,
As scant a man may yet it out with shaking.
Idem. Sorrow.
As one that saw in April or in May
A pleasant garden full of fragrant flowers,
Then when the earth new clad in garments gay
Decks every wood and grove with pleasant bowers,
Coming again on some Decembers day,
And sees it mard with winters storms and showers,
So did the Court to Bradamant appear,
When as she saw Rogero was not there.
I. Harr. As gorgious Phoebus in his first vprise,
Discovering now his scarlet-colored head,
By troublous motions of the lowering skies,
His glorious beams with fogs are ouer-spred
So are his cheerful brows ecclipst with sorrow,
which clowd the shine of his youths smiling morrow
M. Drayton. Like as when Phoebus darting forth his rays,
Glydeth along the swelling Ocean streams,
And whilst one billow with another plays
Reflecteth back his bright translucent beams:
Such was the conflict then betwixt our eyes*
Sending forth looks as tears do fall and rise.
Idem. Like to a vessel with a narrow vent,
Which is filled up with licour to the top,
Although the mouth be after downward bent,
Yet is it seen not to distill a drop;
Even thus our breast brimful with pensive care,
Stopping our tongues, with grief we silent are.
Idem. As the high Elm (when his dear Vine has twind
Fast in her hundred arms and holds imbrast)
Bears down to earth his spouse and darling kind
If storm or cruel steel the tree down cast,
And her full grapes to naught does bruze and grind,
Spoils his own leaves, faints, withers, dies at last,
And seems to mourn and die, not for his own,
But for the death of her that lies orethrowne:
So fell he mourning* mourning for the dame
Whom life and death had made for ever his.
E. Fairefax. As when a foggy mist has ouer-cast
The face of heaven, and the clear air ingrost,
The world in darkness dwells, till that at last
The watery South Wind from the Sea-bord coast
Up blowing does disperse the vapors lost,
And powers it self forth in a stormy shower:
So the fair Britomart having disclost
Her cloudy care into a wrathful stowre,
The midst of grief dissolved into vengeance power.
Edm. Spen. -- As a stroke given on the righter eye
Offends the left, even so by simpathy
Her husbands dolours made her heart vnglad,
And Iudiths sorrows made her husband sad.
T. Hudson. Dissimulation.
As when a weary trauailer that straies
By muddy shore of broad seauen-mouthed Nile,
Unwitting of the perilous wandering ways
Does meet a cruel crafty Crocodile,
which in false grief hiding his harmefull guile,
Does weep full sore, and sheddeth tender tears:
The foolish man that pitties all the while
His mournful plight, is swallowed up unawares,
Forgetful of his own that minds another cares:
So wept Duessa until euentide.
Edm. Spencer. As cunning singers ere they strain on hie
In loud melodious tunes their gentle voice,
Prepare the hearers ears to harmony
With fainings sweet, low notes, and warbles choice:
So she, not having yet forgot pardie
Her wonted shifts and sleights in Cupids toys,
A sequence first of sighs and sobs forth cast,
To breed compassion dear, then spoke at last.
Ed. Fairefax. As guilefull Goldsmith that by secret skill
with golden foil does finely ouer-spred
Some baser mettle, which commend he will
Unto the vulgar for good gold indeed,
He much more goodly gloss thereon does shed
To hide his falsehood, then if it were true:
So hard this Idol was to be ared,
That Florimell her self in all men's view
She seemd to pass, so forged things do fairest show,
Edm. Spencer. As when two suns appear in th'azure sky,
Mounted in Phoebus Chariot fiery bright,
Both darting forth fair beams to each man's eye,
And both adornd with lamps of flaming light:
All that behold so strange prodigious sight,
Nor natures work them guess, nor what to ween,
Are rapt with wonder, and with rare affright,
So stood Sir Marinell when he had seen
The semblance of this false by this fair beauties queen.
Idem. Love.
As men tormented with a burning fever
Dream that with drink they swage their grievous thirst,
But when they wake they feel their thirst persevere,
And to be greater then it was at first:
So she whose thoughts from love sleep could not sever,
Dreamt of that thing for which she wake did thirst:
But waking, felt and found it as before,
Her hope still less, and her desire still more.
S. I. Harr. The man that dwells far North has sildome harm
With blast of winters wind or nypping frost:
The Negro sildome feels himself too warm,
If he abide within his native coast:
So love in me a second nature is,
And custom makes me think my woes are bliss.
Tho. Watson. The Harpie byrds that did in such despite
Grieve and annoy old Phineus so sore,
Were chasde away by Calais in fight,
And by his brother Zeth for evermore:
who followed until they heard on hie,
A voice that said; ye twins no farther fly.
Phineus I am that so tormented was,
My Laura here I may a Harpie name,
My thoughts and lusts be sons to Boreas,
Which never ceast in following my dame,
Till heavenly grace said unto me at last,
Leave fond delights, and say thy love is past.
Idem. All as the greedy fisher lays his hooks
Along the coast to catch some mighty fish,
More for his gain, then wholesome for the dish
Of him that buies: even so these sisters brave,
Have lovers more then honest maidens have*
Tho. Hudson. -- As when mighty Macedon had won
The Monarchy of earth, yet when he fainted,
Grieved that no greater action could be done,
And that there no more worlds was to subdue,
So loves defects, loves conqueror did rue.
Edm. Spencer. Look as the fair and fiery-poynted sun
Rushing from forth a cloud bereaues our sight,
Even so the curtain drawn, his eyes begun
To wink, being blinded with a greater light.
W. Shakespeare. Like as in fury of a dreadful fight,
Their fellows being slain, or put to flight,
Poor soldiers stand with fear of death dead strooken,
So at her presence all surprizd and tooken,
Await the sentence of her scornful eyes;
He whom she favors lives, the other dies.
C. Marlow. Fear.
Like as a Hind forth singled from the heard
That has escaped from a ravenous beast,
Yet flies away, of her own feet afraid,
And every leaf that shakes with the least
Murmr of winds, her terror has increast,
So fled fair Florimell from her vain fear.
Edm. Spencer. -- He shakes aloft his Roman blade,
Which like a Faulchon towering in the skies
Coucheth the foul below with his wings shade,
Whose crooked beak threats, if he mount, he dies:
So under his insulting Fauchion lies
Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells,
With trembling fear, as foul hears Faulchons bells.
W. Shakespeare. As the poor frighted Dear that stands at gaze,
Wildly determining which way to fly,
Or one incompast with a winding maze,
That cannot tread the way out readily,
So with her self she grows in mutiny
To live or die which of the twain were better,
When life is shamed, and deaths reproaches better.
Idem. Like as the Snayle, whose horns being once hit,
Shrinks backward in his shelly cave with pain,
And there all smoothred up in shade does sit,
Long after fearing to creep forth again:
So at his bloody view her eyes are fled
Into the deep dark cabbins of her head.
Idem. As in the night each little fiery spark
May plainly be discerned with our eyne,
But when the day does come we then shall mark
That all are dampt and do no longer shine:
So kindles fear in mind which doubt made dark,
Until my sun in my Horizon shine.
S. I. Harr. So great a terror in their mind was bred
That straight as if with sprites they had been skard,
This way and that, confusedly they fled,
And left the gates without defense or guard:
As tumults often are at stage plays bred,
When false reports of sudden fits are heard:
Or when the ouer-loaden seats do crack,
One tumbling down upon another back.
Idem. Like as in time of Spring the water's warm,
And crowding frogs like fishes there do swarm,
But with the smallest stone that you can cast
To stir the stream, their crowding stays as fast:
So while Judea was in joyful days,
The constancy of them was worthy praise,
For that in every purpose ye should hear
The praise of God resounding every where:
So that like burning candles they did shine,
Among their faithful flock, like men divine,
But look how soon they heard of Holoferne,
Their courage quaild, and they began to derne.
T. Hudson. Of Flight.
Look how a purple flower does fade and die
That painful ploughman cutteth up with share,
Or as the Poppies head aside does lie
When it the body can no longer bear:
So did the noble Dardanello die,
And with his death filled all his men with fear:
As waters run abroad that break their bay
So fled his soldiers, breaking their array.
S. I. Harr. As the swift Ure by Volgaes rolling flood
Chasde through the plain the mastife curres to-forne,
Flies to the succor of some neighbor wood,
And often turns again his dreadful horn
Against the dogs, imbrude in sweat and blood
That bite not till the beast to flight return:
Or as the Moors at their strange tennis run
Defenst, the flying balls unhurt to shun,
So ran Clorinda, so her foes pursude.
Ed. Fairefax. Like as a Lion whose imperial power
A proud rebellious Unicorn defies,
To avoid the rash assault and wrathful stowre
Of his fierce foe, him for a tree applies,
And when in running in full course he spies,
He slips aside, the whilst that furious beast
His precious horn sought of his enemies
Strikes in the stock, ne thence can be releast,
But to the mighty victor yields a bounteous feast,
With such fair flight him Guion often foyld.
Edm. Spencer. Error.
As when old father Nilus gins to swell
With timely pride above The Egyptian vale,
His fatty waves do fertile shine out well,
And ouer-flow each plain, and lowly dale,
But when his later ebb gins to avail,
Huge heaps of mud he leaves, wherein there breed
Ten thousand kind of creatures, partly male,
And partly female, of his fruitful seed,
Such ugly monstrous shapes elsewhere may no man re^
Ed. Spen. compard to Errors vomit. Of Rage.
As savage Bull whom two fierce mastiues bait,
When rancor does with rage him once ingore,
Forgets with wary ward them to await
But with his dreadful horns them drives before,
Or flings aloft, or treads down in the floor,
Breathing out wrath, and bellowing disdain,
That all the forest quakes to hear him rore,
So ragde Prince Arthur twixt his foe-men twain,
That neither could his mighty puissance sustain.
Edm Spen. Look what a noise an heard of savage swine
Do make, when as the Wolf a pig does take
That does in all their hearings cry and whine,
Flocking about as nature has them taught:
So do these soldiers murmr and repine
To see their Captain thus to mischief brought:
And with great fury they do set upon him,
All with one voice, still crying on him, on him.
I. Harr. As when within the soft and spungie soil
The wind does pierce the intrailes of the earth,
Where hurly bu^ly with a restless coil,
Shakes all the center, wanting issue forth,
Tell with the tumor towns and mountains tremble,
Even such a meteor does their rage resemble.
M. Drayton. As when a Comet far and wide descride
In scorn of Phoebus midst bright heaven does shine,
And tidings sad of death and mischief brings,
So shond the Pagan in bright armor clad,
And rold his eyes.
Ed. Fairefax. Like as a Bull when pricked with jealousy,
He spies the rival of his hot desire,
Through all the fields does bellow, rore, and cry,
And with his thundering voice augments his ire:
And threatening battle to the empty sky,
Tears with his horn each plant, each bush, each brier,
And with his foot cast's up his hand on hight,
Defying his strong foe to deadly fight,
Such was the Pagans fury, such his cry.
Idem. Like as a Goshauke that in foot does bear
A trembling Culuer, having spyde on hight
An Eagle that with plumy wings does sheare
The subtle air, stooping with all his might
The quarry throws to ground with fell despite,
And to the battle does herself prepare:
So ran the Giantesse unto the fight;
Her fiery eyes with furious sparks did stare,
And with blasphemous bans, high God in pieces tar^
Edm. Spencer. As Lions meet, or Bulls in pastures green
With teeth and horns, and stain with blood the field,
Such eager fight these warriors was between,
And eythers spear had peirst the others shield.
I. Harr. Like as with equal rage, and equal might
Two adverse winds combat with billows proud,
And neither yield, seas, skies maintain like fight,
Wave against wave opposd, and cloud to cloud,
So war both sides with obstinate despite,
With like revenge, and neither party bowd,
Fronting each other with confounding blows,
No wound one sword unto the other owes.
Sam. Daniell. With equal rage as when the Southerne-winde
Meets in battle through the Northern blast,
The sea and air to weather is resignde
But clowd against clowd, and wave against wave they past:
So from this skirmish neither part declind,
But fought it out, and keeps their footings fast,
And often with furious shock together rush,
And shield against shield, and helm against helm they crush.
Ed. Fairefax. transl. Such was their fury as when Boreas tears
The shattered crags from Taurus Northern clift,
Upon their helmes their Lances long they broke,
And up to heaven flew splinters, sparks, and smoke.
Idem. As when two Tigers pricked with hungers rage
Have by good fortune found some beasts fresh spoil,
On which they ween their famine to assuage,
And gain a feastfull guerdon of their toil,
Both falling out, do stir up strifefull broyle,
And cruel battle twixt themselves do make,
Whilst neither lets the other touch the soil
But either sdeignes with other to partake,
So cruelly those Knights strove for that Ladies sake.
Edm. Spencer. From out his fearful eyes two fiery beams
More sharp then points of needles did proceed,
Shooting forth far away two flaming streams
Full of sad power that poisonous bait did breed
To all that within looked without good heed,
And secretly his enemies did slay:
Like as the Basiliske of Serpents seed
From painful eyes close venom does convey
Into the lookers heart, and kills far away.
Idem. As when a Dolphin and a Sele are met
In the wide champion of the Ocean plain,
With cruel chafe their courages they whet,
The maisterdome of each by force to gain,
And dreadful battle twixt them do darraine:
They snuff, they snort, they bounce, they rage, they rore
That all the Sea disturbed with their train
Does fry with foame above the surges hoar,
Such was betwixt these two the troublesome uproar.
Ed. Spencer. As when the fiery mounted steedes which drew
The suns bright waine, to Phactons decay,
Soon as they did the monstrous Scorpions view
With ugly crapples crawling in their way,
The sight thereof did them so sore affray,
That their well known courses they forewent:
And leading the euer-burning lamp astray,
This lower world nigh all to ashes brent,
And left their scorched path yet in the firmament:
Such was the fury of these headstrong steedes,
Soon as the infants sunlike shield they saw.
Idem. Like as the cursed son of Theseus,
That following his chase in dewie morn,
To fly his stepdames love outrageous,
Of his own steedes was all to pieces torn,
And his fair limbs left in the woods forlorn,
That for his sake Diana did lament,
And all the woodie Nimphs did wail and mourn:
So was the Soldane rapt and all to rent,
That of his shape appeard no little moniment.
Idem. Like raging Juno, when with knife in hand
She threw her husbands murdered infant out,
Or fell Medea when on Colchicke strand
Her brothers bones she scattered round about,
Or as that madding mother among the rout
Of Bacchus priests, her own dear flesh did tear:
Yet neither Juno nor Medea stout,
Nor all the Menades so furious were,
As this bold woman when she saw the damsel there.
Idem. As the heat hidden in a watery cloud,
Striving for issue with strange murmures loud,
Like gunnes astuns, with round-round-rumbling thunder,
Filling the air with noise, the earth with wonder,
So the three sisters, the three hidious rages,
Raise thousand storms, leaving the infernal stages.
I. Siluester. Pity. Courtesy.
She pittious nurse applyde her painful thought
To serve and nourish them that her vp-brought;
Like to the grateful Storke, that gathers meat,
And brings it to her elders for to eat.
And on a Firre-tree high, with Boreas blown
Gives life to those of whom she had her own.
Th. Hudson. As the bright sun what time his fiery teame
Toward the Western brim begins to draw,
Gins to abate the brightness of his beam,
And feruor of his flames somewhat adaw,
So did this mighty Lady when she saw
Those two strange Knights such homage to her make,
Bate somewhat of her majesty and awe
That whilom wont to do so many quake,
And with more mild aspect those two to entertake.
Edm. Spen. As when the Southern wind with lukewarm blast
Breathing on hills where winter long had dwelt
Dissolues the rocks of Ice that hung so fast,
And all the new made mounts of snow does melt:
So with this gentle prayer, though spoke in have,
The damsel such an inward motion felt
That suddenly her armed heart did soften,
As unto women-kinde it chances often.
S. I. Harr. Like as the wind stopped by some wood or hill
Grows strong and fierce, tears bows and trees in twain,
But with mild blasts more temperate gentle still
Against the rocks as sea-waues murmr shrill
But silent pass amid the open maine:
Rinaldo so when none his force with-stood,
Asswagde his fury, calmd his angry mood.
Idem. Courage.
As when two Rams stird with ambitious pride
Fight for the rule of the rich-fleeced flock,
Their horned fronts so fierce on either side
Do meet, that with the terror of the shock
Astonished, both stand senseless as a block
Forgetful of the hanging victory:
So stood these twain unmoved as a rock,
Both staring fierce, and holding ielely
The broken relics of their former cruelty.
Edm. Spencer. Above the waves as Neptune lift his eyes
To chyde the winds that Troyan ships oppressed,
And with his countenance calmd seas, winds and skies,
So looked Rinaldo when he shook his crest.
S. I. Harr. When the air is calm and still, as dead and deaf,
And under heaven quakes not an Aspen leaf,
When seas are calm, and thousand vessels fleet
Upon the sleeping seas with passage sweet,
And when the variant wind is still and lowne
The cunning Pilot never can be known;
But when the cruel storm does threat the bark
To drown in deeps of pits infernal dark,
While tossing tears both ruther, mast and sail,
While mounting, seems the azure skies to scale,
While drives perforce upon some deadly shore,
There is the Pilot known, and not before.
Th. Hudson. As a tall ship tossed in troubled seas,
Whom raging winds threatening to make their pray
Of the rough rocks do diversely disease
Meets two contrary billows by the way
That her on either side does sore assay,
And boast to swallow her in greedy grave;
She scorning both their spights, does make wide way,
And with her breast breaking the foamie wave,
Does ride on both their backs, and fair herself does save,
So boldly he him bears.
Ed. Spen. As when a ship that flies far under sail
A hidden rock escaped has unawares,
That lay in wait her wrack for to bewail,
The Mariner yet half amazed stares
At perrill past, and yet in doubt, ne dares
To joy at his foole-hardie ouer-sight:
So doubly is distressed twixt joy and fears
The dreadlesse courage of this Elsin Knight.
Edm. Spen. Majesty. Pomp.
Look as great Cinthia in her silver Carre
Rides in her progress round about her sphere,
Whose tendance is the fair eye-dazeling stars
Trooping about her Chariot, that with clear
And glorious shows makes every eye delight
To gaze upon the beauty of the night,
Clad and attended with the worlds delight,
So is the Queen in majesty brought forth.
Chr. Middleton. Like trident-maced Neptune in his pride,
Mounted upon a Dolphin in a storm,
Upon the tossing billows forth does ride,
About whose train a thousand Tritons swarm:
When Phoebus seems to set the waves on fire,
To show his glory, and the Gods desire:
Or like unto the fiery-faced sun,
Upon his wagon prauncing in the West,
Whose blushing cheeks with flames seem overrun
Whilst sweating thus he gallops to his rest:
Such was the glory wherein now I stood,
Which makes the Barons sweat their dearest blood.
M. Drayton. As stately Thames inricht with many a flood
And goodly rivers that have made their graves
And buried both their names and all their good
within his greatness to augment his waves,
Glides on with pomp of waters vnwithstood
Unto the Ocean, which his tribute craves,
And lays up all his wealth within that power,
which in it self all greatness does devour:
So flockt the mighty with their following train
Unto the all-receauing Bullenbrooke.
S. Daniell. Then thou on thine imperial Chariot set
Crowned with a rich imperled Coronet,
Whilst the Parisian dames as thy train past
Their precious incense in abundance cast:
As Cynthia from the waue-embateled shrowdes
Opening the west, comes streming through the clouds,
With shining troops of siluer-tresled stars
Attending on her as her Torch-bearers,
And all the lesser lights about her throne,
With admiration stand as lookers on,
Whilst she alone in height of all her pride
The Queen of light along her sphere does glide.
M. Drayton. Civil wars.
Even like to Rheine which in his birth oppressed
Strangled almost with rocks and mighty hills,
Works out away to come to better rest,
Wars with the Mountains, strives against their wills,
Brings forth his streams in unity professed
Into the quiet bed he proudly fills,
Carrying the greatness which he cannot keep,
Unto his death and burial in the deep:
So did the worlds proud Mistres Rome at first
Strive with an hard beginning, ward with need,
Forcing her strong confiners to the worst,
And in her blood her greatness first did breed:
So Spain at home with Moors ere forth it burst,
Did practice long, and in it self did bleed:
So did our state begin with her own wounds
To try her strength, ere it enlargd her bounds.
Sam. Daniell. Like as an exhalation hot and dry
Amongst the ayre-bred moistie vapors thrown
Spetteth his lightning forth courageously,
Renting the thick clouds with a thunder-stone,
As though the huge all-couering heaven did groan,
Such is the garboyle of this conflict then,
Brave Englishmen encountering Englishmen.
M. Drayton. Like as a cloud foul, dark and ugly black,
Threatening the earth with tempest every hour,
Now broken with a fearful thunder-crack,
Straight powers down his deep earth-drenching shower,
Thus for their wrongs now rise they up in arms,
Or to revenge, or to amend their harms.
Idem. Death.
Then down he tumbled like an aged tree,
High growing on the top of rockie clift,
Whose hart-strings with keen steel nigh hewn be,
The mighty trunck half rent with ragged rift,
Does roll adowne the rocks, and falls with fearful drift.
Edm. Spencer. Or as a Castle reared high and round,
By subtle engines and malicious slight
Is undermined from the lowest ground,
And her foundations forced and feebled quite,
At last down falls, and with her heaped hight
Her hasty ruin does more heavy make,
And yields it self unto the victors might,
Such was this Giants fall.
Idem. As when two billows in the Irish sounds
Forcibly driven with contrary tides
Do meet together, each aback rebounds
With roaring rage, and dashing on all sides
That fills all the sea with foame, deuides
The doubtful current into diverse waves,
So fell these two in spite of both their prides.
Idem. Hope.
Like as through Tagus fair transparent streams
The wandering Merchant sees the sandy gold,
Or like as Cynthias half obscured beams
In silent night the Pilot does behold
Through mistie clouds, and vapors manifold,
So through a mirror of my hoped for gain,
I saw the treasure which I should obtain.
^h. Storer. Like as the sun at one self time is felt
With heat to harden clay, and wax does melt,
So Amrams sacred son in these proiects,
Made one self cause have two contrary effects;
For Isaac humbly knew their Lord divine,
But Pharo more and more did still repine;
Like to the corpslet old, the more it is bet
with hammer hard, more hardness it does get.
Th. Hudson. This ill presage advisedly she marketh,
Even as the wind is hushed before it raineth,
Or as the Wolf does grin before he barketh,
Or as the berry breaks before it staineth,
Or like the deadly bullet of a gunne,
His meaning struck her ere his words begun.
W. Shakespeare. Astonishment.
Like as the tiller of the fruitful ground
with sudden storm and tempest is astonished*
who sees the flash, and hears the thunders sound,
And for their masters sake the cattle punished:
Or when by hap a fair old Pine he found
By force of raging wind his leaves diminished:
So stood amazd the Pagan in that place,
His Lady present at that woeful case.
I. Harrington. Even as a Wolf by pinching famine led
That in the field a carrion beast does find,
On which before the dogs and Ravens have fed,
And nothing left but bones and horns behind,
Stands still and gazeth on the carcass dead:
So at this sight the Pagan Prince repind,
And curses often, and calls himself a beast,
For coming tardy to so rich a feast.
Idem. Like to a man who walking in the grass
Upon a Serpent suddenly does tread,
Plucks back his foot, and turns away his face,
His color fading pale, as he were dead:
Thus he the place* thus he the act does shun,
Lothing to see what he before had done.
M. Drayton. Look how the God of wisdom marbled stands
Bestowing Laurel wreaths of dignity
In Delphos I Will, at whose impartial hands
Hang antique scrolles of gentle Herauldry,
And at his feet ensigns and trophies lie,
Such was my state, whom every man did follow,
As living statue of the great Apollo.
Th. Storer. All as the hungry winter-starued earth,
when she by nature labors toward her birth,
Still as the day upon the dark world creepes
One blossom forth after another peepes,
Till the small flower whose root is now unbound,
Gets from the frostie prison of the ground,
Spreading the leaves unto the powrefull noone
Decked in fresh colors, smiles upon the sun.
Never unquiet care lodge in that breast
Where but one thought of Rosamond did rest.
M. Drayton. Courage.
Like as a fire the which in hollow cave
Has long been vnder-kept and down suppressed,
With murmr as disdain does inly rave,
And grudge in so strait prison to be pressed,
At last breaks forth with furious unrest,
And strives to mount unto his native seat:
All that did erst it hinder and molest,
It now deuoures with flames and scorching heat,
And carries into smoke, with rage and horror great,
So mightily the Britain Prince him rousd
Out of his hold.
Edm. Spencer. As he that strives to stop a sudden flood
And in strong bands his violence enclose,
Forces it swell above his wonted mood,
And largely ouer-flows the fruitful plain,
That all the country seems to be a maine,
And the rich furrows flote all quite fordone,
The woeful husbandman does loud complain
To see his whole years labor lost so soon,
For which to God he made so many an idle boon,
So him he held, and did through might amate.
Idem. Like as a Sapphire hanging down the breast
A far more orient glittering does make,
Then does a Diamond of good request
Set in a bracelet, and more glory take,
Not for the virtue but the places sake.
So did a clowdy sapphire dim my light,
Not with his worth, but with his places height.
Th. Storer. Of Adam.
Thou see no wheat Helleborus can bring,
Nor barley from the madding Morrell spring,
Nor bleating lambs brave lions do not breed,
That leaprous parents raise a leaprous feed.
Even so our grandsyre living innocent
Had stockt the whole world with a saint descent.
But suffering sin in Eden him invade,
His sons the soones of sin and wrath he made.
I. Syluester. As done the pots that long retains the taste
Of licour, such as first was in them plaste:
Or like the tree that bends his elder branch
That way where first the stroke had made his launch^
So see we wolfes and bears and hearts full old,
Some tamenesse from their daunted youth to hold.
Th. Hudson. -- Loves fiery dart
Could nere vnfreeze the frost of her chaste heart:
But as the diamond bides the hammer strong,
So she resisted all her suitors long.
Idem. Drunkards.
The more he drank, the more he did desire,
Like to the Ocean sea, though it receaues
All Nilus floods, yet all fresh water craves
From East to West, yet grows he not a grain,
But still is ready for as much again.
Idem. * The staves like ice in shiuers small did fly,
The splints like byrds did mount unto the sky.
M. Drayton. Ill Company.
Like as the perfect Pylot fears to run
Upon the rocks, with singling sheet does shun
Cydnaees straits ot Syrtes sinking sands,
Or cruel Capharois with stormy strands.
So wisely she dishaunted the resort
Of such as were suspect of light report.
Well knowing that the quaintance with the ill
Corrupts the good, and though they ever still
Th. Hudson. Fol. 452. * Look how the peacocke ruffes his flanting tail,
And strutts under his mooned canapie:
And how he quiuers with his mooned sail,
Yet when his lead pale legs he haps to see,
With shame abates his painted iollitie.
The King as proud as peacocke in his love,
Yet droupes again when words nor tears will move.
M. Drayton. Night.
Look how a bright star shoots from the sky,
So glides he in the night from Venus eye,
Which after him she darts as on a shore,
Gazing upon a late embarked friend,
Till the wild waves will have them see no more,
Whose ridges with the meeting clouds contend.
So did the merciless and pitchy night
Fold in the object that did feed her sight.
W. Sha. King.
When as the Sun forsakes his crystal sphere,
How dark and ugly is the gloomy sky?
And in his place there is nothing well appear,
But clouds that in his glorious circuit fly.
So when a King forsakes his royal place,
There still succeed oblique and dark disgrace.
Chapter Middleton Look how the day hater Mineruaes bird,
Whilst privileged with darkness and the night:
Does live secure himself of others feared,
But if by chance discovered in the light,
O how each little foul with envy stird,
Calls him to justice, vrges him with spite,
Summons the feathered flocks of all the wood,
To come to scorn the tyrants of their blood,
So fares the King laid open to disgrace.
S. Daniell. And forth he is brought unto the accomplishment,
Decked with the crown and princely robes that day:
Like as the dead in other lands are sent
Unto their graves in all their best array.
And even like good did him this ornament.
For what he brought he must not bear away,
But buries there his glory and his name,
Entombed for evermore in others blame.
Idem. Company.
Remain upright, yet some will quarrel pike,
And common brute will deem them all alike.
For look how your companions you elect
For good or ill, so shall you be suspect.
Th. Hudson. Of Victory.
Like as whilome that strong Tyranthian swain
Brought forth with him the dreadful dog of hell:
Against his will fast bound in iron chain,
And roaring horribly did him compel
To see the hateful sun, that he might tell
To grisly Pluto what on earth was done,
And to the other damned ghoasts which dwell
For aye in darkness, which daylight does shun,
So led he forth this captive, and like conquest woone.
Ed. Spencer. Like as in summers day when raging heat
Does burn the earth and boiled rivers dry:
That all brute beasts forste to refrain from meat
Do hunt for shade where shrouded they may lie.
And missing it, feign from themselves to fly
All trauailers tormented are with pain:
A mighty cloud does ouercast the sky,
And powers forth a sudden shower of rain,
That all the wretched world recomforteth again.
So did the warlike Britomart restore
The prize of knights of mayden-head that day.
Idem. As when a troop of harvest thrifty swains
With cutting sythes earth ripened riches mowes,
Whole sheaues of corn lie strowen upon the plains.
So fall the Scots before the conquering foes.
D. Lodge. Death.
On Appenine like as a sturdy tree
Against the winds that makes resistance stout:
If with a storm it ouerturned be,
Falls down and breaks the trees and plants about:
So Latin fell, and with him felled he,
And slew the nearest of the Pagan rout.
Ed. Fairfax. Like as the sacred ox that careless stands
With gilden horns and flowery girlonds crowned:
Proud of his dying honor and dear bands,
Whilst Theaters fume with frankensence around,
All suddenly with mortal stroke astoind,
Does grouelling fall, and with his steaming gore
Distaines the pillars and the holy ground.
And the fair flowers that decked him before,
So fell proud Marinell upon the precious shore.
Ed. Spencer. Like as a ship whom cruel tempest drives
Upon a rock with horrible dismay,
Her shattered ribs in thousand pieces riues,
And spoiling all her geares and goodly ray,
Does make her self misfortunes piteous pray.
So down the cliffe the wretched giant tombled.
Idem. Like an autumall star which ruddy does foreshewe
Some death, some pestilence, some bloody overthrow
He buskles with his foe, the assailant he assaults,
And resolute he marks his arrows weak defaults.
Then entering in between his breast plate and his bases,
He seeks his sinful soul, there finds, and thence it chases.
I. Syl. Fight.
Like as two mastiffe dogs with hungry jaws,
Moved first to hate, from hate to raging ire:
Approach with grinning teeth and grisly jaws,
With staring eyes as red as flaming fire.
At last they bite and scratch with teeth and claws,
Tearing themselves, and trembling in the mire.
So after biting and reproachful words,
Sarcapant and Rinaldo drew their swords.
Ed. Spencer. Like as an exhalation hot and dry,
Amongst the air bred moisty vapors thrown
Spilleth his lightening forth courageously,
Renting the thick clouds with a thunder-stone,
As though the huge all covering heaven did groan.
Such is the garboyle of this conflict then,
Brave English men encountering English men.
M. Drayton. Like as ye see the wallowing sea to strive
Flood after flood, and wave with wave to drive:
The^ waves with waves, the^ floods with floods to chase,
And eft returns unto their former place.
Or like the crops of corn in midst of May,
(Blown up with western wind) aside do sway,
Both too and fro as force does them constrain,
And yet their tops redresseth up again.
So whiles the Sirians are by Medes displaced,
And whiles the Medes by Syrians are rechaced.
Th. Hudson. Like as a puttock having spied in sight
A gentle faulchon sitting on a hill,
Whose other wing now made unmeet for flight,
Was lately broken by some fortune ill.
The foolish kite led with licentious will,
Does beat upon the gentle byrd in vain,
With many idle stoopes her troubling still.
Even so did Radagond with bootlesse pain,
Annoy this noble knight, and sorely him constrain.
Ed. Spencer. Even as an Eagle that espies from hie,
Among the herbs a party colored snake:
Or on a bank sunning her self to lie,
Casting the elder skin, anew to make
Lies houering warily till she may spy
Advantage sure the venomd worm to take:
Then takes him by the back and beats her wings,
Maugre the poison of his forked stings,
So does Rogero both with sword and spear,
The cruel monster warily assail.
S. I. Harr. Like as a mountain or a cape of land,
Assaild with storms, and sails on every side
Does unremoved steadfast still withstand,
Storm, thunder, lightning, tempest, wind and tide.
The Souldan so withstood Latinus band.
Ed. Fairfax. So thick flew floods and darts that no man sees
The azurde heavens, the sun his brightness lost:
The clouds of weapons like to swarms of bees
Met in the air, and there each other crossed.
And look how falling leaves drop down from trees
When the moist sap is mixed with lively frost,
Or apples in strong winds from branches fall,
The Sarazens so tumbled from the wall.
Idem. As when a windy tempest blows hie,
That nothing may withstand his stormy stowre,
The clouds as things afraid before him fly,
But all so soon as his outrageous power
Is laid, they fairly then begin to shower,
And as in storm of his spent stormy spite,
Now all at once their malice forth do power.
So did Sir Guion bear himself in fight,
And suffered rash Pirrocles want his idle might.
Ed. Spencer. As Eagle fresh out of the Ocean wave,
Where he has left his plumes all hoary gray,
And decked himself with feathers youthly gay,
Like Eyas hawk vpmounting to the skies,
His newly budded pinions to assay,
And maruells at himself still as he flies,
So new, this newborn knight to battle did arise.
Idem. As gentle shepherd in sweet euen-tide,
When ruddy Phoebus gins to walk in west,
He on an hill his flock to viewen wide,
Marks which do bite his hearty supper best.
A cloud of combrous gnats do him molest,
All striving to infixe their feeble stings,
That from their noyance, he no where can rest,
But with his clownish hands their tender wings
He brusheth off, and often does mar their murmurings.
Ed. Sp. -- They him espying, both with greedy force
At once upon him ran, and him beset
With strokes of mortal steel, without remorse,
And on his shield like Iron sledges bet,
As when a Bear and Tigre being met,
In cruel fight on Libicke Ocean wide,
Espide a traveler with feet surbet,
Whom they in equal pray hope to divide,
They stint their strife, and him assail on every side.
Ed. Spencer. Of noise. Clamor.
As great a noise as when in Cymbrian plain,
An heard of bulls, whom kindly rage does sting,
Do for the milky mothers want complain,
And fill the fields with troublous bellowing,
The neighbor woods around with hollow murmuring.
Ed. Sp. As when the shapelesse huge Leuiaethan
Has thrust himself upon the sandy shore,
Where (monsterlike) affrighting every man,
He belloweth out a fearful deadly rore.
Even such a Clamor through the air does thunder,
The doleful presage of some fearful wonder.
M. Drayton. Joy.
Much like as when the beaten mariner
That long has wandered in the Ocean wide,
Often sow'st in swelling Tethis saltish tear,
And Long time having tamde his tawnie hide,
With blustering breath of heaven that none can bide,
And scorching flames of fierce Orions hound,
Soon as the port from far he has espide,
His cheerful whistle merrily does sound,
And Nereus crowns with cups, his mates him pledge around,
Such Joy made Vna when her knight she found.
Ed. Spencer. Look how a troop of winter prisoned dames,
Pent in the enclosure of the walled towns,
Welcomes the spring usher to summers flames,
Making their pas^imes on the flowery downs,
Whose beauteous Arras wrought in natures frames,
Through eyes admire, the heart with wonder crowns.
So these wood-walled citizens at sea,
Welcome be both spring and summer in a day.
I. Markham. Like as a ship with dreadful storm long tossed,
Having spent all her masts and her ground hold,
Now far from harbor, like to be lost,
At last some fisher bark does near betold,
That gives comfort to her courage cold:
Such was the state of this most knight.
Ed. Spencer. Policy.
As when to purge excessive moist descending,
From Saturns sphere, or else superfluous heat,
Jove stird up by Mars (common good entending)
Sends lightning flash to lay their angry threate.
So wiser heads that knew the scourge of war,
Sought sooth fast means to mitigate the jar.
D. Lodge. As when a skillful mariner does read
A storm approaching that does peril threate,
He will not bide the danger of such dread,
Bur strikes his sails and vereth his manisheat,
And lends unto it leave the empty air to beat:
So did the faiery knight himself abeare.
Ed. Spencer. As Pilot well expert in perilous wave,
That to a steadfast star his course has bent,
When foggy mists or cloudie tempests have,
The faithful light of that fair lampy blent,
And covered heaven with hidious dreriment,
Upon his card and compass forms his eye,
The masters of his long experiment.
And to them does the steddie helm apply,
Bidding his winged vessel fairly forward fly.
So Guion.
Ed. Spencer. Labor.
Like as ye see sometimes the honey bees,
Exerce themselves on buds of sweetest tree,
Where they sometime assault the buzzing waspe,
That come too near, their flames away to claspe.
Or when they honey draw from smelling time,
Or from the palm or roses of the prime,
And how they draw their wax with wondrous art,
Observing ioynture just in every part:
Both up and down, they build ten thousand shops,
With equal space fulfild up to the tops.
Or where the master Be of thousand bands,
Conducts the rest in legions through the lands,
Who daily keeps within their City wall,
Their house, their work, their laws, and manners all.
So thus the sons of Jacob plide their pain,
With whole desire their quarrel to sustain.
Th. Hudson. As do those Emmets that in summer tide
Come out in swarms their houses to provide,
In harvest time (their toil may best be seen,
In paths where they their carriage bring between,
The sick and old at home do keep the score,
And over grainell great they take the charge,
Often turning corn within a chamber large,
(When it is dight) least it do sprout or seed,
Or come again, or we eulls in it breed.
While the Armorers with armor hard and great,
On studies strong the sturdie steel do beat,
And makes thereof, a corpslet or a Jack,
Sometime a helm, sometime a mace does make,
Whiles shepherds they enarme vnvsde to danger,
Whiles simple herds, and whiles the wandering stranger
The tilling culter then a spear was made,
The crooked Sith became an euened blade:
The people food forgets, no ease they take,
Some on an horse, some on his proper back,
Some on a cart, some on a camel bears
Corn, wine, and flesh, to serve for many years.
Th. Hudson. War.
Like to a river that is stopped his course,
Does violate his banks, breaks his own head.
Destroys his bounds, and ouerruns by force
The neighbor fields, in regularly spread.
Even so this sudden stop of War does nurse
Home toiles within it self from others lead,
So dangerous the change thereof is tried,
Ere minds come soft, or otherwise imploide.
S. Daniell. Astonishment
As when the mast of some well timbred hulke,
Is with the blast of some outrageous storm
Blown down, it shakes the bottom of the bulk,
And makes her ribs to crack as they were torn,
Whilst still she stands astonished and forlorn:
So was he stound with stroke of her huge tail.
Ed. Spencer. -- Lying still a while both did forget,
The perilous present stownd wherein their lives were set,
As when two warlike brigandines at sea,
With murdrous weapons armd in cruel fight,
Do meet together on the watrie Lea.
They stem each other with so fell despite,
That with the shocke of their own heedlesse might,
Their wooden ribs are shaken right asunder.
They which from shore behold the dreadful fight
Of flashing fire, and here the Ordinance thunder,
So greatly stand amazed of such unwonted wonder.
Ed. Spencer. Care of children.
All as the painful ploughman plies his toil,
With share and culter shearing through the soil
That costs him dear, and ditches it about,
Or crops his hedge to make it vndersprout,
And never stays to ward it from the weed,
But most respects to sow therein good seed:
To the end when summer decks the meadows plain,
He may have recompense of costs and pain.
Or like the maid, who careful is to keep
The budding flower, that first begins to peep
Out of the knop, and waters it full often,
To make it seemly show the head aloft,
That it may (when she draws it from the stocks)
Adorn her gorget white, and golden locks.
So wise Merari all his study stild,
To fashion well the manners of his child.
Th. Hudson. Liberty.
Like to a Lion that escapes his bownds,
Having been long restraind his use to stray,
Raunges the restless woods, stays on no ground.
Riots with bloodshed, wantons with his pray,
Seeks not for need, but in his pride to wound,
Glorying to see his strength, and what he may.
So this unbridled King, freed of his fears,
In liberty himself vnwildly bears.
S. Daniell. * Like as the hawk which soareth in the sky,
And climes aloft for solace of her wing,
The greater gate she gets up on hie,
The truer stoop she makes to any thing:
So shall you see my muse by wandering,
Find out at last the right and ready way,
And keep it sure, though erst it went astray.
G. Gascoigne. * Like as the ship that through the Ocean wide
Directs her course, unto one certain coast,
Is met with many a counterwind and tide,
With which her winged speed is let and crossed.
And she her self in stormy surges lost.
Yet making many a board and many a bay,
Still wins way, and has her compast lost.
Right so it fares with me in this long way,
Whose course is often staid, yet never is astray.
Ed. Spencer. * -- As she was looking in a glass,
She saw therein a man's face looking on her:
Whereat she started from the frighted glass,
As if some monstrous serpent had been shown her:
Rising as when the sun in Leo sign,
Auriga with the heavenly goal upon her,
Shows her hornd head, with her kids divine.
Whose rise kills vines, heavens face with storms disguising,
No man is safe at sea, the Haedy rising.
So straight wrapped she her body in a cloud,
And threatened tempest for her high disgrace,
Shame from a bower of Roses did vnshrowde,
And spread her crimson wings upon her face.
G. Chapman. Multitude.
Like when some mastiffe whelpe disposd to play,
A whole confused heard of beests does chase,
Which with one vile consent run all away,
If any hardier then the rest in place.
But turn the head that idle fear to stay,
Back strait the daunted chacer turns his face:
And all the rest with bold example led,
As fast run on him as before they fled.
So with this bold opposer rushes on
This many headed monster multitude.
S. Daniell. As when the daughter of Thaumantes fair
Has in a watery cloud displaied wide
Her goodly bow which paints the liquid air,
That all men wonder at her colors pride:
All suddenly ere one can look aside,
The glorious picture vanishes away,
Ne any token does thereof abide.
So did this Ladies goodly form decay,
And into nothing go, ere one could it bewray.
Ed. Spencer. Beauty.
Like as a tender Rose in open plain,
That with untimely drought nigh withered was
And hung the head; soon as few drops of rain
Thereon distill and deaw her dainty face,
Gins to look up, and with fresh counted grace
Dispreds the glory of her leaves gaye,
Such was Iraenas countenance, such her grace.
Idem. Like as the wind and tide when they do meet*
With envious oppositions do affright
The lesser streams running for to regreet
The Ocean Empire, so do these two fight,
One labors to bring all things to his will,
The other cares for to prevent that ill.
Chapter Middleton. Descriptions of Palaces, Castles, etc.
A stately Palace built of squared brick,
Which cunningly was without mortar laid,
Whose walls were high, but nothing strong nor thick,
And golden foil all over them displaid.
That purest sky with brightness they dismayed,
High lifted up were many lofty towers,
And goodly galleries far ouerlaid:
Full of fair windows and delightful bowres,
And on the top a dyall told the timely hours.
Ed. Sp. The sovereign Castles of the rocky isle,
Wherein Penelope the Princes lay:
Shone with a thousand lamps, which did exile
The dim dark shades, and turned the night to day.
Not Jove's blew tent what time the sunny ray
Behind the bulwark of the earth retires,
Is seen to sparkle with more sprinkling fires.
I. Dauies. Logistillaes Castle.
-- Such a Castle that in stately show
And costly substance others all surmounted:
The value of the walls cannot man know,
Except he first upon the same had mounted.
Men have not Jewels of such price below,
Diamonds are to these but dross accounted.
Pearls are but pelf, and Rubies all are rotten
Where stones of such rare virtue can be gotten.
These walls are built of stones of so great price,
All other unto these come far behind,
In these men see the virtue and the vice
That cleaves to the inward soul and mind,
As neither flattering praises shall him blind
With tickling words nor undeserved blame,
With forged faults shall work him any shame:
From hence does come the everlasting light,
That may with Phoebus beams so clear compare,
That when the Sun is down there is no night
With those that with those Jewels stored are.
These gems do teach us to discern aright.
These gems are wrought with workmanship so rare,
That hard it were to make true estimation
Which is more hard the substance or the fashion.
On arches raisd of Porphorie passing hie,
Were gardens fair, and pleasant to the eye.
So hie, that to ascend them seemd a pain,
Few found so rare below upon a plain.
Sweet smelling trees in order standing be,
With Fountains watering them in stead of rain,
Which does the same so naturally nourish,
As all the year both flowers and fruits do flourish.
No weeds or fruitless trees are in this place,
But herbs whose virtues are of chiefest price,
As sovereign sage, and thrift, and herbs of grace,
And Time, which well bestowed makes wise:
And lowly patience proud thoughts to abase,
And hearts ease that can never grow with vice.
These are the herbs that in this garden grew,
Whose virtues to their beauties still renew.
S. I. H. -- She then led up to the castle wall
That was so hie as foe might not it clime*
And all so fair and sensible withal,
Not built of brick, ne yet of stone and lime,
But of thing like to that Egyptian slime.
Whereof King Nine whilom built Babell town,
The frame thereof seemd party circuler,
And part tryangulare, o work divine,
Those two the first and last proportions are,
The one imperfect mortal feminine,
The other immortal, perfect masculine.
And twixt them both, a quadrate was the base,
Proportioned equally by seven and nine:
Nine was the circle set in heavens place,
All which compacted, made a goodly Diapaze.
Ed. Spencer. Up to a stately Turret she them led,
Ascending by ten steps of Alablaster wrought.
That Turrets frame most admirable was,
Like highest heaven compassed around:
And lifted hie above this earthly mass,
Which it suruewd as hills do lower ground,
But on ground, mote not like to this be found.
Not that which Antique Camus whilom built
In Thebes, which Alexander did confound.
Nor that proud town of Troy though richly guilt,
From which young Herod's blood by cruel Greeks was spilt,
The roof thereof was arched over head:
And decked with flowers and arbors daintily,
Two goodly beacons, set in watches stead,
Therein gave light and flamed continually:
For they of living fire most subtly
Were made and set in silver socketts bright:
Covered with lids deuizde of substance,
That readily they shut and open might,
O who can tell the praises of this makers might?
Idem. Fair room the presence of sweet Beauties pride,
The place the sun upon the earth did hold:
When Phaethon his chariot did misguide,
The town where Jove raind down himself in gold,
O if Elysium be above the ground,
Then here it is where naught but joy is found.
Th. Nashe. Lo Colin here the place whose pleasant sight
From other shades has weand my wandering mind:
Tell me what wants here to work delight?
The simple air, the gentle warbling wind,
So calm, so cool, as no where else I find:
The grassie ground with dainty daizies dight,
The bramble bush where byrds of every kind,
To the waters fall, their tunes attemper right.
Ed. Spencer. In little time these Ladies found
A grove with every pleasure crowned:
At whose sweet entry did resound
A ford, that flowred that holy ground,
From thence the sweet breathed winds convey
Odours from every myrtle spray,
And other flowers: to whose array
A hundred Harpes and Timbrels play
All pleasures study can invent,
The Dames ears instantly present:
Voices in all sorts different,
The four parts and the Diapent.
G. Chapman. -- On the other side a pleasant grove
Was shot up hie, full of the stately tree,
That dedicated is to Olympicke Jove:
And to his son Alcides, when as he
Gaind in Nemea goodly victory:
Therein the merry byrds of every sort
Chaunted aloud their cheerful harmony.
And made amongst themselves a sweet consent,
That quickened the dull sprites with musical consent.
Ed. Spencer. Upon this mount there stood a stately grove,
Whose reaching arms to clip the welkin strove,
Of tufted Cedars and the braunching Pine,
Whose bushy tops themselves do so intwine,
As seemd when nature first this work begun.
She then conspirde against the piercing Sun.
Under whose covert (thus divinely made)
Phoebus green laurel flourisht in the shade.
Fair Venus myrtle, Mars his warlike firrhe,
Mineruaes Olive, and the weeping mirrhe.
The patient Palm which strives in spite of hate,
The Poplar to Alcides consecrate.
Which nature in such order had disposed,
And therewithal their goodly works enclosed:
As served for hangings and rich tapestry,
To bewtifie this stately gallery.
M. Drayton. So fair a church as this had Venus none,
The walls were of discoulered Jasper stone:
Wherein was Proteus carved, and over head
A lively vine of green-sea-aggat spread:
Where by one hand lightheaded Bacchus hung,
And with the other wine from grapes out-wrung
Of crystal shining fair the pauement was,
The Town of Sestos called it Venus glass.
There might you see the Gods in sundry shapes,
Committing heddy ryots, incests, rapes.
For underneath this radiant flower
Was Danaes statue in a brazen Tower.
Jove slily stealing from his sisters bed,
To dally with Idalian Ganymede.
And for his love Europa bellowing loud,
And tumbling with the Rainbow in a cloud.
Blood-quaffing Mars having the iron net,
With limping Vulcan and his Cyclops set.
Love kindling fire to burn such fires as Troy,
Syluanus weeping for the lovely boy,
That now is turned into a Cypress tree,
Under whose shade the wood-gods love to be.
Chapter Marlowe. Not that Colossus reared up in Rhodes,
Nor hanging gardens houering in the sky:
Nor all the wondrous mansions and abodes
In Egypt, Lemnos, or in Italy.
Either for riches, cunning, or expense,
Might match this Labyrinth for excellence.
D. Lodge. -- Art striving to compare
With nature, did an arbor green dispred:
Framed of wanton yuie, flowring fair,
Through which the fragrant Eglantine did spread
His pricking arms entraild with Roses red,
Which dainty odours round about them threw,
And all within with flowers was garnished:
That when mild Zephirus amongst them blew,
Did breath out bountious smelles and painted color show.
Ed. Sp. The Tower of Beauty whence alone did flow
More heavenly streams then former age had seen.
Taking their current from that learned hill,
Where lodge the brothers of admire and skill.
Amongst the summer blossoms of their bows,
A thousand several colored byrds was set:
Who moved (as seemed) by charitable vows
Of excellent compassion, ever wet
With honorable tears (for Fates allows
That sensible from senseless still shall set
Modells of pity) learn there with melody
To cheer men's mind foredone with misery.
I. Markham. -- He leads him to the highest mount,
That blood-red billows like a walled front
On either side disparted with his rod,
Till that his army dry foot through them yode
Dwelt forty days upon; where writ in stone
With bloody letters by the hand of God,
The bitter doombe of death and balefull moan
He did receive whiles flashing fire about him shonne.
Or like that sacred hill whose head full hie
Adornd with fruitful Olives all around,
Is, as it were for endless memory
Of that dear Lord, who often thereon was found,
For ever with a flowring garlond crowned.
Or like that pleasant mount that is for aye,
Through famous Poets verse each where renownd:
On which the thrice three learned Ladies play,
Their heavenly notes, and make full many a lovely lay.
Ed. Spencer. Right in the midst of the paradize
There stood a stately mount, on whose round top
A gloomy grove of myrtle trees did rise:
Whose shady bows sharp steel did never lop,
Nor wicked beasts their tender buds did crop.
But like a girlond compassed the height,
And from their fruitful sides sweet gum did drop:
That all the ground with precious deaw bedight,
Threw forth most dainty Odors and most sweet delight.
And in the thickest covert of that shade,
There was a pleasant arbor, not by art,
But of the trees own inclination made.
Which knitting their rank branches part to part:
With wand in yuie twine intraild a thwart,
And Eglantine and Caprifoile among:
Fashioned above within their inmost part,
That neither Phoebus beams could through them thro^g,
Nor Aeolus sharp blast could work them any wrong.
Idem. It was an hill placed in an open plain,
That round about was bordered with a wood
Of matchless height, that seemd the earth disdain:
In which all trees of honor stately stood,
And did all winter, as in summer bud,
Spreading pauilions for the birds to bower,
Within their lower branches sung aloud,
And in the tops, the soaring hawks did tower,
Sitting like King of fowls in majesty and power,
And at the foot thereof, a gentle flood
His silver waves did softly tumble down,
Vnmard with ragged moss of filthy mud.
Ne mote wild beasts, ne mote the ruder clown
Thereto approach, ne filth mote therein drown,
But Nymphs and Fairies by the banks did sit
In the woods shade, which did the waters crown,
Keeping all noisome things away from it,
And to the waters fall tuning their accents fit.
And on the top thereof a spacious plain,
Did spread it self to serve to all delight,
Either to dance when they to dance would feign,
Or else to course about their bases light.
Ne ought there wanted which for pleasure might
Desired be, or thence to banish bale,
So pleasantly the hill with equal height,
Did seem to ouerlooke the lowly vale.
Therefore it rightly cleped was, Mount Acidale.
They say that Venus when she did dispose
Her self to pleasance, vied to resort
Unto this place, and therein to repose
And rest her self as in a gladsome port,
Or with the graces there to play and sport.
Ed. Spencer. It was a chosen plot of fertile land
Amongst the wild waves set like a little nest,
As if it had by natures cunning hand
Been choicely picked out from all the rest,
And laid forth for ensample of the best.
No dainty flower nor herb that grows on ground,
No arboret with painted blossoms dressed,
And smelling sweet, but there it might be found
To bud out fair, and her sweet smells throw all around.
No tree whose branches did not bravely spring,
No branch wherein a fine bird did not sit,
No bird but did her shrill notes ever sing,
No song but did contain a lovely dit.
Trees, branches, birds, and songs were framed fit,
For to allure frail minds to careless ease.
Idem. Groaue.
A sandy Groaue not far away they spide,
That promisd aid the tempest to withstand,
Whose lofty trees yclad with summers pride,
Did spread so broad, that heavens light did hide.
Not pierceable with power of any star,
And all within were paths and allies wide,
With footing worn, and leading inward far.
Ed. Spencer. The porch was all of Porphyrie and Tutch,
In which the sumptuous building raised was:
With Images that seemed to move, see, touch.
Some hewd in stone, some carved in round cut brass.
Also within the beauty was as much,
Under a stately arch they strait did pass
Unto a court that good proportion bare,
And was each way one hundred cubits square.
Each of these sides a porch had passing fair,
That with an arch is into colors placed:
Of equal sise they seemed every pair,
Yet sundry works with them they better graced.
At each of these a wide large easy staire,
Without the which all buildings are defaced.
And those same stairs so lately mounting, led
Each to a chamber richly furnished.
The colors hie, the chaplets gilt with gold,
The cornishes inricht with things of cost:
The marbles set from far, and dearly sold,
By cunning workmen carved and embost
With Images and Antiques new and old.
Though now the night thereof concealed most,
Show that that work so rich beyond all measure,
Could scant be builded with a Princes treasure.
But nothing did so much the sight enrich,
As did the plenteous fountain that did stand
Just placed in the middle, under which
The Pages spread a Table out of hand,
And brought forth napery rich, and plate more rich:
And meats the choysest of the sea or land.
For though the house had stately rooms full many,
Yet in the summer this was best of any,
This fountain was by curious workmen brought
To answer to the rest with double square,
Eight female statues of white marble wrought,
With their left hands an azure sky vpbare,
With raining still expelled heat and drought
From all that under it or near it are.
In these right hands was Amaltheas horn,
By every one of those eight statures borne.
Each of those statues rested both their feet,
Upon two Images of men below,
That seemd delighted with the noise so sweet,
That from the water came that there did flow,
Also they seemd the Ladies lowly greet,
As though they did their names and virtues know.
In all their hands they held long scrowles of writings,
Of their own pennings, and their own endightings:
And in fair golden letters were their names,
Both of the women wrought and of the men.
The women were eight chaste and sober dames
That now do live, but were unborn as then,
The men were Poets, that their worthy fames
In time to come, should praise with learned pen.
These Images bare up a brazen tressell,
On which there stood a large white marble vessel:
This took the water from that Azure sky,
From whence with turning of some cock or vice,
Great store of water would mount upon hie,
And wet all that same court even in a trice.
S. I. Harrington. -- When many a weary step
Had brought us to the top of yonder mount,
Mild Zephirus embraced us in his arms,
And in a cloud of sweet and rich perfumes,
Cast us into the lap of that green meade,
Whose bosom stuck with purple Violets,
Half budded Lillies, and young Musk-rose trees,
About whose waste the amorous woodbine twines,
Whilst they seem maidens in a lovers arms,
There on the curled forehead of a bank,
That sweld with camomill, over whose beauty
A wanton Hyacinth held down his head,
And by the winds help often stole may abide,
He sat us down, and thus we did ariue.
Th. Dekkar. Description of Seas, Waters, Rivers, etc.
The fertile Nile which creatures new does foame,
Long Rhodanus whose sourse springs from the sky,
Fair Ister flowing from the mountains hie,
Divine Scamander purpled yet with blood
Of Greeks and Trojans which therein did lie:
Pactolus glistering with his golden flood,
And Tigris fierce, whose streams of none may be withstood.
Ed. Spencer. Great Ganges and immortal Euphrates,
Deep Indus, and Meander intricate,
Slow Peneus and tempestuous Phasides,
Swift Rhene, and Alpheus still immaculate,
Oraxes feared for great Cyrus fate,
Tibris renowned for the Romans name.
Idem. The Cydnus stream (who for his silver flood,
Esteemd a King) ran now with humane blood.
Th. Hudson. -- Beside their trickled softly down
A gentle stream, whose murmuring wave did play
Amongst the pumy stones and made a sound
To lull himself a sleep that by it lay.
The weary traveler wandering that way,
Therein did often quench his thirsty heat,
And then by it his weary limbs display,
Whiles creeping slumber made him to forget
His former pain, and wipe away his toylsome sweat.
Ed. Spencer. Fair Danubie is praisd for being wide,
Nylus commended for his seuenfold head,
Euphrates for the swiftness of the tide,
And for the garden whence his course is lead,
The banks of Rhene with wines are ouerspread.
Take Loyre and Po, yet all may not compare
With English Thamesis for building rare.
Th. Storer. Great Nylus land where rain does never fall.
Th. Hudson. Anon he stalketh with an easy stride,
By some clear Rivers lilly paued side,
Whose sands pure gold, whose pibbles precious gems,
And liquid silver all the curling streams:
Whose chiding murmr mazing in and out,
With Crystal cesterns, moates a meade about.
And th'artlesse bridges overthwart this torrent,
Are Rocks selfe-arched by the eating current.
Or loving palms, whose lusty females willing,
Their marrow-boiling loves to be fulfilling,
And reach their husband trees on the other banks,
Bow their stiff necks, and serve for passing plankes.
I. Syluester. Description of Seas, waters, Rivers, etc.
I walked along a stream for pureness rare,
Brighter then sunshine, for it did acquaint
The dullest sight with all the glorious pray,
That in the pibble paued channel lay.
No molten Crystal, but a Richer mine,
Even natures rarest alchumie ran there,
Diamonds resolud, and substance more divine,
Through whose bright gliding current might appear
A thousand naked Nymphs, whose yuorie shine,
Enameling the banks, made them more dear
Then ever was that glorious Pallas gate,
Where the day-shining sun in triumph sat.
Upon this brim the Eglantine and Rose,
The Tamoriscke, Olive, and the Almond tree,
As kind companions in one union grows,
Folding their twindring arms as often we see,
Turtle taught lovers either other close,
Lending to dullness, feeling Sympathy.
And as a costly vallance ore a bed,
So did their garland tops the brook orespred:
Their leaves that differed both in shape and show,
(Though all were green) yet difference such in green
Like to the checkered bent of Iris bow,
Prided the running maine as it had been.
Chapter Marlowe. -- In that meade proud making grass,
A River like to liquid glass,
Did with such soundfull murmr pass,
That with the same it wanton was.
Hard by this brook a Pine had seat,
With goodly furniture complete:
To make the place in state more great,
And lesning the the inflaming heat,
Which was with leaves so bewtified,
And spread his breast so thick and wide,
That all the Suns estraunged pride,
Sustaind repulse on every side.
G. Chapman. The well of life, to life can dead restore,
And gilt of sinful crimes clean wash away:
Those that with sickness were infected sore,
It could recure, and ages long decay
Renew, as it were borne that very day.
Both Silo this and Jordan did excel,
And the English Bath, and eke the German Spanie,
Ne can Cephise nor Hebrus match this well.
Ed. Spencer. Rich Oranochie though but known of late,
And that huge River which does bear his name
Of warlike Amazons, which do possess the same.
Idem. -- With the murmuring cadence of the wave,
Which made a pretty wrangling as it went:
Chiding the banks which no more limit gave,
There joined their wel-rund throats with such consent,
That even mad grief at sight thereof grew grave,
And as enchanted, staid from languishment.
Proving, then their delight was never greater,
And grief how much the more, so much the better.
I. Markham. -- Laid at ease a cubit from the ground,
Upon a Jasper fringd with Iuie round.
Pu^fled with waves, thick thrumbd with mossie rushes,
He falls a sleep fast by a silent river,
Whose captive streams through crooked pipes still rushing,
Make sweeter music with their gentle gushing.
Then now at Tiuoli, the Hydrantike brawle,
Of rich Ferraras stately Cardinal,
Or C^esibes rare engines, framed there
Whereas they made of Ibis, Jupiter.
I. Syluester. Proper Epithites and Adjuncts to diverse things. Of Trees, and
Herbs.
The sailing Pine, the Cedar proud and tall,
The Vine-prop Elm, the Poplar never dry,
The builder Oak, sole king of Forests all,
The Aspine good for staves, the Cypress funeral.
The Laurel meed of mighty conquerours,
And Poets sage, the Firrhe that weepeth still,
The Willow worn of forlorn paramours.
The Eughe obedient to the benders will,
The Birch for shafts, the Sallow for the mil.
The Mirrhe sweet bleeding in the bitter wound,
The warlike Beech, the Ash for nothing il.
The fruitful Olive, and the Platane round,
The carved Holme, the Maple seldom inward sound.
Ed. Spencer. Down came the sacred Palms, the Ashes wild,
The funeral Cypress, Holly ever green:
The weeping Fur, thick Beech, and sailing Pine,
The married Elm fell with his fruitful Vine.
The shooter Eughe, the broad leau'd Sycamore,
The barraine Plataine, and the Walnut found,
The Mirrhe that her foul sin does still deplore:
The Alder owner of all watrish ground,
Sweet Juniper whose shadow hurts sore,
Proud Cedar, Oak, the king of Forests crowned.
Ed. Fairfax. Transl. Behold fond Boy this Rozen weeping Pine,
This mournful Larix, dropping Turpentine.
This mounting Teda, thus with tempests torn,
With Inkie tears continually to mourn.
M. Drayton. Alcides speckled Poplar tree,
The Palms that Monarchs do obtain,
With loue-iuice staind the Mulbery,
The fruit that deawes the Poets brain.
And Phillis Philbert there away,
Comparde with Myrtle and the Bay.
The tree that Coffins does adorn,
With stately height threatening the sky,
And for the bed of love forlorn.
The black and dolful Ebonie.
All in a circle compact are,
Like to an Amphitheater.
Math. Roydon. The Spartane Myrtle whence sweet gums do flow,
The purple Hyacinth and fresh Costmary,
And Saffron sought, for in Cicilian soil,
Laurel, the ornament of Phoebus toil.
Fresh Rododaphne and the Sabine flower,
Matching the wealth of the ancient Frankensence:
And pallid Ivy building his own bower,
And Box yet mindful of his old offense:
Red Amaranthus lucklesse paramour:
Oxeye still green and bitter patience.
Ne wants there pale Narcisse, that in a well
Seeing his beauty, in love with it fell.
Ed. Spencer. Mirtle's due to Venus, green Laurel due to Apollo,
Corn to the lady Ceres, ripe grapes to the yo^g merry Bacchus.
Poplar to Alcides, and Olives unto Minerua*
Gentle Amara^thus thou fairest flower of a thousand,
Shall be loves flower he^ceforth, though thou came from a bleeding,
Yet blood shall thou stanch, this gift will I give thee for ever.
Abr. France. Dead-sleeping Poppy and black Hellebore,
Cold Coloquintida, and Tetra mad,
Mortal Samnites and Cicuta bad,
With which th'vniust Athenians made to die,
Wise Socrates who thereof quaffing glad,
Powered out his life and last Philosophy.
To the fair Critias his dearest Belamye.
Ed. Spencer. The wholesome Sage, and Lauender still gray,
Ranke-smelling Rue, and Comin good for eyes:
The Roses reigning in the pride of May,
Sharp Isope good for green wounds remedies.
Fair Marygolds and Bees alluring Thime,
Sweet Marioram and Daizies decking prime.
Cool Violets and Orpin growing still,
Embathed Balm, and cheerful Galingale,
Fresh Costmary, and breathfull Camomill,
Dull Poppey, and drinke-quickning Setnale,
Veine-healing Veruin, and head-purging Dill,
Sound Sauory, and Bazill harry hale.
Fat Colworts, and comforting Perseline,
Cold Lettuce, and refreshing Rosmarine.
Idem. A soft enflowred bank embraced the fount
Of Chloris ensigns, an abstracted field:
Where grew Melanthy, great in Bees account,
Amareus that precious balm does yield.
Enameld Pansies, used at nuptials still,
Dianaes arrow, Cupids crimson sheeld:
Ope-morne, Nightshade, and Venus Nauill.
Sollem Violets hanging heads as shamed,
And Verdant Calaminth for Odor famed.
Sacred Nepenthe purgative of care,
And sovereign Ruberb that does rancor kill.
Sia and Hyacinth that Furies wear,
White and red Iessamines, merry Melliphill,
Fair crown, imperial emperor of flowers,
Immortal Amaranth, white Aphrodil,
And cuplike twill pants strewed in Bacchus bowres.
G. Chapman. The Marigold Phoebus beloved friend,
The Moly which from sorcery does defend.
M. Dray. Of Beasts.
The spotted Panther, and the tusked Boar.
The Pardale swift, and the Tygre cruel,
The Antelope and Woolfe, both fierce and fell.
Ed. Spencer. There might you see the burly Bear,
The Lion king, the Elephant:
The maiden Unicorn was there,
So was Acteons horned plant.
M. Roydon. Rivers.
The fertile Nile, which creatures new does frame,
Long Rhodams, whose sourse springs from the sky,
Fair Ister, flowing from the mountains hie.
Divine Scamander, purpled yet with blood
Of Greeks and Trojans, which therein did lie,
Pactolus glistering with his golden flood,
And Tigris fierce, whose streams of none may be withstood.
Ed. Spencer. Great Gauges, and immortal Euphrates,
Deep Indus, and Meander intricate:
Slow Peneus, and tempestuous Phasides,
Swift Rhene, and Alpheus still immaculate,
Oraxes feared for great Cyrus fate,
Tibris renowned for the Roman fame.
Idem. Fishes.
Spring-headed Hydraes, and sea-shouldring Whales,
Great Whirpooles which all Fishes make to fly:
Bright Scholopendraes, armed with silver scales,
Mighty Monoceros, with immeasured tails:
The dreadful Fish that does deserve the name
Of death, and like him looks in dreadful hue,
The grisly wasserman that makes his game
The flying ships with swiftness to pursue.
The horrible sea- Satyr, that does show
His fearful face in time of greatest storm
Huge Ziffius whom mariners do eschew,
No less then rocks (as trauailers inform)
And greedy Rosmarines with visages deforme.
Ed. Sp. Is the brave Normans courage now forgot?
Or the bold Britons lost the use of shot?
The big bon'd Almains and stout Brabanters?
Or do the Piccards let the Crosbowes lie?
Once like the Centaurs of old Thessaly.
M. Dray.. Of Birds.
The skie-bred Eagle royal bird,
Percht there upon an Oak above:
The Turtle by him never stird,
Example of immortal love.
The Swan that sings, about to die,
Leaving Meander stood thereby.
M. Roydon. The ill fac'te Owl deaths dreadful messenger,
The hoarse night Raven, trompe of dolful dreere,
The lether winged Bat, days enemy,
The ruful Strich still waiting on the beer,
The Whistler shril, that who so hears does die,
The hellish Harpies prophets of sad destenie.
Ed. Spencer. The red-shankt Orcads touched with no remorse,
The light-foote Irish which with darts make war.
Th'rancke ridin'd Scot his swift running horse,
The English Archer of a Lions force.
The valiant Norman all his troops among,
In bloody conquest tried in arms traind long.
M. Drayton. Of Hounds.
-- Grimme Melampus with the Ethiops feet,
White Leucon, and all-eating Pamphagos,
Sharp-sighted Dorceus, wild Oribasus,
Storm breathing Lelaps, and the savage Thereon,
Wing-footed Pteretas, and hind-like Ladon.
Greedy Harpia, and the painted Stycte,
Fierce Tygris, and the thicket searcher Agree,
The black Melaneus, and the brisled Lachne,
Leane-lustfull Cyprius, and big chested Aloe.
G. Chapman. -- Repentance sad,
Prayer sweet charming, fasting, hairy clad.
I. Syl. -- In one consort there sat
Cruel revenge, and rancorous despite,
Disloyal treason, and heart-burning hate,
But gnawing Iealouzie out of their sight
Sitting alone, his bitter lips did bite,
And trembling fear still too and fro did fly,
And found no place where safe he shroud him might.
Lamenting sorrow did in darkness lie,
And shame his ugly face did hide from living eye.
Ed. Sp. Fresh Hyacinthus Phoebus paramoure,
Foolish Narcisse that likes the watrie shore,
Sad Amaranthus made a flower of late.
Idem. Nimphs.
The woody Nymphs fair Hamadryades
And all the troops of lightfoot Naides.
Ed. Sp. Satires.
The Fawnes and Satires from the tufted brakes
Their brisly arms wreathd all about with snakes,
Their horned heads with woodbine chaplets crowned
With Cypress Iauelings, and about their thies,
The flaggy hair disordered loosely flies.
M. Drayton. Fresh shadows fit to shroud from sunny ray,
Fair fawnes to take the sun in season due,
Sweet springs in which a thousand bubbles play.
Soft rombling brooks, that gentle slomber drew.
High reared mounts, the lands about to view.
Low looking dales, disioynd from common game,
Delightful bowres, to solace lovers true.
False Labyrinths, fond runners eyes to daze,
All which by nature made, did natures self amaze.
Ed. Spencer. * Behind Cupid were reproach, repentance, shame,
Reproach the first, shame next, repent behind:
Repentance feeble, sorrowful and lame.
Reproach despightfull, careless and unkind,
Shame most il-fauoured, bestiall and blind.
Shame lowrd, repentance sighed, reproach did scold:
Reproach sharp, repentance whips entwinde,
Shame burning Taper in her hand did hold,
All three to each unlike, yet all made in one mould.
Idem. * -- Stearne strife and anger stout,
Unquiet care, and sad unthrifty head:
Lewd loss of time, and sorrow being dead,
Inconstant change, and false disloyalty,
Consuming riotize and guilty dread
Of heavenly vengeance, faint Infirmity,
Vile poverty, and lastly death with Infamy.
Idem. * His angry steed did chide his frowning bitte.
Idem. Rich Oranochye, though but known of late,
And that huge River which does bear his name
Of warlike Amazons, which do possess the same.
Ed. Spencer. Herbs.
The sable Henbane, Morrell making mad,
Cold poisoning Poppey, itching, drowsy, sad.
The stifning Carpese, th'eyes-foe Hemlock stinking,
Limb-numming, belching: and the sinew shrinking.
Dead-laughing Apium, weeping Aconite.
(Which in our vulgar deadly Wolfes Bane hight)
The dropsie-breeding, sorrow-bringing Psyllie,
(Here called Fleawurt) Colchis banefull Lilly.
(With us wild-Saffran) blistering, biting fell,
Hot Napell, making lips and tongue to swell.
Blood-boyling Yew, and costiue Misseltoe,
With yee-cold Mandrake.
I. Syluester. * -- Through crooked woods he wandreth,
Round-winding rings, and intricate Meaanders,
False guiding paths, doubtful beguiling straies.
And right strong errors of an endless maze.
Idem. * There springs the shrub tree foot above the grass,
Which fears the keen edge of the Curtelace:
Whereof the rich Egiptian so endeares,
Root, bark, and fruit, and yet much more the tears.
There lives the sea-oake in a little shell,
There grows untilled the ruddy Cochenell,
And there the Chermez, which on each side arms
With pointed prickles all his precious arms,
Rich trees and fruitful in these worms of price,
Which pressed, yield a crimson colored juice,
When thousand lambs are died so deep in grain,
That their own mothers know them not again,
There mounts the Melt which serves in Mexico,
For weapon, wood, needle and thread to sow,
Brick, honey, sugar, sucket, balm, and wine,
Parchment, perfume, apparel, cord, and line,
His wood for fire, his harder leaves are fit,
For thousand uses of inuentiue wit.
I. Syluester. The pedant minister, and serving clarke,
The ten pound base, frize ierkin hireling,
The farmers chaplain, with his quarter warke.
The twenty noble Curate and the thing
Called Elder, all these needs will bring
All reverend titles into deadly hate
Their godly calling, and their hie estate.
Th. Storer. Of Trees.
The shady Groaues of noble palm tree spraies,
Of amorous mirtles and immortal baies.
Never vnlearn'd, but evermore there new,
Selfe-arching arms in thousand arbours grew.
I. Syluester. Rivers.
Swift Guylon, Phyton and rich Tigris tide,
And that fair stream whose silver waves do kis,
The Monarch towers of proud Semyranis.
Euprates.
Idem. Of Homer.
Sweet numbered Homer.
I. Syl. Heartstealing Homer, marrow of the Muses,
Chief grace of Greece, best pearl of Poetry,
Drowner of souls, with arts orewhelming sluices,
Embellished with Phoebes lunarie,
Decked with the graces rich imbroderie.
Sweet honey-suckle, whence all Poets sprights,
Suck the sweet honey of divine delights.
C. Fitz-Ieffrey. Of S. P. S.
Hector tongued Sydney, Englands Mars and Muse.
Idem. VVindes.
-- O heavens fresh fannes quoth he,
Earths sweeping broomes, of forests enemy:
O you my Heralds and my messengers,
My nimble posts and speedy messengers,
My arms, my sinews, and my Eagles swift,
That through the air my rolling chariot lift.
I. Syluester. The Aeolian crowde.
Idem. * O sacred Olive, firstling of the fruits,
Health-boading branch.
Idem. * The proud horse, the rough-skind Elephant,
The lusty bull, the Camel water want.
Idem. * -- Let the pearly morn
The radiant Moon, and rhumie evening see
Thy neck still yoaked with captivity.
Idem. * There natures story, till th'heauen shaker dread,
In his just wrath, the flaming sword had set,
The passage into Paradise to let.
I. Syluester. Of the infernal flood.
-- He summond up
With thundering call the damned crew, that sup
Of sulphurie Stix, and fiery Phlegeton,
Bloody Cocytus, muddy Acheron.
I. Syluester. * The sun the seasons stinter.
Idem. Of language before confusion.
-- Ah that language sweet
Sure bond of Cities friendships masticke sweet,
Strong curb of anger yerst united, now
In thousand dry brooks straies, I wot not how:
That rare rich gold, that charm grief, fancy mouer^
That calm-rage, hearts thief, quel-pride coniure-louer,
That purest coin then current in each coast
Now mingled, has sound, weight, and color lost.
It Is counterfeit, and over every shore,
The confusd fall of Babell yet does roar.
Idem. -- Then all spoke the speech
Of God himself, the old sacred Idiome rich,
Right perfect language, where is no point nor sign.
But hides some rare deep mystery behind.
Idem. Of Scaliger.
-- Scaliger our ages wonder,
The learned's sun, who eloquently can
Speak Hebrew, Greek, French, Latin, Nubian,
Dutch, Tuscan, Spanish, English, Arabicke.
The Sirian, Persian, and the Caldaike.
O rich quick spirit; O wits Chamelion,
Which any authors color can put on.
Great Julius fame, and Siluius worthy brother,
The Immortal grace of Gascony, their mother,
Idem. Wing-footed Hermes, purseuant of Jove.
Idem. Of the Hebrew tongue.
-- All hail thou sempiternall spring
Of spiritual pictures, speech of heavens hie King,
Mother and mistress of all the tongues the prime,
Which pure have past such vast deep gulphs of time,
Which have no word but ways, whose elements
Flow with hid sense, thy points with sacraments.
O sacred Dialect, in thee the names
Of men, towns, countries, register their fames
In brief abridgements: and the names of birds,
Of water guests, and forest haunting herds,
Are open brooks, where every man might read.
Miscellanea. Of the Graces. * Acidale.
-- The Graces daughters of delight,
Handmaides of Venus, which are wont to haunt
* Upon this hill, and dance there day and night,
Those three to men all gifts of graces grant,
And all that Venus in her self does vaunt,
Is borrowed of them.
Ed. Sp. They are the daughters of skie-ruling Jove,
By him begot of fair Eurynome,
The Oceans daughter in this pleasant Grove,
As he this way coming from feastfull glee
Of Thetis wedding with Aeacidee,
In summers shade himself here rested weary.
The first of them hight mild Euphrosyne,
Next fair Aglaia, last Thalia merry,
Sweet goddesses al three, which men in mirth do cherry
Therefore they always smoothly seemd to smile,
That we likewise should mild and gentle be,
And also naked are, that without guile
Or false dissemblance all them plain may see,
Simple and true, from covert malice free:
And eke themselves so in their dance they bore,
That two of them still forward seemd to be.
But one still forwards should her self before,
That good should from us go, then come in greater store.
Idem. Simoniake and unlearned Ministers.
Such men are like our curtains at their best,
To make us sleep, or hinder us from light:
Troublers of nature, children of the West,
Haters of sense, adopted sons of night,
In whom the wise both sorrow and delight.
Yet were there not such Vegetalls the while,
What had the wiser sort whereat to smile?
Th. Storer. Renowned Picus of Mirandula,
Hated the substance of a Clergy man
That was unlettered, and made a law,
An ignorant which never had began
To seek, or after seeking never scan.
Some part of somewhat that might wisdom bring,
Should be accounted but a living thing.
Idem. The noble Tichobraghe for whose dear sake
All Denmark is in admirations love:
In deep regard such difference does make
Between those men whose spirits soar above,
And those base essents which only move.
That in his Isles Horizon he admits
No cloudy Meteors of such foggy wits.
Idem. Of Beasts.
The multitude to Jove a suit imparts,
With neighing, blaying, braying, and barking,
Roaring and howling, for to have a king.
A king in language theirs they said they would,
(For then their language was a perfect speech)
The Byrds likewise which chirpes and puing could,
Cackling and chattering, that of Jove beseech,
Only the Owl still warnd them not to seech.
So hastily, that, which they would repent,
But saw they would, and he to deserts went.
Jove wisely said (for wisdom wisely says)
O Beasts take heed what you of me desire,
Rulers will think all things made them to please,
And soon forget the swinke due to their hire,
But since you will part of my heavenly fire,
I will you lend, the rest your selves must give,
That it both seen and felt may with you live.
Full glad they were, and took the naked sprite
Which strait the earth ycloathed in his clay:
The Lion heart; the Ownce gave active might.
The Horse good shape; the Sparrow lust to play,
Nightingale voice, entising songs to say.
Elephant gave a perfect memory,
And Parrot ready tongue that to apply.
The Fox gave craft; the Dog gave flattery,
Ass patience; the Mole a working thought:
^agle high thought, Wolf secret cruelty,
Monky sweet breath; the Cow her fair eyes brought
The Ermion whitest skin, spotted with naught.
The Sheep mild seeming face, climing the Bear,
The Stag did give the harme-eschuing fear.
The Hare her sleights, the Cat his melancholy,
^nt industry, and Conny skill to build:
^anes order; Storkes to be appearing holy.
^amelion ease to change, Ducke ease to yield,
^rocodile tears, which might be falsely spild.
Ape greeting gave, though he did mowing stand,
The instrument of instruments the hand.
S. Phil. Sidney. Preparations for defense.
^me built the breaches of their broken town,
that heaven and Panimire had broken down.
^me other found a Cautell against the Ram,
To save the wall unbroken where it came.
Thus Jacobs towns on all sides had their flanks
With Gabions strong, with bulwarks and with banks.
Some others busy went and came in routs,
To Terrace Towers, some under baskets louts.
Some others also wanting time and might
To strength their Towns, yet used all kind of slight
To dig up ditches deep for Cesternes good,
To draw to them the best and nearest flood.
Th. Hudson. * -- The hidden love that now adays does hold,
The steel and lodestone, Hydrargire and gold.
The Amber and straw; that lodges in one shell,
Pearle-fish and Sharpling: and unites so well
Sargons and Goats, the Sperage and the Rose,
Th'Elme and the Vine, th'Oliue and Myrtle bush
Is but a spark or shadow of that love,
Which at the first in every thing did move.
When as the earths Muses with harmonious sound,
To heavens sweet music humbly did resound.
But Adam being chief of all the strings
Of this large Lute, ore-retched, quickly brings
All out of tune: and now for melody
Of warbling charms, it yells so hideously
That it affrights fell Enynon, who turmoiles
To raise again the old Chaos anticke broiles.
I. Syl. * -- Holy Nectar that in heavenly bowers
Eternally selfe-powring Hebe powers.
Or blessed Ambrosia, Gods immortal fare.
Idem. * O who shall show the countenance and gestures
Of mercy and justice? which fair sacred sisters
With equal poize do ever balance even,
Th'vnchanging proiects of the king of heaven.
The One stern of look, the other mild aspecting,
The One pleased with tears, the other blood affecting.
The One bears the sword of vengeance unrelenting,
The Other kings pardon, for the true repenting.
The one earths Eden, Adam did dismiss,
The Other has raisde him to a higher bliss.
Idem. * Day has his golden Sun, her Moon the night,
Her fixed and wandering stars, the azure sky:
So framed all by their Creators might,
That still they live and shine, and nere shall die.
Till in a moment with the last days brand
They burn, and with them, burn earth, sea and land.
Ed. Fairfax. -- The Wolf the trembling sheep pursues,
The crowing Cock the Lion stout eschues.
The Pullaine hide them from the Puttocks flight,
The Masties mute at the Hyaenas sight.
Yea, who would think of this fell enmities?
Rage in the senseless trunks of plants and trees.
The Vine, the Cole, the Colewort Sow bread dreeds,
The Fearne abhorres the hollow wauing Reeds.
The Olive and the Oak participate,
Even to their earth, signs of their ancient hate.
Which suffers not (o date less discord) the one
Live in that ground, where the other first has grown.
I. Syl. So at the sound of Wolfe-drums rattling thunder,
The Affrighted sheep-skin drum does rent in sunder.
So that fell monsters twisted entraile cuts
By secret power the poor Lambs twined guts.
Which after death in stead of bleating mute,
Are taught to speak upon an Iuory Lute.
And so the princely Eagles ravening plumes,
The feathers of all other foul consumes.
Idem. * -- There the tree from of whose trembling top,
Both swimming Shoales and flying troops do drop.
I mean the tree now in Iuturna growing,
Whose leaves dispearst by Zephyrs wanton blowing,
Are metamorphos'd both in form and matter,
On land to fowls, to fishes on the water.
Idem. * -- The Partrich new hatched bears
On her weak back, her parents house, and wears
In stead of wings, a beuer rupple down
Follows her damme, through furrows up and down*
Idem. * -- We see the new fallen silly Lamb
Yet staind with blood of his distressed damme,
Knows well the Wolf, at whose fell sight he shakes,
And right the teate of th'vnknowne Eawe he takes.
Idem. Furies.
Alecto, sad Megera, and Thesiphon,
The nights black saunghters grim-fac'd Furies sad.
Stern Plutoes posts.
I. Syluester. Nepenthe.
Nepenthe is a drink of sovereign grace,
Devised of the Gods for to assage
Hearts grief, and bitter gall away to chase,
Which stir up anguish and contentious rage,
In stead thereof, sweet peace and quiet age,
It does establish in the troubled mind
Few men but such as sober are and sage,
Are by the Gods to drink thereof assignde,
But such as drink, eternal happiness do find.
Ed. Sp. -- Nepenthe enemy to sadness,
Repelling sorrows, and repeating gladness.
Elyxer that excells,
Save men or angels, every creature else.
I. Syl. Of Echo.
Th'aires daughter Echo haunting woods among,
A blab that will not (cannot keep her tongue)
Who never asks, but ever answers all,
Who lets not any her in vain to call.
Idem. Of the Marigold.
The Marigold so likes the lovely Sun,
That when he sets, the other hides his face:
And when he gins his morning course to run,
She spreads abroad, and shows her greatest grace.
T. Watson. Of the Eagle.
No bird but Jove's can look against the sun.
Idem. -- Enuies bird must say when all is done,
No bird but one is sacred to the sun.
Idem. Hercules Labors.
Beast, Snake, Bore, Stag, Birds, Belt, Plankes, Bull,
Thief, Fruit, Dog Diomede,
Choakt, scard, pauncht, cought, pierst, prizd,
Washed, thrown, slain, pulled, chaind, horsed.
W. Warner. Nylus.
Great Nilus land, where rain does never fall.
T. Hudson. There quakes the plant, which in Pudefetan
Is called the shamefac't, for ashamed of man,
If toward it one do approach too much,
It shrinkes the boughs, to shun our hateful touch.
As if it had a soul, a sense, and sight,
Subject to shame, fear, sorrow and despite.
I. Syluester. Of Acheron.
Rude Acheron, a loathsome lake to hell,
That boiles and bubs up swelth as black as hell.
Where grisly Charon at their fixed tide
Still ferries ghosts unto the farther side.
M. Sackuile. Echidna.
Echidna is a monster direful dread,
Whom Gods do hate and heavens abhor to see:
So hidious is her shape, so huge her head,
That even the hellish fiends affrighted be
At sight thereof, and from her presence fly.
Yet did her fair and former parts profess,
A fair young maiden, full of comely glee:
But all her hinder parts did plain express,
A monstrous Dragon, full of fearful ugliness.
Ed. Spencer. 4. Cardinal virtues.
Andronica that wisely sees before,
And Phronesis the Judge, and chaste Drucilla,
And she that boldly fights for virtues lore,
Descending from the Romine race Camilla.
S. I. Harrington. Of the Eagle.
The Cedar-building Eagle bears the wind,
And not the Falchon, though both Hawks by kind.
That Kingly bird does from the clouds command
The fearful foul that moves but nere the land.
M. Dray. Phoenix.
-- The bird of fame
That still renewes it self and never dies,
And only one in all the world there flies.
S. I. Harrington. * Of all chaste birds the Phaenix does excel,
Of all strong beasts the Lion bears the bell:
Of all sweet flowers, the Rose does sweetest smell.
Of all pure mettalls gold is only purest,
Of all the trees the Pine has highest crest.
Of all proud birds the Eagle pleases Jove,
Of pretty fowls kind Venus likes the Dove,
Of trees Minerua does the Olive move.
T. Lodge. * Who holds league with Neptune and the wind?
S. Dan. The Phaenix gazeth on the suns bright beams,
The Echinaeus swims against the streams.
R. Green. Impossibilities.
He that the number of the leaves could cast,
That in November falls by winters blast:
He that could tell the drops of rain and sleete,
That Hyad, Orion, or Pleyiades weete.
Sheds on the ground that man might only tell,
What tears from Iudiths eyes incestant fell.
Th. Hudson. -- Like Coruiue who forgate
His Proper name; or like George Trapezunce,
Learned in youth, and in his age a dunce.
I. Syl. The firmament shall retrograde his course,
Swift Euphrates go hide him in his sourse:
Firm mountains skip like lambs beneath the deep,
Eagles shall diue, whales in the air shall keep.
Ere I presume with fingers end to touch,
Much less with lips the fruit forbid too much.
I. Syluester. Fly from thy channel, Thames forsake thy streams,
Leave the Adamant Iron, Phoebus lay thy beams.
Cease heavenly spheres, at last your watrie warke
Betray your charge, return to Chaos dark.
At least some ruthlesse Tigre hang her whelpe,
My Catisbye so with some excuse to help,
M. M. Ceston.
That girdle gave the virtue of chaste love,
And wiuehood true to all that did it bear:
But whosoever contrary does prove,
Might not the same about her middle wear,
But it would loose or else asunder tear,
Whilom it was (as Faieries wont report)
Dame Venus girdle by her esteemd dear
What time she used to live in wiuely sort.
But laid aside when so she used her sport.
Her husband Vulcan whilome for her sake,
When first he loved her with heart entire,
This precious ornament they say did make.
And wrought in Lemnos with unquenched fire,
And afterward did for her first loves hire,
Give it to her for ever to remain,
Therewith to bind lascivious desire,
And loose affections straightly to restrain,
Which virtue it for ever did retain.
This goodly Belt, was Ceston called by name.
Ed. Spencer. * The noble Lion never slaies the least,
But always prays upon some worthy beast.
The thunder throws his sulphured shafts adowne,
On Atlas high, or cold Riphins crown.
The tempest fell more fervently does fall
On houses high, then on the homely hall.
Th. Hudson. *Saturn taught men untaught before, to ear the lusty land,
And how to pierce the pathlesse air with shafts from bowmans hand.
God Dis did quail to see his gold so fast conuaid from hell,
And fishes quakt, when men in ships amidst their floods did dwell.
VV. Warner. Twelve foul faults.
A wise man living like a drone, an old man not devout,
Youth disobedient, rich men that are charity without:
A shameless woman, vicious Lords, a poor man proudly stout.
Co^tentious Christians, Pastors, that their functio^s do neglect,
A wicked King, no discipline, no laws men to direct,
Are twelve the foulest faults that most all commonwealths infect.
W. Warner. Engines of war.
-- The Inginers have the Trepan dressed,
And reared up the Ram for battery best.
Here bends the Briccoll while the Cable crackes,
There Crosbowes were vprent with iron Rackes.
Here crooked Coruies fleing Bridges tall,
Their scathfull Scorpions that ruins the wall,
On every side they raise with ioynture meet,
The timber Towers for to command the street.
The painful Pioners wrought against their will,
With fleakes and Faggots, ditches up to fill.
Th. Hudson. * -- The happy Arabs those that builds
In thatched Wagons wandering through the fields.
The subtle Tirians they who first were Clerks,
That staid the wandering words in leaves and barks.
Idem. * At Babell first confused toongs of every language grew.
W. Warner. -- Idolatry did grow
* From Ninus first, he first a Monarchy did frame.
Idem. *Lord Dane the same was called the^, to the^ a pleasing name,
Now odiously Lordan say we, when idle mates we blame.
Idem. * The Turtle that is true and chaste in love,
Shows by her mate something the spirit does move.
The Arabian byrd that never is but one,
Is only chaste because she is alone.
But had our mother Nature made them two,
They would have done as Doves and Sparrowes do.
But therefore made a Martyr in desire,
And does her penance lastly in the fire.
M. Drayton. *I cast not with fools, suffer Saints, let mighty fools be mad,
Note, Seneca by news done for precepts, penance had.
VV. Warner. * The Roman widow did when she beheld
Her son, whom erst she counted slain in feeld.
G. Gascoigne. Rivers.
Fair Danubie is praisde for being wide,
Nilus commended for the seuen-fold head:
Euphrates for the swiftness of the tide,
And for the garden whence his course is led,
The banks of Rhine with Vines are ouerspred.
Take Loyre and Po, yet all may not compare
With English Thamesis for buildings rare.
Th. Storer. FINIS.
FAmes windy trump blew up this haughty mind
To do or wish, to do what here you find:
It Was never held error yet in errant Knights
(Which privilege he claims) to dress their fights
In high hyperbolies: for youths example,
To make their minds, as they grow men, grow ample.
Thus such achievements are assaid and done
As pass the common power and sense of man.
Then let high spirits strive to imitate,
Not what he did, but what he does relate.

