THE COMPLAYNT OF RODERYCK Mors, sometime a gray fryre, unto the parliament
house of Ingland his natural cuntry: For the redress of certain wicked laws,
euel customs ad cruel decreys. A table whereof thou shall find in the next
leaf.

Oh lord god, hear my prayer, and dispyse not my complaynt: look upon me, and
hear me. Psalm.liiij.

THE TABLE.
THat common prayers and a sermon owght to be at the beginning of all cowncels.
The first chap. Of enhansing of rentes by land lords. The. ij. Of the
forfetting of the lands or goods of traitors etce. The.iij. chapter. Of the
enclosing of parkes, forest^s, and chases. The.iiij. Of sellyng of wards for
marriage, where of ensues adultery, which owght to be ponished by death. The.v.
Of the iniuryes done to the comynalty by the kings takers etce. The.vi. Of the
suttylty of sers^yng of wryttes, etce. The.vij chapter. Of promoters, which may
wrongfully troble a man by the law of England, and thowgh he be cast, he shall
pay no charges, etcet. The.viij. chapter. That all judges and plea^ers at the
bar may live of a stypend, given them of the king ^wt of the abbey lands.
The.ix. Of the cruelnesse and suttyltes of the augme^tacyon and escheker etce.
The.x. Of the prolongyng of the law, and of certain abuses in the same, etce.
The.xi. That kings and lords of presons should find their presoners suffycyent
fode at their charge: and of men that have lain long in preson, etcete.
The.xij. That men which be accused for preaching, should not be committed into
their accusers hands. The.xiij. Of lords that are parsons and vicars. xiiij.
Of lords which are shepardes. xv. Of first fruits both of benefices and of
lords lands. The.xvi. Of particular tachementes, that all creditors may have
pownd and pownd aly^e, when any man falls in poverty. xvij. That the rulars
of the earth ought to sit in their gates, or else in their preuy chamber doors.
The.xviij. chapter. A godly admonycyon for the abolysshment of diverse abuses,
and of the service to be had in the Englysh tongue. The.xix. That one pryst owght
to have but one benefyce, and one fermer but one ferme. xx. Of the inhansing of
the custom, which is against the common wealth. xxi. A godly aduyseme^t how to
bestow the goods and lands of the bishops etcetera. after the gospel: with
an admonycyon to the rulers, that they look better upon the hospitalles.
The.xxij. A lamentacyo^, for that the body and tail of the pope is not
banisshed with his name. The.xxiij. chapter A comparyson between the doctrine
of the scripture, and of the bisshops of England. The.xxiiij. chapt. A brefe
rehearsal, conteynyng the whole sum of the book. The.xxv.
O MERCYFVLL FAther, allmyghty god and everlasting, being wythowt end or
beginning, withowt whom nothing is, by whom alone all things have their being
both in heauyn and earth: To the, in whom only is all aid, to the only do I
cry for aid, In asmoch as thou have the hartys of all men in thy handys (yea
even of pryncys) that it will please the of thy infynite mercy and for thy
sonnys sake Jesus Christ our only redemer, to send thy holy spyryt in to the
hartys of all the degreys of men in the parliament house, that this my co^playnt
may receive favor in the sight of them that sy^e in the parliament, whereby
things nedeful may be redressyd to the glory of thy name, the comody^e of the
common wealth, and to the better prouysyon for the poor, which is the thing that
I only seek, as to the, oh lord, it is not unknown.

In as much as there is no power but of god, and when so ever any persons be
greuyd, oppressyd or over yockyd, they must resort unto the hyer powrys for
remedy, which be ordeynyd of god only for the same cause, and inasmoch as the
cowncel of parliament is the head cowncel of all reamys: for it being done with
the consent of the king, wh^t lawys so ever be made thereby, being not against
the word of god, we be bownd to observe them. And though they be against gods
word, yet may we not bodily resist them with any war, violence, or
insurreccyon, under pain of damnacyon. But now contrary wise, as we may not
resist the power of a prince, even so may we not observe nor walk in his wicked
laws, if he make any against gods word, but rath^r to suffer death, so that we
may neither observe them, nor yet violently resist them in that case. Well
then, in as much as the parliament is of soch power and strength, al^hough I be a
man banysshed my natyue contry, only by the cruelty of the forkyd cappes of
Ingland for speaking gods truth, yet seeing so many cruel laws and heavy yockys
upon the showlders of the people of my natyue co^try (specyaly upon the commons)
and again consyderyng how little the poor be regarded and provided for, I can
but rekyn my self bownd to open and disclose unto the said cowncel of
parliament, part of the foresaid yockys. The euerlyuyng god grant, that they may
be as ready to se them redressyd, as their predecessers were to bring the people
in to such calamyte by the making of them: for the which cause I have made this
little work, to cause them to have instruccyon, that they may se a reformacyon,
whereunto they be bownd, and for such causys be they called to gether of god,
and for no partycular or pryuate wealth to them seluys, nor yet to the kings
grace.

THE FIRST CHAP. THERE OVVGHT TO BE Common prayers and a sermon in the beginning
of any cowncel, and so long as it contynueth also.
The first chapter.
IT IS A LAVDABLE thing, that in the beginning of any cowncel or assemble, the
name of god should be called upon: that he of his mercy will send his spiryt, to
sanctifye the hearts of them which bear any auctoryte or stroke in the cowncel
or parliament, that they agree to such statutes and acts, as be to the setting
forth of gods glory, the sanctifyeng of his name, and augmentacyon of his
kingdom. For when we call upon god for such things, we either knowledge, or
should knowledge, that we have need of his help, and that we can not withowt his
assistence, neither determyne, nor yet assent to the determynacyon of any
thing, that may please god: for if we cowld, what need we to call upon him for
any help? And it is certain and infallible, that if we knock, seek and cry
dilygently with ernest and hearty petycyons, with true humblenes of our hearts,
and with out dissimulacyo^, we shall be hard. Therefore I say, it is both
laudable and necessary, that all cowncels be begone with prayer unto our
mercyful father, and in our prayers to open unto him our necessyties, and to
call upon hy^ for aid, to rule our hearts wholly to seek h^s glory. But this
must be done ernestly with h^rty mowrny^g unto him, not slenderly, not for a
face and custom only, as has been hitherto used, to have an unholy mass of
the holy ghost, rolled up with descant, pricksong, and organes, whereby menny*
h^rtes be rauysshed clean both from god, and from the cogytacyon of all such
things as they ough^ to pray for. Whereas it were more conuenyent, that they
were diligently exhorted and put in mind, to consider and ponder, where unto
they be called, and what a recknyng god will require of them. And for as much as
the most part of the lords and burgesses take it rather for an honowr than for
an office wherefore they shall answer and for a dignyte rather than for any
burden, to be cownted of the parliament or cowncel house, and never ponder nor
consider before, what things in the realm be amysse to be reformed by them,
It were more necessary in the stead of the mobled and mynsed mass (whereby
neither god is glori^yed, nor the hearers edifyed) that some honest well learned
man such one as would neither flater, lords, burgesses, commons nor king, but
franckly and freely speak the veryie, should be appointed to preach not only at
the beginning of the parliament, but at the least.iij. times every weke, so
long as the parliament endures, and to stand in the pulpet an howr at the
least, and not above an howr and an half, and there to tell the lords and
burgesses their du^es, and to open unto them such abuses as are to be reformed
in the realm. And let all the lords and burgesses be bownd to be present at
every sermon, or else to be excluded the parlame^t house. If ye will seek such
ways than will the holy ghost light in your cowncel, or* else never, for all your
pyping or singing. And keep both lords and burgesses all in one house to
gether: For it is not the riches or autory^e that brings wisdom. And what
should one house make one act, and a another shall break and disanull the same?
that way is not after the doctrine of the gospel. But now, let us goo to other
matters.

The second Chapter. Of inhansing of rent is by land lords etce.
Consider you, what a wickedness is commonly used through the realm vnponysshed,
in the inordinate inhansyng of rentys, and taking of unreasonable fynys, and
every day worse then other: and even of them specially, to whom the king has
given and sold the land is of those Impys of Antichrist Abbays and nonryes:
which land is being in their handys, but only for that they led us in a false
faith (as their co^panyo^s the bishops still do) but for the faythes sake I
say (for the which they were justly suppressyd) it had been more profitable no
dowte for the common wealth, that they had remained still in their handys. For
why? they never inhansed their landys, nor took so cruel fynes, as do our
temporal tyrannys: For they can not be content to late them at the old price,
but raise them up daily even to the cloudys, either in the rent or in the fine,
or else both: so that the poor man that laboryth and toyleth upon it, and is his
slave, is not able to live. And further if another rich couetos carl, which
has to much already, will give any thing more than he that dwellyth upon it,
out he must, be he never so poor, though he should become a beggar and after a
the^e, and so at length be hanged by his owtgoing: so little is the law of love
regarded. Oh cruel tyrannys. Yea it is now a common use of the landlordys, for
every try^yll, even for his fryndys pleasure, in case his tenant have not a
lease, he shall out him out of h^s ferme, which thing is both against the law of
nature and of charity also he being an honest man, payng his rent and other
dutys well and honestly. I think there be no such wicked laws nor custom is in
the universal world again. What a shame is this to the whole re^lme, that we
say we have received the gospel of Christ, and yet is it worse now in th^s
matter, than it was over fyf^y or.iij. score yearys, when we h^d but the po^y
law, as wicked as it was? For th^n leassy^ were not known. And now the latyag
and engrossing of them (leassys I mean) is one great cause of the^ inhansing
of re^ys: wherefore I pray god these leassys may have a fall, and come to an end
shortly.

Look well upon this ye Christen burgessys: for this inhansing of rentys is
not only against the common wealth, but also at length shall be the chefest decay
of the princypal commodyte of this realm. For why? this inordinate inhansing
of rentys, which is sprung up within few yerys past, must nedys make all
things dear, as well pertaynyng to the back, as to the belly, to the most great
damage of all the kings subiectys, landyd men only except. Yea and even they
them seluys were more welthyer, when their landys went at the old price. For
why? they bye all things the dearer, and yet the common wealth is robbed thereby
not with stonding: as the godly which sekyth his brothers wealth as his own,
will soon judge: how beit this matter is so far gone, that there is no
remedy to the redress of it, but one, and that is th^s: If the kings grace of
his goodness will consider, where unto god has called him, and for what
purpose. A king is anointed, to be a defense unto the people, that they be not
oppressyd nor oueryocked, but by all godly and polytick meanys to seek the
common wealth of his people, so if his grace will call down the price of his own
lands as they went over fyfty, yea forty yearys and compel all other landed
me^^ to the same upon pain of forfetting his whole landys, one part of them to
the kings grace, another to be employed to the common wealth, and the third to
the presenter that can iustyfye the matter, a reformacion may be had, to the
singular ease and co^modyte of the common wealth: and that many ways. For this
being reformed above all other acts, shall bring the cloth of England to a
contynuall vent, and all vytellys to a reasonable price, that all clothys of
other contryes shall stey, where as Englyssh cloth shall come in place, as in
tymys past has done, which thing old marcha^tes and old clothyers can tell.
So^me will object, and say, it is a common wealth to bring the comodyteys of the
realm to an high price: which I utterly deny to be a comonwelth: for what
makes ryddance or good sale so much, as when a comodyte is at a price
reasonable? As a fore is said when Englyssh clothes were sold at a price
reasonable, than all other foren cloth steyd, till that was sold. But now is
englyssh cloth brought to so high a price, that the cloth of many contres is
sold a fore Englyssh cloth: and that causes marchantes to keep their clothes
long upon their hands many times to their great damage. I will say further, In
case this matter be not well^ked upon the sooner, it will be a gretter decay,
than is yet perceived: For cloth will be brought to so high a price, that they
will mar all. A boue all things beware of extremyte: for that ever sekyth a
mischeffe for a remedy. For what with the abundance of woll, that goth out by
licencys and by the staple, fore^ realms myx^ng it with their course wollys,
they make better chepe cloth than Englissh march^ntys can sell: yea and better
for the price. Whether it be a common wealth to bry^g cloth to so high a price or
not, first demand of the honest fermer: but I speak not of the extorcyonar,
grosser, incloser or great shepard, but of the honest pore f^rmer, whether he
lived not better wha^ he sold his wolle at an indiferent and mean price, than
he does now, sellyng for h^lf as much more. And I warant you* if he be none of
those destroyers a foresaid, he will say yea. Than demand the clothyer, if he
lived not better, when he sold his clothys for a reasonable price the pack, and
his carseys for.xxij. or xxiij. pownd the pack, than he does now sellyng them
for.xxx. pound the pack. And except it be a few, which be inordinate rich, and
eat out their neyhbors, they will also say yea, and that they gained more in
one pack, than they do now in three. And as for the poor spynner and carder,
though they have a little more for their pains, they pay doble so much for all
things that goo both to back and belly, and scant can get an house to put in
their headys, or at least not able to furnyssh it for their very necessaryes.
And thus every one eatyth out another. And the only cause of all these, is the
inordinate raising of rentys. It is unreasonable to se, how much they be
inhansed in manner thorowt the realm, except it be a few such, where of the
leassys were geuyn out over.xx. or.xxx. yerys. And the chief cause of all this
be even the landlordes: for as he increases his rent, so must the fermer the
price of his wolle, catel and all vitels, and likewise the merchant of his
cloth: for else they could not maynteine their living. And thus I say, the
lords be the only cause of all the dearth in the reame, God grant, that the
kings grace look well upon this matter himself: for it is hard to have it
redressed by parliament, because it pricketh them ch^ff^ly, which be chosen to
be burgessys for the most part, except they would chose their burgessys only for
their vertuos living, discrecyon, honest behauor, and other godly qualytes, be
he never so pore: such as would his neyhbor should live as him self. And would to
god they would leave their old accustomed chosing of burgessys: for who^ do they
chose, but such as be rych, or bear some office in the contrye etce. many
times such as be boasters and braggars? Such have the^ ever he^h^rto chosen, be
he never so very a fool, dronkerd, extorcyoner, adu^u^erer, never so couetos
and craf^y a parson, yet if he be rych, bear any office, if he be a ioly
cracker and bragger in the contry, he must be a burges of the parliament. Alas
how can any such study, or give any godly council for the common wealth? But and
if any man put forth any thing against Christ's religyon, or against the common
wealth, so that it make for the profyght of antichrystes knights and temporal
rulers of the reame, they shall be ready to give their consent with ^he first.
And whether this be true or no, let the actys of few yerys past be judge.
Every man perceyueth, that there is a fawt, and they be grieved, that all things
be at so high a price, and some be offended at one degree of men, and some at a
another: as the merchant at the clothyer, the clothyer at the fermer, the fermer
at the landlord, which is most just of all. In london and other placys there be
many offended with the great price of vitells, but few men consider the grownd
and origynal occasyon thereof, that it is only by enhansing of re^tys fynes,
etce. that makes all things dear, which is an urgent damage to the common
wealth: And till ye have a redress therein, look to have all things more derer,
make what acts ye can diuyse to the contrary. As touching the kings lands,
some say, that he enhansyth none: and wether it be true or not, I can not tell,
but this am I sure off, it is as evil or worse. For the chancelers and auditors
take soch unreasonable fynes and other brybes, that the tenantys were better
pay yearly a greater rent: for the tenantys are half undone in their
Inco^myng: who has the vantage, god knowyth, wether the king or that the
officers rob his grace, and polle and pylle his leage subiectys in his name,
which is most lykest.

Of the forfetting of landys or goodys of traitors, felons or morderers. The
iij. chapter.
OH merciful god, what a cruel law is this, how far wide from the gospel,
yea from the law of nature also, that when a traitor, a morderer, a felon, or
an heretik is condemned and put to death, his wife and childern, his servants,
and all they whom he is detter unto, should be robbyd for his offense, and
brought to extreme poverty: that his wife, his childern or next kynred should
not enjoy his landys, when they consentyd not to his death? wherefore to take
the landys and goods, it is a great robry, but yet nothing to this, that his
credyte is not paid: For by that meanys he forfettyth unto the king, not only
all his own goodys and landys, but also that which is none of his. Oh most
wicked lawys: by this cruelty is many an honest man undone. Alas, what can the
pore wife, the chyldern, the kynsmen or credytor do withal, being not culpable
in the crime? ^ff any of them be fawty, than let them have also the law, that
is death, which reco^pen^yth the crime. No dowt, the riches of me^ has helpyd
many an honest man to his death, by the couetosnes of the officers, that ferme
such things of the king. To this shall some flatteryng Hypocrite, to win
promocyon or lucre (wherein he shall show, that he louyth his own private wealth
better, than the whole common wealth, or discharge of the kings conscience) shall
object, and fay: It is as necessary to forfett the goodys and lands, as the
life: and specialy traitors: And why? for traitors, will he say, be many times
noble men of great lands, wherefore if his child or kynred should enjoy his goodys
and landys, he might in process of time, be a traitor also, and so revenge his
fathers death against the king. Another bald reason he will happily allege also,
If so be the offender should but lose his life only, there would be many more
offenders than there be. For why? A man consydering that he shall undo his
wife and childerne, it shall cause him to esch: we that evil which he prete^dyd.
To the which I make answer, what man is he living, although he love his wife
and children as well as ever did man, that will pass more, or as much upon the
wordly goodys of his wiffe and childerne, as he will do upon his own life? I
say, no man living, nor that ever lived: and thou art a flaterer and a
dissembler, which defendyst this cause or any other like under such a pretense.
And thou art a stablissher of wicked laws. And where as thou alledgyst, if the
childern and s^ynd should enjoy the goods and lands, they might happily revenge
their fathers death, to that I answer, pray thou to the lord god, and all true
subiectys with the, that he will give grace to the king, to walk in his
vocacyon, to use and exercise his office, to live in the fear of god, sekyng
gods glory only, setting forth his blessed word: and for the common wealth to
make and stablissh polityck actys, depending of the scripture, and to make none
but such as may be grownded upon gods word: and than for my life, though the
child and all his kynred with him, having.xx. thousand to them, rebel never so
much, the king shall not need to fear: For god will defend him, and not his
own power, even as hedyd many times king Dauyd against Saul, as it is to read
in the bokys of the kings. And have we not examples at home? how mercifully
did god quench the fury of the people in the time of the co^mocyo^ in the North?
I pray god, that we be not vnthanckful for that delyuerance and such other.
Wherefore, I say, let us pray, that the kings grace may walk as is a fore said,
and he shall not need to fear all his enemies, for god shall be his rock, shyld
and defender. But contrary wise, if he cast of the law of god, making wicked
laws, and stablisshing them (whereby gods glory is mynisshed, and the pepyl of
god oppressyd) than let him fear: For if god be determined to plage him,
though he kill not only those which be traitors against his grace, but also
their childern, kindred and fryndes thereto, it shall not help him: For god shall
stir up the hartys even of his own fryndes against him, from which thing god
defend him.

Of the enclosing of parkys, forestys, chasys. etce. The iiij. Chapt.
OH lord god, that it would please the, to open the earys of the king, lordys
and burgessys of the parliament, that they may hear the cryeng of the people,
that is made through the reame, for the enclosing of parkys, forestys and
ch^sys, which is no small burden to the commons, how the corn and grass is
destroyed by the dear many tymys, it is to pytyful to hear. It is often seen,
that men ioynyng to the forestys and ch^sys, have not repyd half that they have
sown, and yet sometime altogether is destroyed. And what la^d is your parkys?
be not the most part of them, the most batel and fruteful grownd in Ingland?
And now it is come to pass by wicked lawys, that if a man kill one of those
beastis which bear the mark of no one pryuate person, but be indifferent for
all men, coming upon his own ground, deuouryng his corn or grass, which is
his lyff^lod: and yet if he kyl them upon his oune ground, being ch^^e or
forest, it is felony, and he shall be hanged for it. But what says the prophet
to the makers of this wicked act and such other like? Woo be unto you which
make wicked lawys and cete. To write of what unreasonable length and breddyth
they be, it is superfluos: the thing is to manifest, god grant the king grace,
to pull up a great part of his oune parkys, and to compel his lords, knyghtys,
and gentylmen to pull up all theirs by the rootys, and to late out the ground
to the people at such a reasonable price, as they may live at their hands. And
if they will nedys have some dear for their vain pleasure, than let them take
such heathy, woddy, and moory ground, as is unfruitful for corn or pasture, so
that the common wealth be not robbed: and let them make good defense, that their
poor neyhbors ioynyng unto them, be not deuouryd of their corn and grass:
Thus should ye do, for the earth is the poor mannys, as well as the rych: And ye
lordys se that ye abuse not the blessing of the riches and pour which god has
lent you, and remember, that the earth is the lordys, and not yours: for ye be
but stewardys, and be ye sure, that ye shall give account unto the lord, for the
be flowyng of your riches. And to you burgessys, seeing such things will not be
reformed but only by your pour and auctoryte, I say to you, as in the
beginning: Consider whereunto ye be called, and for what purpose: not for your
oune particular and pryuate wealth, nor yet for the kings, in any thing
preiudycyal to the common wealth.

Of the sellyng of wardys for marriage, where of ensues adultery, which owght to
be ponysshed by death. The.v. Chapter.
OH mercyful god, what Innumerable inconuenyencys come by sellyng of wardys,
for marriage, for lucre of goodys and landys, although the parties never favor
the one the other, after they come to discrecyon, to the great increasing of
the abhomynable vice of adultery, and of dyuelyssh dyuorcement, which has of
late been much used. Now god confound that wicked custom, for it is to
abhomynable and stynkyth from the earth to heauyn, it is so vile: what myschefe
has comne of it, it is to well knoun to many men, I need to write no further
therein. But for christys blood sake, seek a redress for it: and consydre,
that ye be called to the parliament for such purposys. And further, yet that be
godly burgessys and of Christ's congregacyon, consider, that even the same god
that says: thou shall not steal, the same god says also: thou shall not
commyt aduoutry. He that stealyth, is hanged, and why ought not he also to be
hangyd that co^mytteth adultery? Well though that vice reygnyth most abundantly
in noble and rich men, and in the popys shauelings most shamelesly, which shame
to take them honest wives of their oune, I say to you that be godly lernyd,
although it raygne chefely in such parsons, shame ye not, nor fear ye not, to
make it felony indifferently to all men: look you ever to your office, whereunto
ye be called, and seek to discharge your oun conscience, that ye may give a
good accounte at the day, when ye shall be reigned at the judgment seat of
god, to receive judgment according to your dedys.

Of the iniuryes done to the co^munalty by the kings takers etce. The.vi.
Chapter.
OH my heart is heavy, to see the great yocke that is upon the como^s, by the
parcyal act of ra^yng of vytellys, which is most grievous even to the poor
sort: which ratys were made, when rentys went at a much lower price: for that
which went for.xx. shillyngs than, goyth now for.xl. fyfty* yea iij. pound and
above in many placys, as I have touched in the first chapter. And thereby all
things must nedys rise to an high price. And yet this, by reason it touches
the profight of the king and of the higher powers, must stand still in effect,
to the most great damage of the ^ore. And if the robry of the puruyers were
knoune, which bye.iij. times asmoch as seruyth the king, and selle it again to
their oun advantage, thou woldyst say there were no such robry: and this is
used in all manner of things. For if a man have but a copple of h^nnys, and
come to the market with them, if these puruyers mete him, they shall take them
from him by force, and give him for them what they list. Like wise, if a man
have a good dog or hound, it shall be taken from him with out any recompense,
in the kings name, when the king shall never see them. Is not this a miserable
thing? what is it less than robry? And if the kings grace saw the actys of
the most part of his puruyers, I am sure his grace would cause a great sort of
them to be hanged, as they have deseryd. What a pyllage is it to the pore, that
not so much as the poor butter wife, but she is spoiled, and that which
stands her in iij. halpens. shall be taken from her for. ^. penny, dyssh, and
all? and yet she shall not have her ready money neither, but a taly, and sometime
never paid: like wise.ij. pens for an hen, that stands her in.iiij. and
above. And further more, what heart does not consider, that euin as men must
leave their plow and harvest to serve the king with their cartys, so is it
reason they should have a reasonable wagys. What is. ij. pens for a mile?
consydre ye rulers about the king, and ye that will be counted godly burgesys in
the parliament. They had been better to have served the king for.ij. pens a mile
over.iij yerys, than now for.iiij. pens. Oh lord, open the earys of them, that
should hear and redress this matter.

Of the suttylty of seruyng of wryttes. The.vij. chapter.
IT is a wonderos great abuse, being a great troble to all the kings subjects
(but specially to the pore) and great need to be redressed, that when a poor man
has long suyd a gentylman, being a lawer, or a man of any substance, or
frendshyp in the court, or of any suttyl wytt, and has obtained judgment and
a fynal end in the common law, and is come to the point that he must have a
wrytt to attach the body of his defendant, alas how many ways, yea how many
gyles and suttylteys be there, to avoid and escape the seruyng of the kings
wrytt? First, one wrytt may serve but for one shyre: as though the king were
lord but of one shyre. But I dema^d, why may not one wrytt serve in all shyres,
yea in all placys under the kings domynyon, whersoeuer he or his may find his
defendant? surely there is no godly reason why to the contrary, but even the
only private wealth of sotle lawers. And as far as I can learn, one wrytt
lasts but for one term: and the next term, he must be at charge to come
up, or at least to send sometime.iij. or.iiij. hundredth mile for another. And
why should it not stand in his full strength, till it be served? No why, but the
why a foresaid. Again, no man may serve it, but the sheryff of the shyre or
his man, and so many times it is seen, that the sheryff or his man (and
sometime both) play the false shrewys, in geuyng the party warnyng, to keep
him out of the way, or to goo into another shyre, till the poor man or his frynd
be out of the contry or till the date of the writ be exspyred. Alas, why is not
every man a shyryffe in this case, as well as every man is abayly to attache a
felon? sure there is no cause why, but that it is not the profyght of the
shyryff, or else that me^ be not studyos to make laws for the profyght of the
common wealth. Oh the innumerabyl wyles, craftys, sotyltes and delays, that be
in the law, which the lawyers will never spy, because of their private lucres
sake: whereby the common wealth is robbed. They be almost as evil as the wicked
bisshops and prystes of Antichryst, save only that they rob us but of our
temporal goodys, and not of our fay^h.

Of promoters, which may wrongfully by the law of Ingland, troble a man and
cet. The viij. chapter.
Hear another as evil as that, or worse. What an unreasonable law is this,
that it shall be leful for any wicked parson, to commense an accyon against any
true and honest man, in as false a matter as can be diuysed? And if the case be
soch that the king have any enteresse in the matter, or that it any thing
touches the kings profigh^, although it be found false by the law, and that
the law pass^^h with the true honest man yet the villane promoter shall not
only escape ponysshment worthyly deseruyd, but also shall pay no p^ny to the
pore true man's ch^rgys. And why? because it touches the kings profyght: as
though it were lawful for the king to rob or troble h^s subiectys wrongfully.
Oh wicked laws, how cry all the proph^^ys against them and the makers of
them? wh^rfor be ye lernyd ye men of the parliament, that ye may see to
reformethes so wicked laws, lestly be partakers in reward with the makers of
them: lest at length (as the prophet warns) ^he lord be wrath with you and
plage you, that ye perissh from the right way etc. Many lawyers and other will
make obieccyo^s to this, and say, it were no reason they should be sewyd, for it
is a common wealth, wherefore the king should pay no chargys. To whom I answer as
thou at blind in gods word, so is this a blind obieccy on. Admytt that it were
a common wealth. If the promoter sue in right, and the defendant be cast, no dowt
the kings part is recoueryd every penny (if the party be so much worth) well
than, let the gaynes of that which is recoueryd, bear the loss of him which
is wrongfully sewyd. And this is to be consyderyd, because the promoter payth
no charges though he be cast, it is a great coragyng, to him to troble his
neyhbor: for he knows the worst is to bear his own charges.

That all judges and pleaters should live upon a stypend and cetera. The.ix.
Chapter.
NOw would I wish a thing wonderos nedeful to the commonwealth, yet by the way
of petycyon (although the kings grace be bound in conscience so to do) that in
as much as his grace is come to great riches, by re^tys in manner innumerable, of
the abbaylandys deposed (which was ryghtfully done) for which cause I say his
grace is bound, to study some way, that part of the yockys of his subjects may
be eased: as I think no one way better, than this. In as much as men be
naturally geuyn to troble one another, and commonly the wydow and fatherles, and
such as lack riches and fryndes, be put ever to the worst, by reason that the
rich fills the purse of the lawyers, which the poor is not able to do, and
therefore his cause is not heard: for como^ly the lawyer can not understand the
matter, till he feel his money. For this cause I say, I would wissh, that such as
preach before the kings grace and his councellers also, would move him by the
way of petycyon, to put part of the lands to some godly commonwealth. As to
give a stipend to all and every man of law that sytteth a Judge or plea^y^h at
the bar in any of his high cowrty; through the reame, that every one may live
(according to his office) like a lawyer, and not like a lord, as they do with
such goodys as they have gotten by robbyng the pore. I mean not, but that the
suitors shall pay for writing all things: but for council or for his pleating to
pay nothing. And wrytings also had no title need to be looked upon: for in
diverse courts for writing one side of a shete of paper, in which shall not be
past x. or.xij. (...). he will have.ij. grotys, where as.ij. pense were to much.
Well, to the purpose aforesaid, and that the lawyer shall take no penny of no man.
I mean neither the judge nor the pleater at the bar, in pain of losyng his
right hand. and to be banysshed from pleating for ever. Which will be an
occasyon, that the pore shall be heard as well as the rich, and than would he^
discorage men to troble their neyhbers wrongfully: where now they be
maynteyners of discord for their private lukers sake which pruate lucre of the
lawyers, is a bayght to set men together by the earys in the law.

Of the cruelnesse and suttyltes of the augme^tac on and escheker and cete. The
x. chapter.
OH that the kings grace knew of the extorcyon, oppressyon and brybery that is
used in his. ij. courtys: that is to say, of the augmentacyon and of the
escheker, but specially of the augmentacyon. There has been much speaking of
the pains of purgatory: but a man were as good in a manner to come in to the
paynys of hell, as in to either of those.ij. courtys. For if the king have
never so little enterest, all is ours. So by the sutty^^y of the law, for their
oun advantage, they make many times the king to roble his subiectys, and they
robb the king again. Take for an exemple: look upon the clarkys of either of
these courtys. At his incomyng he shall b^yng in manner noth^ng, but pen and
Inck, and within a little space shall purchesse.xx.xl.l.ij. or.iij. hundredth
mark a year. Well, it is a common sayng among the people: Christ for thy bitter
passyo^, save me from the court of the augmentacyon. I have knoune diverse,
which have spent much money in that court, and yet at length they have geuyn
over their matters, and had rather lose all their expensys, than to follow it,
so endless and so chargeable is that court. And there is such oppressyo^ and
extorsyon in those.ij. courts, that all the subjects of the reame (so far
as they dare) cry out upon them.

Of the prolongyng of the law, and of certain abuses of the same. The xi. Chapt.
OH lord god, who looks for any brefenesse of sutys in the law: but me^ be
differyd from time to time, yea from year to year, and drawn out of such a
length with prolongacions, and be at such charge, that I know many men which
have geuyn over their right, rather than to follow the law: so profitable is it
to the lawyers, to the great damage of the common wealth: yea even in the common
law be there great abuses, and amongst many other, this one I note, that the
playntyff shall many times spend as much as the matter is worth, before the
defendant shall make him answer. This no dowt is an undoing to the poor, and a
defense for the rich: for in so long hangyng before he can come to any point,
the rich man weeryth the pore. Cut shorter your process for shame, for that
might well be determined in one term, which ye do in.iiij. And now a days
the law is ended, as a man is frynded: yea and even in the chansery there are
many abuses, and among other this is one, that the defendant shall be sworn
upon aboke, and shall swear falsely, and so it shall be fownd by the cowrt, and
the matter shall pass against him with the playntyfe, so that the court seyth
by their own sentence and judgment, that he is perjured, and yet is there no
punysshment for periuring in that case. And why? All for the profyght of the
court. For if perjury were punysshed in that case, as it should be in that and
in all other, than should the court lose a great sum of money in the year: For
than would but few men so boldly defend wrong causys, as they do, but would
seek to agree with their playntyfes, and pay their due, and make recompense for
such iniurys as they commyt. I dout not, but if my lord chanceler did ponder
well this matter, he would be the first that should procure a remedy for it. A
another thing also worthy to be looked upon, is this: O lord, how men be tossed
from one court to another? yea and that for small matters, and in manifest and
plain causes, even upon a plain obligacyon. This matter is surely nedeful to
be looked upon. Make nor admytt no judge to sit in any court, onles he be able,
righ^fully to judge any matter or cause, that shall be commensed in that court.
And being sufficy^nt to judge such causes, what shame is it to remove it from
that court to a another, as though the king were more strongar or more iuster in
one court, than in a another? which surely is nothing but a bucler and defense
for the wicked and rych, to prolong delay, and to weary him that is in the
right. Make no iudgys therefore (I say) but such as be godly lernyd, and able to
judge between man and man. And let all things be finysshed in that court,
where they be begone: unless men appeal in cause of life and death, or f^r
great and waygthy matters, which may be brought to one head court of the reame:
And to have no remouyng but to that one court, as it was in moses time.

Break down some of your courtys, for ye have to many, being so fylthyly
mynystred. The court of the marshyalsee, I can neither thynct, speak nor write
the slenderness and unreasonable chargys of that court. If the king knew what
boytrye were there used, I think he would never suffer them more to keep court,
or else he would look other wise upon it. It is meruel, but only that god is
mercyful, that fire descend not down from heaven, and destroy that court, and
the augmentacyon.

That kings and lordys of prysons, should find their prisoners at their charge
sufficyent fode, etcetera. The.xij. Chapter.
I See also a pytyful abuse for presoners. Oh lord god, their lodging is to bad
for hoggys: and as for their meat it is evil enough for doggys: and yet the
lord knows, they have not enough thereof. Consider all ye that be kings and
lordys of presons, that in as much as ye shut up any man from his meat, ye be
bound to give him sufficyent fode for a man, and not for a dog. Co^sydre,
that he is thy brother, and the image of Christ, if he believe and repent for
his wicked deed, what so ever he has done. And if he offend the law, let him
have the law (as before is said) acording to the offense. If it be death, than
let him dye, and for the time that he is in thy preson, use him like a
Christyan: For to put a man to death vncondemnyd, is to commyt murder: And to
put a man in preson, and to provide no meat for him so that he sterue for
hungar before he be condemnyd, is no less than to put him to death. Wherefore it
must nedys follow that they which put men in preson, and suffer them to dye for
hungar, are no less tha^ murderers. Further more perchance thy cruelnesse in
mynistryng unto him such evil lodgyng and worse fare, may cause him to fall in
to despair, and so thou for not mynistryng unto him that which thou art ^ound,
may be partaker of his desperacyon. Many times also true men come into
presons: well, whether he be true or false, yet let him be used like a man, and
not like a beast. In some prisons, though it be but for the pleasure of a rular,
he shall bear his own chargys, which be so unreasonable, that it is nedeful to
be reformyd: for such as be poor prisoners, and for the health of their body
desyer to be in commons, and to have a bed, he shall pay.iiij. times more for it
there, than in the derest Inn in Ingland, beside the charges when they be
quytt, and yet neither his fare nor his lodging shall be very gay. It were more
conuenyent, that the kepers of prisons had a stypend appointed unto them, than
to live by pollyng the pore prisoners, and to augment their sorrow. A another
thing also commyth to my mind, which is wonderos nedeful to be looked upon.
There lie in the marshyalsee diverse pore men: some have ly^n.vi. yea.vij.
years, coming up to sue for land, some for more and some for less, whether
their (...) be good or bad, I know not, but by reason their aduersarys be
strongar th^n they, they have found the means to cast them in preson, and
neither can they come to their answer, nor know what is laid against them,
nor yet be suffered to depart preson, but lie there more like dogs than men.
Yea and life wise in newgate there lie servants by the comandme^t of their
masters. Alas, what an h^uy case is it? it were mete and necessary, and a thing
to be ernestly desyeryd, that wh^t so ever he be, that imprysoneth any parson
with out a just cause or due proffes, that he were cast in prison himself, so
long as the other party (...) there wrongfully: And also to forfet the half
of his goods or landys (which as shall be found better of them both) to be
diuyded in.ij. parts, the one to the king, and the other to the person
wrongfully impresoned: this were a good snafful for the tyrannes and
oppressers, And yet but rightful and charitable. No dowt every alderman of
london have power, which they use often for their pleasure, and to accomplish
their tyranny, that they may cast a poor man in preson for certain days. And
when his days be expired, he boroweth his brothers auctoryte, and so may goo
through the.xxiiij aldermen. Yea many times their preson men for their fryndes
pleasure, though the party have deserved no such punysshme^t. This is a cruel
and heavy tyranny, and yet there is no law to ponissh it.

That men which be accused for preaching, should not be committed in to their
accusars hands. The.xiij. chapter.
What reason is it, or what Christen heart will say, that it is right, laudable,
or lauful, that when.ij. men be at any controuersye of a matter of life and
death, the one should be put in to the handys of the other: as lernyd men have
had in times past with bisshops, and yet have been put in to their handys as
presoners: whereof diverse times death has ensued, as there be examples of late
days? Was not one with in these.ij. yerys murderyd (...) the bishop of
wynchesters lodge? and than the matter was forged, that he hangyd him self.
Have ye not a like example of Hunne also? and it is meruel, that any that is in
their custody, is not either poysonyd or murderyd, were it not the high
prouydence of god to preserve them. Wherefore I say, it is not lauful, that any
parson that preaches, teaches or writes the law of the gospel, should be put
in to the handys of the bishops, with whom they contend. And why should not
both partys be put in preson, till the matter be tried, as well as the one? And
if the bishops the^seluys (according to right) should be put in preson, as well
as those whom they accuse, until such ty^e as the matter were tried and heard
before an indifferent judge, they would not be so hasty in accusyng. Yea what
reason is it, that bisshops should have any presons at all, but that all men
should be brought to the kings preson? For it is manifest to all the world, that
all shauelings which bear the mark of that abhomynable wh^re of Babylon (Rome
I mean) be not only parcyal, but also in deed the very enemies of Christ and
his members, even as were their predecessors Cayphas and Annas of Christ's own
natural body. Bishops ought no more to be lordys of presons, th^n was christ
and his a postyls, which were often imprisoned, but they never presonyd man:
wherefore it is manyf^st, that they be against christ. Oh ye rulers, why than
suffer ye them to have presons in their houses, where they torment men most
cruelly, and peruer^ (...) of their fay^h most suttylly, and murder them also?
Yet not so secretly, but god seyth them, though the world seyth them not. What
pestylent courts have they, in which was never innocent ^ound, but when so
ever.ij. false knaves shall secretly accuse a man, although he were as ignorant
as a child of.ij. days old, yet must he either dye, bear a faggot, or recant,
or at least pryuyly bear a faggot of russhes in his chamber as Moore did, so
that who so ever come in to their clawys, may not escape quyte, belyke many
times they be the accusers them seluys. But what reason, yea what extreme
cruelnesse is it, that either in that court or any other, any man should be
condemnyd to death, and have not the witnessys to come face to face openly in
the court, and openly to be sworn? and if the wytnessys be found perjured in
that case, let them even have the same death, that the presoner should have had,
if he had been found gyltye? For who so ever sekyth the death of another
wrongfully, is worthy to have the same him self ryghtfully. Wherefore ye that
be in auctoryte, look upon this nedeful matter, and consider the wordys of the
prophet Dauyd: ye eat up my pepyl with as little pyty, as men use to eat
bread. Reform, reform, though ye will not for the love of god yet for fear,
that the vengeance of god light not upon those law makers only, but upon other
also, for that cruel law that was of late made, that a man shall be condemnyd
to most cruel death, and not to be brought in to opyn iustesse: as were the
seruantys of god, Barnys, Garet and Iherom, so that he shall not answer for him
self. I think there were never so cruel lawys made under the son, as the
most part of the lawys that have been made with in these few yearys past.
Death, death* even for try^yls, so that they follow the high prystys in
crucyfyeng Christ, sayng: Nos habemus lege^, and secundum legem nostram debet
mori, we have a law, and by our law he ought to dye: this mori, dye, dye,
went never out of the pristes mouthys syns that time: And now they have
poysonyd the temporal rulars with the same. Well, be ye warnyd, and search the
scripturys (which be against you) and repent in time. And ye that have been the
autors of such actys, seek to redress them, for dischargyng of your oun
conscience. If ye love the lord, follow the example of them which ground all
their justice upon gods word: as in diverse cytys in germany this dyreccyon is
taken for those that be heretyckys in deed, as be the anabaptistys and such
other. Their dyreccyon is this: They lay no snarys nor grynnys to catch mennys
lives from them, as do our forked bear woluys, but in case any heretycke do
hold any ungodly opinion contrary to the scripture, and so be a teacher or a
seducer of the pepyl in their wicked sectys, than shall he be co^ma^dyd to come
before the justice, whereas shall be certain lernyd men, which shall dispute and
open the scrypturys unto him, and fatherly exhort and command him to leave it.
If he so do, he is brotherly received in to the congregacyon freely, and not
tossed and turmoyled, as our forkyd dragons do with Christ's membrys. And after
if he continue in his wickydnesse, or at the first will obstynately continue
and resyst the manifest truth, than they banyssh him their contry or cyty upon
pain of his head. And than if he will, wylfully or rebellyosly presume to come
in to their co^try or town which he was forbidden, he shall lose his head as
right is, because he breakyth the comma^dment of the temporal powrs, and not
for his faythes sake: neither put they any man to death for their faythes sake:
for faith is the gift of god only* as witnessyth. s. Pawl in the first chapter
to the Phylippyans, so that no man can give another faith. Now let all men
judge, whether these men or our blody bishops goo nerest the scripture.

Of lords that are parsons and Vicars. The.xiiij. Chapter.
YE that be lords and burgessys of the parliament house. I require of you in
the name of all my pore brethern, that are Englissh men and members of Christ's
body, that ye consider well (as ye will answer before the face of almighty god
in the day of judgment) this abuse, and see it amended. When as antichrist of
Rome durst openly with out any vyser, walk up and down through out England, he
had so great favor there, and his childern had such crafty wits (for the
childern of this world are wyser in their generacyo^ than the chyldern of
light) that they had not only almost gotten all the best lands of England in to
their hands, but also the most part of all the best benyfyces, both parsonages
and vicarages, which were for the most part all impropryd unto them. And when
they had the gifts of any not impropred, they gave them unto their fryndes, of
the which alw^ys some were lernyd: for the monks found of their fryndes
childern at scole. And though they were not lernyd, yet they kept hospytalyte,
and helpyd their poor fryndes. And if the personage were improperd, the monks
were bound to deal alms to the poor, and to keep hospitalyte, as the
writings of the gifts of such personages and lands do plainly declare in
these words, In puram elemosinam. And as tochyng the alms that they dealt,
and the hospitalyte that they kept, every man knows, that many thowsandes
were well releuyd of them, and might have been better, if they had not had so
many great men's horses to feed, and had not been ouercharged with such idle
gentyl men, as were never out of the abbeys. And if they had any vicarage in
their hands, they set in sometime some sufficyent vicar, (though it were but
seldom) to preach and to teach. But now that all the abbeys with their lands,
goods and improperd personages, be in temporal me^nys hands, I do not hear
tell, that one halpeny worth of alms, or any other profight, c^meth unto the
people of those parisshes, where such personagys and vicarages be. Your pretense
of putting down abbeys, was, to amend that was amysse in them. It was far amys,
that a great part of the lands of the abbeys (which were geuyn to bring up
lernyd men, that might be preachers after ward, to keep hospitalyte, and to
give alms to the po^re) should be spent upon a few supersticyos monks,
which gave not.xl. pownd in alms, when they should have given.ij. hundredth.
It was amysse, that the monks should have personages in their handys, and deal
but the.xx part thereof to the poor, and preached but ones in a year to them
that paid the tithes of the personages. It was amysse, that they scarsely
among.xx. set not one sufficyent vicare to preach for the tithes that they
received: But see now, how it that was amysse, is amended, for all the goodly
pretense. It is amended, even as the deuel me^dyd his damys leg (as it is in
the proverb) when he should have set it right, he bracke it quyte in pecys. The
monks gave to little alms, and set unable parsons many times in their
benyfyces. But now, where.xx. pownd was given yearly to the poor, in moo than
an. C. places in Ingland, is not one meals meat given. This is a fair
amendme^t. Where they had alweys one or other vicar, that either preached or
hired some to preach: Now is there no vicar at all, but the fermer is vicar and
person all together, and only an old cast ^ way monk or fryre which can
scarsely say his mattens, is hired for.xx. or.xxx. shillings meat and drinck,
yea in some place for meat and drinck alone with out any wages.

I know, and not I alone, but.xx. M. moo know more than.v. C. vycarages and
personages, thus well and gospelly served, after the new gospel of Ingland.
And if a man say to the fermers: why have the people no preachers? seeing ye have
the tithes and offerings ye should find preachers. They will answer, we have
hired the personages of this or that lord, and he or he is person or vicar: we
pay for the tithes and offerings to the lord that is parson. Well than, I say
unto the my lord parson and vicar, thou doyst wrong to have personages and
vicarages, to have the tenth pyg, the tenth sheefe, the tenth lamb, goose,
flese, and so of all other things, seeing that thou art no mynyster, nor no
pryst of Christ's church, and can neither preach, teach, nor do any office
of ^ parson or of a vicar, but polle and pylle. What can thou say for thy
self my lord parson and vicar? Thou wilt say parauenture, the king gave me the
abbey and all that longs thereto, which had them given him be the parliament.
Therefore if thou speak against my being person and vicar, though I neither
preach nor teach, nor yet procure none to do it for me, thou art a traitor: for
this is the.xiij. article of our creed added of late, that what so ever the
parliament does, must nedys be well done, and the parliament or any proclamacyon
ow^ of the parliament time, cannot err. Therefore let no man be so hardy in pain
of death, to speak or complain, for the redress of any thing that is done
amysse, either by the parliament, or by any proclamacyon. If this be so my lord
parson, than have ye brought Rome home to your own doors, and given the
auctoryte to the king and the parliament, that the carnal bisshops gave unto the
pope: which was this: Si papa etce. If the pope through his faut should send
infinyte thousands to the devil, yet must no man speak against him. And if ye
have geuyn the same auctoryte unto the parliament that the papists gave to
their general councels, that is, that they can not err, and what so ever is
onys determined in a general council, must nedys be true, and of no less
auctoryte, than the gospel: ^f this be so, it is all in vain to look for any
amendme^t of any thing. And we be in as evil case, as when we were under the
bishop of Rome, if we have all the laws of him co^fyrmed with fire and death.
Surely the popissh bisshops, when they were robbed of the pope of Rome, they
would nedys have a pope: and therefore they would have made the king their pope,
and they gave him auctoryte to do all things in England, that the pope did in
Rome, as to forbid marriage certain times in the year, and than to sell lycencys
for the same, to selle license to eat flessh in lent* non residencys, and such
other. And even the popys proctor said (as it was told me) that he might make
saints also. And less there should want any thing to a perfyght pope dome, the
bisshops caused a proclamacyon to be set out in the kings name, that from hense
forth the ceremonies of the church, that were of the popys making, should no
more be taken for the popys ceremonys, but the kings, and so they made the king
father to the popys childern. But I am sure, though the bisshops would make the
king pope, he would not take it upon him. And I trust, that every day more and
more his grace shall spy their popissh intentys. But to you my lord personys,
how can ye defend your seluys, if a man should bring this argument against you,
and prove you all theuys, that have personages and vicarages in your hands,
and can not preach. Christ says John the.x. he that enters not in to the
shepefold by the door, but clymeth in another way, is a thief and a murderer:
but ye entered in another way, wherefore ye are theuys and murderers. That ye
come not in by the door, I will prove it thus: Christ is the door, but by Christ
ye came not in to the sheep fold, that is to say, to be parsons and vicars, for
ye grant, that ye came in by the act of parliament, and the act of parliament is
not Christ, for it is not confirmed by christ's word, therefore ye came not by
christ, and so be ye theuys and murderers: as your works prouyd of late, in
shedding of the blood of so many true prechers and shepardes, which spent their
lives for their sheep. If this argument be not strong enough, what say ye by
this? All they that come before me (says Christ) are theuys and robbers, ye
come in to the shepefold before Christ, ergo ye be theuys and robbars. To come
in before Christ, is to be a parson or a vicar before Christ send him: And ye
came in before Christ sent you, for he sends none to be shepardes, but such
as he knows to be able to feed his flock, ergo he never sent you: for he
knows you unable to do that office. And thus to conclude, ye be thieves and
robbers, for a thief comes not but to steal and to kill. Wherefore give over
your personages to learned men, and enter not in to other mennys vocacyo^s to
rob the ministers both of their office and of their living, that ye be not
punisshed of god. But if ye will nedys be parsons and vicars still, and have
all the profightes of the personages, and will have all, even to the ty^he eg
of a pore woman that has but.ij. hennys, ye must have the pains that belong
to such parsons as you be. Hear what almigh^y god says unto you my lordys,
which will be parsons and pastors, Ezechel.xxxij. If I say unto the wicked, thou
shall dye the death, and thou speak not unto him, to keep the wicked from his
way, the wicked h^s own self shall dye in his wickedness, but h^s blood shall I
require of thy hand. Mark well lord parson, for th^s is said to all them that
are parsons, and take wages and living of the people, as tithes and offryngs,
for feding of them with gods word, or ^ls by what ty^le can thou challenge the
ty^hes? look well upon this matter, and by (...) thy conscience upon godds word.

Of lords which are shepardes. The.xv. Chapter.
When the sprytualty was in prosperyte, and had the upper hand in the reame,
they did far excede the temporal lords in couetosnes: but after they had a
fall, and the lords having their spoils, the same pock that was in the
clargys wine and clothes, has so infected the gentyl men of the temporal^ye,
that they can not be content with the sufficye^t lyuelodes that their fathers
left them, but they will inhance, not only the rentes of their lands yearly
(which they need not to do) but also to get riches, they will become parsons,
vicars, myllers, masons, and shepardes: so that no man that was wont to live by
his sheep, can now have any pastor for them, by the reason that lords flocks
eat up the corn, medows, heathes and all together. These gentyl men will say,
that we will keep no order, when we break a ceremony of the popes making. But I
pray you, what order keep they, that never took order in their life, and
inordynately take the living of the ministers of the church, and thurst the^
selves in to other me^nys vocacyons. And where as they should be lords and
rulars, they become parsons and shepardes, and marcha^tes, so that no man can
have any living for them. It were necessari, that this were amended, and that
no lord had mo^ sheep than be able to serve his house and he that does excede,
to forfet his whole flock, half to the king, and half to the complayner.

Of first fruits both of benifyces and lords lands. The xvl. Chapt.
FOr as much as we have denied the popes name, it is convenient that we also
deny all his naughty condycyo^s there with, that all the whole pope with all
popistry may be utterly denied and banysshed. The pope explenitudine potestatis
made a law, that every bishop should l^ck the first year all the fruits of
his bisshopryke, though the bishop were so worthy his living the first year,
as the worthyest of all the Apostels. And he ordained, that these first fruits
should neither be given to blind nor lame, but to himself, to maintain his
pride. This condicyon of the pope is now confirmed in Ingland with an act of
the parliament, whereby not only bisshops must pay the first fruits of their
bisshoprickes, but also every parson and vicar of his benefyce, and every lord
the first fruits of his la^dys. In which act the popes condicyon is not put a
way, but it is.ij. parts gretter than ever it was. For where the bisshops only
did pay the first fruits than, now the parson pay, the vicars pay, the lords
pay, and in conclusyon all men must so often, pay pay, that a man if he took
not good head would thynk, that the latin papa were translated in to Englissh,
here is so much payng on every side. But I judge, that the kings grace was
never the cause of this payng, but they whom the vengeance of god both has and
will ponissh. Wherefore I thinck, if the parliament which granted the king the
first fruits, would restore them to the good shepardes again, the kings grace
could be as well content to scrape out this vncharytable, pay pay, as he was to
put out of his reame that Romyssh papa: Specially seeing it is clean contrary
to the word of god, and plain robbry, if men durst so call it. Hear what the
scripture says of the living of prechers. Thou shall not mosel the mouth of the
ox that tredyth out the corn, that is to say, he that takes pains to
expound the scripture, ought not to be defrauded of his living for his labor.
And seeing that god forbad that no day the ox should be moselled from his meat,
he that should ij. days mosel a laboring ox, should break gods commandment
manifestly. And he that should mosel him up.xij. days, and allow him no meat
at all, should be wonderd at of all men. And every man would say, that he had
done the laboring ox wrong, and contrary to nature also, and that finally he
had broken the commandme^t of god. And shall not he than do a Christen preacher
wrong, and break gods commandm^^t, that moselyth him for the space of
whole.xij. months, though he never so diligently tread out the corn of gods
word, that the people may eat and digest it? Yes surely, though x.M. general
councels and as many parlamentes had determined the contrary. Let not men byld
their conscyences so much upon the acts of the parliament: For when god shall
say at the day of judgment, why have thou taken away my ministers livings from
them, the first year that they fed my flock? Thinck ye, that god will allow
this excuse, I did it by the grant of the parliament, when as that act of
parliament is clean contrary to gods word? Nay verily, he will not allow it:
for either the minister is abyl and does his duty (and so is worthy his meat
the first year) or else he is unable, and so neither worthi to have wages the
first, nor yet the second or third. It were therefore well done, that it were
inacted, that he that preached not, should have no wages, acording to the word
of god: qui non laborat, non manducet: he that laboryth not, let him not eat,
and that the first, second, third, and all other fruits of benifyces after
ward, should be given to the precher, that laboryth in the lords vyneyard. And
as touching the first fruits of young lords lands, every man can se, what
harm may come thereof. The lord has often times when he dies.iij. score
servants. Now if his son want the first fruits of his lands, wherewith shall
he find his fathers old servants? He must bid the^ shift for them selves, and
so they must take sta^dings in shoters h^ll, in newmarket heath, and in
stangate hole. And so this payng of their first fruits, is the cause of great
theft, robry, murder. For commonly the great thieves and robbers, are the
masterles and castaway courtyers, or pompos bisshops servants, that have no
wages of their masters.

Of particular tachementes etc. The xvij. chapter.
ANother thing very needful to be looked upon, is th^s, that when any merchant
or other, by loss of goods, by fortune of the sea, euel seruantys, evil
detters, by fire. or* other wise, come to an after deal, and not able to pay
his credyte at his due time, but by force of pouertye is constrained to demand
longar time, than ye have a parcyallawe in making of tachmentys, first come,
first served: so one or ij. shall be all paid, and the rest shall have nothing.
And commonly ever the rych shall have the foredeale thereof by this tachement, to
the great damage and oppressyon of the pore. For lygh^ly the rich have the
first knouledge of soch things. Wherefore in that case, it were a godly way to
make it in Ingland, as it is in diverse contryes, when any such chance falls,
that than the most in number of the credytors, and most in sum, shall bind
the rest to do and give like time, as do the most of the credytors. And if it
be duly found, that the man be so far at after deal, that he be not able to
pay his whole credit in reasonable time, that than the law may bynd them,
that every man may have pound an pound a like, as far as his goodys will goo,
leauying him some what, as the law shall thynck good. And this law shall be
both neyhborly and godly.

That the rulars of the earth owght to sytt in the gatys etce. The xviij.
chapter.
ANother thing mete for all rulers, even from the lowest unto the highest, to
consydre and redress, is th^s: Alas, how long shall men wait and give
atte^dance upon rulers, before they can come to the spech of the^? And how many
porters be there also, to stop me^ from coming to their spech? when he is
past one, he shall be put back at the second: Or if he pass the second, he shall
be returnyd at the third, unless he be rych or have great fryndys. Oh ye kings
and rulars, for the love of god that ye should have to him that both made us of
naught, and when we were lost by our synnys, redemyd us with the blood of his
son, study the scripturys and there shall ye see, that iudgys, and rulers, yea
even the kings sa^e in judgment in the open gatys, as apperyth in the second
of the kings the.xix. chapter, Deuteronomy the.xvi. the second of Esdras the
third chapter. And why sat they in the gatys, but that the people, yea even the
porest, might come and open unto the king his own cause? Than were there not so
many rych lawyers, which be the poison of the law. For the reverence of god,
ye kings and rulers, either sytte in the ^pyn gatys again, or else let your
gatys, yea even all your dorys, even to your pryuy chamber, be wide open, for
certain howrys, and that every day in the year, even on ester day and all other
days, if need require, as thou may perceive Exodi the.xviij. Judge the people
at all seasons etce. And consider what qualytes a judge or a ruler should have:
their must be me^ that fear god, and that are true, and hate couetosnesse, as
is descrybed in the same.xviij. chapter. How many such rulers be in Ingland?
Yea they should also judge the people rightuosly: They should not wrest the law,
nor know any parson, nor yet take any reward: for gyftys blind the wise, and
pervert the wordys of the rightuos as it follows in the text. Hear ye may se,
that it is nedeful (as I have touchyd before) that judges and all other
pleaters in courtys, have stypendys of the king, and there upon to live. For
here ye se, that the scripture says: gifts pervert the wordys of the
ryghtuos, that is to say, for the gyftys sake they will not se the right of the
pore: and so they turn right in to wrong, whereby the pore be often oppressyd.
In diverse cyteys of Germany (as namely in Arge^tyne) the iudgys and lords sit
opynly every day in the year in their town house, save only on the sunday,
and than also if need require. And there they eat co^tynually their dynars and
suppars, so long as they be in office, because they may always be present to
hear the complaynt of the poor: yea even the porest man in the city or
contry, may boldly come in to their hall or stoue, they being at dynar, and no
man so hardy as to take them by the sleue, to let them from the presence of
the rulars. And there may he open his matter him self withowt his chargeable
man of law. And he shall be haard, and shall not be answered, Tarry sir knave,
till my lordys have dyned. O noble Germanys, god has made you a light unto all
rulers in the world, to rule after the gospel.

A godly admonycyon, for the abolysshment of diverse abusys, that gods glory
only may be sowght. The.xix. Chapter.
HOw can that council seek a godly reformacyon of things misused, wha^ the
council it self has wicked pryuylegys? Wherefore acording to Christ's
commandment (Matthew the.vij.) pluck out the beam of your own eyes first, and
than ye shall the playnlyer se the mote in your neybhors eyes. Se that ye break
first soch vnneyhborly, unbrotherly yea and ungodly priuylegys, as ye your
seluys do enjoy against right and conscience, and than shall ye the better se to
seek the commonwealth. Ye have a preuylege which is this: that if a lord, a
knight, or a burgess of the parliament house, or any of their serua^tys, owe
unto any of the kings subiectys any sum of money (be the detter never so rich,
and the credytor never so poor) he shall by the preuylege of the parliament not
pay one penny, so long as the parlame^t enduryth, be it never so long. Or if any
of them or their seruantys have done to any man any trespass or injury, he may
not also troble them. What is this, but a mayntenance of wickedness? And how
can wickydnesse abolyssh wyckydnesse? but rather increase it. For the lordys
sake look upon these things, and follow the council of.s. Austen: let custom
give place to the truth: so that the truth may rule all things. Also there is
another thing, worthy to be looked upon, which is this. Many noble men and
ge^tyl men retain seruantys, and never give them penny wagys, and scant a cote:
for some be feign to pay for their own cotys, and spend all that they have of
their own and of other mennys also, hopyng upon some reward: And when he
seyth, that all is spent, than he would depart and dare not. And gay he must goo
like his felows, and now his fryndes fail him, what remedy? forsooth shortly
even to wath for abowget. Another sort there is, and they be light ryding men,
all ready: and they will live like gentyl men. And for h^s buclar or shyld, he
will seek to be retayning to some noble man or gentylman that bearyth rule in
the court or contry, though he pay for his own lyuery. And the noble men and
gentyl men, which should be the ponysshers of theft, be the chief maynteyners of
robry by this meanys, often they rob, and be not taken: but in case he be
taken, either he shall have favor for his masters sake, or else bragg it out with
a card of x. ye even face it out, that neither the playt yue nor the.xij. men
dare cast a thief. Or if all this will not help, than procure they the kings
pardon. Oh noble rulars, ye that be Christen in deed, take heed, that ye abuse
not your auctoryte receyuyd of god: for if ye hang one that has offendyd the
law, and pardon another, be ye not than parcyall? And no dowt if ye pardon a
thief of a morderer, and they commit that offense again, so be ye partakers of
their wickydnesse. For why? if ye had done justice before, that offense had not
been committed. Well, make a prouyso, that no noble nor unnoble man, shall
retain any of the kings subiectys withowt lauful wagys: And set a penalty
there upon.

More over In as much as it is open unto all the world, that we have long
walked in a false religyon, and have had confydence in vain thyages (as in the
tradycyons of men's Imagy^acyons) seek to reform these things and to set forth
Christys religyo^: that we may honor one god only, as the scripture teaches
us: And to leave worshipping and calling upon any creaturys in heauyn or in
earth, for he is ageluos god, and will have no other in his sight Exodi xx. Se
therefore that the people may be taught, that they have but one medyator, like as
they have but one god and one redemer. And a way with y^wr superfluos holy
days, for in one holy day is more idleness, whordome and glotony used than
in.x. workyng days. Also away with all your idols and Imagys both great and
small. For if no whore ought to be suffryd in the congregacyon of god (as it is
written in Deuterono. the.xxiij.) than ought not the great whorys to be
banysshed only, but the small also. Wherefore, seeing the scripture callyth
Imagys whorys, Jeremy the.iij. And that ye have rightfully put down the great
Imagys, with whom the people have committed sprytual fornycacyon: all the rest,
even the least also, are utterly to be abolysshed, if ye will take away the
occasyon of sprytuall fornycatyo^ or Idolatry from the people. How can ye for
shame suffer your seluys and the people to crepe to a cross which will rott,
seeing the scripture for byddeth, sayng: non adorabis ea neque coals: that is to
say, thou shall give the^ neither inward nor owtward worshipping* Is not this
an owtward worshypping of an Idol, to crepe to the cross, and to kiss it?
What is it else? further more, banyssh whordom and other abhomynable vices, not
to be named, from your prystes: and let them that will, have their wives, as
they had in the prymatyue church, as had.s. Peter, as appearyth, Matthew
the.viij. and.s. Paul, Philipp. the.iiij For to forbid it as our bishops do.
s. Paul calls it the deuyls doctrine, the first to Tymot. the.iiij. chapter.
Now therefore if ye will believe the holy ghost speaking in Paul, as ye be bownd
to do if ye will believe in god, than shall ye plainly se, that the bisshops
which forbid that and such other like, contrary to the scripture, be deuyls.
Thyrdly condemn that auryculare confession, which is the preuy chamber of
treason of the bisshops. And let the people be taught to confess them seluys to
the lord with a repenta^t heart: Who only forgeuyth syn, and to confess and
reconcyle them seluys to their neyhbors, who^ they have offended, which have
the key of losyng in that case. But as it is now used (namely in axing of vain
questyons) it does not mynyssh sin, but increases it. Provide also, that
prayer and fasting may be set forth, acording to the scripture: And that the
sacramentys may be mynistred in the mother tung: And that all the service in
the church may be taken out of the scripture, the old Testament and the new,
all invented service set a part: And let it be said and song all in the mother
tongue, that all may laud and praise god together: and so shall we know, how to
praise the lord. If ye do this, as ye be bownd, tha^ vndowtydly shall the good
workys appointed in the scripture, florissh among the people: As namely, to
believe in one god only, to help the sayntys in this world, to deck and feed
the image of god: these and such other shall we tha^ do of love, and not seek
nor thynk to be justified by them. But now through gods help, to bring these
godly acts and such other to a good and godly purpose, ye must first down
with all your vain chantrys, all your proud colledgys of canons, and specially
your forkyd wolffys the bysshoppes, leave them no temporal possessions, but
only a competent living. An hundredth pownd for a bishop, his wife and
chyldern, is inowgh. If he be an honest man, and preach Christ sincerely, he
can not lack beside: if he do not, it is to much. And let there be no more
degreys among the^, but prystes and bishops, as it was in the primatyue
church. Now for the goodys of these chantrys, collegys, and bisshops, for the
lords sake take no example at the distrybucyon of the abbay goodys and la^dys,
but look rather for your erudycyon, to the godly and polytycke order of the
Christen Germanys in this case. Which dyuyded not such goodys and la^dys among
the pryncys, lords and rych men, that had no need theroff, but they put it to
the use of the common wealth and unto the prouysyon for the pore, acordyng to the
doctrine of the scripture.

That one pryst ought to have but one benyfyce and one fermer, one ferme.
The.xx. Chapter.
THis thing is also to be looked upon, that even as one man may have but one
wife, so let a pryst have but one benefyce, for if he have more flockys than
one to keep, he will never feed them both well. And if that be not a living for
a man, his wife and his chylderne, as some be not, than join him to the next
paryssh, whereby the poor may be at less charge with the pryst. The popissh
prestys will make a mock at this: which hipocrytes I send to the.x. chapter of
Matthew, where Christ say^h to his Apostyls and mynysters of his congregacyo^,
that they shall not possess gold, silver nor brass etc. how much less then
should they enjoy their Inordynate possessions? And even as a pryst should have
but one benefyce, so make that one man, of what degree so ever he be, shall hold
and keep in his own handys or occupyeng no more than one ferme, manner, or
lordshy? being a competent living, as of xx. pownd yearly rent: so that it may
be lauful for one man to keep.ij. if they both to gether be not above.xx.
pownd: but no man to keep above.ij. be they never so small rent. This were a
brotherly and godly act. For by your oppressors and extorcyoners* how be the
townys and villagys decayed? where as were.viij. x.xij. yea.xvi. how soldys and
more, is now but a sheep house and.ij. or.iij. shepardys. And one man shall
have.ij. or.iij. such things, or more in his ha^dys, that a poor man can
scarcely have an hole to put in his head for these great extorcyonars. So if ye
seek this godly redress, where as ye have a few in a contry, which be
mordynate rych extorcyonars and a great multitude of poor people, than shall ye
have but a few poor, and a great nowmber of a mean and reasonable substance,
and few poor, and less extorcyonars: which would be no small ease to the
commonwealth, here shall all Inclosars, grossers up of fermys extorcyonars and
oppressers of the commonwealth, be offendyd at me and call me heretycke and
traitor: but all such I send unto the fyft chapter of the prophet Esaias, where
he says: woe be unto you which ^oyne one house to another, and bring one land
sonye unto another, till ye can get no more grownd: will ye dwell upon the earth
alone etc? Ye extorcyonars, learn to fear god, and make what, and how
vehemently the holy ghost speakyth here in the prophet, will ye dwell upon the
earth alone? here is a fearful sentence for you.

Of the inhansyng of the custom, which is against the commonwealth etc. The
xxi. chapter.
ANother grievous burden spro^g up of few yerys past, is the inhansyng of the
custom of warys inward, which was granted for certain yearys to help the king
toward his warrys: and yet but upon a condycyon, that the king should be a shyld
and defense of the marchantys goodys, against all pirates and robbers upon the sea, and to make them good such goodys as should be taken. And now it is not
holden for certain yerys, but as it were for ever. And from a subsydye, to a
custom: and yet the merchantys not defendyd acordyng to the commant neither,
whereby many an honest merchant has been undone. This burden is not preiudycyal
to the marchantys only, but it is to the great damage of the whole reame also.
For why? all warys be raised thereby.v. in every hundredth and sum much more:
so that the commons bye all things so much the derer. I think, if the kings
grace knew what a burden it is to the commons, and with what evil will his
marchantys pay it, he would, I dowt not, be content with the old subsydy, that
is to say, a certain of every fardel chest, mawnd, bale, or what so ever it be,
as was in old time: and as it is inflandres, and over all the emperors landys
at this day. Oh that men which be about a king, would be as ready to give
council, to do rightuosnesse, and to seek discharge of their pryncys
conscience, and the wealth of his soul, as they be to enuegle him, to yocke his
commons, sekyng the only profyght of the body: as though there were no world
after th^s, or as though the king of allky^ges saw no further than a mortal
prince.

A godly aduysement, how to bestow the goodys and landys of the bisshops etce.
The.xxij. Chapter.
ALthough there be many godly myndyd, I trust, in the parlame^t house, which
can dyuyse ways ynowe, to employe the goodys and landys of bysshopes, deanys,
canons, and chantreys, to gods glory, to the commonwealth, and to the help of
the pore (as there are ways full many, who so lysteth to study the^) yet I
thynk my self bound, partly to write mine advise, in some things which be most
nedeful. First part of them may be distributed to the poor, as well to poor
maidens marriages and poor house holders, as to the blind, sick, and lame:
unless it be the one half of the plate to come to the kings grace, for this
purpose that it be turned in to the coin of the reame. And of their temporals,
let.viij. or.x. pound and not above of every hundredth, be granted to the king,
that he thereof may have homage, as chief lord and king, as reason is. And to
ease the commons of subsidys, when need shall be: that the pore and myddel sort
of the people may be easyd thereby: The rest to be employed upon poor cities and
townys, and to the prouysyon of the poor, as part of it to be le^t to poor
occupyers, to every city acording to the number of the occupyers in the same.
And let every occupyer have acording to his need: and every one to be bound
brotherly for another, jointly to the king. That is to say, the whole town, as
many as have any part of the money: and the first year (...) pay no entres, but
every year after.iij. pound of every hundredth pound, that the sum may
encreace, and not decay. And make a prouyso, that no cloth be made, but in
cy^eys and great townys, and the town seal to be upon every cloth, which town
shall make good all such faw^ys as shall be fownd in their clothys. And again
also, that the clothyers shall keep no fermys in the cuntry, except it be one
for his own prouysyon: and thus shall ye have true cloth made, and every neyhbor
live by other. The lordys and gentylmen by their londys, the merchant only by
his marchandyse, the clothyer by making his cloth, the fermer by tylling his
land, and bredyng etcete.

Ite^ part of these foresaid goodys may be employed to this use, that in every
hundredth, good town, or cyty, certain howsys be maynteynyd, to lodge and keep
poor men in, such as be not able to labor, syck, sore, blind and lame: And
every one of them to have wherewith to live, and to have poor whole women to
mynystre unto them. And for Christ's sake, ye rulers, look upon your hospytals,
whether the poor have their right there, or no, I hear that the masters of
your hospytals be so fatt, that the poor be kept lean and bare enough ^he
cry of the people is heard unto the lord, though ye will not hear. Now to our
former purpose again, let phisicyans and surge^s be found in every such town
or cite, where such houses be, to look upon the pore in that town, and in all
other joining unto it, and they to live upon their stipend only, without ^aking
any penny of there pore, upon pain of losing both his earys, and his stypend
also. Ite^ in diverse head cities and good towns, let scho^es be mainteyned,
and lectures to be had in them of the.ij. tongys, Hebrew, Greek and Latyne, and
the readers to have an honest stipend. Item in every such cyty and town to have
a certain number of pore men's chyldern, found of free cost, till they be of good
age, and well lernyd. Item the increase of the money, that is to say.iij. pownd
of every hundredth, to be bestowyd upon poor copyls at their maryages to
b^ginne the world withal. These ways and such like, may those goodys and
la^dys be bestowed, of another sort than to find such a sort of belly goddys,
and idle stout and strong lor^^s as ye have done, yea a sort of dronken
bussardys, and thus have the Germanys (where as the gospel is receyuyd)
bestowed the goodys and landys of soch abbeys, as they have suppressyd. And I
thinck, no godly heart can be against this dyuyse. Now therfo^ I exhort the
higher powers, in the name of the euerlyuing god, that if they will not look
upon these spyrytual extorcyonars (I mean bishops, canonys and chanterers)
for the zeal which (...) ought to bear to the congregacyon of god, ney^her
for the love that they ought to have to the commonwealth, and to the poor: Yet
let them remember it for their own welthys sake. And let the kings grace
consider, how tyrannosly by the virtue of their wicked mammon, they used part of
his progenytors, kings of England: as Wyllm Rufus, Henry ^he second, and king
Johan. Read the stories, and ye shall se part of their knavery: yet is the best
made to cloak their wickedness. It were hard to say, whether they were the
auctors of the commocyon in the north or no. I thynck it is as well possible
for the ocyane se to be without water, as it is for them to cease musyng of
myschefe.

A lamentacyon for that the body and tail of the pope is not banisshed with
his name. The.xxiij. Chapter.
OH mercyful father of heauyn, I can never lament enough, to hear the gospel
thus blasphemyd, to be named a thing causyng sedicyon, when it is the only
cause of concord and peace in conscience unto the faithful. Yet these bishops,
deanys, and canons of collegys, with other the popys shauelings acording to
their old wont, shame not to blaspheme this holy word, by all the sotle meanys
that can be dyuysed. How besy were they to stey the puttyng forth of the great
bible, and to have had the bible of Thomas mathy called in, but the lord
streng^h^yd the heart of the prince to set it forth against their willys: yet
how shamefully have they and their members in many placys of England dreuyn men
from readyng the bible? yea and Boner bishop of london, shamyd not in the year
a thousand five hundredth and forty, to preson one porter and other, for readyng
in the bible: which if it be not h^resy to god, than what is heresy? And if it
be not treason to the king to deface his iniunccyons, than what is treason? And
again, if it be not th^ft to the common wealth, to steal from the^ their
sprytual fode, than what is robry and theft? And even in the beginning of the
last parliament in the year a thousand five hundredth and.xli. how did they
blaspheme rage and belie the holy ghost, saing it is not ryghtly translated,
and that it is full of heresys and that they would correck it, and set out one
ryghtly: sooner can they find fautys tha^ amend it. Who perceyueth not your
wicked intent is, that in the mean time ye look for the death of the king,
whom god preserve to his pleasure? O ye blind phylistyans, the scripture is full
of sentencys which teach men to know you, and to beware of you. I can not
blame you, though ye fight thus against god and his word, to shutt it up from
the people: For why? who so ever readyth or hearyth the ^ontentys of that book,
and byleueth the holy ghost, shall plainly se, that ye be the very enemies of
god: and so shall cast you out of their ^onscyence, where ye have long sytten in
the place of god: whereby also ye should lose your great riches and auctorite,
which makyth you to roar like lions, to tear like bearys, and to byte like
cruel woluys, and to styng like adders. No dout one bishop, one deane, one
college or house of canons, has ever done more mischeffe against gods word,
and sought more the hyndera^ce of the same, tha^.x. howses of monkys, friars,
chanons, or nunnys ever did. The kings grace began well to wede the garden of
Ingland, but yet has he left stondyng (the more pytye) the most fowlest and
stynkyng wedys, which had most need to be first pluckyd up by the rootys, that
is to say, the prycking thistels and stingyng nettels: which still stondyng,
what helpyth the deposyng of the pety members of the pope, and to leave his
whole body behynd, which be the pompos bisshops, canons of collegys, deanys,
and such other? surely it helpyth as much as to say, I will go kill all the
foxes in. s. Iohans wodde, because I would have no more foxes bred in all
England. We say we have cast the pope out of Ingland: how so I ask ye, seeing
he came never in Ingland, how can he be cast out thereof? some will say yes, his
tributys and other pollagys be taken from him. Well, thankys be to god, we be
some what eased of our temporal and bodyly burden. But there be gretter things
in this matter, than that: which well ponderyd, we may say, and lie not, that
the pope remains wholly still in Ingland, save only that his name is
banisshed. For why, his body (which be the bisshops and other shauelings) does
not only remain, but also his tail, which be his filthy tradicyons, wicked
lawys, and beggarly ceremonies (as. s. Paul called them) yea and the whole body
of his pestiferos canon law, acording to the which, judgment is geuyn through
the reame, and men condemnyd to death after the prescrypt of it: so that we be
still in Egypt, and remain in captyuyte, most greuosly laden by obseruyng and
walking in his most filthy dross aforsayd, which is a mysty and endless maze.
And so long as ye walk in those wicked lawys of antichrist the pope, and
maynteyne his knights the bisshops in soch inordynate riches and vnla^ful
auctoryte, so long say I, ye shall never banyssh that monstruos beast the pope,
out of Ingland. Yea and it shall be a mean in process of time, to bring us in
to a temporal bondage also again, and to have him reygne as he has done like a
god. And that know our forked cappys right well: which thing makyth them so
boldly and shamelesly to fight in their gods quarrel, against christ and his
word. The bishops of England never took so great pains to defend the pope and
his kingdom, as they have done syns the kings grace took rightfully from him
his accustomyd pollagys, which vsurpedly he had out of this reame. To prove
this to be true, what blood have they shed, syns that time, of the beloved
servants of the euerlyuing god, for preching, teaching, writing and walking in
the truth: as Tewkysbery, Baynam, ^ryth, Bylney, Barnys, Garet, Ierom, with
diverse other in kent, salysbery, and diverse other placys. And Wyllm Tyndal
the apostle of Ingland, (although he were burnt in Brabance) yet he felt the
bisshops blessing of England, which procured him that death, which he looked for
at their hands. Nevertheless, I dowt not, but that all these be of the number
of them, that. s. Ioha^ spekyth of in the Apocalipse, which lie under the
altar, till the number of their brethern be fulfilled, which shall be slain for
the gospels sake. I rehearse not their namys for any praise to be geuyn to
them: but that the co^gregacyon of Christ may laud and praise the euerliuyng
god, for giving them grace to stand so faithful in the lord to the end, leauyng
us the victory, which is part of your spyrytual comfort. For god promyseth the
preachers and mynysters of his word, no other reward in this life. And through
the preaching of these poor wretchys (but out castes, in the sight of the
world, as. s. Paul says) he has wrought this, that where as the king was
before but a shadow of a king, or at the most but half a king, now he does
wholly raygne through their preaching, writing and suffryng. But now to the
tyranny of the bishops onys again: which besides the murderyng of these
saints, how have they bewitched the parliament house in making such ^^yperos
actys as the beast of Rome never made him self? for the pope never made the
marriage of prystes, to be death and such other. Thus by your sotiltes and most
crafty wyles, ye make the people to abhor the name of the pope for a face, and
compel them to walk in all his wicked lawys. And the word of god which we say
we have receyuyd, is not nor can not be suffered to be preached and taught
purely and sincerely, without mixyng it with your invented tradycyons and
service. For who so ever does (sto^ding faithfully unto it) he shall dye for it.
Thus ye may se, that the thing which we say that we have cast of, we receive,
cherissh, maynteyne, and walk therein: And again, that thing which we say we
have received, by the craft and tyranny of the bishops, is abhorred, despised,
taken for a sedycyos thing, called new lernyng, and men be dreuyn from it for
fear of loss of goodys, of ponysshme^t of body, and danger of death: so weak
and frail is our flessh. What a lamentable thing is this, that men should be
dryuyn from the gospel of Christ, the glad tidings that brings peace in
conscience to the faithful, that is forgiveness of sins in Christ's blood.
By these frutys all men may know, that they be more natural to their wicked
father the pope, than any child can be to his natural father. And that shall the
reame feel at the change of a prince, or at such time as they look for, unless
god of his mere mercy break the wicked councels of them. What is the cause,
that the bisshops be so dilygent to sytt so often upon the.vi. wicked artycles,
But only that they be a stablysshing of the popys auctorite, be thou sure? Now
therefore, that same god which gave grace to Achab to harken unto the ^oyce of
Elyah. the.iij. of the kings the.xviij. to the co^founding of the false
prophe^ys, give our noble king that same grace, ^f it be h^s godly will of Rome,
I will recyte certain doctrynes of the scripture, manifestly taught by the holy
ghost, the prophetys, apostyls, and by Christ Jesus himself. And compare them
with the doctrines of the bishops, and thou shall manyfestly se, that their
doctrine is as directly against the holy ghost, as is light against darcknes.
First the scripture teaches one god only thorout the bible, and the apostles
refused to be worshipped, as the.xiiij. chapter of the acts of the apostels
does manifestly declare, where Pawl and Barnabas rent their clothys, cryeng
unto the people: Why do ye this? we be mortal men like unto you, turn from
these vanytes unto the living god, etc. like wise the angel refused to be
worshipped of man. Apocalypse, the.xxij. with diverse other testymonyes, as
the.xx. of Exody, the Psalm. lxvi. and lxxxvi. And again, Imagys are forbidden
through the scripture, and hated of god, which commands us, that we should not
ones bow unto them, Exodi. the.iiij. and.xx. Leuiticus xxvi. And Solomon
curses both the Image and the maker theroff, sayng, the sekyng of the^ to be
the beginning of whoredom in the xiiij. chapter of the book of wysdom.
Further more read the.xliiij. chapter of Esaias, and I dowt not, but if thou
beleuyst in god, thou wylt not worship nor knele before an image, for all the
goodys in the world. But now contrary to this doctrine, our forkyd chananytes
the pompos bisshops teach us to worship many goddys. If any man ask me how I
prove that, I answer: what a multitude of holy days have they made unto
saints, as to the Virgyn Mary, Pawl, Peter, Iamys, Johan, corpus Christi,
etcet. For what purpose do they hold those holy days, but only to honor the^
as gods? do they not make men to fast their euyns as though they were gods?
do they not teach us to pray to them, and to cry to them for help? Come to
the labor of a woman that is a pharysy, and thou shall hear her cry and call
for help, more upon the virgyn Mary, than shall will upon the euerly^yng god,
who is the only creator and sauyor of the virgyn: yea and that most
blasphemosly, sayng, our lady have mercy upon me. And like wise upon other of
goddys creaturys. Now in these days they will say happily, we teach not to
worship them as gods, but as mediators. (...) the, that is also a false and a
deuelyssh doctrine. For the scripture says, there is but one mediator between
god and man, Jesus Christ the. ^. to Tymothy the.ij. chap. Hebruys the.iiij
the.ij. of Johan. the.ij. chap. the Ephesyans the iij. S. Paul did well to name
Christ, that we may know, who it is, though the bishops will not for their
offerings sake, and therefore they would have many mediators. It is euydent also,
that they teach men to worship Imagys, for every church is full, and specially.
s* mary ouerys in so^hwarke, for gylded imagys. And although by the virtue of
the kings iniunccyons* diverse Idollys be taken away yet. Bonar ^isshop of
lond^n, by the cowncel of cole his trayteros popyssh chanceler, one of poolys
right scolars, although he came from him under a presence, to be his depute as
his frutys declare, if they indifferently were looked upon, by his deuelyssh
council, I say, his master shamed not, contrary to the same iniunccyons, to set
up other in their placys: as in the body of Powlys church, where as stood an
Idol of the virgyn Mary, of his fervent charity toward the mayntena^ce of
Idolatry, that it should not utterly decay, and of his cold love, and favor
toward the kyngys iniunccyons, set up in the same place another Idol of. S.
Johan baptyst. And Wynchester at his being a Ratyspone, caused an Image to be
gyldyd, and paid for the gylding of an Idol, named the schone Mary, that men of
all nacyons being there, might se, what favor he bare toward his pryncys
iniunccyons. Do they not by these and such actys condemn the kings deposyng of
Idols, as much as in them lies. Oh pry^ytraytors, and open Idolators. Ye will
say, they be bokys for the unlearned, and therefore necessary: But how can that be
necessary, why^h the holy ghost so diligently forbyddeth utterly, as before is
said, Answer me cole with thy po^yssh canon law? Again, god in the old law
appointed the seuynth day to be kept holy called the sabbate day, for the which
we hold the sunday: which our fore fathers ordained in the stead of the
satterday, that the people should come together to the tempyl, to hear goddys
word preached in their mother tongue, whereby they were edifyed to walk in the
amendment of life, and to bring forth the frutys of our faith, that is good
workys appointed in the scripture, only to goodys honor, and the profyght of
our neyhbore: but yet not to keep it so Idylly, that after we have heard gods
word, but that we might do any nedeful business upon the sunday, as well as
other days. And as for our holy days of our own inuenting, in which we
worship the creaturys of god, the lord hatyth them, as apperyth plainly in the
first of Esaias. Yea god hatyth and abhorryth them, says the Prophet Amos in
the.v chap. And Paul rebukes them, that keep soch holy days, Galathyans
the.iiij. sayng, ye observe days etce. I am afraid, lest I have bestowed labor
upon you in vain. But our Idle bisshops contrary to the scripturys before
cyted have brought us in bondage, that in manner the forth day in the year they
have made holy day, and not to god only, as all men know, but to his
creaturys: And how do the people hallowe them? In coming to church to a sort of
domme ceremonies, and to here much invented service, in a strange tongue which
they understand not, nor yet.x. among an hundredth of them seluys. And thus the
people depart the church as empty of all sprytual knowledge, as they came
thither. And the rest of the day they spend in all wanton and unlawful gamys,
as dyse, cardys, dalyeng with women, dansing, and such like. But if any man do
any bodyly work, though very need for the mayntenance of his living co^pel him
there unto, he shall be punysshed and called heretycke to. But not witstondyng,
this they are content with (thankys be to god) that if such an heretyck work
every sunday in the year, though it be on Easter day, for the kings grace, or
by his commissyon, it is no offense, but lauful, as though it were lauful for
the king to break gods commandment. But for all that, if they fearyd not more
the king than they do god, they would ponyssh them also. Oh most suttyl and
wyly theuys, what king or emperor, ye what bishop or Apostle, can dyspense
with godds word, which he either bids or forbids? Where as Christ says,
thou shall not put away thy wife but only for adultery, can all the whole
world, ye antychrystes, dispense with me to put away my wife, but for that
cause only? If ye believed ryghtly in god, and lived in his fear, ye should
dispense therewith for no another cause. More over the scripture teaches us,
marriage to be institute of god, Genesis the.ij. and honoryd of Christ with his
presence and first miracle, turnyng water in to wine, Johan the.ij. And. S.
Pawl say^h: let every man have his wife, to avoid fornycacyon. ^. to the
Coryn. the.vij. mark, he says every man, here is no man except. For it is
honorable, says Paul to the Hebruys, and the bed thereof undefiled. And in
the primatyue church it apperyth, that the Apostels had wives, as Peter and
Paul as is before rehearsed, And Paul calls it a deuyllyssh doctrine to forbid
marriage, to them that have not the gift of chastyte. And yet not witstonding
our lecheros bisshops, o^ rather sodomytes, as chaste as a saw^ bytch, take it
for a vile and an unholy thing: for they forbid themseluys and all that bear
the mark of the beast antichrist to mary* and have procured death to them that
seek rather to mary, than to burn: but to keep whorys, their own law
permytteth. Steuyn gardner, which was the chief causer of that wicked act, is
it not manifest and openly knoun, that he kepyth other mennys wives? which I
could name, and will do here after, if he leave not his shameless whordom. If
all the bishops of Ingland were hanged, which keep harlots and whorys, we
should have fewer po^pos bishops than we have. Well, you bishops, which had
your maryd wives at the making of that wicked act, and put them away for fear,
look well upon it, for ye had been better to have suffered death, than so
cowardly to deny the law of the lord. Wherefore I advise you in the name of the
lord, bytterly to repent with Peter, taking better hold, and receiving your
own married wyuys again: yea though ye should give over and for sake all your
po^pos auctoryte and vain riches. And stand fast to gods word, even in the
face of princys, as did the apostels, the Christen bishop. S. Ambrose, with
all the faithful sort from the beginning. Remember what Christ says: he that
denies me before men, him shall I deny again before my heuynly father. And
again: he that holds the plough, and lokyth back, is not mete for me, and
such other. For if ye stop your mowthes, your talent shall be taken from you,
and given to him that has x.

Again, the scripture teaches us to confess our sins only unto god with a
repentant heart, and to look for absolucyon of them through Christ, Daniel.
the.ix. Dauyd confessyd him to the lord, Psalm. xxxij. and.li. M^nasses made a
right confession, as apperyth in his prayer. If we so confess our selves, we
shall gladly forgive even our enemies. And in thus confessing our sins to the
lord with a co^tryte heart, repentyng and turning from our sins, all that we
have done before, shall no more be thought upon, but seperat from us, so far
as is the east from the west as say^h the prophet. And when we offend our
neyhbers and brethern, we may not only confess us unto the lord, but also unto
them whom we have offended, and be reconciled one to another, as Christ
teaches us in the.v. of Matthew, and James also in the.v. chapter of his
epistle. This confession taught us the holy ghost long before antychryst had
fownd out that fylthy ^^ricular confession to his gresy shauelings, which was
not from the beginning, neither shall be to the end. They teach men to pour
their sins in to the earys of their generacyo^, that they may sytt in the
conscience of men, where as god alone should sytt. And again, they hear gladly
the confession of harlottes, that they may know where to speed. And the sy^nes
being pouryd in to their ears by mouth, not redargyng the repentance of the
heart, yet they take upon them to forgive such synnys, where as it is the office
of god only to forgive sin. And they do both rob god of his office, and
also, disceyue the pore blind people, which thynck them seluys to be healed,
when they remain lepers still. For their malice remaynyth still, ^uyn against
their fryndes many times, and that for small matters, not withstonding their
confession. As for the key of byndyng and* losyng, the grettest part of them
know no more what it meanyth, than a bussard. Oh ye blasphemers, what grownd
have ye to stablyssh your aurycular confession? Happily ye will allege that
place, where as Christ sent the lepers unto the pryst, luke the.xvij. which
makes as much for that purpose, as to lay an union to my little fyngar for the
tothe ache. For Christ sent them to the prystes, only to offer an oblacyon
after the law, and that the prystes might se, that they were whole, and so
after certain days to be kept in for a trial, which exspyred and than they
being fownd whole, the prystes might admytte them to come in to the company of
the whole people again. Read the.xiij. and.xiiij. of Leuiticus, and thou shall
perceive the same. Christ healyd the people of diverse other diseasys as of the
palsy, blody flyxe, possessed with deuyls and such other, yet he never sent
none to the prystes, but the lepers only: which he did, because it was so
appointed of god in Moises law.

Item Christ teaches us, how we should pray, not with much bablyng, as the
hethyn do, thinkyng to be heard for their much bablyng sake. Matthew the.vi.
(yet ought the prayer of a Christyane to be contynuall, as he shewyth by an
example of the lendyng of.iij. loauys luke the.xi. and again by the parable of
the judge luke the.xviij) but we must pray in lifting up our minds unto god,
and we must regard, that our mouth, spyryt and heart be elevated to gether
myndfully in faith: for god is a spyryte, and will be worshypped in spyryt and
truth, Johan the.iiij. This teaches the scripture: but our forked Hypocrytes
teach us to number our prayers, to say so many ladys Psalters, with long
ma^tens and euynsonges: and that all in latyne. Which the lay people understand
not. How can we pray, or worship god aryght* when our hearts know not whether
our mouth laudyth god for his benefightes already received, or else that we
demawnd any peticyon? against soch kind of prayng. S. Paul fygh^y^h with the
sword of the spyryt in the.^iiij. to the Corynth. And also the Proph^te Esaias in
the.xxix. chap. sayng: In vain does this people approach unto me with their
lyppes, their heart being far away from me etcete. But our shauelyngs teach,
yea and command their shauelyngs, that they be bownd to over run their
service from the beginning to the end, and than good inowgh, wherso ever the
heart be: but (...) there lack but one verse vnsayd, they have a grudge of
conscience, and mean that all their labor is lost, for the which cause I my
self in my days have said many times.ij. hundredth and fifty aues to one ladys
Psalter, because I would be sure to say inowe. Forsooth it may well be called
lyplabor.

Item the scripture teaches what true fast is, and how to fast, in the.lviij.
of Esaias, that is to say, to let them out of bondage which be in danger: to
break the oath of wicked bergans: to let the oppressed goo fre: to deal thy
bread to the hungry, to bring the poor fatherles to thy house, to cover the
naked etce. For soch fast, Christ offeryth us the kingdom of his father,
Matthew.xxv. Which teaches us also, that wha^ we fast, we should not fast to be
seen of men, but unto the father, Matthew the.v But our belly gods teach, yea
command us a contrary fast, appoynting us days to absteyne from flessh. To the
which fast, not only the strong, lusty, and helthy parson is bownd, but also
the sick, poor and nedy, which has scant nature to bear the body. And
though he has not eatyn a good meal in.viij days before, yet must he fast
their appointed days. And that not only to the honor of god, but also for the
honor of the saints, his creaturys yea and some also for the honor of the pope
as the Imbryng days: so lo^h be the bishops, that their fa^hers, antichrystes
rememberance should decay or be forgoten. And where as christ techy^h, not to
fast to be seen of me^, they will have all the world to know when they fast,
for they proclayme it openly always in the church the sunday before, sayng:
such a day ye shall fast in the worship of this or that saint. And yet though he
eat abundance of fyssh, so that he surfeit, or drynck till he be dronken, that
(...) not, nor their law reprouyth him not* But as before is said, though very
necessyte constrayne a poor man to eat a morsel of flessh upon their
appointed days, he is an (...), and must do penance. And if he will (...) to it
that he may so do by gods law (as he may in deed) he shall dye therefore. Is not
this a miserable thing? No man denies this, that if any man feel his flessh
prone and ready to wickydnes, it is necessary for him to abstain from meats,
not only flessh, but all other meats that may provoke him to any
concupisce^ce, until he has mortifyed his flessh, and made it subject and
obedyent unto the spirit: But this must not be done only on the friday or
upon certain appointed days, but every day thorout his life, when so ever he
shall feel his flessh so enclyned and bent. And this fast shall be a remedy, to
swage the ragyng of his flessh. And it is good to be used of syngle parsons,
and of such as be absent from their yockfelows, and prycked to fylthynes. And
this is the fast, which S. Paul speaks of unto the Colossyans: Mortyfye your
members upon earth, etc. but to teach, that me^ are bownd to forbear or
absteyne from meatys, more one partycular day than another, or more from one
kind of meat than from another (seeing god has created all to be received with
thanckys giving of the^, which believe and know the truth) it is a deuyllissh
doctrine, as. S. Paul witnesses. i. Tymot.iiij.

Item Christ said unto his apostles, which were bisshops of his church, that
they should be servants and mynisters, and not Idols as ours be, saing: The
kings and lords of the ge^tyles raygne over them, and they are called gracios
lords, but ye shall not be so: but he that will be grettest among you, shall be
your mynister: and he that will be chief, shall be servant unto all. For the son
of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister unto other. And again:
christ says, that foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nestys,
but the son of man has not where to rest his head. Soch possessionars were the
bishops of the primatyue church. Now ye may openly se, that our lordly
apostateys from christ, be nothing less than ministers or Euangelical
bisshops. For they be masters, governors, rulers, lords, yea and most greatest
lords. And they will be co^myssyonars in manner in every temporal matter. And
they be also of princes and kings councels, and embassytors for princes. But
woo is unto that cite, town, contry or reame, where they rule in council. And
come^ly it spedeth vnhappyly to that reame, where they be embassytors, shortly
after. For some mischefe follows more or less, or else they fail of their
purpose, as some did with in these.ij. yerys, thanckys be unto god only
therefore. And where as christ had not where in to hyde his head, how contrary
be they unto him and to his apostels also, whose successors they will be called,
when they be not thing less. What lords have more gorgyos houses than they
have? yea few lords like them. What a cockatryse sight was it, to se such an
abhomynable sort of pompos bisshops in lordly parliament robys, as went before
the king at Westmyster the.xvi. day of January in the year. 1541. even to the
number of.xviij. where as.iij. were inowe to poison an whole world? what godly
redress, to set forth the christen relygyon, or reformacyon of things for the
common wealth can there be hoped for, where such a sort of vypers be? And
specially where they bear such a swing, as Wynchester does, to whom the
grettest number of the bisshops do lean? How blind be the temporal rulars
still, to suffer such a kingdom to raygne amongst them? Every man may se, how
unlike they be unto Pawls mind. ^. to Tymothe.iij. who says, that a bishop
must be the husbond of one wife. Now it is euydent, they will no wives, but
whores as many as they list, And if any of christ's bisshops take a wife, after
the second warnyng, they will burn him. Honestly appareld, says Paul: and how
pyedly goo they like mommers, disgysed from the common people? Paul says,
harberos: of whom? of the poor? No, of whom than? of lordys, knights, and men
of law, that they may defend their popissh kingdom. Paul says: Apt to teach,
but they beat, and teach nothing: And if they teach any thing, what teach
they? even that Paul writes of unto Tymothe the doctrine of the dyuel: making
the word of god of none effect through their tradycyons. Paul says: Not given
to fylthy lucre. But where be so couetos wretches in the world, as our
shauelings are? he that denies the^ but one grote, of that which they do but
say to be their right, how will they toss him in the law? yea and if he stand
against them, they will serve him as they served master honne, or else bring him
to the ^yer. Now all men may se, that their qualiteys agree with Paul's
description, as rank poison does with holsom remedy Ite^ the scripture
teach^th us to bear the cross of ch^yst, saing: let every man take his
cross, and follow me etce. and it teaches us that cross to be all manner of
aduersyte and tribulacyo^, which we should bear for the gospels sake after
christ a^l the days of our lyffe, as christ says in the.ix. of luke: who so
ever bears not his cross daily, can not be my disciple. And for this cause.
S. Paul reioyseth so often in his pistels, of that cross, which he receyuyd for
the gospels sake, in the second to the Cory^thyans the.xi. chapt. Galat.
the.vi. and in diverse other places. But our forked and open Idolators teach no
such cross, but because Christ suffered doath upon a cross (which is rotten
many years a goo) they will have men to worship all crossys, which be but
synylytudes of the cross that is rotten. And how forse they all men, to crepe
unto that cross at Easter? And if they crepe and give no money nor money worth,
^hei shall be cownted heretyckes. Thus for lukers sake the greasy canonistes
nosel the people in Idolatry. Oh lord, how have thou plaged the world for
Idolatry and adultery? which our bisshops can not se, because they can not
sprytually perceive aryght, the benefyte that we received only in Christ's
blood through his passion. But they must have a cross of silver and gold borne
before them, which they worship: for they must se with their corporal eye, that
which they worship. But what says the scripture? who has seen the symylytude
of god at anytyme? They will not bear that cross of Christ, that Paul speaks
of, the vi. to the Galathyans, but they will crucifye unto death all those which
would bear that cross. Now most dear christyans, and specially ye burgessys
of the parliament, here I have brefely touched certain things, how and what the
holy scripture teaches through the holy ghost, spoken and written by his
prophetys, Evangelists and apostels, yea and by his dear son also our only
and full redemer Jesus Christ. Also I have touched as brefely as I can, certain
things how and what our bisshops teach, whose doctrine is as directly against
the scripture of god, as antichrist may be against Christ. And as they agree in
these few things, so do they in all other. Search the scripture, and thou shall
as easily know the enemies thereof, as thou may know a fox by his furred
tail. How ca^ god and mammon agree? no more surely can the po^pos bisshops
agree with the scripturys, because it bewrayth them. It calls them ravening
wolves in shepys clothyng, Matthew the.vij. Eze.xxij. Zophoni.iij. And do not
their qualytes in all points agree with wolves? for as little pytye have the
bisshops upon a right preacher, writer or professor of the gospel, as has a
wolf upon a lamb in his hongar. There be examples inowe in our days, how
they have constrained certain men to recant. And where as the holy ghost says,
that they shall come in shepys clothing, do not they come under the color of
gods word, to confound both the word and christ thereto as much as lythe in
the^? I would feign axe a questyon, whether those that persecute, or those which
are persecuted, be more like wolves? Thou seist, that those which he
persecuted, are very pore me^ in the sight of the world (although they be rich
in god) And neither they nor none of their doctrine never persecuted man unto
death, They have no rule, no pour, no toth, no horn, no sword, no law as
bisshops have. But the forkyd persecutors have unreasonable riches, and pour of
the sword etce. in their handys: The pore sort seek the blood of no man, but
are content to spend their own blood, to call all men unto christ by his word,
with the loss of their lives. Wherefore if thou be not wilfully blind, and a
membre of antychrist, thou may easyly se and perceive, which be wolves and
which lammes. The scripture callyth the^ also dragons, lions, Bears and such
other names as in the.vij. of Daniel, Prouer.xxvij. Ezech.xxij. and in diverse
other places, and all for their cruelnes and other correspondent qualyteys,
which I will no further prosecute at this time, because the matter is euydent
inowgh with out any further declaracyon.

A brefe rehearsal, conteynyng the sum of all that is hitherto spoken.
The.xxv. Chapt.
NOw to touch the conclusyon of this my co^playnte, the effect (as ye may
perceive) is this, that the body of this reame, I mean the comynaltye, is so
oppressed and oueryocked, as few reamys under the son be by wicked laws,
cruel tyra^nes, which be extorcionars and oppresors of the commonwealth. For
all men are given to seek their own pryuate wealth only, and the pore are
nothing provided for. We remain also and continue still in a perpetual bondage
and spiritual captiuyte, for as much as we walk in all the wicked laws, most
fylthy tradicyons, and beggarly ceremonies of Babylon, Rome I mean, which the
bisshops of the reame (the dear children of their father of Rome) co^strayne
me^ under the pains of death to observe, by force of their inordinate riches
and unlawful auctorite. All which abuses here in mencyoned and innumerable
other, which I can not, neither is it possible for me to remember, for the love
that ye ought to have unto god, and for the hope that ye ought to have in the
merytes of christ's blood, all ye lords, knights and burgessys seek, seek to
redress the^, And let all things be reformed, and set forth by the soch stone,
which is godds word. So that from hense forth the glory of god may be sought in
all things, as ye have in time past sought the glory of me^. And where as ye
have sought every man his own pryuate or partycular wealth, now seek your
neyhbors wealth as your own. And where as ye have bestowed much riches upon the
dead, and clothed stocks and stones, Now bestow it upon the living poor
saints, which be the image of god as the scripture teaches. And let all
things be done of Zeal only for gods truths sake. And thus ye shall please
god, and cause him of his mere mercy to withdraw his wrath, yea rather his
justice from us, that is to say innumerable plages ha^gyng over our headys and
bent against us, which we have rightfully deserved, for castyng a side gods
word, and following our own Imagynacyo^s. But in case ye will not so do, nor
harken to reform the premysses, seeing god has so many ways warned you (as by
his mynisters, preachers and wrytars) but will still play the cananytes and
tyrannys, no dowt even as god is god, so look for some of the plagys of Egypt,
which he will suddenly send upon you, when ye thinck least upon them. Yea all the
examples of the bible declare, that without diligent reformacyo^ and profound
repentance, the reame of England above all other reamys under the Son has
most rightfully deseruyd to be plaged, and that very shortly. For why? at this
day the extorcyo^ and cruelnes of the temporal rulars is so come to pas, that
in manner every one of the^ is become a very Nero. And the yockes of the law be
so heavy, that no faithful christen man is able to bear them. As for adultery
and Idolatry, which ever stanck in the sight of god, I thinck there was never
reame under the son might so well be compared to the land of Sodom and Gomor
as the reame of England. And further to declare the lykelyhode of your
ponysshme^t, how has the word of god been preached and set forth by wrytars? so
syncerely, and so abowndantly, as never was more in any reame. And the
mynisters of god in that office have been so suttylly persecuted, and so
cruelly mordered as was never more in city nor reame, no not in Jerusalem,
which is reproved in the scripture for killyng of the prophetys. And all the
examples of the bible declare, that where the word of god goth before, and is
not received, nor no amendme^t of life following thereupon, the plages of god
followed ever more.

Again: another lykelyhode that ye shall not escape your rightful ponisshment;
is this. Many years past what tranquillyte has this reame been in? And what
troubles of late has god so fatherly pacifyed? That we might euydently se,
that it was his work, and no mannys. And all to have brought us unto
repentance. Again, what plenty of corn and abounda^ce of other things have
we had these few years past? so that all things had been at a wonderos low
price, as I think was never seen in England, but only for that that rent is be
so enha^sed. Mark this, and ye shall perceive, how Jointly this agreith with
the. vij. fat oxen, which betokened a time of plenty, but look what followed?
vij. lean oxen, Genesis. xli. Wherefore as is said, these things be surely bent
against us, and must of necessyte come upon the reame, unless god turn his
Justice in to mercy. But I advise the o Ingland, presume not thou there upon,
and say not, but thou art warned. Wherefore a wake from thy sleep, that thy blood
come not upon thine oune head. The euerliuyng god, who of his Justice most
rightuosly plaged Jerusalem, and of his most favorable and abundant grace
showed mercy unto the cyty of Bethula, that most mercyful god, grant unto the
people of Ingland such like repentance as had the Ninyuytes, and to bring forth
the fruits of the same, turning from their wicked ways, as the Niniuytes did.
If thou so wilt, oh mercyful lord god, so be it. The grace of our lord Jesus
Christ, the love of god, and the fellowship of the holy ghost be with you all:
whereby ye may turn from all your abhomynacyons, to the euerliuyng god. So be
it, so be it.

Imprinted at Sauoy per Franciscum de Turona.


