GRANDSIRE GRAYBEARD. OR Machiauell Displayed.

Wits Wisdom.

Wit says that this for Wisdom goes
(Oh pity!) Virtus post nu^^^s.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Higgenbotham, and are to be sold in the Bulwark
near the Tower at the sign of the Unicorn 1635.

TO THE READER, (with the Contents) a CAVEAT.
OLd grand-sire Gray-beard, who the world had tried*
And (by experience) learned both good, and bad;
Tendering his Son, thought good (before he did,)
To lesson well his best beloved lad:
Lest he should fall by following the World,
Whose tricks he tells and how they be controld.
Conceive Wits Wisdom with consentlesse heart,
He that has ears to hear, here stop them fast,
Perusing it, use wise Ulysses Art,
And manacle thy mind to Virtues Mast:
Be like the Be, suck out the sweet and good,
The rank refuse, let be the Spiders food.
Grandsire Graybeard.
The Preface.
COme hither Son, and learn thy fathers lore,
It is not now as it has been of yore:
For in my youth would no man read to me,
That now (in age) I can deliver thee.
Precept 1.
IF thou will be a man of much esteem,
Be not the same what ever so thou seem.
Speak fair to all, be courteous, gentle, kiad,
But let the world know nothing of thy mind.
Let slip no time, may be for th^n e^uai^e,
But trust no friend for Faith begins to fail,
Refuse no gifts to fill thy coffers full,
The wisest poor man passes for a Gull.
Be temperate in affect, no quarrels move,
And if thou love thy self, f^ll not in love.
Have care for all men, but confer with few,
And count fair words to be but as a dew.
Follow the time, find humors, flatter pride,
And praise the Groom, but only please the Bride.
Str^ue not with great ones, meddle not with small,
^or trifles trouble not thy self at all.
Frequent the Church, make show of great devotion
And be not bashful to receive promotion.
Look big at beggars, wear thy clothes neat,
And spen^ not to much money at thy meat.
Save thy horse-meat at thy couzins stable,
And take thy trencher at another table.
Break jests on cowards, but take heed of knaves,
And love no bawds for they are beastly slaves.
Be perfect in Arithmeticks close Art,
In all accounts to make a saving part.
Observe the Lion, do not stir the Bear,
And love the Woolfe but only for the hair.
Learn of the Ass to bear, the Dog to wait.
And of the Ape to counterfeit conceit.
Catch not at flies, they are but swallows food,
But love the meat that nourishes the blood.
Feed like a Woolfe on blood whilst it is warm.
He is a fool that feels another harm.
Yet scome as kind as he that seems to cry,
To see him sick, whom he would wish to die.
Take heed of interest, sell nor gage no land,
And from assurance ever keep thy hand.
Take no man's word, for coin is hard to get,
And it is a custom (now) to pay no debt.
Stand not to look upon a Peacocks tail,
Who (if he see his legs) will stoop his sailer
When Iack-Dawes chatter, let the language go,
Better be silent then to prattle so.
Come not within the verdict of a Jury,
And come not near a Tyrant in his fury:
Commit no secrets to thy second Self,
For never yet was Ape but played the Elfe.
Kill not a fly, and let a flea alone,
That sucks the blood, and never hurts the bone.
File not thy finger's with a filthy Slut,
And ride not often on a gauld-backt cut.
Fear not a shadow, but avoid a danger,
And do not keep a Jade at rack and manger,
Remember nothing that thou do not write,
Lest danger do thy fearful heart affright.
Be sociable in each company,
But have no hand in any villainy.
Be conversant with strangers, learn languages,
Sound their estate, mark their carriages,
Know their diversities of wares, their worths and prises,
But trouble not thy self with vain devices.
Learn to know kingdoms, nations and their natures
Their laws their judgments male and female creatures;
And how their wealth does rise, by war or peace,
And how their states begin, and how they cease;
How they may be offended or defended,
And how their quarrels grow and which way ended.
But of all Notes, note chiefly this of all,
How thou may rise, who ever hap to fall.
Suspect thy wit, be wary of thy will,
And learn to spare, but never learn to spill.
Think no man wise but he that gathers wealth,
And keep the diet that preserues thy health.
Sit not up late, unless it be for gain,
For lack of sleep is hurtful for the brain.
Go not to Sea, whilst thou may live on land,
Lest scaping rocks thou fall upon the Sand.
Travel with ease, take beed of taking cold,
And (next to God) take comfort in thy gold.
Get all contentment that the world can give,
For (after death) who knows how we live?
Strange things are spoken, but believe the best,
And leave the worst. I leave thee to the rest.
Promise enough, but not perform too much:
Yet with thy betters evermore keep touch.
Wear not thy shoes too short, nor cloak too long
Use thy friends well, but do thy self no wrong.
Abandon foo^es, make much of cunning wits,
But favor most that most thy profit fits.
Work all the week for profit every way,
And keep thy Conscience for the Holy day.
First if thou be a Courtier, know thy place,
And do not serve for only show of grace;
But let thy profit answerthy expense,
Lest want do prove a woeful patience,
And thou do prove the proverb often told,
A careless Courtier young, a beggar old.
And if thou be a Scholar and can preach
And know rightly how thy flock to teach;
Let never conscience at thy profit knock,
But sheare thy sheep, and fleece another flocks
For be thou poor what ere thy preaching be,
Thy parish will not pass a pin for thee.
If that thou be a Soldier, serve for fame
But let thy golden pay maintain the same;
For he that spends more then he gets in sight,
Will be a beggar, though he be a knight.
And if thou be a Lawyer, know the right,
But keep thy client in a cunning plight.
For how can thou a cunning pleading hold,
If that thy tongue be not well tipped with gold?
And rich attired, thou shall have room to stand,
And plead thy cause whatere thou have in hand.
But barely clad, and in a poor array,
Thou may (perhaps) have hearing at doomsday:
For though the Law be right and judge be just,
Yet with the rich the beggar may not thrust.
If that thou be a Merchant mark thy trade,
And of thy wares what reckning will be made*
And be not lavish in a lewd expense,
Lest banqu'rout prove a bad experience.
And if thou be a crafts man weigh thy pains,
And let no Alehouse eat out all thy gains;
For if thy charge above thy getting go
Thou will be quickly in the beggars Roe.
What says the crafty clown in clowted shoes?
Time was ordained to get, and not to loose.
What though the poor lie staruing in the ditch?
It is the dearth of corn makes farmers rich.
Aim still at profit howsoere it grows,
Make the wind serve thee wheresoere it blows,
For it is this wealth, this profit, and this gain,
That dies the color ever more in grain.
Learn the Physician and the Lawyers fee,
And (for thy profit) speak as fair as he.
Promise the one good speed, the other health,
In any course it is good to gather wealth.
Learn all diseases and their several cures,
And care not what the patient heart endures;
But give him one day grief, another case,
Not as his patience but his purse does please.
Learn Cards and Dice, and any cheating play
That may bring in thy profit any way.
Learn how to stop a Card and cogge a Die,
But shift it cleanely from the Gamesters eye:
At Ruff and Trumpe note how the dealer rubs,
There is no pack without the Knave of clubs.
Learn all Religions, be of every Sect,
And (chiefly) to thy profit have respect.
For this same ( conscience) is so bare a thing,
As it will make a beggar of a King.
Learn to get riches by the beggars purse,
The Fox fares best when geese begin to curse.
Learn every trade and traffic, train and trick,
And live not by the dead but by the quick.
In sum, of what estate soere thou be,
Learn to be rich, for that will hold with thee;
Be rich I say my Boy, be rich and wise,
Gold is a precious metal for the eyes.
Why? rich men (they) have money and gay geere,
And goodly houses, and most dainty chief:
Fair wives, fine pictures, plays and courtly dances
And many cheats that come by many chances:
Brave Siuer boxes, sweet perfumes and waters,
And twenty other more such kind of matters.
Whiles the poor man that pines for want offriends
May sit and sigh and pick his fingers ends.
And every morning wash his face with tears,
And wipe his blubbred eyes with sheu'led hears;
And walk abroad for forrowes recreation,
Or starve himself, or feed on contemplation.
Make curtsie to the shadow of a Lord.
And glad to get a look, and half a word;
Blush and fal^ back when gay folk come in place,
And start to look a Lady in the face.
Talk to the air where no man lists to hear him,
And plod alone, where no man will come near him.
And thus recording of a heavy care,
He feeds (perhaps) upon a hungry fare;
Till some good Knight or learned Gentleman,
(That is a prudent Politician
And can make uses of afflicted brains,
And gather profit from their toiling pains)
May hap to grace him with a countenance,
Give him a blew coat with a cognizance,
An old cast doublet, or a pair of boots,
Feed him with brown bread, small beer, herbs and roots
And now and then (perhaps) a piece of meat,
That scarce a man would give a dog to eat;
Or after (happily) some good service done,
Make him a Tutor to his youngest Son.
Laugh at those beggars, speak in scorn at pelse
Care thou for nothing but to enrich thy self.
For Truth reports that does of thrift entreat,
If thou be rich thou quickly writ be great.
Plot for a pudding, or a piece of souse,
The Cat would never watch (but for a Mouse,)
The Fox would never hunt (but for his prey.)
And workmen (but for gain) would play all day*
It is this Wealth, this Profit, and this Gain,
That makes the Labourer sing away his pain.
Set snares for Wod cocks, pit-falls for small birds,
And catch a fool with nothing but fair words.
Dandle the Child, grow inward with the Nurse,
And think no beggry base that fills the purse.
Laugh with the Lecher at Maids bash fulness,
And with the Chaste at fleshly filthiness,
And with the spend-thrift at the misers buggs,
And with the Miser at the beggars rags.
Diss wade no Princes from their choice of pleasure,
Nor a rich Miser from his love of treasure.
If he be rich, what ever so he be,
Seem in thy humor to be just as he.
If he be poor, then let him beg alone,
It is a trade that few grow rich upon.
Persuade a slave he is a gentleman,
Although he drop out of a dripping pan:
It is no matter, if his purse can bear it;
His rascal pride wih never blush to hear it.
Persuade a Clown, that he is half a Knight,
And that his wealth deserves that place aright,
And his Maid-Marian with her winscot face,
Might be a Lady (but for lick of grace.)
And make her think that she is half a Queen,
And scarce on earth is such another seen,
For virtue, beauty, wit, for shape and feature:
Though God (he) knows, that she is no such creature.
But if she do applaud it, it is no matter;
He is a fool (for profit) cannot flatter.
Commend a Soldier when he is in crowns,
And swear a Knight must govern over Clownes.
In many a camp how be his caske did bear,
Although (poor Coward!) he came never there:
But yet be sure thy flattery so to frame
That thine may be the gain, though his the fame.
Commend the Lawyer, and his studious reading,
Admi^e his judgment, and extol his pleading^
But flatter so, that if thou get a fee,
Thou mai'st have out a share as well as he.
Follow a Bishop with a world of praise,
And make him as the Loadstarre of thy days;
Admi^e him, and extol him to the skies,
But so, that thou may get a Benefice,
A Vicridge, Cure, a Clarkeship or some such,
As will return thee profit small or much.
Commend the A^c^ant, honor his adventure,
Who gets his wealth by danger, not Indenture;
Commend his ^ade his craffique, and his truth,
The honor of his age, and toil of youth;
But yet (with all) be sure to flatter so,
That to thy purse some piece of money grow,
Or on his board thy trencher may be laid,
Or borrowed money never to be paid,
And tell (What-lacke ye) that he lackes no wit,
And (for his head) that he deserves to sit
On higher seats then the Churchwardens stools
For he has more wit then a world of fools.
But yet in feeding of his idle vain,
Be sure to pick-out some odd private gain
A rapier, dagger, stockings, boots, or shoes,
Somewhat does well, though beggars may not chose.
Tell Mistr^s-minks (coy she) that keeps the shop,
She is a Ship that bears a gallant top;
She is a Lady for her lovely face,
And for her countenance half a Princess grace;
Then bite the lip and wink, and hang the head,
And give a figh as if thy heart were dead.
And show strange passions of affections sense,
That she may pity love (Sr.) reverence.
But let the issue of this coming be,
That from her purse some profit come to thee.
A piece of satin, fustian, or some stuff,
A falling band, or a three double-ruffe,
A hat, a shirt, a cloak-cloth, or a ring,
Knives, purses, gloves, or some such pretty thing,
For (somewhat has some savor) it is this gain,
That to muention gives the sweetest vain.
Why? tell a Cobbler he is half a King,
When ore his patches he can sit and sing,
And knock his Last, and whet his cutting knife,
There is no kingdom to a merry life.
But yet in telling of this idle tale,
Be sure (at least) to get a pot of ale.
For this same (nothing) brings no world about,
Better play small games then be clean shut out.
If that thy Wife be fair, and thou be poor,
Let her stand like a picture at thy door,
Where (though she do put pick her fingers ends)
Fair eyes, fond looks will gain a world of friends,
Play at bo-peepe, see me, and see me not,
It comes off well that is so closely got.
And evermore (say I) well fare the vent,
That paies the charges of the house and rent.
If that thy Wife be old, thy daughter young,
And fair of face, or of a fluent tongue;
If by her Sutours silver may be had,
Bear with small faults, the good will help the bad.
If thy Maid-seruants be kind hearted wenches,
And closely make kind bargains on thy benches,
If by their pleasure may thy profit grow,
Wink at a wanton; who has not been so?
If that thy friend do lack a little wit,
And in his humor have an idle fit,
To take a Wife, and use thee for his wooing,
Speak for thy friend, but for thy self be doing,
For every friend is to his friend a debtor,
To love him as himself, (but yet no better.)
But for thy self if thou have got a Wife,
Make show to love her dearly (as thy life)
Though (for thy quiet) ^hou could be content,
A (...) charge were at her burial spent.
An^ (...) that (charge) be of thy grief he ground,
For many Wives are better lost then found.
(...) come unto the second matching,
(...) for fear of cunny catching,
M(...) to twenty wenche, in a day,
But let no ^sid^es lead thy heart away.
But where thou find'st good store of land, or gold,
There lay in close to purchase a tree-hold.
And be not squ^mish at a nice conceit,
That may dissuade thee from a pleasing bait.
If thou be rich and have another pride,
(That he may go on foot while thou do ride)
Find means to feed his swelling humor so,
That high conceit may above compass go,
Till Fortunes frowns his folly so do check,
That male* content do after break his neck;
Then lay in for his lands, his goods, his place,
But still be sure to keep thy self in grace.
But if thou be not up, and seek'st to rise,
Step by degrees, and in thy steps be wise.
Creep, crouch, and kneel, until thou be aloft,
But then sit fast, for fear, thou fall not soft.
Refuse no service, be it nere so base,
By any means may bring thee into grace.
And make no conscience to attend on sin,
To keep the door where Devils dance within.
Find a rich Heir, and note his disposition,
How he is given to baseness or ambition,
And with thy lending lay his land aboard,
That he may be thy slave and thou his Lord.
Who in the whole will undermine so fast,
He Will leave his Lordship like the land of wast.
If that thou have a Partner in thy stock,
And both your wealths lie all under one lock;
And if thy Partner ride abroad for pleasure,
And put thy faith in trust with all thy treasure;
At his return do upon quarrels stand,
When thou have got his wealth into thy hand.
Say, in accounts he has deceived thee,
(Although thou know no such matter be:)
When, if he will not take what thou will give him
To course of law (for his best comfort) drive him:
Where, while he railes on thy ill conscience,
Thy patience closely shall put up his pence.
And whatsoever honest minds surmise,
Wealth (with the wealthy) make the wealthy wise.
Be rich therefore, I say, be rich my Son,
For wealth will sway the world when all is done.
GRANDSIRE GRAYBEARD. OR Machiauell Displayed.

Wits Wisdom.

Wisdom against Wit replieth thus,
Virtutib. aurum vilius.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Higg^nb^^^am, and are to be sold in the Bulwa^ke
near the Tower at the sign of the Unicorn 1635

TO THE READER A Transition.
NOw having taken a view of villainy,
Whereby thou may Wits wicked wiles discern
W^ose wisdom is untruth and tyranny,
More wh^lesome read here (Reader) may (...) learn:
Wits-Wisedome, let it crew thy contemplation,
But Wisedoms-Wit, thy life and conversation.
The world (it) aims at wealth pomp, and delight,
And him it does account for witty wise;
Who has the craft, the cunning, and the slight,
By my plot to mount and to arise:
Plaine-dealing lo, dies beggar, that is the worst,
But Fraud forever dies with shame accursed.
Grandsire Graybeard.
The Preface.
But now my son, that thou have learnd this lore,
(Upon my blessing) look on it no more
Except it be (by ill) to know the good;
But yet take heed lest it be understood.
Precept 1.
BE that thou seem to be, in word and deed,
Lest Pater n^ster put thee from his Creed.
Fair speech is good, but keep not a foul mind,
For hollow hearts are of a hellish kind.
A good beginning makes a blessed end,
And hold him for a dog that has no friend.
Receive (...) bribe to fill a rustie chest,
A quiet conscience is a Kingly feast.
And it is a ^eauie ^ence in sorrows Roll,
To save the body and to loose the Soul.
In Honors cause, maintain thy reputation,
And hold love good for Reasons recreation.
Affect the wise and with the learned talk,
And with the virtuous often make a walk.
Sooth no ill cares with idle flattery,
Honor the Bride, but do the Groom no Rye,
With great or small be sure to keep even measure,
And scorn no trifle that may do thee pleasure.
Frequent the Church, with faith and true devotion,
And do not step too fast unto promotion.
For far more grief is in a headlong fall,
Than if thy care had never climbd at all.
Be wisely kind to every quality,
And ever keep good hospitality.
At thine own charge keep thy horses stable,
And seek no banquet at a beggars table.
For a true mind had rather starve then eat,
When churles or servants grudge a stranger meat.
Jest not with cowards, for they will but cry,
And as for bawds, pity their beggary.
Arithmeticke is seen in every trade,
But true accounts are ever to be made.
For when the last count-reckning is cast up,
Then shall the crafty take their poisoned cup.
For Lions, Bears, For Wolves, for Apes and Asses
Leave them to figure humors looking-glasses.
And have a care to carry so thy self,
No storm may drive thy ship upon the shelfe.
Swallows do ^eed ^ns^es, but light they sly*
While Epicures in too much feeding die.
By others harms seek not thy private good,
A bloody feast is an untimely food.
And to dissemble love is such an evil,
As nearest shows the nature of the Devil.
To help thy friends, do not forbear thy hand,
And (for thy credit) sell both goods and land.
Deny no friend, when he does friendly crave it,
For honest minds will pay, when as they have it,
Perform thy word, but promise not too much,
With rich and poor be careful to keep touch.
Let garments fit thy body, grace thy mind,
And to thy friend (as to thy self) be kind.
Let care of conscience, guide three every way,
To give thee comfort on the holy day.
First if thou be a Courtier know the grace,
And seek in heaven to have a higher place,
And if on earth such service profit brings,
What shall he have that serves the King of Kings?
If that thou be a Scholar and can preach,
With simple truth thy simple Audience teach;
And feed thy flock thou have in charge to keep.
Lest that thou prove a Wolf unto thy sheep,
But whatsoever (here) be thine estate,
There is none poor but he whom God does hate.
And if thou be a Soldier, suck no blood,
To Kingly minds it is unchristian food.
And honors title who does truly hold,
Shall it in mercy find, and not in gold.
If that thou be a Lawyer, judge the right,
And let no briberie bl^nde a blessed sight:
For thou shall find it writ in Mercies roll,
Better a thread bare gown, than threadbare soul
And if thou be a Merchant, know thy cares,
And do not wound thy conscience with thy wares
Lest in repentance all too late thou find,
The gain is loss that feeds a greedy mind.
In brief, of what estate soere thou be,
Let truth and conscience ever govern thee.
Let clownes clap all their craft on clowted shoes,
Seek thou no earthly gain thy Heaven to loose.
Aim at no profit with a poisoned breath,
Lest it be paid in thy second death.
An honest gain in every trade does well,
The wind blows ill that blows the soul to hell.
In Law and Physic have a conscience,
In making gain of thy experience.
Lest that thy Clients cry, or patients death,
Make thee cry out and howl in hell beneath.
For Cards and D^ce and all such idle play,
From thy delight discard and cast away.
For deal or rub whose hap it be to have,
The Knave of Clubs will ever be a Knave.
By wicked plots do never prole for pelf,
Let thy Souls care be nearest to thy self.
And sooth no humors in an evil mind,
For poisning breath is of a hellish kind.
And though to hurt a few to help a many
Seem good, yet (better) not the help of any.
Flat no Mistress Fubs, or John* a Noddes,
Nor honor golden Calves, nor wodden gods.
Nor puff a Peasant up with flattering pride,
A rascal will but like a Beggar ride.
If that thy wife be fair, be thou not foul,
To let her play the Ape, and thou the Owl.
And to thy daughter be a better Sire,
Then l^ke a hackney let her out to hire.
And for thy servants let no belly swell,
A baudy-house is but an earthly hell.
Be faithful to thy Wife, firm to thy friend,
And constant in religion to the end.
If thou be rich, abandon wicked pride,
And do not on the horse of envy ride,
Nor seek the well deserving to disgrace,
Nor put the virtuous spirit out of place.
If that thy friend do trust thee with his love,
Unto his trust do not a Traitor prove;
Lest he that sees thy ill-gotten treasure,
Do pay thee home with an il-meaten measure,
Be rich and wise in that good wit, my Boy,
That death nor hell, nor devil can destroy.
Tax no man's name in any evil matter,
But like a Christian deal with every creature.
Be sorry for the evil thou have done,
And go on with the good thou have begun.
Pray for thy faith, that it may fail thee never,
So (though thou die) yet shall thou live for ever.
Serve GOD, thy King, be to thy Country true,
Live till thou die, then bid the world adue.
FINIS.

