A LETTER APOLOGETICALL OF GEORGE BRISSE Lord of Desgrutieres, wherein are set
down the reasons that moved him to turn to the Reformed.

WRITTEN TO MONsieur TOVRAINE, Advocate in the Court of Parliament of BRETANY.

A WORK VERY PROFITAble for those to read that desire to know the grounds of
their Religion.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, printed by G. ELD for RICHARD LEA, and are to be sold at his shop at
the North entry of the Royal Exchange, 1616.

The Epistle to the READER.
AS to serve GOD is the part of a Christian, so how to serve him aright is the
part of a wise Christian to learn. I am deceived if this Book do not teach
that; and therefore cannot receive too much applause. This superstitious age is
linked in Marriage to heresy, who have begot many impious Infants, I mean
books both ridiculous and blasphemous written by Sectaries, but especially by
the Romish writers. The most gross errors of whom this Treatise unfolds.
Thank the Author for the Work, Me for the translation, and GOD for both.
Farewell.

SIR
IF heretofore you have done me the honor to repute me a man of desert, and
have been desirous of my salvation, I desire that now also you would have me
in the like esteem. To the end therefore that my alteration of religion
imprint in you no hard conceit of me, I have thought it fit to set down the
motives, and reasons which have induced me to this change; beseeching you to
believe (and my GOD knows that I lie not) that I have not had regard to any
humane considerations, but on the contrary have not harkened to the promises
and promotions which the Roman Church offered unto me; and have lost the
friendship of many personages, whom nevertheless I will not leave to love, and
honor, and you principally, Sir, whose virtue, and good opinion I have ever
much esteemed, and desired. These considerations infuse a hope into me that
you will relish well my reasons, which briefly, and summarily I will here set
down.

Give me leave then to tell you, Sir, that when I was the most zealously
addicted to the Roman Religion, I had notwithstanding this persuasion that
Religion is not subject to men, how great and learned soever they be, but that
they are subject to Religion. I also then held Religion to be the Rule of
salvation given by GOD to men, to which every man ought to be subjected, it
being not permitted to any one to exempt himself, or to change, or diminish
it. And thereupon enquiring of some of the Roman Church (whom I reputed the
most learned) where this Rule was given by GOD, they answered that it was
contained in that book commonly called the Bible, and that it was peculiar to
this book only to be styled the Word of GOD. According to their information
(having first inuoked GOD for increase of knowledge) I set my self to read
this book, and having read intentiuely all the Gospel, I was much astonished
to find almost nothing in it that had been taught me. I plainly perceived
that it was not there commanded to inuoke the Saints, nor to render any service
to Images, nor to sacrifice JESUS CHRIST, nor to adore the Host, nor to pray
to GOD without understanding: I also clearly saw that there was no mention
made of Purgatory, nor of Lent, nor of Masses, nor of Merits, nor of Monks,
nor of diverse Orders of Religion, nor of the Primacy of the Roman Church. In a
word, I found few things there, which I thought to be expressly commanded in
the Word of GOD; nay quite contrary, I found many passages contradictory to
those things which in former time I had learned.

Being in this Labyrinth, I thought the next way to get out was, to address my
self to some of the greatest Scholars of that Religion, and to implore their
aid. Which I did, and received this answer from them, that it was not for me
to read the Holy Scripture, and to enquire after things which passed my
capacity. Also they told me that the Catholic Roman Church had so ordained,
to which the holy Scripture sends us, saying that it is the pillar and the prop
of Verity. 1 Timothy 3. verse. 15. Who hears not the Church, ought to be held for
a Pagan, and a Publican. Mat. 18. and JESUS CHRIST says to S. Peter, I have
prayed that thy faith fail thee not: which manifests unto us, that the Roman
Church founded upon Saint Peter cannot err in faith.

Discoursing of these things with my self, I thus said to my self. I believe
that JESUS CHRIST died for me, and that the promises contained in the word of
GOD appertain to me as well as to any other of the Church. Wherefore then
should I not dare to look into those things which appertain unto me? If I
had books of love or fables, they would not take them from me, and yet they
will deprive me of that book, which they themselves affirm to be the word of
GOD. And if (as they say) it be not to be read but by the learned, no man
should ever read it, since that no man can be learned in it before he have
read it. I had thought that men had read the Scripture to become learned in
Piety, and to attain to that heavenly wisdom, which out-shines all humane
wisdom as much as the Sun a candle. I also assure my self that the Scribes
and Pharisees were as learned as any now alive, and as conversant in the
Scriptures as any of the Roman Church, and yet we find that CHRIST being
demanded by his Disciples why the Scribes, and Pharisees understood him not,
answered; that to them was not given to know the secrets of the kingdom of
God. Yet the Papists would persuade us that a man may be learned in the Gospel
before he read it. Why do they allege to me passages of Scripture, since they
will not permit me to see whether they allege them faithfully or no. I would
have them to show me the places which they cite to prove the authority of the
Roman Church. As for that passage where the Church is called the pillar, and
the prop of Verity, I find that there is no mention at all made of the Roman
Church, no more then of the Greek, or Syrian. I may add also, that there is
no likelihood that the Divine truth should be founded upon men, it being more
convenient that men should make the word of GOD their foundation. S. Paul by
these words means only that the Church is established by GOD on the earth to
maintain, and defend the Truth against infidels, and enemies of the Truth: so
that these words represent to the Church her duty, and not her authority. So
the Syrian Church founded by Jesus Christ, and his Apostles was a pillar of
verity against the Jews and Pagans, but this did not free it from error. The
same may also have happened to the Church of Rome.

As concerning the passage, which says, that he who hears not the Church
ought to be held as a Pagan, and a Publican; he that reads the precedents, and
subsequents shall soon perceive that these words serve not to prove that the
Roman Church, which they call Catholic (that is to say Universal) should be
judge in deciding controversies of Religion. First, because in that place the
Roman Chuch is not named. Secondly, because that there it is not spoken of
controversies of religion, but of a quarrel between two brethren. Thirdly, it
is evident that the Catholic, or universal Church is not there meant; for to
take up a quarrel between two brethren we should in vain expect the
judgment of the Church universal: by the Church then in this place is meant
the Pastors, and Conductors of some Church particular, endeavoring to appease
the malice of particular men: and it is according to the precept of GOD in his
word, that he, who will not consent to what they shall decree, be put in the
same rank with Pagans, and Publicans.

The third passage is that which most offends me; for this seems to me to be
a hard consequence; I have prayed that thy faith fail not, Peter: then the
Roman Church cannot err. By the reading of the whole passage it does appear
most manifest that CHRIST speaks not at all to the Church, nor of the Church,
but that he directes his speech only to the person of S. Peter, preparing him
for the temptation, into which he was shortly after to fall, that is, to deny
his Savior. JESUS CHRIST promises him by these words that his faith shall not
fail him in this temptation, but that he should no sooner fall, but that the
hand of GOD should raise him up again. Secondly, and if CHRIST should there
have meant the Church of Rome, is it possible that neither that place, nor any
other passage of Scripture should mention it? Thirdly, which more is, if our
faith be built upon this supposition, to wit, that Saint Peter is the head of
the Church universal, and that he has made the Bishop of Rome his
successor, not only in the Bishopric of Rome, but also in the charge of
being head of the Church, and that this charge has succeeded in a direct line
without variation of doctrine, and without interruption of succession; If all
this be true, I demand how the people shall be assured of it, since that to
know it, many histories, and authors ancient, and modern are to read; which
are written in a tongue which the people understands not. In this point also
then I remain unsatisfied.

I must needs confess to you also that after I had learned that the Roman
Church held, that consecration, and Transubstantiation is not at all in the
Mass unless the Priest have intention to consecrate, I feared much I might at
one time or other commit Idolatry, knowing that oftentimes the Priest has his
mind otherwise busied, or does not believe himself that which he does, or is a
derider, and a profane man: from whence it necessarily follows, those who
adore that which the priest liftes up, adore bread, and call it their creator,
and their GOD. I fell into this perplexity by reading the Gospel, where I
found the institution of this Sacrament no way to be considered by the Papists.
First, for I found that in the Gospel all the assistants did communicate; but
in the Mass ordinarily the Priest alone eats. Secondly, likewise every one
received both the species. Saint Paul 1 Cor. 11. speaking to the people
commands every one to prove himself, and to drink of this cup; but in these
days the cup is taken from the people. Thirdly, JESUS CHRIST did not lift up
the Host as do the Priests. Fourthly, the Apostles did not adore the Host,
as in these times the people do. Fifthly, in the whole institution of this
Sacrament there is no mension at all made of Sacrifice, nor is it commanded
that JESUS CHRIST be sacrificed for the living, and for the dead. Sixthly, JESUS
CHRIST spoke in a tongue which the people understood. Seventhly, the Gospel
says that JESUS CHRIST took bread and broke it: clean contrary, the Roman
Church affirms that the Priest does not break bread, but the accidents of
bread, to wit, the color and roundnesse of bread, etc. Eighthly, the Gospel
witnesses that JESUS CHRIST took bread, broke it, and gave it on the
contrary, the Roman Church holds that the Priest gives not bread. 10. I find
also in Saint Mat. 26. verse. 29. and in Saint Mar. 14. verse. 25. that JESUS
drank of the fruit of the vine, that is to say, wine; it was then wine when
he drank it: for although two cups are mentioned, as appears by Saint Luke;
yet Saint Matthew, and Saint Mark speaking only of the cup of the Sacrament
cannot questionless understand by the fruit of the vine the wine of a cup, of
which they speak not. 11 I also find in S. Paul, Cor. 10 ve. 16. and cha. 11.
ve. 26. that we eat and break bread: but the Roman Church says that we
neither eat, nor break bread. 12. It is apparent that Saint Paul expounds
these words in form of a Paraphrase, in this manner, the bread, says he,
which we break is the Communion to the body of CHRIST.

But the Roman Church denies all this, and says that it is not bread, and that
we break not bread, but the speeies, and apparences of bread: from whence it
follows that these apparances of bread should be the Communion to the body of
CHRIST. 13. I find also in the Acts of the Apostles that the Disciples
assembled themselves to break the bread. Chap. 2. verse. 46. and Chap. 20.
verse. 7. It would seem a thing ridiculous to the Papists if one of their
religion, going to receive the very body of CHRIST at Easter, should say that
he goes to break bread.

14 I see that the Gospel according to Saint Luke Chapter. 22. and the
Apostle Saint Paul 1 Corinthians. Chapter. 11. informs us how these words
(this is my body) are to be understood: for when they come to speak of the
cup, in steed of (this is my blood) they thus expound, this cup is the New
Testament in my blood. The bread then is the body of our Savior in like manner
as that which is in the cup is a Testament; which is not in substance, but in a
Sacrament, As also JESUS CHRIST calls it a commemoration, And as ordinarily
in Scripture, signs and Sacraments take the names of that which they signify.
15 If the Cup be the Testament in the blood of CHRIST, as says Saint Luke, it
is not then the very blood of CHRIST; for it were absurd to say that the blood
of CHRIST is in the blood of CHRIST.

I will further confess unto you that when I was at the height of my ignorance
this manner of speaking (as to lift GOD, to carry GOD, and by the mouth to
receive the creator) seemed to me harsh, and gross. Also, I could not hear
without grief some of the reformed religion to vpbraid us with our Priests
making GOD, and that they sold GOD for a little money in private Masses; and that
if JESUS CHRIST be in the Host, he which steals away the Host, must
necessarily steal away JESUS CHRIST. They also in way of mockage told us that
our greatest Doctors held that the body of CHRIST might be carried away by
Mice, which would make any man's hair to stand an end, that has in a dear
esteem the honor of JESUS CHRIST, our blessed Savior, the eternal Son of
GOD. Moreover, to affirm that CHRIST'S body is in so many places, and that it
is in every crum of the bread, is not agreeable to the Gospel, which gives
him a body like to ours, that he might be our brother. They who allege that
his body is now glorified do not consider that when he made this Sacrament
his body was yet infirm, and not glorified. Further, his glorification has
not changed his humane nature, but has only taken away the infirmities of it.

There is also another inconvenience in the Roman Church, which drove me from
it, which is, that whereas Saint Paul in the 10. Chap. to the Hebrews says
that we are sanctified only by the death of JESUS CHRIST, the Romish Priests
say that the Mass is the same sacrifice with that of the Cross, and that they
sacrifice JESUS CHRIST really, and truly for our redemption. Which I utterly
dislike; for whereas at first the Romish Priests taught me that the death of
JESUS CHRIST was the only price of our redemption, now they give me for the
price of my redemption the sacrifice of the Mass, which notwithstanding is not
the death of Jesus Christ. It cannot be said that the Mass is the continuation
of the sacrifice of the Cross; for then it should be the continuation of the
death of Christ, and so CHRIST should die continually. To conclude, they which
affirm that the Mass is the sacrifice of JESUS CHRIST, say withal that it is
the application, and commemoration of the sacrifice of CHRIST on the cross:
from whence this consequence may be derived, that it is not the sacrifice of
JESUS CHRIST: for as the application of a plaster, is not a plaster: or as
the application of a medicine, or a rule, is neither a medicine, nor a rule: so
the application of the sacrifice of JESUS CHIST is not the sacrifice of JESUS
CHRIST. The same may also be said of commemoration.

Purgatory is another cause of my separation from the Romish Church. I learned
at last that the Popish Purgatory was built upon this tenent, to wit, that
JESUS CHRIST by his death, and suffering has satisfied for the punishment of
sins before Baptism, but that he has not satisfied for the punishment of
sins committed after Baptism. I was very inquisitiue after this doctrine; as
judging it to be a point most behoofull of all for a Christian to understand,
since that it explaines unto us what CHRIST has done for us. But though with
all diligence I read the Scriptures yet could I not find there any mention at
all made of Purgatory. I then grew bolder, and thus questioned some of the
Romish religion. Has not JESUS CHRIST paid enough to deliver us from
Purgatory? And if he have paid enough, why does not GOD accept, and take this
payment for as much as it is worth? 2 And since that Christ makes intercession
for us in heaven, why should not the souls be rather quit of Purgatory by his
intercession, then by the indulgences of the Pope? 3 And if (as the Papists
hold) none of the faithful which shall live at the day of Judgment shall go
to Purgatory, why cannot GOD as well exempt us, without violating his justice?
4 It is true, that nothing defiled shall enter into Paradis: but Saint John in
his 1 Epist. chap. 1. says that the bluod of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from
all sin. 5 The Roman Church also holds that in Purgatory sins are not
purged away but punished; it may therefore more fitly be styled a Tormentary,
then a Purgatory. The ordrus, and blots of our souls are not punishments, or
pains, but sins, of which Jesus Christ does cleanse us. 6 It is necessary
that the satisfaction of our Savior be applied to us: but it is GOD that must
prescribe the means how to apply it, for to us it is not permitted to invent
them. Moreover, the ineanes applied to a thing ought to be contrary to the
thing, there being no medicine which is applied with poison. In like manner the
way to apply unto our selves the remission of our debts by Jesus Christ, is not
to make us pay them. The means to apply to out selves his grace, and mercy, is
not in tormenting us in a fire. Truly the holy Scripture produces us examples
of persons received into Paradise, and entered into peace, and glory,
incontinently after their death; as the thief. Luke. 2.29. Saint Paul 2 Timo.
4.8. and Esaias. 57. verse. 1. and 2 Apocal. 14. verse. 13. But we find no
example of any man sent to Purgatory. 8 The only light which has directed us
to find out the error of this Purgatory is experience, which shows us that
it is a thing merely invented for gain: for no man sees particular Masses but
for those that give money: poor men must content themselves with general
prayers, in which the rich have also a part. The Mendicant Friars never go to
the funeral of a poor man, and yet his soul has cost as much, and is no
less precious in the eye of GOD then an Emperors. The letters of Indulgence,
and personal dispensation, which the Pope grants, is not but for persons of
quality.

Another thing also much moved me; to wit, that a man cannot be assured of his
salvation; which made me thus to reason with my self. Shall I any longer
remain in a religion which (after I have made a hurde of merits, and
satisfactions, nay, have bought the satisfactions of others) cannot assure me
after all this whether I be the child of GOD, or of the Devil? what religion
can this be which teaches such distrust? On the contrary, through the whole
Scripture GOD exhorts us to trust in him, and to come to him with a full
certainty of Faith. Heb. 10.22. and bids us with boldness to trust in him with
a lively faith in Jesus Christ. Ephe. 3.12.

Consider also, Sir, with me, that the commandments of the Roman Church are
much more honored and observed then the commandments of GOD. 1. Because it is
there taught, that the Roman Church authoriseth the holy Scriptures, that is to
say, that the ordinances of men authorize the commandments of GOD. 2 To cate
flesh upon a good Friday is a greater sin then to commit murder, or
adultery; yet is this the Friday, on which ordinarily Christ did eat the
Paschall Lamb. 3 To blaspheme the name of GOD in this world is a small
offense; but to speak ill of the Pope (especially in Italy, and Spain) is an
unpardonable, and a burnable offense. 4 The Jews have a religion which affirm
Christ to be a cousner: but to say, that there is no other Purgatory but the
blood of Jesus Christ is a crime deserves the Inquisition. 5 Every Bishop of
France may give absolution for faults committed against the law of GOD, but
cannot absolve men of sins committed against the Pope, and his Sea. Also in
the Roman Church they teach things absolutely contrary to the word of GOD, in
his Gospel. 1 GOD says Exodus 20. Thou shall not make the likeness of things
which are in the heavens, or in the earth, thou shall not bow down before
them, etc. But in the Roman Church they paint the Trinity, and kneel before
the images of Saints. 2 GOD says in his law, Six days shall thou labor: The
Pope says thou shall not labor six days, but shall observe the feasts of
every week. GOD says by his Apostle. 1. Tim. 3. verse. 2. and 4. that a Bishop
should be a husband of one wife only, and that his children should be subject
to him in all reverence: but the Roman Church wills that a Bishop have
neither wife, nor children. 4 GOD commandes by his Apostle. 1 Cor. 10. that
when we are invited to the houses of Infidels we should eat of all that which
is set be, fore us, without making any scruple. On the contrary, the Roman
Church commands thee, when thou art invited into the houses of Heretics, not
to eat of all that which is set before thee in Lent, and on Good Friday. 5.
GOD says by his Apostle, 1 Cor. chap. 14. that it is better to speak five
words in the Church in a tongue understood of the people, then ten thousand in
an unknown tongue: On the contrary the Roman Church serves GOD in an unknown
tongue. Neither does she only err in this point, but in many others also. But
it may be, Sir, you think that the Multitude warrants a religion. I find that
Jesus Christ. Mat. 7. verse. 13. would that we enter in by the strait door,
saying that the way is large through which the multitude passes, and leads
to destruction. If you argue against me with signs, and miracles; I must
answer you with my Savior, that an adulterous nation demands signs; and in
the 13 of Saint Mark he says that false Doctors should come, making signs,
and miracles to seduce. If you seek to convince me with the chair of the
Pope, I answer you that the Pharisees objected to Christ the chair of Moses,
and their succession, and yet were the enemies of Jesus Christ. Also Jesus
Christ sends us not to Chaires, but to his word, saying in Saint John 10. that
his sheep follow him, and hear his voice. And in the 8 chapter he says. If
you persevere in my word, you shall be truly my Disciples. Moreover, at this
day the Syrian, and Greek Churches, more ancient then the Roman, vant of the
like succession, and condemn the Roman Church.

If you reply that in the word of GOD there are difficulties, and obscure
passages, I answer that I make my self in such things neither judge, nor
interpetor, but this I am sure that I understand enough in the Scripture to
save me. And I assure you that since I turned to the true religion of Jesus
Christ, I have learned more in two months then I did in all my life before. I
have learnd since to believe no longer by another man's faith. The consideration
of these odious errors makes me exhort you, as you tender your salvation, to
think of these things, and to deliver your soul from this captivity, to the
end that you may glorify GOD on the earth, if you desire to be glorified in
heaven. I beseech GOD that you may be, Sir and rest.

FINIS.

Your humble friend, and servant. DISGRVSTIERES.


