AN EPISTLE TO THE LEARNED NOBILITY OF ENGLAND.

Touching translating the BIBLE from the original, with ancient warrant for
every word, unto the full satisfaction of any that be of heart.

By HVGH BROVGHTON.

JOHN I. The light shines in darkness, though darkness does not comprehend it.

MIDDELBVRGH, By Richard Schilders, Printer to the States of Zealande, 1597.

To all the learned Nobility of England, HVGH BROVGHTON wishes all increase
of knowledge, that they may esteem the understanding of Gods word, and care
for synceritie in it, to be the head of wisdom and true Religion in CHRIST.
WHEREAS many (right Honorable) from the high to the low, of all sorts have
been desirous greatly and a long time, to have the holy book of God, which for
the old Testament is in Ebrew, for the new all originally in Greek, to be
translated and beautified with all furniture for playnes and ornaments: that
such as study it, should in no place be snared by the translater: but rather
in all poinctes might have at the first laid clear before them all that study
can afford: It may be thought a good help to the bringing of their desire to
pass, by joining of al effectually in execution of the work: to show what
in this pains may be better done then yet we have in England. And as bare
shortness is soonest viewed: so matter of large, long, high and deep
quantity, shall be brought into speech of no greatness, but narrow, short, low
and shallowe, that the meanest may in good part judge, what ought to be
censured. What poinctes a sincere translation ought to have, mo the^ yet our
have.
The holy text must be honored, as sound, holy, pure: head must be taken that
the translater neither flow with lies nor have one at all: prophecies spoken in
doubtful terms, for sad present occasiones, must be cleared by sad study and
stayed safty of ancient warrant: terms of equivocation witty in the speaker for
familiar and easy matters, must be looked unto, that a translater draw them
not unto foolish and ridiculous senses: Constant memory to translate the same
often repeated in the same sort is most needful. Facility of phrase, defended
by the new Testament, the Septuagint, and writers old indifferent for all
nations, must be had. And herein, the stately words of the new Testament, in
Greek, taken from the Septuagint may stand profitable in the margent through
the old. Also where the later repeat the former holy writers, therein as it
were commenting upon them, that should in all clearnes be expressed, and noted.
These be poinctes of necessity. Some others of ornament in the end of our
speech may be considered. Thus all are briefly told once: which by enlargement
will appear more pleasant. And speech of all shall be used, by your honorable
patience. First a Translater of the Bible should beware least of his own head
in translation or notes, 1. care that the holy Ebrew or holy Greek text be
not disannulled
he disanull the text: and blame the watchful eye of Gods providence, for not
preserving the writ aright. That fault is exceeding great, for a man to take
upon him to be wiser then God: and to take his kingly care tardy, in truth of
words. All men will grant that there is not an idle plant, fish, worm,
foul, or beast in nature, nor yet star in the sky: but all known and
looked unto by Gods care. Now whereas all that would be happy are commanded to
think day and night on Gods Law by the spirit of endless wisdom: as learning
the Eternal better thence then from the creation: we might have bin sure that
the father of light, An holy 21. fold Alphabet, a matter of bravery, tells
babes that God would never fail in a ^od or prick of necessity. Psalm 25.
omits Vau and (...).
would never require that: but would also for his part affoorde a law, void
of trappe and snare: to delight the souls that follow him. That matter of
necessity may better be conceived by things of ornament, into which God for
us has condescended. A man would little have thought that the most High should
make Alphabets for us in his book. But we now may see it done. The Psalm. 25.
has an Alphabet, saving for two letters: and the Psalm is a general form of
prayer. There the wisest may try, whither any wisdom could supply the
argument, by Ebrewe words of sage force. The Psalm. 145. is alike, Psalm. 145.
Nun only is omitted. Psa* 34. has an overplus Psa. 37. has an Alphabet with
much enterlacing. Psalm. 211. and 12. in ^che member. Psalm. 119. eightfold.
one letter omitted. The Psalm. 34. has an Alphabet perfect and one verse for a
glad saying, upon all, fit always. The Psalm. 37. has an Alphabet most exact,
though many verses seem to hide it. The Psalm 111. conteyneth Gods laud. The
112. the Godly man's: in most curious sort, for every member of speech. The
119. goes upon commendation of the Law of life: with an eightfold Alphabet,
and mentioning the word in sundry names in every verse: what virtues it has.
Which sayings coming from him that carries about all things by his mighty
word, should assure us, that it was safely kept. Matrones virtues in Alphabet.
Pro. 31.
Solomon in like battell-ray has commended good Matrones: that they teachinge
their children from the breasts, should give them the milk of Gods word. And
Jeremy at the kingdoms ruin penneth his Lame^tations with a watchful eye,
very much for phrase: using from Moses, David, Solomon, Esaias, and all former,
Ieremies distinct art, of a confused state, in a sixfold Alphabet.
terms uttered of the destruction which he saw, and felt. But his Alphabet is
more wonderful, to show in man's confusion, Gods distinction. So the first
Cha. has 22. verses in the 22. letters order. The Chapter 2. to stir our care
has the like with changing place of Pe, and Ain, two going together, but the
later going before: so the fourth Chap. is most exact in the same sort, for Pe
and Ain: and all the other in due order: that by this doubled matter, study
should be stirred up. The Chap. 3. has thrice every letter in ord^^: that by
three witnesses Gods looking too his letters might be seen. These being
matters of Elega^cy more then bare necessity, Matters curious in elegancie.
show that no less watchfulnes was over the words of sentences. Which thing
should move us to hold the text vncorrupt. The 148. margent readings.
Besides a matter of singular great importance comes hither to be considered:
the margent readinges of the old testament. They are eight hundred forty and
eight in number. And the word in the text was not read, but the word in the
margent. These greatly touch all to know why so it falls out: Christians be
loathsome that slander the holy providence, as not providing well for them: where
unspeakable care is showed, for their tendering.

22. times Naar in the Ebrew text is read Naarah.


that Christians no longer follow Kimchi and Ephody the Jews, whom Barbinel
and Elias Leuita damn of great injury done to Gods holy Majesty, for saying
that the text was corrupted in Babylon. Any may see that no Scribe would
twenty two times of negligence write Naar, a Gyrle, for Naarah: the margent
term read for Naar: which signified a Boy or Gyrle: and for weighty cause
was read Naara a Gyrle. The filthy town Zebyim, burnt from heaven, named of
the pleasant situatio^, the Roes, a name of Christ in Salomons song, was read
Zeboyim, all the four times that scripture has it. Error could not fall into
such wisdom. Likewise when Rabsakes filthy terms are in the text to be
seen, but clearer in the margent to be read, they who say, that corruption
bred this vrbanity, weigh not but cast lottes what to speak. So for books
written after the captivity, past times of bondage: where the Samaritanes
speech against the Temple-builders, is as they spoke it, doubtful Ebrew:
Marge^t readinges in books set forth after the captivity, since when Jews
had no hinderance to save the daily read text, argue the slaunderers of dulnes
upon gross impiety.
as, We do not sacrifice: or, Sacrifice we not? there in Loa, and Lo, the word
of the text and margent expound one the oher. And again in Zachary speaking
of Ierusalems destruction and women's usage by soldiers gross to speak: the
text tells the term to be seen: the margent, what the holy Spirit would
have read. Thus for civility or facility in sense: the margent reading is
given with equal authority as the other. Moreover, whereas the Prophets deep
skill, that omits the particle Vau, that is And, in a speech of two members, or
has a word too sharp for the common sort, in orthography strange, and
differs in a letter from the usual manner: the margent having the usual
shows what care the holy Synagogue had, that no one syllable should amaze the
simple, but were all taught from God to couple diligence with easy sense.
These poinctes, some touch every tongue, some only Ebrewe grammar: where a
learned professor would as soon look to swallowe a camel, as to escape
blame, in vnheedines herein. Succession of rare godly men, all Babels reign
prove all babes who think that all copies in so short time could be corrupted
or any one lost. Mardochai was captiued, which they that deny may see here
what thanks Christians and Jews would kenne them 2 Samuel 20.8 Enochs speech and
Michaels were framed Rhetorically of Ebrew DD. from Moses short speeches: the
like whereof is yet in their commentaries Talmud rabbi Nathan, and Midras
Debarim.
And further off would he be from thinking that Babel caused one letter amiss,
when Jeremy lived til Ezra was of understanding, Ezechiel prophecieth unto
thirty five years of the captivity: the exact half: and Daniel was there
all the while, the marrowe of Godliness, learning, wit, and wisdom: and the
wealthiest subject in the world: that he could want no will, skill, nor
ability to keep all scripture which the holy wisdom of God saw needful to
make up the body of Ebrewe holy story. Mardochai was next him in time of
captivity, and godliness: and an holy Writer, as he: of equal authority in
Daniels end of life, or aged about 110. years: he as well with Aggei, Zachary,
Ezra, and such would have an eye to the text his soundness. Wherefore
translatours herein fall foully, when they say that Michal is put for Merob: or
upon Jude complain of books lost, for Enochs speech: or Michaels. That is a
principal poinct to be looked unto: the observations whereupon will lighten
eyes to much further sight into Gods word. In this matter the Massorites care
should be opened: Grammarians of Ebrew sprung from Ezra and long continued: who
reckoned every letter how often in the holy Ebrewe it came: how often words
of short or full writings were diversely written and where: and what strange
texts would seem corruptions to the unstayed: and for Eth and Vau, little
particles how often they come together in sort easy to deceive a copyer,
without a table of direction: such poinctes are a brazen wall to save from
doubt of scriptures certeintie: and from extreme rashness: that condemn as
faulty, things of heavenly synceritie. So when we come to translate Achaz
king of Israel: 2 Chro. 28.19. 2 Chr. 21.2
or Iosaphat king of Israel: we should with the Massorites note the
strau^genes, that Israel is put for Judah: and check the Rhemist, that marking
that title in Achaz but not in Iosaphat, rages against the text as though it
had been corrupt and would thereupon draw us from Gods word unto a Church,
and to Rome: Strange sayings upon rare occasion make Rhomistes and Rhemistes
blaspheme, whereby all their skill in scripture is soon seen, Ebrew elega^cy
strange in other nations, but full of effect, by the Prophets very Pithy
shortness made us blame speeches most witty and far from corruption.
by whose policy Christ was crucified: while they run from mischief to
mischief. The like care must be used for the new Testament: and more
judgment: be cause Christians took not the like heed: as not being in equal
danger. Here we have committed gross faults, blaming most learned speeches.
For example some shall be brought: The holy Ghost in Greek speaks thus: Iocob
dyed in Egypt, and the Patriarchs, and they were carried to Sychem: And they
were put in grave: That which Abraham bought for price of money, That from the
sons of Emor of Sychem. Here the Pronowne They, the close repetition of the
Pronowne, That, and omission of the copulative, usual in Prophets, rare in
common speech, caused us to amend the holy text: to leave Jacobs burial
untold, who yet was principal in the narration: to say that Abraham was put for
Jacob: and to falsify the buying For price of money: as though Jacob had
bought his plot for money and not for Lambs, as the Greek translation
expounds Jacobs price. Genesis 33.19. Ios. 24.32. Job. 42.12. and is no more
used in Ebrewe, and the 70. were borne in the end of the Ebrew ^on^g, the
eldest and best warrant for translating.
Keshita is translated Lambs in the Seventy: whose translation for common
words, the new Testament checketh not, but follows most exactly, and
infinitely: So that we may well know, that Saint Luke writing in Greek, meant
the grave that Abraham bought for price of money: and that wherein Jacob was
buried: and not that wherein the Patriarchs were buried. Whereby there can be
no color, that Abraham in the text was put for Jacob: but in the whole
sentence the Translatours dealing weakened our strength, and disgraced the
grace of holy synceritie. That the simple may better understand what I blame,
you shall have the translation used of us, which marreth the Greek: and the
annotations upon it, which condemns that which God commends unto us. And I
hope no man of grace will be angry to have Scripture cleared, nor vex me any
more with grave Fathers. If they that blame have any gravity or drop of
grace, they will wish all men disgraced, rather then one syllable of Gods
word. And they who must confess unskillfulness, shall not do well, unless they
willingly do yield unto the truth, and love the honor of God more then their
own: and make it plain unto the people: that the book which we call the Bible
is the Hebrewe for the old, the Greek for the new: and translations are but
so far as they are true and exact from the original: and without hinderance
may and must be examined by the other: yea where they are blameless and
sincere, by the original their clearenes and authority must aye be
strengthened by the Ebrew. Thus the text stands: The text all translated.
And Jacob dyed both he and our Fathers, and were carried over into Sychem, and
laid in the sepulcher that Abraham bought for money of the sons of Emor the
son of Sy^hem. Here appears an error: for Abraham seems to ^e put in the
text in the steed of Jacob, The note, intolerable.
for Jacob bought ^he sepulcher of Emor, and not Abraham, who bought before a
field of Ephron. You see the text, and the note: which if we all would grant
curraunt, then would the papists earnestly triumph, that we Protestants
confess the text to be corrupted: That will I never do, while breadth
stands in my breast. I believe that I shall soon find some hundredth
thousands in England, that will no more turn the sword with Stephanas
against their own heart, after sight how their case is well if they knew their
own good things. Saint Stephen speaks in his most heavenly oration other
wisdom of exact skill, yet blamed of great men. Vr by him is in Mesopotamia:
and his deadliest enemy Barbinel, does therein defend him full learnedly: but
we commonly seek qualifications vnartificial, whereby a Turk or Jew would
say that we made him but a lier. Saint Stephen says, that Abraham was brought
by God from Charan after his fathers death: but we make the speech uttered Genesis
12.1. to be spoken in V R, a calling as well of Therah, as of Abraham, yet Moses
order of speech defends: who shows that Terah died in Charan, upon whose
death he ends his The Perashah in the Law is a full separation of matter,
which may not be confounded.
section, to make a separation full and absolute, from the matter following of
Abraham's calling. Philo the Greek Jew (unlike the late malicious) is fully of
Stephens mind, and shows that opinion, to have been then general But Jews
malice being increased, shuffled the promise made to Abraham, into three score
years of Terahs life: so to obscure all the matter: as not being Abraham's
peculiar, in Terahs life time. Saint Stephen his Angelique tongue might have
helped here, but that we pervert his words. Yet I am not to speak much here of
this matter, because this poinct touches not corruption of text: unless we
urge that our shufflinge of Abraham's promise into Terahs life, and translatinge
thus: Genesis 12.1. The Lord had said unto Abraham, get thee, etc. being referred
unto his calling from Vr, proves the Perasha or Ebrew section very unfit, in
the middle of a matter: as doubtless it should be most unfit. So, this speech
may properly belong to the writ and letter. But this matter does most
touch the second poinct, of making scripture false by ill tra^slating, rather
then blames the text. One place more has the holy martyr, as Saint Luke did
pen it, where some blame the writ, How 70. in Genesis 46. and 75. Act. 7. be
reconciled without blame of copy.
and more can not tell what they may say of it. Saint Luke Act. 7. makes Jacobs
family to be of seauentie five souls, whereas Moses in Ebrew has but
seauentie. And an Arabique translation, written (as none are yet printed I
trow) brought unto me from the Indianes, has but seauentie souls. Here is
matter for a skillful translatour to work upon: By my learned friend M. Phil.
Nicols, being at Carthaginaes surprising.
to defend and clear Saint Luke, and I deem it will not be hard to do. For
thus the case stands: The Septuagint add unto Moses Persons, five to Joseph
(unborn when Manasses and Ephraim were but seven or eight years old, at
Jacobs coming to Egypt) a son and a grandechilde to Manasses, Machir and
Gilead: to Ephraim two sons, Sutelah and Tahan: with Sutelahs son Eden: all
these, five: and accordingly do they sum all, to be seauentie five souls.
Great reasons moved them: which few words can not make plain. Saint Luke
writing in Greek was to follow the Greek: though Saint Stephen spoke as the
Ebrew stood. And the Arabique translatour, that followed the Ebrew in a near
language, which should be conferd with the Ebrew, not with the Greek in Genesis
46. showed a profound judgment: A phrase Act. 13. true in 450. which properly
is but 339 and lappeth al one book and 19. places in one sum.
regarding as St Luke did, nations weakness, whereof unto this day few know
Saint Lukes mind, though it be not dark, if we had looked unto the
Septuaginta. Like unto Saint Stephens abridgement of old large stories comes
Paul's oration Act. 13. where he reckons the nineteen Judges, thirtene
defendours, six offenders, all their times, as they in troubles ruled and dated
two at once, years after a sort four hundredth and fifty. So it is most
exactlie after Saint Paul's sort of reckoning: and so Josephus reckons the
Judges years: when for the 480. 1. King. 6.1. he makes 592. years. Here the
Rhemistes mar the text: and the whole narration: neither bewe faultles, who
for years but 339. propre, say about 450. the hundredth and eleven of the
oppressors nothing ^ugmented the worlds age: therefore in propriety 450. can
not be said: about 450. and in a kind of speech it was exactlie so, and not
about 450. And these examples may be sufficient to show a Translators care for
defense of the text. Many are ready from both Testaments. One kind I cannot
pass over, which Daniel has in two examples: The Massorites only kept
Daniels copy pure: twice in Dan. 7. and 8.
where but for the Massorites Bible, the common copies would continue error.
Daniel turns the notation of a Chaldean kings name and his own Chaldean
name, into clean contrary significations, by transposing one unsounded
letter: Bell is the author of wealth: and Bell is a fire of sorrow these are
clean contrary, as darkness and light: sin and justice: idols and the throne
of God. The like is in Daniels Chaldean name: which breaks out a fire of
sorrow, from Gods fiery throne against such as held Bell a protector of store
and treasure: Unless we join both the Great Venetians Bibles, none printed
will here give a Translator that which he must perform, right writing for
notation: in the former name. But in Daniels Chaldy name the text in Plantines
Bible is sincere: marking the difference of it Cha. 1. and Chap. 10. And this
poinct only being so full of wisdom in Daniel, should move any wise nation
to peruse their translation, though it had no other imperfection. The^ matter
is a pearl, and an holy thing: where hogs and dogs shall see no peace of
the heavenly Jerusalem: and such as contemn this matter will be no better in
Daniels eyes: whose rare commendation from men, and Gabriel is for us, not for
him self.

2. Care: that the Translatour bread not a lie.
The next labor to this, no better observed of us, should beware making
untruths in turning the Bible into our tongue. The like harm comes by notes
that would make the world false. I would that examples of less plenty were in
this kind: though their store may stir to cure the soar. And first for no
less then the third part of the world, Sem falselie translated the Elder
brother to Iapheth.
touching Iapheth our Father, we stayne his birthright: when our translation
makes him younger the^ Sem, Ge^. 10.21. where Sem should be brother to Iapheth
the eldest. The record of years, the situation of the words, the Greeks
universal consent unaltered in any of their translations known, the preualent
consent of Ebrewes, for the most that way, and noted in Chimehi the king of
Grammarians in Gadal, the custom that God prefers not the Eldest to be
Christ his father: these and such things should have caused to loathe not to
follow the vulgar Latin. For as a dead fly putrifieth a box of precious
oinctment, so one such oversighte does unto an whole book, and is a thorn to
the side and eyes. An other thorn pricking the heart of good Joseph's fame, is
in Genesis 44.5. by not marking the plain and exact propriety of the Ebrew,
touching Joseph's silver cup. Is not that it, Se^sible wise speeches turned to
witchcraft or extreme folly.
in which my Lord drinks: and for which he would search thoroughly. So the
words in their first signification mean: so old Onkelos took them: so the
sense is sensible. And again in Joseph's speech the same is alike: Know you not
that a man as I, can search thoroughly? But we have in our best: Is not that the
cup in which my Lord drinks, and for which he consulteth with prophecies: or,
in which he prophecieth. And what man would ever speak so senseless. There
the note goes thus: He went not to the coniurers for any matter: but this is
said by dissimulation, to increase the crime. So verse. 15. Wot ye not that
such a man as I, do consult with propheci^^s. This speech had no wit, less
religion: how should ^hey think it: and why should he board with edged tools,
^o favor witchcrafte? There our note has these words: though he did not the
thing: he should not have nourished the opi^ion that he did so. Thus we
slander the holy Joseph, Joseph slandred, badly.
and ^exe our souls about coniuringe and sorcery, where the ^each is plain.
For Nichash, the term that caused doubt, ^^gnifieth first, to try out, or
find out: and in that sense Laban ^sed it to Jacob. And in a second sense: to
search too far, as ^y curious arts. Now they that would looth blottes in a
fair picture, should much more loath blottes and wrinkles which our drowsines
brings upon the story, which the spirit of Grace has penned in most
heavenly beauty and facility, as of purpose alluring all to look on, and to
study it: and to enter into the open porch of the Bibles temple. But we make
an hedge of thorns to shut men out: whence we can not gather figs and
reasins: but many do gather pricks to anoyance of such as tender the ioyance
of Religion. Such thorny dealings must look for that event that David in his
last speech told, That they may not be touched, without iron or shafte of
spear: but beeinge as thorns must be burnt in their place. The honny in the
honny-combe, or the hid Manna, will not soon be found in the Prophets
languages, where the speech is worse then any Heathen would speak. And these
staynes Genesis had by us: being whiter then any snow in the original, and a
goodlier body of story, then any Apelles pencill could painct for a fair Lady.
In Exodus one poinct has long troubled many: and at the last deceived our
Bishops, to set in the argument a flatt untruth, which should cut, as it
were, all Moses in pieces. And hardly can a man find any part of the Law,
where an historique error would more disturb. The place lies in Exodus 12.40
These words we make to be the text: The dwellinge of the children of Israel,
which they dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years. The fault was
not ours, but the Papists, that brought it into honor: and some Greeks, at
whom I marveyle: seeing the Septuaginta cleared the sense by a large
paraphrase, and the most of their own had gone aright. And yet the fault was
ours, that in a matter of such infinite helps as be for the truth herein of
Ebrewes, Greeks, Latins, we would dash all Moses authority: and that so
manifestly, as to say in the argument thus: They dwelt in Egypt four hundred
and thirty years. Moses knew that his Ebrewes would thus understand him: The
peregrination of the children of Israel, which soiourned in Egypt, was four
hundred and thirty years. The Law being spiritual, regarded Christ
promised to Abraham, who therevppon left his country: which peregrination
always concerned Israel, and therefore is called The peregrination of the
Children of Israel. Moses teaches in Cohath, who was with Jacob and lived 133.
years, and his son Amram, who lived 137. and his own 80. all 350. that
Israel could not be 430. years in Egypt. Genebrarde pieuishnes: who yet
professes great Ebrew skill.
Here Genebrard willing to defend the Latin rude translation, says that
Moses might omit some of his Ancestors. He that speaks so, has his
conscience burnt with an whot iron. What Ebrewe, Greek or Latin, thought Moses
any further then the seventh from Abraham, and to what end and purpose should
he cast all his Ancestors years up to Adam, if he omitted any? Or how
could Iocebed his mother be Levies immediate daughter by our four hundred and
thirty years? And so in our Lords house: where Ezron came with Jacob: how
could Ezrom, Aram, Aminadab, and Naasson fresh at the coming from Egypt, draw
in succession four hundred and thirty years? Thus, Saint Matthewe and Saint
Luke for our Lords Fathers, with Ruth and first Chron. and Moses in families
infinite, should be disgraced. Again, Saint Paul the Apostle of JESUS Christ,
should lose his authority, who from Abraham's promise of Christ elder then
Circumcision unto the Law, makes it but four hundred and thirty years. And
that our own Bibles note observes upon Genes. Chap. 15. very well. So it
must needs be a great fault, to cross our selfs and all holy authority, and
all the best of all sorts, in so large a story, drawing infinite absurdities
upon a ground of one.

The Septuaginta expressly tells what peregrination of Israel was meant: even
theirs and their Fathers, repeating it, The 70. paraphrasinge for plainness
Theirs and their Fathers in the land of Chanaan and in Egypt. And this their
doing is evident in the Greek tongue unto this day. Moreover, both the
Talmuds in Megilah record this their paraphrase. Wherefore a translation
disturbinge all, must not be defended: how so ever Genebrard and Adricomius
bring in their Chronicle all the worlds age to this error. Jews would skoph
such Ebrewe professors: that mark not how fables are made of purpose upon
Moses phrases: that children should better mark them. Thus a Rabbin is feined
in the Talmud to reason before great Alexander, against Egyptians complayninge
that Israel robbed them and requiring restitution. The Rabbin obiecteth the
text as an unskillful man would take it: the dwellinge of the children of Israel
in Egypt servantes there was 430. years: and all their spoils were little
enough for so long service. This fable made for skill of phrase will make us
simple, if we be in deed babes. Now seeing Israel multiplying like fish, had
of 70. but about six hundred thousand strong men, how could that be a miracle
in 430. years space. Abraham fought with many kings, about 430.^. after three
Sem, Cham, and Iapheth, left the Arc: and those kings had many: infinite more
were on the earth, of great troops: So that by our version six hundred
thousand absurdities would follow. And furthermore this one thing should be
sufficient to urge amendment, that none of our nation read that, but are
deceived or grieved: and weakened in zeal to religion. Wherefore they must lay
their hand upon their mouth, that say, The Queen will not have the
translation bettered. Her Majesty's footmen know that she sent an othergates
word to Sir Frauncis Walsingham, even to consider of furthering the matter:
and Bishop Elmer the best Ebrician of all the Bishops, was very earnest with my
self to take the matter in hand: and deserves this mention for honoring Gods
word. Now that the good, of Bibles (which truly deserve great commendation,
though not of absolute perfection) be not in any part hindered, which
lightly are not faulty but where Papists erred before, Notes bely^ the text.
I will rather touch observations which falsify the text, and make men to
hold it corrupt. And first this taken from papists: In the year 1572. Adam
lived two hundred and thirty years, and begat Seth. Moses made a grosselye^
by blasphemous notes.
wherein Moses had omitted one hundred years. Does not this make Moses a
lier? Can one undertake to tell a man's age, and put 130. years for 230. and
not lie? And if Moses omitted it, who knew it? The teacher of Moses was none
other but he which measures the waters in his fist: peiseth the heavens in
his spa^ne, holds all the dust of the earth in an half-pint: weighs the
mountains in a balance: and who could teach him, how to have instructed Moses
better in the way of knowledge? When such perverse and crooked notes,
disannulling that which Gods letters speaks, come before our Bibles as a
furtherance of the simple, what marveile is it, if blind guides lead the
blind into the ditch? Infinite store of such has the same introduction to the
Bible, enough to entangle all that believe them, and to make the Bible seem
inexplicable. One gentleman of the North complained to ^e, how that pains
enta^gled him. Such erroneous pains should be openly condemned, and not sold
but to the learned, that can judge of untruths. Touching the 230. years ^n
what daliance with profane Heathen the 70. feigned not one hundred only to
Adam, but 1250. more unto others many unto Nachor, I have showed at large in a
treatise of Sem or Melchisedek, and in my little book of long pains, ^hewing
scripture concent. And I judge this a Translatours ^uetie, to show the right
meaning of old hid doeings, which by mistaking blame the holy letters. A
wicked table sold in the heart of our Bibles, disturbinge all the Bible most
shamefully.
An other Table of no less poison pretending to reconcile Saint Matthew and
Saint Luke, is prefixed to the new Testament in our great Bibles: which I
blamed in print sharply, and since it has not bin printed: but thousands
enough to poison an whole nation, were sold before. That table first denies
in effect six places where Achaziah is father properly to Ioas: while it
ends Salomons house in Ioas: casting down six testimonies of him whose word
made all the frame of nature too stand. That table would flee in a story that
needs must speak properly unto a strange use of words: but common reason
should have taught, that a strange kind of speech is not often used in one and
the same matter: neither may it be used, but where the narration was cleared
before. Ezra, when he penned the Chronicles from the plain story of the Kings,
uses terms in rare elegancie, and hard: but for the matters familiarity;
when he names the six and thirty years Malcuth Asa: when Asa had not passed
seauentene in reign. Now Malcuth being kingdom or reign, and the time
agreeing with six and thirty years from Iudahs kingdom, parted away from
Ieroboams: the matter tells what Ezra meaned: and his round sum from many
particulars, in a narratio^ known, had great clearenes. Whereas the kings
story might not have been penned at the first so. Now, where in a careful
narration of long discourse, Ioas comes son to Achaziah, saved by
Achaziahs sister at an year old: and after a tyranny of six years, at
seven, is made king: the denying of sonages propriety here is nothing less
then to make a flat lie: and for six places of one tenor a sixfold stumbling
against the holy Ghost, who has planted in man a spirit that should teach him
knowledge: against which they that strive, shall be condemned of their own
heart. Ben used elegantly in a borrowed spech: Which the^ that saw not,
disturb by one error all the holy story.
In an other place Ezra uses Ben very elegantly. For it signifies Son, or
Belonging too: and that in great variety. So Achaziah is Ben, a son of
twenty two years, when his father died at forty. Now when Ezra, showing how
he came of Athaliah the daughter of Omry, properly daughter to Achab (but he
names Omry, to call the reader to consider his purpose for Omries kingdom:
whose kingdom at Iorams death, stood forty two years, laid down by many
parcels in the kings, and often Synarchies) when Ezra the learned showing the
troubles of all this kingdom, says: He was Ben of forty two years: the
term left his first signification, for his usual in a trope: Affected unto:
or Belonging unto the famous two and forty years. This dealing in Ezra
declared not only his own readiness in the story, but also his nationes
common readiness. They knew well that Ezra could not have from God any
authority to check Gods former authority: nor yet to speak any thing but
that they might judge off. And doubtless he would speak as they at the first
might allow: and the blind acquainted with the Scripture would not stumble.
And so the ordinary Commenter in Ebrew Ralbag playnneth all upon this: Two and
twenty years old was Achaziahu when he reigned: and one year reigned he in
Jerusalem: and his mothers name was Athaliahu the daughter of Amri king of
Israel. Ben is son or belonging unto, or affected unto, in sundry sorts.
Thereupon Ralbag writes letters that speak thus: 2. King. 8.16. Mark that
2. Chr. 22. it is said: Ben of two and forty years. And mark that his count
in the Chronicles was not of the birth of Achaziahu, but from the time of the
arising of the kingdom of Amri and Omri I do use for the same: as he is
translated by A. and O*
Omri. And because he was of ^is seed, it befell him that he was killed with
the king of Israel. And thus goes the sum: After thirty and one year of
Asa, Omri reigned over all Israel: and reigned after that, six years: and
Achab his son twenty two and Achaizahu two years: and Ioram ^ame to the
twelueth. Behold then the two and forty years of the kingdom of Achab. And
for: His mothers name was Athaliahu the daughter of Amri: that shows the
reason of his phrase. For she ^as properly the daughter of Achab. Thus the
Rabbine shows, how Ezra expounds the Kings story for Amries daughter,
being properly Achabs: leaving the propre time as immovable as any rock:
and for memory bringing many parcells to one sum. And therein must a
Translatour be so fully settled where property can not be altered: as
careful, to allow and follow the truth of the Ebrewe copy. Pretense of
reconciling, breding endless variance, is most dangerous, against truth of holy
story.
And if the Lord tell six times, that Ioas the King was son to Achaziah,
tables prete^ding to reconcile Saint Matthew and Saint Luke, breaking of
Salomons house in Achaziahu: and bringing Ioas to Nathan, though Europe
embraced them, and our Bibles bare them in their heart before the holy Gospel,
yet a sound Translatour must loath them as a leprosy. How circumspectly we
have done herein, we should consider, to abolishe with public authority,
our ouersightes and unskillfulness, mother of lothing all religion. Many that
find us raw in matters of plain story, the ground of all, and set before
our eyes, will less think that, in matters of collection and pliable
affection of arguments, and things of the world to come, we should be of any
sound judgment. And Christians should not be as the Athenians, whom
Demosthenes taunteth for being like dogs that bite the stone flong at them,
and not the flinger: blaming not the authors of the fault, but the tellers
what is committed. Dan. 12.
The wise will always love understanding: as the wicked can not abide it. This
table poisoning all simple that use it, makes the fathers of our Lord all
these, Symeon, Leui, Luke 3.30.
Matthat, Iorim, Eliezer, Iose, Er, Elmodam, Cosan, Addi, Melchi, Neri, who was
Salathiels father, the table makes all these to be the Kings from Ioas to
Iechonias. A greater matter of story could not be, then our Lords right line:
neither did Julian with Porphyri take Christians ever so tardy in any their
imperfections, as that they confounded the Gospel by ignorance therein. And
Mine answer to the^ will come anon.
Jews objected unto my self, for this forged table, our badnes, their gladness,
(for they know it full well) that by our Evangelists none could prove that
Christ came of David. And they seek no more to disturb all Christianity,
then to have Salathiel naturally Iechoniahs son. For, then Christ must come
of Solomon: and all Saint Lukes Gospel, and, with all, Christianity failed.
And Christ should come of the worst that ever could be: who comes of none
unfaithful. He should come of Iehoiakim that burnt Gods word, and killed a
Prophet: of Manasses the sawer of Esai, of Achaz that fyered to Devils his
own children: of Amatziah, in religion an Edomite: and of Ioas, that killed
Zachari, as Cain did Abel: of such, the shame of the world, the King of glory
should become king of the Jews, the praise of GOD among men. Though we see
how careful God was to commend Rahab in the old and new: The suspected in
dignity have glory from God: that Christ's live should be holden to have none
base.
least her young life should stayne the ^ine: to commend Ruth, equal to Abraham
for leauinge, Country, kinsfolk, and fathers house: to commend Bathshebah,
Pro. 31. least some inferioritie of faults should not ^uffer her to match the
best. Such co^me^datio^ was needful.

Moreover, the counsel of God was to leave Salomons Kings to their own race,
that David's Throne might be holden a Celestial and not like the fool
Roboams: and the Kings pronounced to eternal life, Dan. 7. Kings named
Kings of eternity Da. 7. before they were borne: as they were in Math: the ten
to Joseph,
should not soon ^e brought from this row. David's last speech gave an
othergates warning: that his house would not be right with God: and that God
had otherwise made sure the covenant. But we lookee not to the rock of truth,
the strait propriety of Gods word, both for continuing Salomos house, while
the holy Ghost did in narration of ordinary playnes, that might admit no trope
continue it: and again to finishe (...) when God swears and cries thrice to
write the end of it, Ierem. 22.30. A confident learned Translatour, would ^ot
believe all the world, that Iechonias had natural chil^^en after Gods oath
and three-folde charge to the contrari^* So this table dashinge all authority,
truth, story, old and new: breaking off against a six-fold testimony,
trans^^bstantiating eleven or twelve Kings into an other Line, ^^eeding above a
thousand gross lies, by shufling two and ^^ftie with 18. personages: and 18.
into them: continuing stock against an oath and threefold charge to end it:
and that for a kingdom, whose ruin all the earth was to mark, ^or a better
kingdom, this table by ignorance of Scripture ground has hardened Turks:
whose sword the word would have turned to our good: has hardened Jews, to
despise the ioyance of the Gospel: has weakoned Papists to think the Gospel
and Scripture inexplicable: has weakened even our selves to burst out into
heinous notes, and barbarous rage against the openers of the truth. Some of
Poules and S. Paul's Cretes know.
For thus goes our Genevas note upon Iere. 22.30. Not as though he had no
children, for afterward he begat Salathiel, Mat. 1. If we know not when a
writer must speak pro pre, or be counted a lier: and when words may be taken
in freer use, to great grace, we have not settled our grounds of study, for
translating. The first penner of the matter and all writers of it must use all
certain and sure plainnes, until all doubts be removed. And so the Kings
story is most exact: The abridgers grace stands in short speech: with close
helps to call unto the larger declaration. When Aggei and Zachary had cleared
Ieremies prophecy, that Zorobabel, who fanned Babels golden head was not of
Iechoniah, but of Nathan David's son, then Ezra more freely brings in speech
of the kingdoms right, Zorobabel to be Iechoniahs son: but with two close
warninges: for first he makes the Uncle Zedekias, son: as following in the
kingdom: at Iechoniahs removing: next, he shows how Iechoniah was
strait-prisoner, assyr: when he made Salathiel his son. And so the Thalmud
takes assyr, in Sanedrin, for an adjective, bound, kept up, and hard kept.
And Seder Olam Zuta tells in Catalogue of Iechoniah for sonage and
fatherwood: Dibberu Abothenu: A singular grant of Jews for S. Math. cha 1
our Fathers did speak so. And here the force of truth is mighty. The
Rabbines know, that if their people knew Solomon's house to be ended, their
hope of a Pompous kingdom were gone. Therefore they make this one of the
articles of their faith: To deny that Messiah comes of Solomon: is even to
deny God and so all his holy prophets. And to Jeremy they say: That
Iechoniahs repentance altered Gods oath. But they have a sure true rule, that
Moses own repentance could not alter Gods sentence pronounced for an outward
punishment. Moreover, his thirty and seven years imprisonment cutteth of all
opinion of ^epentance altering Gods dealings. Then the Talmud and Rambam say
from their fathers: that captivity reconcileth. Their own millions in 1500.
years experience, dasheth all that opinion. Touching Saint Matthew, he knew
as well as Saint Luke, that Salathiel was of Neri, and the nation all generally
knew that: and then none of his nation would mistake him: and having in hand
to show how Christ was king of the land promised to Abraham, reigned of
David, at the which fame of king, Herod feared: he was to follow the phrase
of his nation, which termed the heir, son, (...) unwilling to let heathen
know the line to be broken off: ^nowing why Ezra did so before. And all nations
would ^^mmende that shortness. Thus the Table that stained our ^^ble, our
religion, our nation, convicted, I trow sufficiently should stir better
looking to our taklinges, unless (...) mean to make a shipwreck of all faith.
I hope I have ^^nished it, from being any more printed: though I can ^^t call
it in. But now I must return to handle more at ^^ge the place of Ezra 2.
Chro. 22. And I must crave leave ^re for a long spech: as Homers warriers,
Diomedes and Gla^^^^ make before they fight, for the matter here is rare, eight
terms of gold in holy Ebrew: Whereof Cethem and Paz seem terms of Ophir and
Vpaz: and if we knew where gold is so called, there we might deem old Ophir
an^ Vpaz to (...)
precio^^, golden (in gold of all Ebrewe terms Cethem, Paz and other terms
full goody of gold) which knitteth all nerves of ^auids house in due use of
motion: and all from Moses to ^^r Lord. I must show how to hinder all this
treasure and ^^re of good, vnhedines marred that rare wit of Ezraes pu^nes:
laboring of purpose to make famous the four and ^wentie years of Omries
house: Full of calamities six seauens ^f years: and drawing Judah unto ruin:
that Ioram killed his ^rethren, Achaziah was killed in his first year, the
Kings ^^ine in Salomons house, but Ioas, was rooted out: and he strangely
kept, and Athalia reigned: that after six seauens of Calamities in Omri, and
that kingdom ended: Judah should begin their stirs in the seventh seaue^,
and hold it thoroughly: when such a wicked brood of Iezabel reigned in Judah,
that God killed three: Leprosed the next: plagued the people and Kings stock:
left the good K. Ezekias long sonnelesse, showing how unwilling he was to
continue the kingdom: left Manasse to shed blood, calling (as Abels) for
Babylon-punishment, and for some taste, carries the King thither: kills Amon,
and tells Josias plainly of captivity: and by Sophonie of paying his sons:
prisoneth Ioachaz, gives Ioakim the burial of an ass: captiueth and blinds
Sedekias, kills his children: swears that Iechonias shall dye childlesse:
bids all the earth, the earth, the earth to mark it: that none should think
Christ the king of glory, to descend after the flesh of Iezabel. Al these
mischiefs the Jews knew and considered full well: that the two and forty
years was most famous among them: that to be called a Babe of that two and
forty years was to be noted as most openly cursed from (as we say) his
mothers belly: and if that had been co^sydered, Ezra had been cleared: and the
curse upon the later Kings weighed: neither would men ever have bin so
senseless, as to have brought in Nathans house, the holy seed at the first to
be plagued, in the first year of coming to the kingdom, yea and the first
year of coming into the world. For they that make Ioas to be of Nathan,
must grant that absurdity also. If the swift Scribes readiness had bred in us
heedinesse, al these calamities had not made Jews triumph in disputation (where
mine eyes and ears were ten witnesses) that by our Evangelists we could not
prove that Christ came of David: If Ezra had been marked Jeremy for Chonias
had been marked: Troiaque nunc stares Priamique arx alta maneres:

The Church had increased and not lost: and the pen had killed more Turks then
our sword: and made Jews to have made us better Jews, the Romans 1.29.
true praise of God. For when the story is cleared, faith is wonderful much
helped. And the Persons be much to the story. But our strangenes in Scripture
exceeds: neither to understand by our selves, nor to learn by others
discoursing: nor yet to account of weightiest matters. Weighty matters among us
are blasphemed
And in truth this is a paradoxe double. As Iosaphat little thought that
Iezabels daughter, at the least Achabs, would, in Achaziah, ruinate his house,
that one such matter should overthrow the kingdom: so scholars little though
that one syllable, Ben: being vnpropre in the two and forty years, but
supposed pro^re: and contrary-wise propre in Ioas but supposed in our cursed
table vnpropre, should disturb all the Bible. ^et, as the little spark of the
tongue enflameth the whole whele of the creation: so one syllable being
mistaken, This was a pardoxe and strange.
has ^indled a flame through all our Bible that must be quen^hed: or the
careless Vc-alegon, that hinders shall find a ^reater fire from the white
judge in Daniel: before whom ^ookes are opened, which will note all errors.
But now, seeing I have, as my entrance of speech showed, many ^^inctes to
handle besides clearing of the original writ, or ^^tter: and the bewaring least
in our translation or notes, ^^e make lies: I may not pursue our oversightes
for these ^^inctes with any further discourse. A digression to a translation in
latin used much in our soil, and worthily for much good, yet herein in ferior
to ours: and used to my check.
Here I will show a little of a stranger: in a man very well learned, and
accepted in our soil: to whom I offered conference, and sent unto ^im noted,
what I blamed; and answer was made, that ^he Church should judge. And in mild
quietness I referr ^t to the Churches judgment. My blame is, that this La^in
translation, for to much curiosity, shrinketh from the plain use of terms
which every heart will tell ought to have been reserved. I reverence the
learned work, but mine own nation more: and think my time spent this way not
the lesser: to weigh Ebrewes with the Greeks, until both agreed upon a truth
sensible to every heart. For the story of Kings, all their chain of story, I
must differ. First for the chain of Iudahs kingdom: in Ezechiels thrie
hundredth ninty years: thereupon for twenty two years of Anarchy in Israel:
which are swallowed up: and thereupon four and twenty in the time of Azariahs
reign: and thereupon for Amatziahs reign: whereof he would have full eleven
years spent in banishment: and thereupon the swalowing up of eleven years
Anarchy which in truth should be betwixt Amaziahs death and Azariahs reign:
and thereupon: seeing he makes Azariah eight and twenty year a lepre: and
Iotham reigns after his fathers death in the second of Pekach: being but
five and twenty years old, and rayneth but sixteen years: he twice wresteth
the text further then native light will suffer. In the same tenor we, and the
French following him, must wrestle: whether we say better for Osee that he
preached seauentie years, or they, for fifty years. The simple must be
taught whether is deceived, otherwise they will cast off both. So for the sin
of Israel: in Ezechi. 4. whether Ieroboams calves, or somewhat in Salomons 27.
be meant. And hereupon all the authority of the second of the Chronicles: how
native judgment can defend it in his sense: and likewise whether he
overthrow not Ezra, Nehemiah, Ester, Aggei, Zachari, and puts Daniels seauens
to a plunge, and Mat. 1. and this proposition: God has recorded the worlds age
from the creation to the redemption. Hitherto the Chain of Jubilees will
belong: and such other matters as will folloe in their sequel. These poinctes
must needs be named: least fame of strangers draw us hereafter to deny our
own good, as it has done heretofore: into all the former errors: that
hereafter we may look to truth and ancient warrant, stronger then any late
professors, and exame^ it before our people be troubled with any new editio^:
in which every one, who will, should have full speech: for all poincts of doubt.
Thus I blame this work, for novationes not his own. The harm of these
errors.
For bad Jews invented all this disturbance of very malice: to break of the
five chains which draw from Adams fall unto our Lords resurrection: which
where they are known of Christ also confessed. Which though I have made famous
already, yet I think it not tedious, to handle them often. For they are a
greater ornament to the neck, then any chain of Cethem, Paz, or any other
the finest gold. The first reaches all clear, as the sun, Five chains
draw from Adams fall to our Lords resurrection: For which a digression here
may do good: that none be so hardy as to despise one word, as it were a link,
touching them, least he be found guilty of disgracing all.
from the beginning of time to the death of Abraham's Father: the author of
idolatry, in Christ his Line, and cause of ceassing the account for particular
men's age in that tenor. The next begins upon his death: with a new promise
of Christ making Abraham heir of the world. From that to the Law, Temple,
and Salomons death, an other vndowsable is continued. His idolatry was worthy
to have that ended: for which his kingdom was parted, and Jeroboam did set up
calves for Gods: which doing is commonly called, The sin of Israel. The^
Judah only is Gods kingdom: and it for honor of Asa is called the kingdom of
Asa. That is reckoned by comparison of Judah with Israel, in the kings book: by
Judah only in the Chronicles. And by one sum in the fourth of Ezechiel: from
the sin of Israel unto an end, The sin of Israel, Ezekiel. 4.
where forty years also for an other matter famous, then in action, is full
concluded. The preaching of Jeremy in playnnes, dignity and fame, does make
forty years from his beginning in the thirteeth year of Josias unto the end
of the kingdom, and ruin of City, and Flames of Temple, and the Arkes
destruction. The golden Candlestick with his seven stalks, two and twenty
bowls, eleven Knoppes, nine Flowers, that goodly work of Bezeleel: that
reasted in the shadow of God, then it was burst: Chyram the Father of Solomon,
was not the bras worker, but Chyram the king, whose daughter Salomo^ had among
his 700 as their familiarity argues, and Greeks in Eusebius* note.
then all Moses Curtines, and all that Chyram the kings of Tire, the Father of
Solomon, and Chyram the Tyrian artificer, made to Solomon: the one by
procuration, the other by trade, all these goodly things left the Temple: and
showed Christ his wrath. Then Sedekias lost his eyes, that never would see:
The^ Saraias, father to Ezra, was killed for badnes in high sacrificehood: the
death of whom being in record, kills all common received greek accomptes,
thence to great Alexander, by Ezra one man living thither: then Sedekias
children were killed, the only hope of Salomons stock. And this was a famous
mark to end the third chain upon such a famous punishment of idolatry, and
end of Moses ceremonies, poor elements in deed, that Christ from Ezekiels
vision full of eyes, might appear in the ambre light and pureness. This mark
was a goodly pillar, at which the third chayn might be fastened: Four helps
are for the Kings times
as the kingdom of Asa beginning was a pillar for the other end. Such famous
marks the holy style shoteth at: having a fourefold string to the bow: Judah,
Israel, both in parcells, Judah sole, and one total sum. Which chain if a
Translatour break, as Ralbag, Iarchi, Seder Olam, and others malicious do:
stealing linkes now from the one, now from the other, The 390. Eze. 4. must
be looked unto in all particulars.
he will four times disturb all the king story and Ezekiel: and shall roove
at such dim marks, for beginning, and ending Ezekiels three hundred and
nientie years: as never can argue any golden chain to draw the world unto
Christ: but be worse then a cankred wier one, of linkes all broken asunder. And
as a good heart would bleed to see the Four parts are of the Ebrew: the
(...): the Pro^tes, historique: Prophets Oratorie: and Preceptory with them,
disputationes and meditations
Second part of the Prophets, that of the holy story most fair printed (with
the goodly hedge of the Massorites, directing the copyers that they never
miss) to be cut in pieces, and all authority of them for ever abolished: So a
good heart would groan and closely weep, to have the sense of the holy story
all chopped as herbs to the pot. And who so ever has a clear taste in
Scripture, will think that never any wormwood made waters bitterer, then such
senses would be to the taste of an Eliu and a Job: which would judge by ears as
the palate by taste. And now by three Chains, Yet we also have missed
as Master Calvin marked, no moderate men can miss for the time, from since
Satan's fiery tongue did set the wheel of the whole creature on flame, until
the Chaldean Serpent-race burned the Temple, the allurement of nationes unto
the worship of him that made the Temples of the heavens. We commonly miss in
the fourth chain.
A fourth chain comes for Gods enemies: short, as showing Gods lothing to
bring them in this draught and carriage, of seauentie years. And commonly we
add some seven linkes of years, that so Judah should be seauentie seven
years in Babel: and disturb prophecies infinitely. Where Jews agree for our
good we miss. Goodly skill?
Though ^n this place the Jews universally agree with that which Jeremy should
force us unto. The fifte chain reaches from Babels fall to our Lords death.
This was known in the Apostles time to all Jews: and comes infinitely to
^he regarded in the new Testament. And this one poinct ^s enough to stop all
Antichristian mouths: that the sons labors have a better story then that of
Bitias Atlas ^^oller in Didoes court: Vergil. Aeneid. 1.
even his labors through all ages ^^ll Christ showed a new world: where all
that mark it, shall be as the sun in the kingdom of the Father. And this one
work, trayleth infinite heathen almost their eue^y book, to be weighed, and
found full of chafe, He that breaks any link, in the Chain drawing to the
redemption does mar all the re^^*
void of gold, and light as vanity: being tried by the holy Bible.

Now, they that grant a fiue-parted chain thus to ^each, must needs grant
that they who break it in any one place, make all the rest to be vain and
void of counsel: and they that thrust idle linkes of their own copper, be as
counterfaiters, and forgers of metalles: and if they draw the time far
longer then the particulars will bear it out, And herin are we faulty
specially upon Daniel.
they draw into pieces all the body of story: as Nabycadnezar gave in sentence
over his Chaldeans. This standing thus, I trust every man of heart will require
in a translatour much care and skill for every one of those linkes; no less
then faith and skill in a goldsmith: yea and so much more as the matter is more
precious: though not a small number show, that they would rather have the
truth of God to perish, then former ignorance detected. But such must be
utterly contemned with as good stomaches as they bring. The Judge that sits
upon the fiery throne can, as all men know, Al truly learned joy to have their
pains amended.
and will, as Moses tells, pay them home, when their foot shall fall. And I
hope all learned will joy to have their good and learned pains bettered: and
scoured from that rust, which otherwise would cankre the whole. Now I will
return to touch the work I speak of, as I showed what Rabbines deceived it:
who to a bad end of purpose, in their own counsel, this did speak against
their conscience. The observing of these matters will breed plenty of
dexterity in the story of the Kings: which, some Ebrews think that Ierem.
penned: as Ezra the Chr. In sum, this much I think of that learned Latin
work and of the late French edition which follows it: that in the
obseruationes much injury is done to the truth of story. Examples may these
be taken. Amazias reigned at Jerusalem nine and twenty years, says the
text. The notes check it, that he reigned but seauenteene years, and lived at
Lachis, bannished all the rest. Amazias was killed, and when his son was
sixteen years old, the people of the land made him king. The notes make him
reign all the time of his fathers banishment. The text tells, that he began
to reign in the seven and twentieth of Jeroboam: that he was then sixteen
years old: and so he should be about four at his fathers death: and a
regentship of eleauen years should go betwixt. The notes make him reign
four and twenty years before that time: that is eight years before he was
borne. The text makes him reign two and fifty from Ieroboams seven and
twenty. The notes make him then stricken with a leprosy and to continue eight
and twenty years. The text teaches that Iotham, at his fathers death, was
but five and twenty years old. So, by the former note, he should judge the
people before he was born, three years. The notes, to avoid that, expound the
text thus: He was five and twenty years old when he reigned, that is, when
he ruled the kingdom in his fathers leprosy: and he reigned sixteen years:
that is, after his fathers death. If this had been done in mine own nation, I
would have blamed it more largely: But I loath to disgrace a learned pains, but
for infinite necessity. And our travels might have more cleared the regentship
of Azarias and the two and twenty years of Anarchy: that earthquake of the
state, and the styrres called Iezreel: and likewise for Ezekiels 390. years,
where the French notes return to the right truth: against their own
particulars in all these errors, we in a few words might have kept our
nation from liking strange opinions. Other matters of this Latin work for the
last Prophets times and Zorobabels house, I have written, against his learned
defendor therein: though not here. D.R. whom I name for honors sake. He deserved
great commendation for hazarding his fame: whether 2000. years errors holden
almost generally over all Greeks and Latins Libraries, could be set on flame
with a fire of judgment taken from the holy author. And, I trow, all of heart
and our language, will confess that part cleared, by my pains: how so ever
some feared to stand to an arbitrament: reported that they had passed, as
learning would require them and all to determine. Yet hearing what infinite
millions were against me: they thought it the safest way to have all in
suspense. But I thought it a duty unto God and my country, to clear not
only the cause, but all the Bible, by Gods help, in our tongue: and to seek
for the next kingdoms help, if that labor at home should be blasphemed.
Experience in Daniel the hardest book, cleared (I hope) in the very
dedication, may show how soon and easily, much holden past hope of
achieving, may be accomplished. And now to leave strangers, I will return to
our own upon Daniel: where I blame our pains, that while we make two
Nebuchadnezars: and miss of the Images time, and fourth Monarchy, and ill
translate Gabriels oration for redemption: and in our argument, Cha. 12. tax
Daniel for obscurity: who has the greatst plains that ever the matter could
suffer: While this runs current, all the Bible will complain that we do
exceedingly darken it. It his better antiquiry were disgraced for missing the^
the truth of Daniel should be hid.
Neither do I think it better to have the truth of Daniel hid, then
antiquity disgraced for missing. But now I have discoursed more largely of my
two first poinctes: then I well may upon all the six following: how heed
must be taken, least the Ebrewe writ or Greek of the new Testament be
blamed: and least in translation or exposition the holy book be pestered
thorough us, with untruths: or have any one at all. One error more I would
have spoken off, for a place of Daniel ill translated: but it is to great to
be opened unto the people: least they want stay in moderation. I did object it
with sharpnes not the least unto a scholar of high place, and great recompense
for his study: who took it in good part, and sage moderation. And so I trust
he will take all the rest. Such affection will cause him self and others,
some great reast, which little meddling bredeth.

The third care in a Translatour, which ought to be, The third care: for
prophecies spoken in doubtful terms, in sad occasiones.
as that person which Nebuchadnezar saw by night, watchful and holy, is, that,
in speeches of the Prophets, where the holy servauntes of God speak of
purpose terms doubtful; where the profane would otherwise skoph or
persecute: there the true clear light with full warrant be kindled in the
tongue used of him. If he write for a nation that professes the truth, and
not for profane Lagidae, as the ^eptuagint: who living in those styrres of the
iron and clay ^egges of Daniels image, not cleaving together, and of the wars
of Seleucidon and Lagidon, which the Angel uttered unto Daniel of purpose in
hard phrases, for the Jews safety: they, living in these very times, had
crossed all the Angels wisdom: if they had opened unto their profane ^art
that which Gabriel hid for their good. But our case ^owe is nothing like
theirs: in christian kingdoms. Wherefore a Translatour should above all things
be ready in all ^^riptures where such hidinge of the mind is used.

(...) ready Ebrician, that sees one of imperfect study labouringe to
translate, will tell almost for every place where a Translatour would miss.
And touching ^^ch as in Daniel have deceived translatours, them I have ^^ted
in my commentationes upon him: Recompense demanded was promised. D. C. was
appointed Requester: M. L. G hinderath.
dedicated unto ^me of you Nobles, and others of honorable Gentry, to (...)
regarded according to the sage honor of her Majesty's ^uuernement. By Daniel
most of any, because he lived ^^der the profane, these tenours of speech and
wonder^^ll witty hiding of the mind, may be considered sound^e, to be had in
heart readily. In such places, Dani 7.17. in one version otherwise far the
better.
a man wor^hie the name of an Ebrewe professor, will be most ready: ^s in
matters most weighed, searched, tried and peysed by him in the gold balance of
Ebrewe diligence: where ordinary plain speeches require not to be so much
thought upon who would not look better about him: that should find this going
current for Gods word. The four beasts are four Kings: who shall take the
kingdom of the Saints, of the most high: and hold the kingdom for ever: even
for ever and ever. This can not stand with religion, any more, then Tartarus
can be Paradise: and eternal woe, blessedness. Here an Ebrician would long
before he came to the place, think upon the rock, where others made
shipwreck: and mark how the Particle Vau, one letter, was a key to open or
shut the sense. So in Daniel again, Chapter 7. ver. In our common Bible.
12. As concerning the other beasts, they had their dominion taken away, but
their lives were prolonged for a certain time and season. This speech vnspeaketh
it self. For the beast is the Empire: and when the Empire is gone, the beast is
no more a beast, but stands on his feet, as a man: when a private man's heart
is given him: as in ver. 4. of chapter 7. Agamemnons man in Euripides beholding the
Emperor writing for Iphigenia his daughter, to come to be sacrificed, and by
fatherly affection blotting: and again writing: and again razing: marveyleth
at his cross dealing. This dealing i^ more marveylous: no natural affection
here carried, but vnacquaintance with Daniel and with the Ebrew tongue. And
reason might tell that the speech crosses it self. And herein I must commend
my L. of Canterburies grace: who though he thought it not an officers part, to
admit soon a new translation: and when I had presented unto him self and
his patronage the seven first chapters, all the Chaldy part, and the first
chapter with somewhat more about it: he wrote in deed to stay the work: yet
when I debated what his place required him to do, he wrote again to license
the work: his grace saying, that he would not defend it: I should stand to the
defense of it. And full ready am I to do that. And I dare defend his grace
for that translation: that it is bettea then the usual in the Church. And
whereas a certain Printer feared, least in time it would come into the Bibles,
he needs no more to fear, then least in time our nation will commonly learn
Daniel in one hour: which without an heyfer, that many prick, will not so
soon be clear: and was long sealed up in our nation. Full is the Prophet of
examples, biddinge heedines, but finding headdines. And Moses had the like
occasion, as he lived, when skant any in the world belee^ed that the world was
created, or ruled by God, or that any God was. Less did they think of the
state and condition, in which the wicked Spirits and souls are in eternal
chains, and darkness with pains: which state as they ^hought not off, they had
no propre term for it in their ^peach. And likewise for the state of joy,
the portion of ^he faithful in the sight of Gods glory: the wicked world
^newe it not: and therefore had no term for it. In this case Moses hydeth his
mind from the wicked: as touching any one propre term for either Eternal
death, or Eternal ^^fe. But he by matter and argument does spread it abroad
unto such as love the appearing of the just judge. By the ^^rme DEATH, he
means Eternal death, when leaves (...) the sore be not fetched from the tree
of life: and so by ^fe in promises fastened upon Christ, he means Eternal
^fe: Even as Adam closely meant by the name of EVE: which the Septuagint
translate LIFE. So by the curse v^on the Earth, he means an Eternal curse
with it, for all ^he Serpents brood. And for this the Jews generally, Upon
Leu. 26. many of them.
saying the Sadducees, understood him: and handle the mat^er most learnedlie. O
that they had gone further to the tree of life: then their readiness in the
text would have multiplied knowledge, even for both Testamentes. One word in
him of this kind, has bred much stir amongst us Sheol, that is, The verb,
the root of it is Shaal. to require and Scheol is the state which every life
with sense pays, as a debt: when it is spoken of a body, whether of man or
beast, as in the company of Coreh, Dathan, Abyram, the destruction from this
life is meant. If sequel of matter bring more, by the matter, not by the word,
it must be admitted. In men's case we term it commonly the grave: though fish
in Sea, or fire in earth, or Hyrcanyan dogs panches, or Egyptian Glasses,
were their tomb: or they were, as Iakym, that with his penknife did cut
Ieremies lamentations, cast away as the burial of ash: fit for such as hate
such diligence about Gods word, as by Ieremies example we may see, that the
Eternal does require. That state to the body is Scheol: to the soul, the
loss of this world in such as knew not the souls immortality is Sheol: to
me^ of further reach: the world of the Souls: the world unseen of us that be
here: without distinction of lotts there. For few knew that: the hidden of
God called in Ebrewe, psalm. Cxi, Sod, the mystery of righteousness. And they
the Lillies among thorns spoke as the common world: and commonly of the
soul by terms fit for the body, for such as granted no further continuance,
and for such as granted that there was an other world. And as dying is holden
a degree lower then life: and daily speech ought to be such, as the greater
part be not troubled with it, to descend to Scheol is to leave this world. So
Jacob would descend to Scheol unto Joseph: so Judah feared to bring his
fathers graynes to Schecol with sorrow: so Gods anger in Deuteronomy. 32. and in the
same syllables in Jeremy, speaking of Ierusalems fall, is a fire that burns
unto the low Scheol. Not determininge of their souls: though their case were
dangerous in wars brought for idolatry: men dying in contempt of the
covenant. The argument might determine: the term did not determine. Haides in
the Greek is the very same: and neither of them is ever in Scripture,
directly the state of Eternal torment: but as king Ezechias describes it:
The ^utting-off from this life: the not seeing of Iah, in the land ^f the
living: the removing of their dwelling hence as a ^ente: the shearing of life,
as the weauer does his web ^^ckes from the Thrummes. And in Job, Aethan,
psalm. 89. ^^lomon Eccles. all men do descend to Sheol, as Joseph, Jacob,
^^echias. And in a speech of death, when life is soon reco^^red, descending to
Scheol, signifies that the soul fully ^ent from the body, even to the world
of the dead: and (...) divinity meaning to appear before God. In that sense
^ery man's soul, by Solomon ascends, and the beasts des^^ndeth. So that the
worlds common language: To des^^nde into Scheol, and the Prophets: ascend
unto Gods ^one or to return unto God, leaving the body to the (...): these
differ not in substance one hair breadth. Eu^^s Act. 20. fell from the third
height, dead. But his soul (...) yet within him: and then had not descended
into (...). The soldier buried by Elyseus was dead: but whe^^^r his soul had
fully leaft the body, that may be further ^ired. Our Lord being dead, had not
his soul resting ^e dead body, but void of all controversy, it went to (...)
world of the souls, through the tabernacle of his ^e, and to paradise: the
joy of happy souls. Which ^g to testify, some of them returned to this
world. The ^ell and his Angels might well perceive it: But the ^ch or article,
Descended into Haides, meddleth not (...) one or other, but makes sure a full
and absolute de^ure unto the world of the souls. His sufferings were
^^^peakeable, and the agony of his soul: as he told at ^r beginning to his
Disciples: and when skopers were ^ut him, and dogs, he declares by turning
his speech unto God, how to unspeakable extremity his torments went on: Why
O my God do thou forsake me! The phrases of both, the first from Psalm. 42.
the verse repeated Psa. 43. (for the Greek of it is the Greek of the new
Testament) the next from Psalm. 22. these two be the saddest phrases of the
language. And we must think, that as much is under them as can be contained:
for the suffringes of our Lord, and that he spoke of his own person. But I am
not now to run into a common place: if any stir be of late risen, that
way, men of preferrment for their pains, must look to the defense of the
truth. And it is injurious to require any to war on their own charges: as
some have requested me to deal herein. But for a Translatour, he must be
careful in such poinctes: where for the manner of the world the Scripture has
terms general, that the unlearned in tongue, and the unstayed in the
grounds, will turn often times into a wrong sense. In this sort the term,
Hell, thorough the old Testament, should be well looked. He that thinks it
ever used for Tartaro or Gehenna, otherwise the^ the term Death may by
Synecdoche importe so: has not skill in Ebrewe or that Greek, which breathing
and live Graecia spoke: if God has lent me any judgment that way. And who so
ever can not clear the Apostles words by men indifferent: as Old Greeks,
Rabbines, and such like is unsettled in his study. Saint Peter's place in his
first Epistle and third Chapter affoordeth a good example for heed in places
hard. My 3. place of 8. is of speeches hard of them selves: not of made so by
us, as 1. Pet. 3.
Though it belong not properly to this part which I handle. For he spoke so
plain, that any Jew then, or yet alive, would understand him. And thus he
should be translated: Christ suffered, etc. being made dead in the fleash, made
alive by the Spirit, in which spirit he had gone and preached to them that now
are spirits in prison: because they disobeyed when the time was: when the
patience of God once waited in the days of Noe. I assure my self that there
is not any learned Jew in the world, nor was, since Saint Peter's time, but
would thus understand him. For all these poinctes are plain with them: the
Spirit of God, Genesis 1.2. Ze Ruho Shel Melech Ha Mashiah^ This is the Spirit of
Massiah the King. So, the spirit of God that preached to Noe, should be that
spirit of Christ, who^ Saint Peter in expou^ding his mind, calls God, whose
patience waited. Also they have this most famous, how God long showed his
patience, while ^he Fathers were alive: how the holy Ghost preached by Noe.
and first by Noe since the day of Adams fall, and day ^f pronouncing the curse
upon the earth: telling Noe the ^^me of Execution: and that that generation
strove against ^he spirit of God: and that God brought upon them double ^^aues:
of water and of Gehennah fire. And in the text of ^oth Talmuds this matter is
laid as a common article Dor (...)-mabbul ein lahem chelek le Olam ha-ba. The
generation ^^at died in the deluge, they have no hope of blessed por^^on in the
world to come. Now, seeing all these positi^^s be true, that by the Eternal
spirit of Christ, his humane ^^ule came to the body and so it was made alive:
and that ^he Eternal spirit is about ten times noted in the Law to ^ue gone
done: (whence Saint Peter divinely takes the ^^each of Christ his going in
the divine nature, unto other as famous matters) and showed patience: and
brought (...) Deluge upon the world, void of Religion, and prea^hed not in
any man with express calling before Noe, and therefore his story was the
fittest for an example: and damneth for ever all that be out from the covenant:
seeing all this matter is true, and the propriety of Saint Peter's words in
their most exactenesse, will abide this: and the Jews, to whose nation he
wrote, admitted all this: and never would admit any other meaning of these his
words: which for matters in visible, must be plain and in granted senses: A
learned Translatour, who from childhoode should be acquainted with the holy
Ebrewe and Greek: and for it with all writers for both tongues, such a
Translatour would be better then many co^menters. Saint Peter would acquaint
his nation, that the Spirit of Christ was in the Prophets, whom they called
Jehovah. And in a matter of so great weight, to translate so that the humane
soul of Christ should now be meant spirit: and that to be made alive, which
dye can not, and to take a journey vnrecorded in the penners of the Gospel:
and to preach among souls, gone hence and to Noes age peculiar: as having
disobeyed once: but after as better advised: If Saint Peter had any such
meaning in glaunses vndisputed out: the scattered Jews, who admit no doctrine
but taught in Moses and the Prophets; they would have rejected all the
Apostles authority. But in this place we make clouds: he bred none. And in our
clouds we might sooner enable Job to bring about all propounded by God, as
above his reach: as defend Saint Peter against any Jew: which thing he that
can not do, is but a raw Doctor of the new Testament. A man might as soon
tell upon what foundation the earth was laid: what measure it has: how the
Sea was shutt with doors: how it is swadeled with the dark: how to give the
morning his charge, and to show the day spring his place: yea and may as soon
open the gates of death and see the doors of the shadow of death: as tell how
Christ's humane soul could dye, and be made alive: and what sermon he should
make enjoined from Moses and Elias doctrine: or why peculiarly to men of the
fludds age: or defend co^stantlie any such thing, at all, done by Christ's
humane soul: of any conference or speech among the dead. And Saint Peter knew
that Moses commanded to leave the hid things to Jehovah our God: and knew that
our Lord him self never taught his Disciples to break that: and might not
breed leappers over the threshell. And for this very poinct of our affirming
that Christ went to Gehennah, the Jew Isaak Ben Arama, who writes full
excellent things for Christianity in Shaar 52. upon Exodus and shows that all
his nation since Jerusalem fell, have mistaken all the Prophets: and is cited
for our side by Munster and Nebiensis upon Psa. 110. he disputing upon Leuit.
26. for the end of the Law, and how all those curses might ^e avoided; saw
no comfort in Iudaisme: and then he ^urneth toward Christianity: but
complayneth that we make Christ descend to Gehenna: and to bring out the
Fa^hers thence: whereas if we had expounded the suffringes of Messiah (which
all Rabbines confess that the Psalms make them infintie great) as the
Evangelists pen them, ^olde by our Lords own tongue, and much perceived ^y
the Disciples: such a Rabbine would have turned ma^^e, and by such means we
Christians should have coue^ed infinite many of our sins: where God would
miti^^te many his punishments over us for turninge sinners unto the right way.
I wish all that love the truth, to try ^his proposition; None that know
absolutely, as a profes^our of Ebrewe and Greek should, the holy phrases of
^cripture: Sheol and Haides, Gehennah and Tartarus, and whence Paradise for
Heaven, and when it began: as, THE WORLD to come, no Linguist, a true Linguist,
meting with his match to be tried by authors indifferent (as the Disciples
spoke and wrote) will defend, that any one syllable in scripture does so much
as ever glaunse, that Christ descended to Gehenna. Here, and in such poinctes a
translation bearing on the same page the original, Ebrew for the Old, A
translation for trial propounded unto all to speak against where they could:
should have the original which it: and such would always be good for libraries
and the learned.
with all Massorites clearing of the text: and the Greek for the New, with
declaration from what kind of writers every member of sentence is fetched, and
made according to them by one that has his eyes in his head, and the spirit of
Elihu in Job, such a translation in one word would calm all waves. The
Aethyopian translation may be an example upon Saint Peter's place, which has
for Spirit, Manphes Kades: the Spirit Holy. The plain Aethyopians, among whom
many Jews dwelt, show that they never staggered there. By such two words in
a margent note, all strife would cease. So in the Psalm 110. The Greeks
translated divinely: From the womb before the morning star have I begotten
thee. The Ebrewe was hard of purpose: and the Greek Translatours do show
their great divinity. I would herein follow them: either in the text, or lay
them down as paraphrastes in the margent. For their authority for divinity
is next the undoubted Prophets and Apostles. Though for their difference from
the Ebrew, accented, vowelled, and sound in every piece of letter (so near
it must be examined) millions of poinctes, which entangled us, must be
considered. And now I have handled largely three poinctes of eight: wherein we
must confess oversightes: which for a dry causie bring us to quabbemyres: and
we may not refuse amendment: for fear, (as some have spoken in effect) least
men will say: we had no way at all heretofore. This objection was made. Men
will say that we had no Bible heretofore: if we now amend. It may be
learnedly disputed, whether they be men that so speak. For they that read the
Bibles translation of ours, best know by their own experience, where they
stick fast: and these gainsayers show that they never read the Bible: and
men of such humors are not to be counted men of worth in tongue: and they that
plaspheme the certeintie of Gods word so pure, so wise, so watchfully kept,
little know what they do in so weighty a cause: and they injury authority,
when they hinder ^he public good. But this labor should have a mild style, ^o
win all to a good work. Yet thus much I dare say: that, right, not might:
skill, not will: pains, not gaynes, should bear sway for that book which the
Greek term ^alleth Book (Bible in Greek is book) as being the only ^ooke of
all books: as all being bables in respect of it: that ^nlearned babbling may
not be thrust unto it: but such as has crept in, must be taken out. The fourth
poinct, for terms of Equivocation.
Now for the fourth ^^inct, Terms of Equivocation witty in the speaker for
^^miliar and easy matters, how they must be looked vn^^, that a Translatour
draw them not to foolish and ridi^ulous senses. In this sense Moses said,
Seth named his ^ine Sorrowful (Enosh). Then sprang profaneness: Concerning
^lling upon the name of the Eternal. Thus he proceeds to ^^we how man's
wickedness hastened the curse, which ^od pronounced upon the earth. And whereas
he taught ^^e Gospel and prayer to God closely: because the wic^^d would never
understand but skoph, if it had been at ^ge told: he teaches the fall away
as closely. Ebrewes ^^ry many, rightly understood Moses: and Kimch^ the ^^mmon
recorder equal unto a thousand: and Latins ^^anie: But dog Jews, who would
not have Christ Re^eemer, and espy our strength, they rebel against the
^^ght: As Aben ezra with others, of like rancour. Herein ^ marueill, why
Tremelius having done well, was altered and marred after his death. As likewise
in Daniel 9.24. and 23. I could wish him restored to his former goodness. Now
we upon Genesis 4.26. say, Then men began to make invocation in the name of the
Lord. But Moses expounds him self Chapter 6.1. (the Cha. 5. is but a
parenthesis in the narration) and shows when men began to be multiplied, God
saw that their malice was great. And that is the reason why our father Seth
termed his son Enosh: Sorrowful. It had been senseless to call him
sorrowful: upon calling on Gods name. Now the Prophets call Man Enosh: still
expounding the text. So that a corruption of it, greeueth all the rest. An
other example of this kind I will bring from the new Testament. Mary
Magdalene had that affection toward Christ, which every full faithful soul
has in the Canticles. When she was a little past the watchmen: she found him
whom her soul loved: she laid hold upon him: as not willing to let him go.
Our Lord says, cleave not to me: or fasten not so on me. I do not yet
presently ascend. The holy and wise Evangelist left out her action, to be
gathered by our Lord his speech. So Daniel omitted his hindera^ce of The
Chaldean King is written seven several ways in the Prophets, wherewith to
acquaint our nation to know the Ebrew diligence variety is, not amiss.
Nebycadiozor to worship him: for modesty, and by the sequel does teach it.
Any wise may see, that John did the like: in omission of the woman's hearty
gesture. And our Bishops notes learnedlie show that. A commendatio^ of the
Bishops notes.
For thus they speak, upon Ioh. 20.17. Hereby Christ corrects her carnal
affection, looking too much to his bodily presence, and therefore he pulled her
from outward and externe offices, toward his bodily presence, and willed her
to be mindful of his ascension. The translation of the text is senseless: A
most senseless speech; ^earing the (...) Christ (...) ^rdes.
Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended unto my Father. Every linguist will
confess, that two gross faults are here committed. For the Greek Verb of
touching is such, as timber works fastened touch: and is, To fasten unto: to
be joined unto. And so Saint Paul does use it, saying: It is good for a man
not to touch a woman: that is, not to be fastened by marriage as one. And so,
Haphe, a substantive of this verb, is translated, a joint. Ephe. 4.16. This
was a gross oversight: not to clear the equivocation. And some who have a
mind to Descend to Gehennah, and can not abide that Christ's soul should go
to Paradise, as the thief believed it should: and as all Jews would swear,
his words ought to mean, have cited this text against that: ^s though Christ
spoke of his souls ascension, denying it ascension: where all souls that ever
were, ascend to Gods judgment. The speech following shows, that our Lord
^^ake of his bodies ascension. Now for the term in the Greek, ill
translated, I am not ascended: all of Ebrew study know, that the tense Abar
is used infinitely for a time not past, but quickly to come. And the Greeks,
Eusebius, ^^ocopius, and such, note that: but the Doctors of Ebrew ^kill, even
to their Babes, so plain it is. Now our Lord ^^ake all in Syriaque Ebrew,
saving the revelation. And his phrase uttered after the resurrection, shows
that: which thing John would express in Greek: but for us it ^ould be, I do
not yet presently ascend. ^ stand the more upon this matter, for that a
scholar of ^^asonable good accounpt in speech for one of you No^es, Psa. 16.
where you meant Scheol the world of the dead: ^ere he said he would burn in
this opinion, that Christ ^^scended to Hell, meaning Gehenna hell. I would not
^^ish him to stand to his words. One is ready to bring against him: Millia,
quot magnis nunquam ven^re Mycaenis.

I will defend Bucers bones of Doctrine, that they are ^urified with the fire
of judgment, against any that will disturb them, in our nation, for Psalm. 16.
and Act. 2. But I must return to translating: where two gross faults in one
short speech stayne much the glory of Gods word. Because it was an Herculean
labor at Augaeas stable to toil in this part: I noted about three score
chapters of Esaias, Ecclesiastes, and others with lines what I blamed in this
kind: and sent them to an whole nation to be looked unto: and will here lay
down an Epistle written before unto me from them by the consent of their most
Noble King, for that kind of study which I felt paynefull and costly now
thirty years: though some of ours despise it: and for their resolution to
have this work to go forward. Thus it speaks: written by one special
learned Scholar: Their words must he recorded, not as others do like, but as
the Epistle ^are them.
I thank God, who has moved your heart, guide Sir, to communicate with us
always your most godly and learned trauells, whereby the best of judgment
and most co^summate in learning amangs us, finds tham selves not a little both
profited and delighted. The word of your Translation, here moved ane very
earnest desire of all after it. I have showed your affection and maid report
of all the guide things you did concredit to the bearer to the noble Gentleman
you wrote of, which were al most gladly accepted. So that you may persuade
your self, if you resolve to come in this country, you shall be heartily
wealcome to him, and to us all most expected, wishing earnestly our Inn war
worthy of such a ghast. In the mean time we all do most heartily thank you,
and imbreath you in the Lord Jesus.

From Edingbrouche the xx. of November 1596. Your oblised friend, I.M.




This kind letter would not be forgotten: specially of me so much beholde^ to
the nation: and much more then yet I have showed, which now I can not stand
upon. But I must return to the foresaid translation: yet I must not hope to
bring in this kind where all will run in one sort, examples one of a
thousand, that I might: where the Prophets short speeches to stir diligence,
are by us turned from Christ to Belial, from virtue to sin, from the temple
of God to peors religion: as, if thou hate her, put her away. Malachy. 2. we
make God a commander of divorceme^ts upon hatredt which doctrine Christ
expressly confuteth.
I will show anon, how it fell out, that so many errors grew, the cause
whereof, they that be in them, I am afraid, do little know. And thus much for
the fourth poinct; that terms of Equivocation be not turned to ridiculous
senses: wherein we have committed many offenses: but not more nor nothing so
many as the vulgar Latin. The fifte poinct. Constant memory to translate the
sam always alike.
The next poinct that I am to handle, is most pleasant: and the missing in it
argues not want of learning, but of leisure. ^t conteyneth constant memory to
translate the same often repeated in the same sort: and the differing
repetitions likewise with their differences. Moses terms be repeated
infinitely in all the Prophets: The Psalmist follows Deborah much in the very
letters: and Solomon much ^is fathers sayings: though in much again he is in
style ^^raunge as having much conference with Eastern Phi^osophers. So in
Ecclesiastes, he differs in style from all. ^ob is also in his very letters
cited very much of David, Salo^on, and the Heard-man of Tekoah: who begins
with the End of Joel. Esaias likewise has as Joel this sweet and terrible
saying: A co^suming from God^ shall come.
Ce shod myshaddai iabo. Showing how he hono^ed the spirit which spoke in him.
Micha does honor him ^^ much and more: who copyed out a great number of ^^nes
from Esai with very little change: And Jeremy folow^th him so notably, later by
seauentie years, that in long ^lusions of Pachadh, Pachath, and Pach, as
fear, care, snare, ^^^en tossed in the sentence: he solemnizeth his very
Let^rs: showing with all how that which Esaias teld, they felt: (...) in Taaniah
and Aniah, bewayling and wayling Esaias pro^hecyed, Jeremy recorded, both to
Judah. So for Moab he ^ath Esaies eloquence: and Abakuks very syllables for
Babel. So Abakuk too has Esaies for the knowledge of God covering as water
does, in the Sea: so Micha the second begins with that strange Grammar and
letters of Micha the first. In Ebrewe Shim gl^^ g^ammim c^llam.
Hear o ye people, all they. The Ebrewes change the pronownes suddenly, now
and the^: as the two Michahs do, o YE, and all THEY. Now, the using of the
same syllables, bids to look unto the same event. Micha son of Imlah
proved true in Achab, and the fall of Israel for the time the^, though four
hundredth false prophets thought and taught otherwise. So should the Jews
think of Micha the Morasthite, that his words would prove equally true. It
is a deap matter that only Abbakuk Aggei and Zacha y title them selves
Prophets.
But to hold on: Abakuk entitleth him self a Prophet: Aggei and Zachary do
the same: none, I trow, but they three. The reasons be weighty: And Daniel is
a wonderful gracious man for all things. And in noble sort for this: for
calling by one skillful word, whole stories to be compared together. By the
word Tippaghem, was Troubled, used only before in Pharaohs spirit, placed
again in Seven ways scripture writes his name: which to imitate none of grace
will forbid.
Nauocodrosors he calls into mind: Pharaoh, his Chartummim, or coniurers,
Joseph and infinite comparisons with Nauocodrosor, his Chartummim, and Daniel:
yea the whole stories for both kingdoms are called into mind by one word,
Be-hammered the word properly signifies. But how so ever it should be
translated in the margent of the later from the first it should be noted. So
when he prayseth God, as dwelling in light that none can come too, which thing
God handles in Job in speeches reaching through the frame of nature, Daniel
uses a phrase used only of God: Iadagh Binah: to know understanding:
teachinge thereby how he that will, may prove true his saying of Gods
wisdom, from Gods own declaration of it: a peculiar long speech used of
purpose in that argument. So Mauz, the name of might and almighty used of
David, Solomon, Esai, Nahum, Ezekiel, with attribes commonly of rock, life,
salvation, and such. So in Daniel in the plural number incresing the force.
Mauzim, and the temple is called the sanctuary of Mauz, and fortes of Mauzim:
wherein while the Seauentie hid their mind, an error intolerable came in, in
Dan. 11. which thus should stand: As for the God Mauzim (that is almighty) in
his place he shall worship, Se the common translation.
yea a God shall he worship whom his fathers knew not: and he shall cause the
holds or fortes of Mauzim to have a strange God. Here the Angel comfortes the
Jews against Antiochus strength, by the very name of God, twice laying
attributes of the Temple to clear the speech. But I may not tarry in Daniel,
Nehemias repeateth that term in honor of Daniel, and memory of him. But of
all, Ezra, is most herein, whose whole work of the Chronicles is infinite much
in the very syllables of the former: and when he changes the phrase, that
change has great use, and should be marked in a translation. Such is the new
Testament: whose first oration fasteneth to the last speech of the old. For
Gabriel to Zachary begins the new Testament where the old ended. And this
should have made the Church to have hid the ^idde Apogrypha, according to their
name: and never to ^aue let them see the sun of the Church. They break the
chain: and make monstrous all the body of the Testament, absolute without it:
and not admitting any word of it: for language to any one letter, nor to any
wit in style, articles or story. Infinite much of the new testament might have
in the margent the Ebrew which it tra^slateth. As this: Grace and peace from
God: Aarons blessing, and this: The new Testament is almost all from the old.
God knows who be his: from Moses speech to Coreh: and God has not forsaken
his people. Be thou perfect as thy Father in heaven is perfect: from this, Thou
shall be perfect with the Lord thy God, and so infinitely. A Translatour should
have all this in tables before him. So the Bible should be shorter for memory
by a quarter: when the mind should see what was plain before, and is but
repeated. And in facility ten times easier: showing no new matter to be in
handlinge, but a commentary of the old. Moses song, Deuteronomy. 32. might be showed
al through in the Prophets, Paul, Peter, Jude, and others. How we have
contemned all this: examples we have like the sand of the sea, that can not
be numbered. Two I could bring too heinous: either ouerturning, the one the
maine of faith, in a Translation: the other in a note casting out the canonical
with a Semicycle, as less profitable, and drawing in Tobyes Legenda aurea,
made as other Jewish, forbid fables, to break all the frame and honor of Gods
counsel: wherein we show that we never knew, how the families guide the
holy story, in a most sensible dignity: and what families might not excel the
rest, nor yet in any dignity come near the chief. And thus five parts of my
eight are concluded. The sixth care Facility of phrase. Curiosity an enemy to
this poinct.
In our sixth care facility of phrase defended by the new Testament, the
Septuagint, and writers old indifferent for all nations must be had. Here
students in Ebrew miss by curiosity: as when they say: He that believes
shall not hasten. The Septuagint knowing that hastening to unstayed thoughts
in the mind, and color of face argues shame: said shall not be ashamed. Moses
says: The day of their destruction is near: and the case of the things ready
for them hasteneth. Saint Peter translateth him most oratoriously: though
changing his order: Their destruction sumbleth not: and their judgment of old
is not slow. The holy Ghost his translation here should stand. Many such
places come where the strict propriety is too harsh. As, If the just have his
payement (that is doubtful to the simple) in Greek, is hardly saved: very
learnedly. Ignorance herein caught of late two sides of striuers tardy, about
this: God called for darkness and it came, and they were not disobedient unto
his word. Therein some defend the Ebrew, Where the 70 (to avoid an harshphrase)
dealt as paraphrastes, our unreadiness caused Batrachomy^machia^: where a
Gra^maria^ kite would carry away both striuers
as they may: but marked not the verb plural put impersonallie. The Greeks
altered the relation of disobedience unto the Egyptians thus: As they disobeyed
his word. Herein we had a very unseasonable strife: with bitter contention,
and extreme unskillfulness in the offenders and defenders. The Greeks knew well
what the Ebrewe had: but saw it harsh for the Greek phrase: and that made
them depart from propriety, as paraphrastes may, retayning the sense. And
here I think it good to digress a little unto the Septuagintaes story, for
great use of our present matter. Of the Septuagint: that all translated not the
sam thing, but every one his part, etc.
Their time is said to be in Ptolomy the second his days: their number to be
exactly seauentie and two, six of every tribe. Ptolemy Philadelphus desirous of
a famous Library, sent to Iu^ah for their best authors and translatours: and
had them ^^nt. They translated several parts about fourtene chapters, as now
we distinguish them: or some one might go ^^rough some little book alone. The
copyes which they ^ad with them in Egypt, were not vowelled nor acce^ted: ^ut
as some Printes yet are without either. Where both ^^lpes are not, none without
exceeding great pains can ^^t upon the truth always. The want whereof left
the ^^ptuagint unto infinite errors. They were not all of like (...). The
Translatours of Moses were very eloquent: Gene. 4. If thou offer well, and
divide not well thou have sinned.
yet ^^e Translatour of Gods words to Cain, either of purpose ^^d his mind,
or was very simple in Ebrewe. They who ^ealt with the story, were likewise
eloquent: and so in the ^rouerbes and the Psalms. The Grecian on Job was a
^^et reader: and cared not to yield every saying strictly, ^ut what might be
to Greeks familiar: The Translator of ^cclesiastes, was younger in Ebrew the^
Greek: he of Amoz ^ot the best: he of Ezekiel very learned. The diversity of
their style: and hitting now: now missing far, in the same, tells that all
did not al. Oftentimes they rather abridge then translate: as on Hester, and
infinitely in the Prophets. In mysteries and hard Phrases often they deal
exceeding well. 1^50. years difference Gene. 5. and 11. betwixt Ebrewes and
Greeks, this yet amazeth the world.
But very much they hid their mind* specially for the worlds age betwixt Adam
and Ahraham. There was no other translation but theirs in the Apostles age: and
it was more known to the Jews then the Ebrewe, ended from daily use five
hundredth years before. Therefore they use it exceeding much. In many places
they leave it and translate most oratoriouslie. The Greek Testaments words 4600
are* the most part, from the Seauentie.
It was often deceived by mistakinge Characters like: as, Daleth and Resh, be:
D. and V. Caph and Resh: where the foot of Caph wanted Ink. In such places, if
the translatours had borrowed their neighbors copies, they had not missed. But
they saw no reason of exact care, where their labor was required only for a
brave Library. Syracides that was a child when they translated, excuses the
matter, how hard it was to translate Ebrew into Greek. Hard must it be for
those poor afflicted Jews lothing Heathen, to afford seaue^ty learned through
all the Prophets Emblemes, Ebrew subtilties, and Greek elegancy: where the
Church never had seaue^tie, or I trow seven that spent their life in Ebrew and
Greek for the explaning of the Bible. The church never had yet seven that
spent their life in vowelled Ebrew and Greek exact antiquity, for the Bibles
use.
Their translation was turned into Arabique, though that tongue is almost
Ebrew, and into the near Ethiopia^: either because they had not exact
Ebricians, or thought it not safe to differ. The vulgar Latin, and all ours,
saving the Geneva follow it. And this is the cause why ours come so much short
of the Ebrew. And the defendours mind to feed on ackornes when corn is
found out. Judgment in a sucking Babe is not weak, short of a man's: more
then theirs which compare ours with one able to abide trial by the Ebrewe,
comes short of true learning. The Genevah followed the Ebrew, though the French
brag how it followed their: the Dutch how their. I trow it is not inferior
to any of theirs: as D. Trelcatius often confesses at Leyden. And I think the
BB. Why our Bb returned to follow the 70. rather then the exact, true
infallible Ebrewe.
revived the folowers of the vulgar Latin and the Greek, least our people
should be too much amazed at the first, by the great diversity. But to
return and conclude: as memory to mark how the la^er follow the former for
light, and delight, so a learned ^acilitie is of unspeakable force. Now
comes in the ^eauenth poinct: the brave Greek terms either of the Sea^entie,
or of the Apostles better usage. The seventh poinct: for stateli greek terms:
to stand in the margent.
Their marking is of great importance. And this should not only be a great help
^o show still through the marge^t Gods handlingl al his old ^^ories: but a
matter of certainty in difficulties. Some here ^^iding amiss, disgrace all.
For example this may be taken: ^aul says: We must give more heed to that
which has been ^ard, least we flow: our common translation has: Ebt. 2.1.
very coldlie translated: where Zub Lam. 4. or Luz, Pro. 3. is touched.
least at ^lie time we should let them slip. Saint Paul had been a ^abe, if
he had thought that all Ierusalems Rabbines could ^^rget upon what principles
Paul disputed: or thought that (...) the Rabbines had embracest the rules and
principles, they ^^^uld soon forget them. Here the Arabiques translate
ele^^ntlie, Naskitu: WE FALL. The Syriaque, Naebed WE PE^^SH. Saint Paul's
metaphore was taken from Ieremies la^^ntations, 4. in Teth. They are in better
case which died (...) the sword, then which died by hunger: which flowed,
(...) perced by wanting the fruit of the field. This trope ^^lled into the
Jews mind Sedekias kingdoms fall: Taaniuth goes upon Ierusalems second and
last destruction.
and ^^arned of a far greater, which soon fell upon contempt (...) this
warning. Of that Ierusalemy has a common treatise, (...) whole book upon this:
which all, Paul warned in one (...) term: that might not be turned to a base
meaning, be^^lling no men of gravity in any religion or reason. In this place
the bare word should have been kept, or an other warranted. He that could not
come to Saint Paul's reach: yet should have marked how from Pro. 3. his Greek
word was taken: for a froward departing, and the word two ways terrible, each
leading to destruction, and both meeting together, Zemach Esa. 4. Apau^gasma*
Ebrew 1.3.
would be twice tres-excellent. The brightness of glory, Eb. 1.3. expounds
Zemach, or dayspring, Esa. 4. to clear all the Prophets: all Paul, and the
Chaldy (upon Esai 4) a rare place of old Ionat. a Rab (of old Simeons age or
near) speaking clearly of Christ. Now to teach us, that, The Syriaque has
Zimcha, Esaies. When thousands of these come in singular great matters, better
then commentaries to lighten eyes: all together will make a mountain of golden
learning, and have great force. Here a translatour should have all that the
new testament translated, noted in his Ebrew Bible: to be plentiful in the use
of that help. So for this sentence: He makes his Angels spirits, and his
ministers a flame of fire: not only the Septuagint and the Apostles, but also
the Zoar in many places saw that God spoke of the Angels made like winds and
flames. Wherein the facility of the matter should be warranted for better
satisfaction of all: by all of indifferent affections. In this all translations
of learned tongues old and ancient will much delight and strengthen: the
Arabique and the Syriaque: the Chaldy paraphrastes, Onkelos, Meturgeman,
Ierusalemy: Ionothan, Joseph the Blind, Aquilas: the Septuagint. Yea and the
fragmentes of Aquilas Symmachus, Theodotion. As when Jacob says, ^hebet is in
Moses 32. times: and never a Scepter in him, but, a Tribe.
the Scebet shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come, Aquilas says: by
Scebet (in Greek Sceptron) he means the tribe. He said truly: Learnedly and
to infinite good use. Ierusalemy and Barbinel check us rightly: for Malachy,
Thus they say: For he hates diuorcements: The Eternal is the speaker. Here
their authority is the strongest of all humane: for us, against them selves.
The Babylonian Talmud is no less: construing Ezra 1. Chron. 3. That Iechonias
Assyr, in strait prison made Salathiel his son: here the Talmud for this one
poinct is much worth. Most pleasant ^re the Prophets words, turned by the
Apostles: as Sechi and Maos, in Ierem. and Peripsema and Scybala in Saint Paul.
^n this sort all the Greek Testamentes words might be ^rought into every
Bibles table: yea and the Ebrew two, with one leaf of Grammar introduction:
whereby a few ^oures would yield a method to judge and study as oc^asion and
leisure served. A Linguist would as easily per^orme this, as these his
country la^guages. And this must be ^olden, that Libanus affoarded not more
timber trees to ^^lomons house, then the Greek Septuaginta does to the ^ewe
Testament: and the terms called into question for ^iuinitie being in it are
best expounded by it. Examples I ^eede none: infinite experience of daily
striuers show e^^ugh. And now comes the last poinct to comment by ^^ripture:
so all Salomons Proverbs may be set on the fit ^^ories: so the stories with
their Prophecies* and the Psalms ^on the law: the Epistles upon the
Ceremonies much: ^^ch on all. The help herein would make the new Te^^^ment,
and the former Prophets, as Daniel, Esaie, and ^h, easy, before the Reader
comes to them. The conclusion,
And ^we I have ended all parts touched in my entrance of ^^ch. Ornaments
above these, I have elsewhere con^^ed into one work many already. To
conclude, ^s I had to say touching translation. The rare Hono^^^le Earl H.
Huntingdon, many years together, H.E. of Hunting. should be honored still of his
true affectioned, to finish his beginnings,
urged my ^^ll this way: whom one Earl of you, Nobles, of near ^initie,
succeeded in willingness and so liberally toward ^arges, that upon that
(according to these eightfold ob^^^uations) somewhat, if God will, shall come
to light. And one of you Lords requested me to write a common Epistle to you
all: that you might so better know how in time to agree for execution of good
will this way. That request I have (as ye see) accomplished. And I hope your
Noble learning will not expect an inflaming peroration. The dignity of the
matter is greater then any Orator can match. And for personnages, none be so
fit as your selfs to urge it. Professed Scholars, who study to live: and not
live to study, are commonly, being advaunced, hinderers of all that passes
the common base course. And as my furtherance for honorable words, works,
charges, and all tendering has been from the Nobility (from what side the
contrary: I will yet see, and nothing say) so I am free to choose whom I would
honor in this motion. Under the term of Nobility, as we here toward
Germany do, I conteyne all the ancient and good Gentry of the land: whom all I
wish to have a care and portion about the book of life. The deliberation should
be quick. The King of our language has dealt very royally for his part: with a
willingness very ready. Yet my great desire was, that English Nobility might
be moved, to be at the charges of this travel. And so I leave the matter to
your learned Honorable and Worshipful consideration.

From MIDDELBVRGH, in Sea-land, This 29. of May, 1597. Your Honors to
command, H. BROVGHTON.

A request to the Arch. of Cant. to call in a corruption of a late English
Co^mentation upon Daniel, dedicated to the right H. Lords.
YOUR Grace, overseer of all learned matters in our Nation, and I, having a
right in things of my own travel, and all our nation, as contemned or
deceived, ^aue been iniuried by a Printer, who has corrupted my ^ommentaries
upon Daniel, specially in the Ebrew: to the ^isgrace of all the work: and of
all our students. In the ^^brewe verses of Rabbi Sadaias the letters which
begin the ^erses words, commonly five in every row (besides the ^lphabet
letter) stand for the Arithmetique, how often the ^tter entreated upon, is used
in the Ebrew tongue, and the ^^ripture textes agree in number: where, if any
one letter ^amisse, all the frame of the work is marred. Moreover (...) the
Ebrewe textes all Printers and Writers think it a ^y gross part, ever to
corrupt any Scripture text: as the ^wes glory that in neither Talmud, nor any
commentary ^heirs ever any text is corrupted by the citer. And they ^e this a
common saying: That to miss in one letter is ^orruption of the whole world.
Now when Jews and ^^ristians see that things in Ebrew corrupt, ouerthrow^
that present argument, stayning holy Scripture, and ^th skill rather of Balams
Ass, then of learning, come ^th, in England, where men should be learned, and
things ^ered unto our Honorable Lords, they will think ve^ basely of all the
Students of our nation. Those verses a matter of so great importance, that a
Professor of ^bridge offered an Angel to have one copye in written ^de: and
after mine came forth: two students one of Cambridge an other of Oxforde,
desired me to put the^ f^rth in fayrer and more distinct letters: and they
would each undertake copyes to five pounds: both ten. Hereupon I caused M. Fr.
Raphelengius, the best of Printers, to print me a thousand: which I have sent
to England, to make our Divines readier in great matters. Master Joseph.
Scaliger, a Gentleman of rare learning, and Master Raphelengius had never
seen them before I sent them to Leyden: Both as good Linguistes, as any in the
world: and learned men: to whom I am very much beholding for singular gentleness
in lending me books rare and of rare commodity: such as our nation, I trow,
never yet saw. A certain English man here, had by my gift but one copy, and was
showed the use of it: of whom I demanded in sadness to record it in print, what
he esteemed of the matter: and he said that of truth, he would not for twenty
pounds be without the copye and the matter. The case standing thus, I can not
choose but be grieved to see my Ebrewe studies so defaced, a good old work and
a rare monument, marred, and occasion offered to have our nation for learning
much contemned. The certeintie of the holy text in Ebrew, is a matter, as all
called to grace, will confess to be gracious. And that rare piece of work of
Sadaias, will seem, to all, void of Papistrie, and endued with reason, to
confirm much the certeintie of Scripture. Wherefore proceeding from an enemy,
for the truth, and grounds of faith, the corrupting of it should seem a work
far from grace. Besides these verses of Sadaias, a piece of the Ierusalemy
Talmud, very pleasant and learned with Gentlemen learned in Ebrew, is corrupted
in this Printers edition: whereas no open adversary could so much disgrace, as
such a corrupter of matters brought about not without great pains, pretending
reverence to the author. I have felt grief in this kind already not a
little: by a book collected from sundry fragmentes by a seruingman: and falsely
reported to be notes from me. As that book was in printing, I did cause the
seruingman to show your grace of it, that the Printer had no author for his
work: and, as he told me, the Printer was bound in five hundred pounds not
to proceed: but by a bribe, ventured against his band, and upon complaint
answer was returned, that the Printer would noise how he was undone: So
against all that I could do, forged ware, some stolen from me, some from
others, and more kinds then Labans sheep colors, were sold dear in
London, and Sturbridge fair, and still fathered upon such as most loath it. As
all truth should be truth: specially in divinity it should be so. And the
befooling of an whole nation should not be counted a light fault: in forging
authors, by pieuish printers, and greadie of dishonest gaynes. I was minded
never to have printed any thing. But forgers of matters to be as mine, which I
lothed, they forced me to leave in print the whole vein of my judgment in
Divinity, in the book of Scripture concent. That any might know mine from
forged ware. Now at my first printing much anger I had. When it came forth:
the great Lord Chauncelour told the Queen, as he bragged, that in no case any
countenance might be showed me: and thereupon a Noble Earl, who had named unto
me a fine recompense of my study, hearing of the L. Chauncelours speech,
altered. And I to pay the L. Chauncelour, minded to have lived in Germany:
till I heard the Queens answer: That he commended, whom he condemned. For
that the book was schollerlike and all for the States good: where to know
how to ouerreach others, and not to do it, argues a mind bent to quietness.
Another gave out words also to the Queen: unlearned and malicious: of whom I
will yet speak nothing. Your Grace I must now commend for much humanity, that
told one, sent in my cause: that whatsoever you could do for me, you would:
So that I would acknowledge my friends. In truth my L. touching preferments I
was thus minded hitherto: that if my worthier in the common estimation stepped
before me: I would rejoice. But when two hundredth thousand pounds a year is
spent by the Church upon such as can not read a line of the Bible: and I could
not live in England vnsollicited still to preach: and was commended by the
Queen, whom I trow you will not check, I see not why I may not require my
recompense: as the Realm has put the Queen in trust to deal: and require it
with as good a conscience, as you may receive one penny of your tenantes. You
gave me counsel to be toward some Bishop or some Lord as one said to whom it
should be told. The Queen or a Prince should be the only Patron for one of
my years spent in hard studies. And the Countess of Warwick told that the
Queen would not for all the prefermentes in the Realm, I went out of the
Realm. In the time of deliberation, I pray your Grace, that Printers be not
allowed to disgrace my studies.

Your Graces to command, H. BROVGHTON.


